Dr.  Coe’s synthesis and review of Mesoamerican archaeology thus  provides an excellent test of the Book of Mormon. Dr. Coe’s  book The Maya makes a number of factual statements  about the physical, political, [Page 79] geographical, religious, and cultural  aspects of ancient Mesoamerica. Given his very negative view of the  Book of Mormon, it is impossible to claim that the facts  Dr. Coe selected might intentionally favor the Book of Mormon.

If  the Book of Mormon is not what it claims to be, then it is  a work of fiction. It is simply false, as Dr. Coe obviously  believes it to be. There are no other rational options. If the  Book of Mormon is a piece of fiction, then some person  or persons in the early 1800s made it up. If the Book of Mormon  is fiction, then its author was guessing every time he wrote as fact  something about the ancient inhabitants of the Americas. This means  we can compare reasonably these “guesses” in the Book of Mormon  with the facts presented by Dr. Coe in The Maya.

Thus  we take the statements of fact in The Maya as essentially  true, and we compare the “guesses” in the Book of Mormon  with these statements of fact. To repeat, for purposes of our  Bayesian statistical analysis, we accept the universe of facts  summarized by Dr. Coe in The Maya as essentially true. We  then rate the value of each “guess” in the Book of Mormon  (or statement of fact) as evidence using three criteria:

  - Is  it specific? Is it clear that the guess in the Book of Mormon  is directly comparable to a statement of fact in The Maya ?
  - Is  it specific and detailed? Are there important details in each guess  in the Book of Mormon that correspond to at least some of  the details given in The Maya ?
  - Is  it specific, detailed, and unusual? Is the statement of fact in the  Book of Mormon (or “guess”) unusual in the sense that  someone writing the book in the early 1800s would probably not have  the background or knowledge to include [Page 80] this statement of fact in his  work of “fiction,” that is, the Book of Mormon?

We  assign a number to the quality or strength of the evidence for  (or against) the hypothesis as follows: The numbers 2, 10, and 50 are  the strength of the evidence for the hypothesis, that is, the  hypothesis that the Book of Mormon is a work of  fiction. The numbers 0.5, 0.1, and 0.02 are the corresponding  strength of the evidence against the hypothesis; that is, these are  points of evidence that support the historicity of the  Book of Mormon. Illustrative examples are given below  following a brief introduction to statistics in general and  Bayesian statistics in particular.


## Insights  from Basic Statistics

Statistics  describes the probability (likelihood) of events occurring within  a given population. A population is a set of related  items or events of interest for some test we wish to perform. In this  case, the population we wish to test is the factual statements in the  Book of Mormon and corresponding factual statements in the  book The Maya . We wish to determine whether or not the  Book of Mormon agrees or disagrees in a statistically  significant way with what is known about ancient Mesoamerica as  summarized in Dr. Coe’s book The Maya.

One  of the simplest illustrations of probability is given by rolling  dice. The statistical population of interest here is the possible  values (1 through 6) on the six sides of the die. Since a die  has six possible values, then there is a one in six chance  (16.66666% of the time) that the value 1 will turn up when the die is  cast, and the same probability exists for each of the other values 2  through 6. If two dice are thrown, then each die is independent of  the other, and there is still only a one in six chance that any  given value will turn up for that die when it is rolled.

Here  is a key point for statistical analysis: probabilities of  individual, statistically independent events must be multiplied  together to calculate the probability of all the individual events  occurring simultaneously .

The  probability of each individual die coming up with a 1 is  16.666 … %, but the probability of rolling “snake eyes,” or two  dice coming up with a 1 on the same roll (simultaneously), is  not 16.6%. It is 16.6% (0.166) times 16.6% (0.166), which is  about 0.02756, or approximately 2.76% of the time. So, roughly three  times out of a hundred times, snake eyes will result when two  dice are rolled simultaneously. Further, if we roll three dice at the  same time, what will be the probability of rolling three 1s? By the  formula, it is 0.166 x 0.166 x 0.166, which is about 0.00457, or  about five times in a thousand rolls of the dice.

[Page 81] How  about three different events, each with different individual  probabilities, all occurring together? Let’s say the first event  has a probability of 1 in a hundred (0.01), the probability  of the second event is one in a thousand (0.001), and the third  is one in ten (0.1). What is the probability of all three of these  events occurring simultaneously if they are part of the same  population? It is 0.01 x 0.001 x 0.1 = 0.000001 or 1 in a million.  The probability that all these events will not occur together is  1.0 minus the probability that they all will occur together. In this  example, it is 1.0 minus 0.000001 or 0.999999, or 99.9999%, or  999,999 to 1.

In  the real world, we usually don’t experience the mathematically  well-defined probabilities that rolling dice offers. Instead, we  usually deal with “odds” or “likelihoods,” many of which are  somewhat subjective. By subjective , we mean the person  performing the test must decide for him or herself what constitutes  strong evidence, what evidence is positive, and what evidence is  supportive but not particularly strong. These are the three relative  strengths of evidence summarized above: (1) specific (Bayesian  “supportive”), (2) specific and detailed, (Bayesian “positive”)  and (3) specific, detailed, and unusual (Bayesian “strong”).


## Bayesian  Statistics: A Rational, Scientific Approach to Weighing Evidence

We  can assign a likelihood ratio or “Bayes factor” to each  statement of fact given in the Book of Mormon and compare  these statements with corresponding statements of fact in The  Maya . This likelihood ratio is the strength of each individual  statement of fact as a piece of evidence. It is calculated as  the probability that the statement is true if whoever wrote the  Book of Mormon was guessing divided by the probability that  the statement is true if instead the Book of Mormon is  fact-based and essentially historical. The likelihood ratio expressed  in this way therefore represents the strength of the evidence in  support of the hypothesis, that is, against the factual nature of the  Book of Mormon.

Note:  only statements of fact which are dealt with by both books can  be rationally admitted to the analysis; on statements of fact where  one or the other book is silent, we cannot factually assume either  agreement or disagreement. There is no rational scientific basis for  doing so.

Once  we have chosen the likelihood of guessing correctly about each  individual fact, we then multiply the likelihoods of guessing right  about each of these specific facts. The number obtained by  multiplying all the individual likelihoods together is the strength  of the total body of evidence that whoever wrote the Book of Mormon  was guessing about these fact claims.

Thus  the overall Bayes factor or likelihood ratio is the weighted strength  of the evidence, and it tells us how much we should change our  prior beliefs based on the new evidence. We start with some  prior odds, representing our beliefs about the hypothesis before  seeing the evidence. In order to be rational and intellectually  honest, once we have seen the new evidence, we must update our  beliefs accordingly to obtain our posterior odds, or the odds that  the hypothesis is true after accounting for the strength of the new  evidence, both pro and con, and our previous beliefs expressed as the  prior odds.


## [Page 84] Bayesian  Analysis of the Facts Given in the Book of Mormon and The  Maya

For  the subject of this article — the factual nature of the  Book of Mormon — we choose to start with extremely large  “skeptical prior odds” against the book. We allow only  a 1:1,000,000,000 (one in a billion) prior odds that the  Book of Mormon is a historical document. Thus we start  with odds of 1,000,000,000:1 (a billion to one) that the statements  of fact in the Book of Mormon are just guesses made by  whoever wrote the book.

This  means that even before we look at the new evidence, we are very  confident that the Book of Mormon is a work of  fiction. We would require cumulative supporting evidence with  a likelihood of 0.000000001 (one in a billion) in order to  change our beliefs to the point where we would consider “even odds”  (1:1) that the book is fact-based. We would require evidence even  stronger than that to consider it likely or be confident that the  Book of Mormon is not a work of fiction, that is, that  it is an accurate historical record, based substantially on facts.

It  is a common error (deliberate or otherwise) to consider only  a few pieces of evidence when examining the truth or falsity of  a given hypothesis. In the extreme, this practice is called cherry-picking . In cherry-picking, evidence against one’s  existing hypothesis is deliberately excluded from consideration. This  practice is, of course, dishonest. It is another common error to  consider some pieces of relevant evidence as having infinite weight  or having zero weight compared to other pieces of evidence. This  practice is irrational and unscientific.

These  practices of cherry-picking or overweighting/underweighting evidence  cannot be allowed in scientific enquiry. They are neither rational  nor honest. We must consider all relevant evidence if we hope to make  honest, rational decisions. Also, no piece of evidence has infinite  weight. There are always limitations on the strength of any  individual piece of evidence. Assuming a piece of evidence has  infinite weight is equivalent to saying the question is already  decided and is therefore beyond the scope of further rational, honest  enquiry.

The  value of Bayesian statistics is that it provides a disciplined,  formal way of bringing available evidence to bear on a given  question. The evidence is weighted according to its probative value  and the cumulative strength of the evidence for and against the  hypothesis being tested. The hypothesis (the question of interest to  us) in this analysis is the factual nature of the Book of Mormon.  The question of interest is: “Is the Book of Mormon  a work of fiction, or is it a factual, historical document  according to the cumulative, relevant evidence summarized in The  Maya ?”

[Page 85] To  perform our analysis, we assign one of three likelihood ratios to  testable facts or “correspondences” between the Book of Mormon  and Dr. Coe’s book. The facts, taken from Dr. Coe’s book, are  compared with statements of fact in the Book of Mormon.  Recall that the hypothesis we are testing is that the Book of Mormon  is false, and we assume a billion to one prior odds in favor of  the hypothesis that the Book of Mormon is indeed false.

Pieces  of evidence in favor of the hypothesis, that is, that the  Book of Mormon is false, are weighted by their “likelihood  ratio,” which is a positive value greater than one (either 50,  10 or 2). This likelihood ratio is multiplied by the skeptical prior  of a billion to one to increase the weight of the evidence  against the Book of Mormon.

Points  of evidence in favor of the essentially factual nature of the  Book of Mormon (called the converse hypothesis ) are  weighted by their likelihood ratio, a positive decimal fraction  (0.5, 0.1 or 0.02). These fractions are multiplied by the skeptical  prior of a billion to one to decrease the weight of the evidence  against the Book of Mormon, in other words, to provide  evidence for the factual nature of the Book of Mormon.

To  illustrate, here are three examples, one for each likelihood ratio,  in favor of the converse hypothesis; that is, in favor of the  essentially factual nature of the Book of Mormon.

Specific  and detailed correspondences: 0.10 (Bayesian positive evidence for  the converse hypothesis). Facts assigned a likelihood of 0.1  are details in the Book of Mormon that agree with details  in The Maya. The author of the Book of Mormon might  have been able to reason out such details, given time, study, or  expert knowledge, but we think it would have been very difficult for  the writer to have guessed correctly. Thus these correspondences are  quite specific and also provide some important details.

One  example of Bayesian “strong” evidence is the remarkably detailed  description of a volcanic eruption and associated earthquakes  given in 3 Nephi 8. Mesoamerica is earthquake and volcano  country, but upstate New York, where the Book of Mormon  came forth, is not. If the Book of Mormon is fictional, how  could the writer of the Book of Mormon correctly describe  a volcanic eruption and earthquakes from the viewpoint of the  person experiencing the event? We rate the evidentiary value of that  correspondence as 0.02. We assume a piece of evidence is  “unusual” if it gives facts that very probably were not known to  the writer, someone living in upstate New York in the early 19 th century, when virtually nothing of ancient Mesoamerica was known.

We  can also conceive of correspondences that are specific and unusual  but not given in sufficient detail to assign them a weight of  0.02. One such specific and unusual correspondence is the existence  of an arcane sacred or prestige language as mentioned in Coe’s book  and in the Book of Mormon (1 Nephi 3:19 and  Mosiah 1:2). However, insufficient details about this language are  given to regard the correspondence as [Page 87] specific, detailed, and  unusual, for a weight of 0.02. Instead it is assigned a weight  of 0.10, for specific and unusual only.

The  uncertainty one feels toward any particular correspondence can also  be reflected in the assigned likelihood ratio. For example, if  a correspondence seems specific and somewhat detailed but is  believed to lack enough detail to warrant the higher evidentiary  weight, it can be assigned a likelihood ratio of 0.5 rather than  0.1.

We  assume the writer’s religious knowledge came from the Bible; his  cultural/social knowledge came from his (and his family’s) own  cultural/ social experiences as relatively poor, less-educated  working farmers typical of their time; his political knowledge from  American and British political institutions existing in the early  19 th century, and his knowledge of Native Americans from  his own knowledge of Native Americans of his time and place  (northeastern North America). Facts that could not have been obtained  from those sources in the early 19 th century could only  have been guesses by the writer of the “fictional”  Book of Mormon.

Therefore,  it was impossible for the work of Stephens and Catherwood to have  directly influenced the Book of Mormon. In contrast,  Reverend Ethan Smith’s book, View of the Hebrews, has  some very limited information on Indians in Mexico, primarily the  Aztecs and Toltecs, and might have influenced the writer of the  Book of Mormon. We account for this fact in our analysis as  described in Appendix A.

If  the Book of Mormon is of early 19 th century  origin, then, according to Dr. Coe, the author of that “fictional”  work could not have known anything about the Mayan area. Thus, if we  are rational and honest, we will not attribute to any hypothetical  19 th century author of the Book of Mormon the  same degree of knowledge and sophistication [Page 88] about cultural, social,  physical, geographical, and other characteristics of the ancient Maya  that only a few comparatively well-educated people have now in  the early 21 st century.

The  purpose of this article is to rigorously test facts given in the  Book of Mormon versus facts given by Dr. Coe in The Maya and in other venues. It is fortunate that our analysis will be  naturally conservative, underweighting the evidence in favor of the  Book of Mormon. Even if we are trying hard to be rational  and honest, we have a natural tendency to overestimate  Joseph Smith’s likely knowledge of ancient Mesoamerica (or  that possessed by anyone else of his time). Present-day educated  individuals are likely to know much more about ancient Mesoamerica  than did the (supposed) 19 th century author(s) of the  Book of Mormon.

To  illustrate, we examine the three separate statements of fact in the  Book of Mormon given above. The Book of Mormon  claims to be a real historical record. Either these statements  are just guesses, or indeed the Book of Mormon is an  accurate historical book. There are no other choices open to us. Each  of these statements supports the Book of Mormon’s claim  to be a fact-based record. What is the overall likelihood of  getting all three of these guesses right: (1) the practice of  repopulating old or abandoned cities (0.5), (2) an accurate  description of Mesoamerican geography as composed primarily of  highlands and lowlands (0.1), and (3) an accurate, quite detailed  description of a simultaneous volcano/earthquake (0.02)? The  product of these three likelihoods is 0.5 x 0.1 x 0.02 = 0.001 or  likelihood of one in a thousand .

But  that is not nearly enough. Our “skeptical prior” is a billion  to one that the Book of Mormon is a work of fiction.  And a billion to one (1,000,000,000) times one in a thousand  (0.001) is still a million to one. So even after considering  this evidence we are still quite confident that the Book of Mormon  is a work of fiction, but we are less confident than we were  prior to examining the evidence, due to our rational, intellectually  honest assessment of these new pieces of evidence.

However,  many more facts are mentioned in Dr. Coe’s book The Maya that  we can test against corresponding statements of fact in the  Book of Mormon. Specifically, we have found 131 such  correspondences. We divide these correspondences into six separate  categories:

  - Political  (33 correspondences)
  - Cultural/social  (31 correspondences)
  - Religion  (19 correspondences)
  - Military/warfare  (12 correspondences)
  - Physical/geographical  (13 correspondences)
  - [Page 89] Technological/miscellaneous  (23 correspondences)

Since  the truth (or falsity) of the Book of Mormon is a supremely  important question, we trust readers will exert themselves and make  their own comparisons between Coe’s book and the Book of Mormon.  We hope they will honestly weigh each piece of evidence for  themselves and decide what likelihood ratio, if any, to assign to  that piece of evidence.

This  is essentially what is demanded of jurors in trial situations. Jurors  are to weigh honestly and carefully all the evidence, without  prejudging the outcome, and then render a true verdict according  to the evidence. But jurors (and honest readers of the  Book of Mormon) must not prejudge the case before hearing  all the evidence, must not take their duties lightly, and must not  arbitrarily reject evidence for or against either side.


## Results  of the Analysis

We  have compiled six different categories of evidence in Appendix A, as  noted above. For example, the sixth category includes technological  and miscellaneous correspondences. We found 23 specific technological  and miscellaneous correspondences between the Book of Mormon  and The Maya. Of these, three have a likelihood of  0.5, eight have a likelihood [Page 90] of 0.1, and twelve have  a likelihood of 0.02 (3 + 8 + 12 = 23). Thus the overall  likelihood of these 23 positive correspondences, taken as a whole  for statistical analysis, is (0.5) 3 x (0.1) 8 x  (0.02) 12 = 5.12 x 10 –30 .

The  overall likelihood of the positive correspondences in each of the six  categories has been computed in this way. They are, respectively:  4.99 x 10 –33 , 3.21 x 10 –35 , 1.28 x 10 –24 ,  2.0 x 10 –13 , 1.28 x 10 –18 and 5.12 x 10 –30 .  We then compute the overall likelihood of all six categories taken  together by multiplying these six numerical values together. The  result is 2.69 x 10 –151 .

We  can confirm this calculation by noting that of these 131  correspondences, 23 have a likelihood of 0.5; 57 have  a likelihood of 0.1; and 51 have a likelihood of 0.02. Thus  the overall likelihood can also be computed and confirmed as 0.5 23 x 0.1 57 x 0.02 51 = 2.69 x 10 –151 This  product represents the likelihood (probability) that the positive  correspondences between the Book of Mormon and The Maya under the six categories of comparison are the result of a very,  very long series of consistent lucky guesses by the author of the  Book of Mormon.

Recall  that according to Bayesian methods, our skeptical prior odds were  a billion to one against the Book of Mormon being  a historical document. Thus we started our analysis by assuming  that the statements of fact in the Book of Mormon were just  guesses. We must multiply one billion times 2.69 x 10 –151 to determine the degree to which the evidence provided by the  131 positive correspondences changes our opinion. The result  of this calculation is 2.69 x 10 –142 .

We  have not yet considered the negative correspondences and their impact  on our opinions, but will weigh these negative correspondences after  briefly discussing sensitivity analysis.


## Sensitivity  Analysis

In  statistics it is good scientific practice to do a “sensitivity  analysis” by which the effects of changed assumptions or changed  data on the results are determined. For example, if we assign the  weakest likelihood ratio (Bayesian “supportive” or 0.5) to each  of the 131 correspondences, the overall strength of the evidence is  then 0.5 131 equals 3.7 x 10 –40 . We then  multiply this number by one billion (10 9 ) and find that  the likelihood that the Book of Mormon is a work of  fiction is less than one in a thousand billion, billion,  billion, billion.

As  another example of sensitivity analysis, we can choose to admit only  half the 131 correspondences to evidence at the same evidentiary  weights as given in Appendix A. If we do so, the cumulative  likelihood [Page 91] of these correspondences is still about 1.0 x 10 –65 .  When multiplied by the skeptical prior of one billion, we find the  likelihood that the Book of Mormon is the result of  guesswork is still less than about one in a hundred billion,  billion, billion, billion, billion, billion.

A third  sensitivity analysis is as follows. Of the 131 total correspondences,  23 have a likelihood of 0.5; 57 have a likelihood of 0.1;  and 51 have a likelihood of 0.02. Thus the ratio of the  correspondences with respect to their relative strengths is roughly  1:2:2 (specific: specific and detailed: specific and detailed and  unusual).

Thus  the question is: “At this ratio of 1:2:2, how many total  correspondences are required to shift our skeptical prior of  a billion to one against the Book of Mormon to  a billion to one in favor of the Book of Mormon?”  The answer is about 17 total correspondences — only 17 out of 131  correspondences (13% or about one out of every eight) must be  accepted at their assigned evidentiary strengths to shift the strong  skeptical prior to a strong positive posterior.

Under  all three sensitivity analyses, our strong skeptical prior hypothesis  of a billion to one against the fact-based nature of the  Book of Mormon still gives way to a much, much  stronger posterior hypothesis in favor of the Book of Mormon.  We conclude that the Book of Mormon is historical, and is  based in fact, with odds of many, many billions to one that this  statement is true.


## Data in  Support of the Hypothesis that the Book of Mormon is a Work  of Fiction

We  started with a very strong skeptical prior hypothesis of  a billion to one against the historicity of the Book of Mormon.  However, to this point, we have considered only data in support of  the historicity of the Book of Mormon, that is, in support  of the converse hypothesis. What about data in support of the  opposite hypothesis, that is, that the Book of Mormon is  fictional? As before, the evidence considered here will be statements  in The Maya which disagree with corresponding statements in  The Book of Mormon.

Again,  it is only rational and honest to compare statements of fact which  are dealt with by both books . On statements of fact where one  or the other books is silent, we cannot assume either agreement or  disagreement. There is no rational scientific basis for doing so  because there is no evidence to support our choices.

Surprisingly  few pieces of evidence cited in The Maya support the  hypothesis that the Book of Mormon is a work of  fiction. We were able [Page 92] to find six such points of disagreement between The Maya and the Book of Mormon, namely the  existence of (1) horses, (2) elephants, (3) iron, (4) steel, (5)  copper and (6) refined gold and silver. (We combine refined gold and  refined silver instead of considering them individually because gold  and silver are usually found together, and thus to refine gold is  also to refine silver.)

These  points of disagreement are summarized in Appendix B. As with Appendix  A, we give citations and page numbers from The Maya to  support these negative correspondences and citations from the  Book of Mormon where the points of disagreement are found.  Finally, we provide a brief analysis of each correspondence. We  evaluate these six points as having a cumulative strength as  evidence of 1.25 x 10 8 .

However,  given our own inherent bias on the topic, we choose to overcompensate  and deliberately err on the side of skepticism by weighting all six  points as strong evidence, with a Bayes factor of 50 for each  point of disagreement. We do not think each of these points is  actually Bayesian “strong” evidence, but we allow this  sensitivity test to severely examine the Book of Mormon’s  claims.

Weighting  each piece as strong evidence, the strength of the total body of  evidence from The Maya supporting the skeptical hypothesis is  thus 506 = 1.56 x 10 10 . Therefore, the total  body of evidence taken from The Maya , including the skeptical  prior of a billion to one, is 2.69 x 10 –142 x 1.56  x 10 10 = 4.2 x 10 –132 .

If  one is rational and carefully weighs the evidence, the authors  believe that the initial strongly skeptical prior hypothesis of  a billion to one that the Book of Mormon is a work  of fiction must change. It must give way to an enormously stronger  posterior hypothesis, namely that the Book of Mormon is  indeed fact-based: it has very strong political, cultural, social,  military, physical, geographical, technological, and religious roots  in ancient Mesoamerica as that world of ancient Mesoamerica is  described by Dr. Coe in The Maya .


## The  Anti-Book of Mormon Hat Trick: Expanding the Body of  Evidence

Now,  suppose we are not content with this reversal of our skeptical prior  and wish to try to maintain it unfairly while still appearing to be  rational. One way to do so is to expand our body of evidence unfairly  by including not only scholarly works like The Maya but also  including purely skeptical, “cherry-picked” evidence gathered  from nonscholarly sources.

[Page 93] For  example, in his 1973 Dialogue article and in the 2011 and 2018  podcast interviews, Dr. Coe mentions twelve more specific facts to  support the hypothesis that the Book of Mormon is false.  These include brass, chariots, sheep, goats, swine, wheat, barley,  cattle, silk, asses, a hybrid Egyptian/Hebrew writing system,  and the lack of Semitic DNA in the New World. Analyzing these twelve  additional correspondences taken from the podcasts and from Dialogue , we estimate their cumulative weight as 3.13 x 10 15 (see Appendix B, last part).

We  do not accept Dr. Coe’s (or more accurately, John Dehlin’s)  objection to “coins” or “week,” which were also raised as  possible negative points of evidence in the podcasts. The revealed  text of the Book of Mormon does not include the word coins in the Nephite monetary system described in Alma 11. While the word week does occur in the Book of Mormon, the book does  not say that a Nephite week consisted of seven days. Thus these  two data points are not admitted to evidence; they are not facts  actually asserted by the Book of Mormon.

To  enable a very severe but nonetheless fact-based test of the  historicity of the Book of Mormon, we grant to all 18  pieces of evidence cited by Dr. Coe a weight of 50 (“strong”  evidence) against the historicity of the Book of Mormon. To  be clear, we do not think these 18 pieces of evidence actually merit  this weight nor that such biased and nonscholarly sources should be  admitted to scholarly analysis. According to our evidence- weighting  scheme, at most these 18 facts qualify as specific and detailed, for  a weight of 10 each. But they are not particularly unusual.  Evidence for their existence might not as yet have been found by  archaeology, or evidence might be available but still scarce.

Nonetheless,  for the sake of the most rigorous possible fact-based test of the  Book of Mormon, we admit all 18 of them at the maximum  evidentiary strength considered in this article. Thus we multiply  2.69 x 10 –142 times 50 18 to recalculate the  odds of the hypothesis by accounting for the 18 data points provided  by Dr. Coe and others. We find that the likelihood that the  Book of Mormon is fictional is about 1.03 x 10 –111 ,  less than one in a thousand, billion, billion, billion, billion,  billion, billion, billion, billion, billion, billion, billion,  billion.

Just  how small a number is this? No easily grasped comparisons are  possible. The mass of the smallest known particle, the neutrino, is  about 10 –36 kg, while the mass of the observable  universe is about 10 52 kg. Thus the ratio of the mass of  the neutrino to the mass of the entire universe is approximately  10 –88 . This ratio, the mass of the neutrino  to the mass of the [Page 94] universe, is still one hundred thousand, billion,  billion times greater than the odds that the Book of Mormon  is a work of fiction.


## Two  Control Studies

In  the case of Manuscript Found, our posterior conclusion is much  stronger than our prior assumption that this book has little to do  with ancient Indian cultures. In other words, weighing the additional  evidence, we are even more convinced than we were before the analysis  that this book has very little in common with the ancient Indian  cultures as described in Dr. Coe’s book. Since Manuscript Found is written as if it were a true account, we conclude that it  is not true; it is fiction. (In fact, Manuscript Found is  excruciatingly bad fiction.)

In  the case of View of the Hebrews, weighing both the positive  and negative points of evidence (correspondences) between this book  and Coe’s book The Maya , we find that the positive evidences  are essentially counterbalanced by the negative evidences. Thus the  posterior conclusion is the same as skeptical prior assumption. View  of the Hebrews has little in common with the ancient Mesoamerican  Indian cultures described in The Maya. This book is not  written as fiction, but the universe of facts it cites do not agree  well with the universe of facts cited in The Maya . This level  of factual agreement could likely have been obtained by “guessing.”

View  of the Hebrews was published in 1823, well before the  Book of Mormon. Thus an important outcome of analyzing View  of the Hebrews was to document what Joseph Smith might have  known about [Page 95] the ancient Mesoamerican Indians. To make our analysis as  rigorous as possible, we did not allow any fact claim in View of  the Hebrews that corresponds to a specific fact stated in  both The Maya and the Book of Mormon to be  classified as “unusual” in our comparison of The Maya and  the Book of Mormon (see Appendix D). We did this because  Joseph Smith might have known about that fact from reading View  of the Hebrews . Therefore, that particular fact could at most be  specific and detailed (Bayesian positive) but not “unusual”  (Bayesian strong).

Since View of the Hebrews also contains many fact claims that run  contrary to facts in The Maya, this begs a question: “Why  did Joseph Smith not include those erroneous fact claims from View of the Hebrews in his ‘guesses’ that supposedly form  the basis for the Book of Mormon?”

Therefore,  those individuals who believe Joseph Smith was strongly  influenced by either View of the Hebrews or, more improbably  yet, by Manuscript Found , have some serious explaining to do.  They must explain why Joseph Smith took only the correct fact  claims from View of the Hebrews and why he avoided including  incorrect fact claims from Manuscript Found (see, for example,  negative correspondences 4, 6, and 9 in Appendix C) or also incorrect  fact claims from View of the Hebrews (see, for example,  negative correspondences 1, 2, and 4 in Appendix D).

Well,  if so, how did Joseph Smith avoid breathing in so much bad air?  Wrong guesses about ancient Indian cultures abound in Manuscript  Found and View of the Hebrews . How did Joseph Smith  manage to avoid making those wrong guesses? And how did Joseph Smith  manage to “guess” so much that was overwhelmingly correct?

To  name just a few of his correct “guesses,” how did Joseph Smith  guess correctly that separate historical records were kept of the  reigns of the kings, that large-scale public works were built, that  the fundamental unit of political organization was the independent  city-state, that the word “seating” meant accession to political  power, that an ancient Mesoamerican culture declined steeply and then  disappeared a few [Page 96] hundred years bc, that settled marketplaces  existed, that large migrations took place toward the north, and so on  for 124 more such examples?

Surely,  Joseph Smith must be the greatest guesser of all time,  succeeding with odds of many billions of billons of billions to one  against him.

We  prefer a more rational, more intellectually honest conclusion:  The Book of Mormon is a real historical record. It is  authentic.


## Summary

Dr.  J. B. S. Haldane, the great British biologist, once said that  prejudice is an opinion arrived at without considering the evidence.  Book of Mormon scholarly critics ignore a very large  body of evidence. They fail to read the Book of Mormon  carefully and objectively. In other words, they approach the  Book of Mormon with deep preexisting prejudices.

While  Dr. Coe is undoubtedly a great Mayanist, his knowledge of the  Book of Mormon is appallingly deficient. He has not paid  the price that any scholar must pay in order to offer a credible  opinion on a given topic. He doesn’t know his material. He  doesn’t know the Book of Mormon more than superficially.

There  are at least 131 correspondences between Dr. Coe’s book and the  Book of Mormon. In this article, we have cited 151 separate  pages of The Maya . Thus, well over half of the pages of Coe’s  book contain facts that correspond to facts referred to in the  Book of Mormon. Those who carefully read both Dr. Coe’s  book and the Book of Mormon can scarcely avoid noticing the  many correspondences between the two books.

Thus  Dr. Coe’s opinion “The picture of this hemisphere between 2,000  bc and ad 421 presented in the [B]ook [of Mormon] has little to do  with early Indian cultures” is simply not supported by the evidence  provided in his own book. Using Dr. Coe’s own book, we find that  early Mesoamerica has a very great deal indeed to do with the  Book of Mormon. The cumulative weight of these  correspondences, analyzed using Bayesian statistics, provides  overwhelming support for the historicity of the Book of Mormon  as an authentic, factual record set in ancient Mesoamerica.


## [Page 97] Appendix  A Positive Correspondences between the Book of Mormon  and The Maya

A few  comments must be made on the timing of events with regard to the  evidence summarized below. Most of the events in the Book of Mormon  took place from roughly 600 BC through AD 400, that is, mostly the  Late Preclassic period through the first century or two of the Early  Classic. The Book of Ether takes place very much earlier.

Dr.  Coe’s book strongly focuses on the Classic (Early, Late and  Terminal Classic), so it is fair to ask if the cultural, social,  political, etc., information summarized in The Maya is  relevant to the Book of Mormon. In other words, is it even  valid, because of the differing time periods, to make many of the  comparisons we have made?

[Page 98] We  believe the answer is yes, for three important reasons:

  - This  extended quote from p. 61 of The Maya is critically  important here: “ The more we know about that period [the Late  Preclassic], which lasted from about 400 or 300 BC to AD 250, the  more complex and developed it seems. From the point of view of social  and cultural evolution, the Late Preclassic really is a kind of  ‘proto-Classic’ in which all of the traits usually ascribed to  the Classic Maya are present, with the exception of vaulted stone  architecture and a high elaboration of calendar and script on  stone monuments.” Thus the Late Preclassic period, which  corresponds to most of the Book of Mormon events, is  certainly relevant to the Classic in terms of “social and cultural”  features.
  - Dr.  Coe, in his Dialogue article and later in the podcast  interviews, claims that based on his knowledge, the Book of Mormon  is false. If Dr. Coe can make such an assertion based on his  knowledge, then it is certainly reasonable and intellectually  rigorous to use the knowledge summarized in Dr. Coe’s book to  examine the opposing hypothesis, namely that the Book of Mormon  is true.
  - Correlations/congruencies/similarities  that occur after the Book of Mormon period are certainly  not invalid for that reason alone — far from it. We use an alphabet  developed by the Phoenicians about 3,000 years ago. The major world  religions that influence our culture so much today were founded  millennia ago. Our code of laws comes from English common law, about  a thousand years old, which was in turn based on still earlier  Roman civil law and Roman Catholic canon law. Our numbering system,  including the all-important zero, uses Arabic numerals, which were  actually derived from Hindu mathematicians working about 1,500 years  ago. Our division of the day into hours and minutes comes to us from  ancient Babylon and Egypt. The foundations of the modern scientific  method go back to the work of the Greek scientist Thales of Miletus,  who was active about 2,500 years ago. Even our modern three- course  meal structure goes back to the Muqaddimah of Ibn Khaldun,  written 600 years ago.

Thus,  older cultures and societies definitely leave important marks on  subsequent societies. It is perfectly consistent with history that  the [Page 99] Book of Mormon peoples in Preclassic times might have  left significant marks on the Maya Classic period, which is the  primary focus of Dr. Coe’s book.

Coe’s  standard: “Sylvanus Morley had thought that there was once  a single great political entity, which he called the ‘Old  Empire,’ but once the full significance of Emblem Glyphs had been  recognized, it was clear that there had never been any such thing. In  its stead, Mayanists proposed a more Balkanized model, in which  each ‘city state’ was essentially independent of all the others;  the political power of even large entities like Tikal would have been  confined to a relatively small area, the distance from the  capital to the polity’s borders seldom exceeding a day’s  march” (p. 274).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Throughout the Book of Mormon itself  there is never a reference to “Nephite nation” or to  a “Lamanite nation.” Interestingly, the word nation is used in reference to the Jaredites (Ether 1:43), a very  different people culturally than the Lehites. The Book of Mormon  uses this phrase: “nations, kindreds, tongues and people.” The  Nephites and Lamanites were clearly kindreds. In contrast, the word nation is used frequently in terms of the “nations of the  Gentiles.” The noncanonical Guide to the Scriptures has  eight references to “Nephite nation,” showing how deeply  engrained this idea of nationhood is in modern readers. But the  Book of Mormon never puts those two words together for  Nephite/Lamanite societies. The nation-state is not a political  structure found anywhere in the Book of Mormon. Instead,  the Book of Mormon peoples were organized politically in  city-states. Often one city-state would dominate a group of  other city-states. This dominance is the subject of the next  correspondence

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  There is not a single reference in the text of the  Book of Mormon to “Nephite nation” or “Lamanite  nation.” It is also unusual. Joseph Smith was growing up in  the new nation of America, with a great deal of pride and  self-identity as an independent nation. How did he avoid identifying  the Lamanite or Nephite peoples as “nations”? But he did avoid  it. What a lucky “guess” — over and over again during the  course of the Book of Mormon history.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Clusters of villages and communities were organized  under a single polity, dominated by a large ‘capital’  village, which could have contained more than 1,000 people. (p. 51).”  “Quirigua lies only 30 miles [Page 100] (48 km) north of Copan; … that  seems, on the basis of its inscriptions, to have periodically been  one of the latter’s suzerainties” (p. 137). “Bonampak,  politically important during the Early Classic, but by the Late  Classic an otherwise insignificant center clearly under the cultural  and political thumb of Yaxchilan” (p. 149). “These are  Tamarindito, Arroyo de Piedras, Punta de Chimino, Aguateca, and Dos  Pilas; the latter city seems to have dominated the rest” (p. 150).  “We now know that not all Maya polities were equal: the kings of  some lesser states were said to be ‘possessed’ by the rulers of  more powerful ones (the phrase y-ajaw , ‘his king,’  specifies this relationship” (p. 275).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:12; Alma 61:8; Helaman 1:27 . Zarahemla is clearly the Nephite capital city in the  Book of Mormon, with 140 mentions in the book. It is to  Zarahemla that the other cities of the Nephites look to for  leadership and supplies in their wars against the Lamanites. When the  Lamanite chieftain Coriantumr invades the Nephite confederation, he  makes straight for Zarahemla, “the capital city,” in the heart of  the Nephite lands, and bypasses all the lesser cities. Later the  city/land of Bountiful seems to become the Nephite capital  city-state.

Analysis  of correspondence: This political model was clearly part of  Book of Mormon political arrangements, so it is specific  and detailed in both books. It is also unusual. There is no  corresponding political arrangement in Joseph Smith’s time  which he might have used as a model.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Dos Pilas; the latter city … [began] putting  together a large-scale state as early as the seventh century AD,  when a noble lineage arrived from Tikal and established a royal  dynasty. The family was clearly adroit in its political maneuvers,  switching from an allegiance to their cousins at Tikal to one with  Calakmul, its arch-enemy” (p. 150).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 23:31 and Alma 43:4‒5. The  Amalekites and later the Zoramites, both of whom are Nephites by  birth but have dissented from the Nephites and built their own  cities, go over to the Lamanites as a body.

Analysis  of correspondence: The analysis is specific and detailed. In both  cases, whole city-states changed their political allegiance to that  of a former enemy. This does not seem unusual to a modern  reader and probably would not have seemed unusual even to a country  boy in the relatively innocent early 19 th century.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “In art, in religion, in state complexity, and  perhaps even in the calendar and astronomy, Olmec models were  transferred to the Maya” [Page 101] (p. 61). “Civilization … has  certainly been achieved by the time that state institutions … have  appeared” (p. 63). “By Classic times, full royal courts came  into view” (p. 93). “closer to the heart of the city itself,  where the dwellings of aristocrats and bureaucrats” (p. 126).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:1‒2; Alma 2:6‒7, 14‒16; Alma  27:21‒22; Alma 30:9; Alma 51:2‒7; Alma 60:7, 11, 21, 24. Both  the Book of Mormon and The Maya clearly show  societies that have large, complex state institutions. For example,  the Nephites had (1) some form of elections, (2) armies supported by  the state, (3) chief judges and lower judges, and (4) kings (at least  part of the time). The Lamanites appear to have had kings at all  times. Dr. Coe (p. 63) notes that state institutions were  developed among the Maya by the Late Preclassic, consistent with  Book of Mormon timing for the references provided.

Analysis  of correspondence: Both the British and American civil  governments had large, complex state institutions, but the Native  American societies certainly did not. This comparison is specific,  has quite a bit of detail, and probably would have been unusual  to Joseph Smith.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: To name just a few of the cities mentioned in The Maya we have Uxmal, Chichen Itza, Coba, Tulum,  Acanceh, Ek’ Balam, Mayapan, Piedras Negras, Ceibal, Palenque,  Naranjo, El Mirador, Bonampak, Uaxactun, Kaminaljuyu, Takalik Abaj,  Tikal (p. 9). “the great Usumacinta … draining the northern  highlands, … twisting to the northwest past many a ruined Maya  city” (p. 16‒17). “More advanced cultural traits, … the  construction of cities” (p. 26).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 51:20; Alma 59:5; 3 Nephi 9:3‒10.  Many named cities are mentioned in the Book of Mormon.

Analysis  of correspondence: By 1830 America had many cities, but there  were no cities on the frontier where Joseph Smith translated and  published the Book of Mormon. The Native Americans with  whom Joseph was familiar did not build cities, although he might  possibly have learned about some Native American cities by reading View of the Hebrews , so we do not count it as unusual.  Nonetheless, the correspondence is specific and quite detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Far up the New River … is the important site of  Lamanai, … occupied from earliest times right into the  post-Conquest period” (p. 85).

In the  case of the city Lamanai (Laman), all three consonants, and only  these three consonants, namely LMN, are found in the correct order  and are the same consonants as given for the city of Laman mentioned  in the Book of Mormon. This seems to be a “bullseye”  for the Book of Mormon. How did Joseph Smith correctly  “guess” the correct consonants, and only the correct consonants  in the correct order for the name of an important city “occupied  from earliest times?”

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, detailed and  statistically unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 1:7.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Native Americans with whom Joseph Smith  had direct contact did not have cities, let alone cities so densely  settled. He may have learned about Native American cities from View  of the Hebrews, but that book gives no information about how  densely settled those cities were. So this correspondence is specific  and detailed, but we do not count it as unusual, since Joseph Smith  might have gotten the idea from View of the Hebrews .

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Civilization … has certainly been achieved by the  time that state institutions, large-scale public works … have  appeared” (p. 63). Dr. Coe notes that city walls (certainly  a public work) were built “when, in places, local conditions  became hostile” (pp. 126, 194, 216).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:10; Mosiah 11:8‒13; Alma 14:27‒28;  Alma 48:8; Helaman 1:22; 3 Nephi 6:7‒8; Ether 10:5‒6.  The Book of Mormon speaks in some detail about the  large-scale public works that its societies, particularly its more  decadent societies, achieved.

[Page 103] Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence is both specific and  detailed. It would also seem unusual. The Native Americans of  Joseph Smith’s time and place did not build public works or  temples. Why would Joseph Smith have written a book that  clearly claimed that “the Indians” did so? However, since View  of the Hebrews references temples and walled towns (not in any  detail), and Joseph Smith might have gotten the idea from that  book, we will only count this correspondence as specific and  detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The excavation of two tombs from this period has  thrown much light on the luxury to which these rulers were  accustomed” (p. 74).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 11:3‒15.

Analysis  of correspondence: Joseph probably knew that the British royal  court lived in luxury, but the chiefs of the Indian tribes did not.  Why would Joseph have assumed that the ancestors of the Indians had  kings who lived in luxury? The Book of Mormon contrasts the  reign of King Benjamin, who deliberately did not live in luxury, with  decadent rulers who did. So Joseph was correct that some decadent  rulers did live in luxury, but there are few details, and this is not  particularly unusual.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Its superstructure’s chambers contain a stone  throne in the form of a snarling jaguar, painted red, with eyes  and spots of jade and fangs of shell; atop the throne rested a Toltec  circular back-shield in turquoise mosaic” (p. 206).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 11:9; Ether 10:6.

Analysis  of correspondence: Again, Joseph might have known about the  elaborate throne of the British royal family, so it was perhaps not  unusual, but what Native Americans was Joseph familiar with that had  thrones, let alone elaborate thrones? How did he “guess” this one  correctly? To be conservative, however, we will classify this as  a specific and detailed correspondence, but perhaps not an  unusual one.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “We now know a great deal about … Maya  societies as the seats of royal courts” (p. 7). “By Classic  times, full royal courts came into view” (p. 93). See also  pp. 7, 93, 95, 126, and 209.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:1‒2; Alma 22:2; Alma 51:7‒8,  21.

Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya refer repeatedly to these institutions of royalty. So the  correspondence is both specific and detailed. However, it may be  a stretch to call it unusual. While there were no Indian kings,  Joseph certainly knew about British royalty, and [Page 104] might have been  influenced thereby to put it into the Book of Mormon. So to  be conservative, we will not classify this one as unusual, although  it is specific and detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Where such stratagems typically played out was in  royal or noble marriages” (p. 97). “An elite class  consisting of central Mexican foreigners, and the local nobility with  whom they had marriage ties” (p. 103).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:24; Alma 47:35.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific but not  particularly detailed in the case of the Book of Mormon.  Joseph might also have been aware of the political marriages in the  royal houses of England and Europe. So we rate this one as specific  but not detailed or unusual.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “In courts, feasts and gifts helped to bind alliances  and keep underlings happy, with effects across the kingdom”  (p. 97).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 18:9; Alma 20:9.

Analysis  of correspondence: Neither book offers a lot of  distinguishing detail, although the references are specific. The  practice seems unusual in Joseph’s frontier setting in democratic  America. Why would Joseph Smith attribute this practice (unusual  for him) to the ancestors of the Indians? This correspondence is  therefore ranked as specific and unusual but not detailed.

Likelihood  = 0.1 .

Coe’s  standard: The Maya refers clearly to this practice: “In courts,  feasts and gifts helped to bind alliances and keep underlings happy,  with effects across the kingdom” (p. 97).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 2:12.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon reference to  political gifts is less specific but strongly suggestive. Again, the  practice seems unusual in Joseph’s frontier setting in democratic  America. Why would Joseph Smith attribute this practice (unusual  for him) to the ancestors of the Indians? This correspondence is  therefore ranked as only somewhat specific and unusual. The overall  likelihood is downgraded from specific and unusual to only specific.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “courts did not operate by individual actions alone.  They worked instead through factions pivoting around a high  ranking courtier or member of the royal family” (p. 97).

[Page 105] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 1:2‒9.

Analysis  of correspondence: In America in the early 19 th century, the party system had already been born, and the party often  pivoted around a key political figure like Thomas Jefferson or  John Adams, so this idea was not unusual to Joseph. However, it is  both specific and quite detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “[The Founder of Copan] was another stranger coming  in from the west, perhaps from Teotihuacan” (p. 118). “[At  Dos Pilas] … a noble lineage arrived from Tikal and  established a royal dynasty” (p. 150). “Uxmal … was  the seat of the Xiu family, but this was a late lineage of  Mexican origin that could not possibly have built the site”  (p. 180).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:19; Alma 47:35; Helaman 1:16.

Analysis  of correspondence: Again, both the Book of Mormon and The Maya specifically refer to this practice and in  considerable detail. However, Joseph Smith might have been aware  of the change in family dynasties in England about a century  earlier when the House of Hanover succeeded the House of Stuart as  kings of Great Britain, and used this as his model (however  unlikely). So the correspondence is specific and detailed, but  perhaps not unusual. To be conservative, we assign this a likelihood  of 0.1.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard : At Tikal “closer to the heart of the city itself,  [were] the dwellings of aristocrats and bureaucrats” (p. 126),  “the palaces were the administrative centers of the city”  (p. 128). At Aguateca the archaeologist was able “to identify  specialized areas, such as a house which was probably that of  the chief scribe of the city” (p. 151). “The House of the  Governor was built, probably to serve as his administrative  headquarters” (p. 182).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 60:19, 22; Helaman 9:1‒7.

Analysis  of correspondence: Both books are quite specific on this point,  but the Book of Mormon does not provide a lot of  detail. However, Joseph Smith never saw a state or national  capital city with its administrative center and nearby houses for  officials until well after the the Book of Mormon was published. So  this is unusual and specific.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “the ‘stela cult’ — the inscribed glorification  of royal lineages and their achievements” (p. 177). “The  text is completely historical, recounting the king’s descent from  Pakal the Great” (p. 264n169). “The figures that appear in  Classic reliefs are not gods and priests, but dynastic autocrats and  their spouses, children, and subordinates” (p. 273).

[Page 106] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 9:4; Jacob 3:13; Jarom  1:14.

Analysis  of correspondence: Like The Maya , the Book of Mormon  is very specific and detailed about separate records being kept of  the reigns of the kings. We know of no reason or existing historical  model that would have led Joseph Smith to have correctly  “guessed” that the doings of the kings were kept separately from  the rest of the history of a people. This is a specific,  detailed and unusual correspondence.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Mesoamerican ’empires’ such as Teotihuacan’s  were probably not organized along Roman lines; … rather, they were  ‘hegemonic,’ in the sense that conquered bureaucracies were  largely in place” (p. 100). “it seems obvious that many of  the native princes were incorporated into the new power structure”  (p. 206). “Or perhaps Calakmul found it easier … to rule  through local authorities” (p. 276).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 19:26‒27; Mosiah 24:1‒2.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya are both specific and detailed about this practice. As Dr. Coe  suggests, the only model Joseph Smith might conceivably have  heard about for control of subjugated peoples was the Roman one,  which was the opposite of the system used among the Maya, and also  the opposite of the system used in the Book of Mormon. How  did Joseph Smith “guess” that one correctly? Specific,  detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “the ruler took in tax or tribute” (p. 93).  “Scenes with food, drink, and tribute” (p. 97). “displays  of captives or tribute” (p. 124). “On what did the  population live? One answer is tribute” (p. 216).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:15, 22; Mosiah 19:15, 22, 26, 28;  Mosiah 22:7, 10. Also Alma 23:38‒39; Alma 7:22; Alma 24:9.

Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, the Book of Mormon and The Maya are both specific and detailed about the practice of  tribute. However, it is possible that Joseph had heard about this  practice either through the Bible or other sources. So we will  classify this correspondence as specific and detailed, but not  unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “There were 24 ‘principal’ lineages in Utatlan”  (p. 225). “There were approximately 250 patrilineages in  Yucatan at the time of the Conquest, and we know from Landa how  important they were” (p. 234).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob: 1:13; Alma 47:35; 4 Nephi 1:36‒38;  Mormon 1:8‒9.

Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya are very specific and detailed about how important it was  to belong to a leading patrilineage. While Joseph Smith  might have picked up this idea from reading the Bible (that is, the  tribes of Israel) we think this is very unlikely. So we regard this  correspondence as specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood =  0.02

Coe’s  standard: “The K’iche’ state was headed by a king,  a king-elect, and two ‘captains'” (p. 226). “royal  youths … or the ‘great youth,’ … perhaps the heir-designate”  (p. 278).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 1:10; Mosiah 6:3.

[Page 107] Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon also refers to  the practice of an heir-designate, so this is a specific  correspondence, but it is not particularly detailed. Also, Joseph may  have been aware of the practice of having heirs to the throne of  Great Britain. To be conservative, we will assign this correspondence  a likelihood of 0.5, although it may perhaps merit  a greater evidentiary strength.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “The K’ iche’ state was headed by a king,  a king-elect and two ‘captains'” (p. 226).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 22:3.

Analysis  of correspondence: Gideon clearly serves in the capacity of  a captain to King Limhi, so the idea is specific or highly  suggestive. It also seems unusual. Where would Joseph Smith have  come up with this idea? Because of lack of detail, we will assign  this correspondence a likelihood of 0.5, although it  probably merits a greater strength.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “[Spearthrower Owl installed his own son] … as the  tenth ruler of Tikal” (p. 109). “King of the great city of  Palenque [was] the second son of the renowned Palenque [ruler Pakal  the Great]” (p. 161). “There were 24 ‘principal’  lineages in Utatlan, closely identified with the buildings … in  which the lords carried out their affairs” (p. 225). “The  ancient Maya realm was … a class society with political power  … in the hands of an hereditary elite” (p. 234). “the  names of the cities themselves or of the dynasties that ruled over  them” (p. 271). “dynastic record of all Palenque rulers”  (p. 274).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: From the beginning of the Book of Mormon,  the key political question was which of sons of Lehi had the right to  exercise political power over the rest of Lehi’s descendants; in  other words, who would be the leader of an hereditary elite? See  Mosiah 1:9; Mosiah 11:1; [Page 108] Mosiah 19:16, 26; Mosiah 28:10; Alma 17:6;  Alma 20:8; Alma 24:3‒4; Alma 50:40; Helaman 1:4‒5; Helaman 2:2;  Ether 6:24.

Analysis  of correspondence: Both books very clearly attest to the central  importance of family dynasties. The Lamanite political model was  clearly that of hereditary kings. Even among the supposedly more  democratic Nephites, following the political reforms of King Mosiah,  the office of chief judge (an elected position) often descended from  father to son, for example, Alma to his son Alma, Pahoran to his son  Pahoran, etc. Obviously, there was a de facto hereditary  elite even during a time of popular elections.

Likewise, The Maya provides many examples of continuing conflict over  the question of which lineage would exercise political leadership. So  this correspondence is specific and quite detailed. However, it is  not unusual. Joseph might have been aware of the various family  dynasties in Europe and Great Britain, and their unending conflicts.  This correspondence is thus assigned a likelihood of 0.1.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The wily K’uk’ulkan II populated his city with  provincial rulers and their families” (p. 216). “At the head  of each statelet in Yucatan was the … the territorial ruler who had  inherited his post in the male line” (p. 236). “The kings of  some lesser states were said to be ‘possessed’ by the rulers of  more powerful ones” (p. 275).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:2‒3; Alma 17:21; Alma 20:4, 8.

Analysis  of correspondence: This pattern is clearly evident among the  Lamanite kings in the Book of Mormon and also as detailed  by Dr. Coe in The Maya . So the correspondence is specific and  quite detailed in both books. We know of no political model in his  time on which Joseph Smith might have relied to correctly  “guess” this correspondence. The kings of Great Britain did not  have provincial rulers of royal blood. Thus this correspondence is  specific, detailed and unusual. However, because of its overlap with  correspondence 1.2, we assign only a likelihood of 0.5 to  this correspondence. This choice is due to the specific additional  information that sometimes these provincial rulers were of royal  blood.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Epigraphers conclude that pectoral reverse records  the ‘seating’ or accession to power, of the ruler in question”  (p. 91). “Important glyphs now known to relate to dynastic  affairs include … inauguration or ‘seating’ in office”  (p. 274).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 8:12; Helaman 7:4; 3 Nephi 6:19.

[Page 109] Analysis  of correspondence: On three separate occasions, the  Book of Mormon uses exactly this word seating or seat to describe the holding of or accession to political  power. So the correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual. It  seems very unlikely that Joseph Smith would have correctly  “guessed” this particular word.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “a hereditary Chief Priest resided in that city, …  but in no source do we find his authority or that of the priests  superseding civil power” (p. 243).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 4:16‒18.

Analysis  of correspondence: Under the leadership of Alma the Younger, the  role of the head of state and the head of the church were separated,  while they had previously been combined. It appears that this was the  pattern afterwards among the Nephites, but we do not know what the  pattern was among the Lamanites. So this correspondence is specific,  but not detailed. Also, this pattern of “separation of church and  state” as practiced in America would not have been unusual to  Joseph Smith.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Several courtiers were so mighty as to be magnates,  perhaps descended from collateral royal lines. They needed to be  co-opted and watched, lest their pretensions got out of hand”  (p. 93).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma: 51:5, 8.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Alma describes a continuing  conflict in the Nephite confederation between those who desired  a freely chosen government and those who were of “high birth”  and sought to be kings. So the correspondence is specific, but not  very detailed in either book and probably not unusual to Joseph,  since seeking after power seems to be part of human nature.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Courts were often imitative. Through a curious  form of standardization, they emulated each other, even those of  enemies” (p. 95).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 47:23.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon likewise refers  to a specific custom of Lamanite royalty which had been taken  from their Nephite enemies. Dr. Coe himself regards this imitative  feature as “curious”; so we will agree to that point. It is  indeed unusual. However, there is not a lot of detail in either The Maya or the Book of Mormon about these imitative  practices, so we will classify this correspondence as specific and  unusual, but not detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard : “A final observation is that courts functioned as  ‘great households'” (p. 97).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma Chap. 19 (the whole chapter)

Analysis  of correspondence: Alma Chapter 19 describes a somewhat  unusual scene in which many of King Lamoni’s subjects gather to  Lamoni’s “house” (not his palace) in quite a familiar,  quasi-democratic way and are apparently able to bring their swords  along with them. This would certainly not be the case in the court of  Great Britain. So the practice is definitely unusual, but there is  not a lot of detail, and Dr. Coe is not very specific about what  he means by “great households.”

However,  there is enough specificity in the concept of royal courts as  households and the idea that King Lamoni had a house, rather  than a palace, to warrant identifying this as a correspondence.  While this may not be a detailed correspondence or  a particularly specific one, it is very unusual. Therefore, we  assign this correspondence a likelihood of 0.5.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “ Any candidate for high office had to pass an  occult catechism known as the ‘Language of Zuywa.'” (p. 236).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Enos 1:1; Mosiah 1:2.

Analysis  of correspondence: King Benjamin “caused that [his sons] should  be taught in the language of his fathers, that thereby they might  become men of understanding.” Later, his son Mosiah became the  ruler of the people. Likewise, Enos (a prince of sorts) was also  taught in the “language” of his father. One is led to ask: “Was  the regular course of education not sufficient for these young men;  was their common language not enough to qualify them to lead?”  Apparently not. This correspondence has some detail, and while it is  specific enough to get our attention, and is definitely unusual, we  do not think it merits a likelihood of 0.02; instead it is  assigned a likelihood of 0.1.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Thus, we can expect a good deal of local  cultural continuity even in those regions taken over by the great  city; but in the case of the lowland Maya, we shall also see outright  interference in dynastic matters, with profound implications for the  course of Maya history. (p. 100). “there are signs of …  profound breaks in the dynasty” (p. 116).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:1‒19; Alma 24:1‒2.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Maya also describes numerous other  instances in which one Maya kingdom invaded another and abruptly  changed the ruling dynasty. The same thing also occurs in the  Book of Mormon, [Page 111] when King Mosiah replaces (peacefully) the  ruler(s) of Zarahemla; and later in Alma 24 when the rebellious  Lamanites depose their hereditary king. So this correspondence is  specific and detailed in both books, but it probably does not qualify  as unusual. Joseph might well have known about the many European  wars, with multiple rulers bent on deposing each other.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The kings of some lesser states were said to be  ‘possessed’ by the rulers of more powerful ones” (p. 275).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 19:15.

Analysis  of correspondence: It is interesting that this specific word possess is the one used by the Maya to describe subservient  rulership. Likewise the Lehites (for example, 2 Nephi 1:9)  and the Jaredites (for example, Ether 2:8) were instructed that  theirs was a “promised land” and that they would “possess”  it as long as they kept their covenants with their heavenly king.  That same word possess was the relationship the Israelites  were to have with their lands of promise, under God’s rule (for  example, Deuteronomy 11:8, 2 Nephi 24:2) . The  wording here is highly specific, and unusual, but may not be detailed  enough in the case of the Maya to warrant a likelihood of 0.02,  but it does warrant a likelihood of 0.1. How would  Joseph Smith have guessed how appropriate that particular word  was to describe this relationship between a more powerful king  and his subservient kings among the Maya?

Likelihood = 0.1

Calculation  of overall likelihood for political correspondences

There  are 33 separate political correspondences between the Book of Mormon  and The Maya. Of these, nine have a likelihood of 0.5, 16  have a likelihood of 0.1 and eight have a likelihood of  0.02. Thus the overall likelihood of these 33 positive  correspondences is 0.5 9 x 0.1 16 x 0.02 8 =

4.99 x 10 –33 .

Coe’s  standard: “Given the similarities among the diverse cultures of  Mesoamerica, … its peoples must share a common origin, so far  back in time that it may never be brought to light by archaeology”  (p. 14).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See the Book of Ether.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon specifically  refers to a much earlier migration, the “Jaredites,” from  the Old World to the New World thousands of years before the Lehite  migration. However, the Book of Mormon does not say, as Coe  strongly implies above, that the earlier [Page 112] culture was the common  origin of subsequent cultures. Those details are lacking in the  Book of Mormon. The pattern is, however, unusual. It is one  thing for Joseph Smith to have “guessed” the existence of  the Lehite colony, but to correctly guess another much, much earlier  culture/migration is quite unusual. We rate this specific and unusual  for a likelihood of 0.1.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “there must have been an active interchange of ideas  and things among the Mesoamerican elite over many centuries”  (p. 14).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:12‒15; Mosiah 7:9,13; Alma 47:23,  35‒36; Helaman 4:3‒4, 8; Helaman 11: 24‒25; Alma  63:14; 3 Nephi 1:28.

Analysis  of correspondence: Coe is very specific and detailed in his  statement. The Book of Mormon is likewise detailed and  specific about the many exchanges of people (especially elite  peoples) and ideas over centuries among the Book of Mormon  peoples. Even a well-educated person, which Joseph Smith  was certainly not, would have a hard time thinking of  a historical model for this behavior, let alone blending it so  seamlessly and unobtrusively into the larger Book of Mormon  history. Therefore it is specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood  = 0.02 .

Coe’s  standard: “More than a negligible percentage of Tikal’s  population came from elsewhere, including the introduction of foreign  brides for elites” (p. 109).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:24 and Alma 47:35.

Analysis  of correspondence: Ammon was a Nephite prince whom the king  of the Lamanites sought as a husband for one of his daughters;  and Ammonihah was a Nephite by birth who became king of the  Lamanites after marrying the queen, so the correspondence is specific  and detailed. There were indeed foreign brides for elites. However,  Joseph might have been aware of the intermarriages among the royal  houses of Europe, where elites also had foreign brides, so it is not  unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “[Yucatan was famed for] production of honey, salt  and slaves” (p. 19). “Slaves comprised both sentenced  criminals and vassal war captives” (p. 225). “Human  sacrifice was perpetrated on prisoners, slaves, and children”  (pp. 243‒44).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:15; Alma 27:8; 3 Nephi 3:7.

Analysis  of correspondence: King Benjamin specifically states that he had not allowed his people to make slaves of one another, strongly  implying that slavery was the usual practice. (Mosiah 2:13). The  Lamanites offered to become slaves until they had recompensed the  wrongs they had done to [Page 113] the Nephites. The Gadiantons offered  a partnership with the Nephites as an alternative to slavery. So  the practice of slavery is specific and detailed in both books. Alas,  slavery has never been unusual, and it was certainly known to  Joseph Smith.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Languages other than Mayan were found in isolated  pockets, indicating either intrusions of peoples from foreign lands  or remnant populations engulfed by the expansion of the Mayan  tongues” (p. 31).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:19; Mosiah 9:6‒7; Mosiah 23:30‒35;  Alma 27:22.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon contains examples  of both kinds of linguistic “pockets,” both by intrusion and  engulfment. So the correspondence is specific and detailed. It  perhaps is not unusual, however. Joseph Smith might have  reflected on the intrusion of English into the French peoples of  Canada, or on the immigration of so many Germans during the  Revolutionary War … and then woven this idea seamlessly into the  Book of Mormon. Unlikely in the extreme, but possible. To  be (probably overly) conservative we rate this one as specific and  detailed, but not unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard. “men made from flesh. … [Humankind] turned to  wickedness and … were in their turn annihilated … as … a great  flood swept the earth” (p. 41). “the last Creation before  our own ended with a great flood” (p. 249).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 5:11, Alma 10:22.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Lehite colony had the five books of Moses,  and thus the flood story. Among the Maya and the Lehites, the great  flood was specifically due to the wickedness of men. So the  correspondence was specific and detailed. However, because  Joseph Smith may have read View of the Hebrews (however  unlikely that may be), we are not allowing this correspondence to be  unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The presence or absence of the Bering Strait is thus  not necessarily relevant to the problem [of the settlement of the  Americas]: the very first Americans may well have taken a maritime  route” (p. 41). “From the setting sun we came … from  beyond the sea” (p. 224).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 18:8, 23; Omni 1:16; Ether  6:12.

Analysis  of correspondence: Coe is specific on this point, but not  particularly detailed, at least as regards his interpretation of the Annals of the Kaqchikels . In contrast, the Annals themselves  seem to be very specific and detailed on [Page 114] this point. According to the  Kaqchikels, their ancestors came from the west, beyond the sea. The  Book of Mormon is specific that both the Jaredite and  Lehite migrations were by sea, and the Lehites came from the west. We  are not told how the Mulekites arrived. In Joseph’s day, most  educated persons believed in a Bering Strait migration of the  ancestors of the American Indians, perhaps by the land bridge. So for  Joseph to say that the Book of Mormon peoples came by sea  was unusual. However, in deference to Coe’s different  interpretation of the Annals from a plain reading of that  quotation, we rate this one as specific and unusual, but not  detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “There is some consensus among archaeologists that  the Olmecs of southern Mexico had elaborated many of these traits  beginning over 3,000 years ago, and that much of complex culture in  Mesoamerica has an Olmec origin” (p. 14). “The Olmec  civilization went into a steep decline ca 400 BC”  (p. 61).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:21; Book of Ether, especially chapters  13‒15.

Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence is detailed and specific.  It also is unusual. What information or possible model did  Joseph Smith have to “guess” a steep cultural decline  among a very ancient American Indian culture at the same time  the evidence summarized in The Maya says the decline occurred?  In a word, how did he “guess” this one?

Likelihood =  0.02

Coe’s  standard: “The esoteric knowledge of the Maya … served to  separate and elevate people in the know from those denied that  privilege” (p. 96). “Now, while among some other peoples  such kin groups are theoretically equal, among the Maya this was not  so, … for there were strongly demarcated classes” (p. 235).  “At the top were the nobles, … who had private lands and held the  more important political offices, as well as filling the roles of  high-ranking warriors, wealthy farmers and merchants, and clergy. The  commoners were the free workers of the population, … but in all  likelihood even these persons were graded into rich and poor. There  is some indication of a class of serfs, who worked the private  lands of the nobles” (p. 235).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 32:2; Alma 51:21; 3 Nephi 6:11‒12;  4 Nephi 1:26.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, and both the  Book of Mormon and The Maya agree in the details  upon which class distinctions were based, namely birth, wealth, and  learning. While distinctions based on wealth and learning probably  would not have seemed [Page 115] unusual to Joseph Smith (coming from the  working poor class), distinctions based on noble birth might have  seemed unusual. To be conservative, we will not count this as  unusual, only specific and detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “When the [Temple of the Feathered Serpent] was  dedicated ca AD 200, at least 200 individuals were sacrificed  in its honor” (p. 100). “The honored deceased was buried …  and [was] accompanied not only by rich offerings of pottery and other  artifacts, but also by up to three persons sacrificed for the  occasion (generally children or adolescents)” (p. 104). “Human  sacrifice was perpetrated on … children (bastards or orphans bought  for the occasion), … fit offerings for the Maya gods”  (p. 243‒44).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 4:14‒15, 21.

Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is detailed and specific in both  books. However, we do not count it as unusual. The practice of  sacrificing children and infants is described in the Bible, and  Joseph might have learned about it there.

Likelihood = 0.1

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 1:2; Alma 10:3; Mormon  9:32.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence here is the tie with Egypt  on multiple levels. The Book of Mormon claims to be written  “in the characters called among us, the reformed Egyptian.” Nephi  starts out his record telling us that he made it “in the language  of the Egyptians.” Furthermore, Lehi was a descendant of  Manasseh, who was born in Egypt of an Egyptian mother. The  correspondences are detailed and specific as far as the Egyptian ties [Page 116] are concerned, and very unusual. Why would Joseph Smith have  “guessed” that the ancestors of the Indians had these ties with  Egypt? This correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual, but  since Dr. Coe mentioned only one of several possible ties with  Egypt, we will downgrade the correspondence from 0.02 (specific,  detailed and unusual) to merely specific, or

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Many dynasties were founded in the Early Classic  period. Several … appear to have hived off from the southern  Lowlands” (p. 108). “What is clear is that, far more than  once thought, people moved about in the Early Classic periods”  (p. 109).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:12‒15; Alma 8:7; Alma 27:22; Alma  47:35.

Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya are full of examples in which large and small groups set out on  their own to found new cities. In the Book of Mormon we  have Nephi’s people separating from the other Lehites after their  arrival in the New World; Mosiah and his people leaving the main body  of Lehites and joining the people of Zarahemla; Zeniff and his people  going up to reclaim the land of their first inheritance; the people  of Ammon moving to avoid destruction; the flight of the people who  followed Alma the Elder, and so on. The correspondence is specific  and detailed, but probably not unusual. Joseph Smith and his  family were themselves part of a highly mobile American frontier  population, busy founding new communities.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The royal cooks and cleaners or other menials …  did not merit mention” (p. 129). “Among some other peoples  such kin groups are theoretically equal, among the Maya this was not  so. … The commoners were the free workers, … but in all  likelihood even these persons were graded into rich and poor. … And  at the bottom were the slaves who were mostly plebeians taken in war.  … Slavery was hereditary” (p. 235). (See the entirety of  p. 235.)

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:26‒33; Alma 32:4‒5; Alma 35:9;  3 Nephi 6:10 –12 .

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon details the same  sources of inequality as does The Maya : those owing to  education, social status and wealth. So the correspondence is  specific and detailed. Again, alas, this correspondence would  certainly not have been unusual to Joseph and his family … as  relatively poor “commoners [and] free workers,” using Coe’s  words. Since this correspondence has some overlap with 2.9, we reduce  its probative weight from 0.1 to 0.5.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “a variety of men, women and even children involved  in the buying and selling of commodities including shelled maize,  maize tamales , atole (maize gruel), salt and even vases”  (p. 145). “These are unique scenes of daily life within  a bustling marketplace. … Such markets have been found at  a number of other Classic Maya cities” (p. 146). “There  was a great market at Chichen Itza” (p. 233).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 7:10.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon is specific about  the existence of markets, but not detailed, except that there was  a “chief” market in Zarahemla, which was also the leading  city of the Nephite civilization at that time, strongly implying that  there were other, less prominent markets in Zarahemla or elsewhere. The Maya is highly detailed, however. This is undoubtedly  unusual. What North American tribes did Joseph Smith know of  that had settled, stationary marketplaces? So how did he “guess”  that one correctly? Specific and unusual for a likelihood of  0.1.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The Itza … were driven from this town … and  wandered east across the land, … where they settled as squatters in  the desolate city [of Chichen Itza]” (p. 216) “Those Itza  who were driven from Chichen Itza [wandered back] to the Lake Peten  Itza” (p. 219).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: The Lehites were driven from their Jerusalem home  and wandered for years before they found a home in the New  World. Alma the Elder and his people were driven from their homes by  King Noah and wandered in the wilderness until they found a home.  The Anti-Nephi-Lehis were likewise driven from their homes and had to  seek a new home in a strange land.

Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence is specific and detailed  in both books. It also seems unusual. Where would Joseph Smith  have gotten this idea of a wandering people seeking for a new  home? Most people do not read the Aeneid until college, if  they ever read it at all. What other literary work might Joseph have  gotten this idea from? Specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood =  0.02

Coe’s  standard: “intensification of inter-elite competition,  manifesting itself in different ways: not only in ‘wasteful  architectural extravagance'” (p. 175).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 11:8‒11.

Analysis  of correspondence: In both books, the correspondence is specific  and detailed as to ornamentation and costly excess for the thrones,  palaces, etc., of the elite. Joseph Smith was an unsophisticated  young man who had [Page 118] lived his life as a member of the working  poor. How would he know about such extravagance? How would he know  how to describe such ornate things without going overboard? Where  would he have seen such things? This is certainly unusual. So the  correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood =  0.02

Coe’s  standard: “They could have been the Yukateko on their trek  north to Yucatan from the Maya homeland” (p. 47). “Old  thrones toppled in the south as a new political order took shape  in the north; southern cities fell into the dust as northern ones  flourished” (p. 174). “The early Colonial chronicles in  Yukateko speak of a ‘Great Descent’ and ‘Lesser Descent,’  implying two mighty streams of refugees heading north from the  abandoned cities” (p. 177). The Yukateko trek took place many  centuries before the Late Classic migration northward, so this kind  of thing happened in widely different periods.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 63:4‒9; Helaman 3:3‒12.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon speaks repeatedly  of the “land northward” as the place where the Nephites could  flee or go into to settle. The land northward was where the Nephites  made their last stand and were finally destroyed. These northward  flights also took place over centuries. This is really a “bull’s  eye” for the Book of Mormon: a specific, detailed  and unusual correspondence.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “At some point … there was a single Mayan  language, Proto-Mayan, perhaps located in the western Guatemalan  highlands. According to one linguistic scenario, Wastekan and  Yukatekan split off from this parent body, with Wastek migrating up  the Gulf Coast to northern Veracruz and Tamaulipas in Mexico, and  Yukatekan occupying the Yucatan Peninsula. … The parent body then  split into two groups, a Western and an Eastern Division. In the  Western group, the ancestral Ch’olan-Tseltalan moved down into the  Central Area, where they split into Ch’olan and Tseltalan. The  subsequent history of the Tseltalans is fairly well known: in  Highland Chiapas, many thousands of their descendants, the Tsotsil  and Tseltal, maintain unchanged the old Maya patterns of life. …  Other Western language groups include Q’anjob’al, Tojol-ab’al,  Mocho’, and Chuj, which stayed close to the probable homeland …  The Eastern Division includes the Mamean group of languages. Mam  itself spilled down to the Pacific coastal plain at an unknown time”  (p. 28).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See: Words of Mormon 1:13; Mosiah 10:10; Alma  2:16, 32; Alma 54:16‒20.

[Page 119] Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. Book of Mormon  peoples indeed moved around a lot, just as The Maya describes . But apart from the large northward migrations  already described in 2.17 above, other details are lacking. Also,  this is certainly not unusual. Joseph Smith and his family were  part of a mass westward migration of Americans that had been  going on for a very long time.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “an individual called Ek’ Balam, … after whom the  place was anciently named” (p. 194).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 23:31; Alma 8:7; Alma 17:19;  3 Nephi 9:9.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in both the  Book of Mormon and The Maya , but Coe does not  mention many examples of this practice, so it is not detailed to the  same degree it is in the Book of Mormon. Also, in frontier  America it was common practice to name small towns and villages after  the founder or founding family. So this practice would not have been  unusual.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “From the setting sun we came, from Tula, from beyond  the sea” (p. 224).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: 1 Nephi 18:8, 23. This is clearly the  claim of the Book of Mormon: the Lehite colony came from  the west from beyond the sea.

Analysis  of correspondence: Coe discounts this statement as self-serving  political propaganda by those claiming descent from those hailing  from “the legendary home in the west.” Perhaps, but why would it  have any political power if the claim itself did not somehow matter  to the populace? And since Dr. Coe thinks the Book of Mormon  is fiction (or legend), then the Book of Mormon is accurate  and detailed in also making that claim, even if fictional. Given  similar statements in View of the Hebrews , we do not count  this as unusual, but it is both specific and detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “‘The raised wooden standard shall come! … Our  lord comes, Itza! Our elder brother comes, oh men of Tantun! Receive  your guests, the bearded men, the men of the east, the bearers of the  sign of God, lord!'” (Thus said the prophet Chilam Balam,  p. 227). From one of the books of Chilam Balam as follows:

> “Eat,  eat, thou hast bread; Drink, drink, thou hast water; On that  day, dust possesses the earth; [Page 120] On that day, a blight is on  the face of the earth, On that day, a cloud rises; On that  day, a mountain rises; On that day, a strong man seizes  the land; On that day, things fall to ruin, On that day, the  tender leaf is destroyed, On that day, the dying eyes are  closed, On that day, three signs are on the tree, On that day,  three generations hang there, On that day, the battle flag is  raised, And they are scattered afar in the forests, On that  day, the battle flag is raised, And they are scattered afar in the  forests.” (p. 229).

Coe thinks  that the Book of Mormon has such language because  Joseph Smith knew the Old Testament “very, very well.” We  disagree completely. The Hebrew [Page 121] chiasms and poetic parallelisms in  the Old Testament were largely erased by the scholars who translated  the King James Bible into English.

Even if  Joseph Smith knew about this kind of language, it is entirely  another thing to be able to write (or more challenging yet, dictate)  more than 300 separate chiasms into the Book of Mormon in  such a way that they integrate seamlessly with the message of  the book. Moreover, none of Joseph Smith’s own written sermons  or other writings use these poetic parallelisms. If Dr. Coe is  correct, why did Joseph Smith write these poetic parallelisms  into the Book of Mormon and then completely stop writing  like this? We find this objection inconsistent and uniformed.

We invite  Dr. Coe or anyone else to dictate a chiasm like Alma Chapter 36.  They can’t do it. This is unusual in the extreme. We would like to  give it a much higher weight (one in a billion?) but our  own weighting scheme forbids that. Instead, we give it a likelihood  of 0.02.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “This crop [maize] is so fundamental today that its  cultivation and consumption define what it means to be Maya”  (p. 242).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:22; Mosiah 9: 9, 14.

Analysis  of correspondence: In the Book of Mormon, corn is the  first grain mentioned; and not just once but all three times corn is  mentioned in the Book of Mormon, it is the first or the  only grain mentioned, not wheat. So this correspondence is specific  and detailed. But we do not count it as unusual, because View of  the Hebrews also mentions the primacy of corn among the Indians.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “From the ceramics at a site such as El Perú we  get an idea of the palace staff described in Chapter 4: the courtiers  and attendants, royal ladies or concubines” (p. 129).  “Monogamy was the general custom, but important men who could  afford it took more wives” (p. 234).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob 1:15; Jacob 2:27; Mosiah 11:4; Ether  10:5.

Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is specific in both books, and is  generally limited to rich men taking more wives. So the practice is  also detailed to that extent. Joseph would have been aware of the  practice of multiple wives among the Biblical patriarchs, and also  with David and Solomon. Among some Indian tribes, important men also  took multiple wives. So it is not unusual. Specific and detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “ to be able to trace one’s genealogy in both lines  to an ancient ancestry was an important matter, for there were  strongly demarcated classes” (p. 235).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 25:13; Alma 10:1‒3; 3 Nephi 5:20;  Ether 1:6‒33; Ether 6:22‒25; Mormon 1:5; Mormon 8:13.

Analysis  of correspondence: Coe describes this practice clearly and in  some detail. The Book of Mormon also describes it clearly  and in great detail. Why would this idea occur to Joseph Smith  in democratic frontier America in the early 1800s? America had  recently thrown off the rule of a class-based society, the  British. So the correspondence also seems unusual. Specific, detailed  and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “According to the early sources, the Maya books  contained histories, prophecies, maps, tribute accounts, songs,  ‘sciences,’ and genealogies” (p. 239). “Far more is  known of later Maya priests. … [They] kept the all-important  genealogies” (p. 243).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 3:3, 12; 1 Nephi 5:14;  1 Nephi 6:1; Jarom 1:1; Omni 1:1, 18; Alma 37:3.

Analysis  of correspondence: This practice of the priests (religious  leaders) carefully keeping genealogies is specific and detailed in  both The Maya and in the Book of Mormon. It is also  unusual. We know of no contemporary practice or model in Joseph’s  Smith’s world that put such emphasis on priests keeping a careful,  written, long-term record of one’s ancestors, a record handed  down over centuries. Specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood =  0.02

Coe’s  standard: “The latter include … amorous activities that are  probably of a homosexual nature” (p. 258).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 30:18.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon’s reference to  homosexual practices is veiled, but clear enough. How else does a man  commit “whoredoms”? There are no details in either book, and the  practice is not unusual.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Ch’olti’an became a literary language of  high prestige among scribes … [and like other prestige languages in  other civilizations] continued to be the preferred written languages  long after the spoken ones had died out or transformed into something  else” (pp. 30‒31). “Ch’olti’ … may well have served  as a lingua franca among elites and surely evolved, as [Page 123] did Medieval Latin and Coptic, into an arcane sacred language used by  few” (p. 270).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 1:2 and 3:19; Mosiah 1:2,  4; Mormon 9:34.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon emphasizes “the  language of the fathers,” a written language connected to the  language of the Egyptians. It is the language in which the plates  were written and was known to very few. It was obviously not the  common language. The reference is specific for both books, detailed  and unusual. Joseph Smith had not even mastered English at the  time the Book of Mormon came forth and certainly knew  nothing of Coptic or Medieval Latin, which he might have used as  a model for this correspondence.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “the Itza … moved into the peninsula … in the  thirteenth century, and gave their name to the formerly Toltec site  of Chichen” (p. 202).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 9:8; Helaman 11:20; 4 Nephi 1:7.

Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is specific in both books,  although Coe offers only one example for detail while the  Book of Mormon offers several examples. It is doubtful that  Joseph Smith knew of any examples around him that could serve as  a model for this practice. America was being built up by  founding new cities and towns, not repopulating old or abandoned  ones. So the correspondence is specific and unusual. Because Coe  cites only one example, we will not claim it to be detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Another pervasive idea was the division of the world  into sectors [four of them]. … In the Classic period, eagles were  thought to perch in each of the four directions” (p. 246).  “The four walls of spectacular … royal tombs … display distinct  hills. … Placed in the middle, the deceased became the center of  the universe” (p. 247). “a map of world directions, adorned  with gods and sacrifices appropriate to each quarter, …  celebrations … presided over by a set of four young gods,  a nod to the four directions” (p. 249). “The  Zinacanteco world is conceived of as a large quincunx, with four  corners and a ‘navel of the earth’ in the middle”  (p. 292).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 22:25; 3 Nephi 16:5;  Ether 13:11.

Analysis  of correspondence: Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  are specific and detailed about the idea that the world is divided  into four quarters. If Joseph Smith was making this up, why not  into halves, or thirds or eighths? Coe (p. 247) notes that this  idea is widespread and very ancient among humankind, which is  probably why we ourselves talk in this way [Page 124] about the four quarters of  the earth, without giving it much thought. Specific and detailed, but  for this reason, not unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “there are also good reasons to believe that it was  the Olmecs who devised the elaborate Long Count calendar. … Many  other civilizations, including the Maya, ultimately drew on Olmec  achievements” (p. 54). “In art, in religion, in state  complexity, and perhaps even in the calendar and astronomy, Olmec  models were transferred to the Maya” (p. 61). “The Maya  looked to the west [toward Olmec lands] … as the enduring locus of  civilization” (p. 63).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Because of the 24 gold plates found by the people  of Limhi among the ruins of an ancient civilization, The  Book of Mormon also looks to an ancient, destroyed  civilization as a source of knowledge, but apparently  exclusively as a source of depraved knowledge of “secret  combinations” rather than of useful accomplishments. For example,  see Mosiah 8:9; Alma 37:29, 32; Ether 8:9 and 9:26. It is interesting  that both the Jaredites and the Maya were ultimately destroyed  because of “endemic, internecine warfare” (Coe’s words; see  above).

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is certainly specific, but  the details do not match, perhaps because of the very different  orientations of the two books. The Book of Mormon tells us  that the Nephites were destroyed because of their embrace of the  secret combinations also found in the book of Ether, so the  Book of Mormon probably would not be inclined to tell us if  anything useful and good came from the Jaredite records. It is also  unusual. Why would Joseph Smith “guess” that the ancient  Indians looked toward an even more ancient civilization for guidance,  either for good or bad? This correspondence is specific and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “It was not just the ‘stela cult’ — the  inscribed glorification of royal lineages and their achievements —  that disappeared with the Collapse” (p. 177), “Native  lineages seem to have deliberately falsified their own histories for  political reasons” (p. 199). “[A postclassic site] …  consists of plazas surrounded by lineage temples” (p. 225n145).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: The Book of Mormon is a lineage  history. It begins with the story of Lehi and his family, and was  later edited and compiled by Mormon (“a pure descendant of  Lehi,” 3 Nephi 5:20) and his son Moroni. The Book of  Ether is likewise a lineage history. Ether was a direct  descendant, through many centuries, of Jared.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books. It is also unusual. How could Joseph Smith have  learned about lineage histories, and woven this correspondence into  the fabric of the [Page 125] Book of Mormon in such an unobtrusive and  comprehensive way? How did he “guess” this one correctly?

Likelihood = 0.02

Calculation  of overall likelihood for Social and Cultural Correspondences

There  are 31 separate social and cultural correspondences between the  Book of Mormon and The Maya. Of these, five have  a likelihood of 0.5, 16 have a likelihood of 0.1, and ten  have a likelihood of 0.02. Thus the overall  likelihood of these  31 positive correspondences is 0.5 5 x 0.1 16 x  0.02 10 =

3.21 x 10 –35 .

  - Central role of temples (ritual centers) in society Coe’s  standard: “Kaminaljuyu … consisted of several hundred temple  mounds” (p. 55). “The lowland Maya almost always built their  temples over older ones” (p. 59). “On top of this …  pyramid had once been a pole-and-thatch building” (p. 82n33).  “Even more advanced temples have been uncovered at Tikal”  (p. 83). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 5:16; Mosiah 9:8; Mosiah  11:8‒10; Helaman 1:21; Helaman 13:4; 3 Nephi 11:1. Analysis  of correspondence: Temples, ritual centers, were obviously  central to Maya life. So were they also among the Nephites. One of  the very first things that Nephi’s small group does after splitting  off is to build a temple “after the manner of the temple of  Solomon” (2 Nephi 5:16). King Benjamin gathers his people  around the temple. After the great destruction, the Nephites gather  around the temple in the Land of Bountiful, and the risen Lord  appears. While this correspondence is specific and detailed, we do  not count it as unusual, because Joseph Smith might — perhaps,  possibly, conceivably — have gotten the idea from View of the  Hebrews. Likelihood = 0.1 Strong Christian elements in Maya religion Coe’s  standard: “Many Colonial-period Maya identified the risen  Christ with the Maize God” (p. 71). “The raised wooden  standard shall come! … Our lord comes, Itza! Our elder brother  comes. … Receive your guests, the bearded men, the men of the east,  the bearers of the sign of God, lord!” (p. 227). “There was  … a great deal of … blending between Spanish and Maya  religious institutions and beliefs, since in many respects they were  so similar” (p. 289). Book of Mormon  correspondence: From the title page to the last chapter, the  Book of Mormon is, as it claims to be, another witness that  Jesus is the Christ. [Page 126] Analysis  of correspondence: In both books, the correspondence is specific,  detailed and very unusual. Why would Joseph Smith have “guessed”  that the ancient Mesoamericans had strong elements of Christianity in  their religious practices? View of the Hebrews claims to find  ancient Hebrew elements among American Indian tribes, but not  Christian elements. So this is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Change in popular cults; decline of a great city in the  highlands in the Late Preclassic Coe’s  standard: “While the pre-eminence of Kaminaljuyu during the  Late Preclassic period is plain to see, its star began to sink by the  second and third centuries AD, and most of it was left in ruin at the  close of the Late Preclassic” (p. 80), “It is strange that  figurines are absent from most known Chicanel sites, indicating that  there was a change in popular cults [during the Late Preclassic  300 BC to AD 250]” (p. 81). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman Chapters 10 and 11, 3 Nephi (all),  and 4 Nephi 1:20, 35‒40. This is the time period with  which the Book of Mormon deals most intensively, and it  includes many separate events of religious awakening, increased faith  and great prosperity, which are then followed by apostasy and  idolatry. Thus there are indeed many changes in “popular cults,”  including the final one starting in about AD 200. Fourth Nephi  outlines the fall and disintegration of Nephite society, which begins  about this time. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in both books,  but much more detailed in the Book of Mormon than in The  Maya. The timing is also unusual. In the long centuries of Maya  civilization (roughly 1800 BC to 900 AD) the Book of Mormon  correctly “guesses” the period that Coe recognizes as a dramatic  one when “a change in popular cults” occurred. We count this one  as specific and unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Close association of temples with sacred mountains/hills (pyramids) Coe’s  standard: “Rising up the corners of the temple’s substructure  are monstrous faces representing witz or mountains”  (p. 136). “Long thought to be faces of the Maya rain god  Chahk, they are actually iconographic mountains ( witz ), the  descendants of the corner masks placed on Classic-period monuments  like Copan’s Temple 11″ (p. 180). Book of Mormon  correspondence: 2 Nephi 12:2‒3. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and quite  detailed in both books. The temples are associated with sacred  mountains, for example the Temple Mount in Jerusalem. Although  perhaps Joseph Smith might have gotten the idea from careful  reading of the Bible, nothing in conventional Christianity of his day  would have prepared him to see the [Page 127] association between temples and  holy sacred mountains, a concept shared by the Nephites and by  the Maya. This is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood =  0.02 Seers and seer stones exist Coe’s  standard: “Two of the houses were certainly devoted to village  rituals; Structure 12 in particular had … a collection of  crystals like those used by modern Maya diviners” (p. 107).  “Two types of religious specialists practice here and in other  traditional Yukateko settlements. One is … seemingly imbued with  far greater spiritual and perhaps real power: this is the hmeen ,  ‘he who does or understands things.’ … These specialists still  play an important role in divination and prophecy, using their  crystals to scry the future” (p. 296). “The rite begins  after the hmeen has consulted his zaztun or crystal”  (p. 297). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 8:13‒17; Mosiah 28:13‒16; Ether  3:23‒24, 28. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both the Book of Mormon and The Maya. However, we do  not count it as unusual, although it will certainly appear unusual to  the modern mind. Joseph Smith had his own seer stone before the  coming forth of the Book of Mormon and might have used that  as his model for including seer stones and seers in the book. Likelihood = 0.1 Temple and other religious rituals involve bloodletting Coe’s  standard: “In the great courtyards less private activities took  place, including dances, ritual bloodletting from the penis and  tongue on calendrically important days” (p. 129). “These  were inscribed within a very brief period … and celebrate …  temple dedication rituals such as bloodletting” (p. 184).  “Before and during rituals, … self-mutilation was carried out by  jabbing needles and stingray spines through ears, cheeks, lips,  tongue, and the penis, the blood being spattered on paper or used to  anoint the idols” (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jarom 1:5, 11; Alma 25:15‒16; Mosiah  13:27‒28. Analysis  of the correspondence: Up until AD 33 or so, the Nephites  practiced the Law of Moses, with its temple rituals involving  bloodletting. Presumably they also followed the Abrahamic practice of  circumcision. While the practices described in The Maya and  the Law of Moses correspond in that they involve bloodletting from  both human and animals for religious rituals, the details overlap  only somewhat. Also they would probably not be unusual to  a Bible-reading individual. Specific, but not detailed nor  unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 [Page 128] Belief in resurrection Coe’s  standard: “Following their ultimate victory, they resurrected  their father Hun Hunahpu, the Maize God” (p. 71). “Modern  rendering of a wall painting of the resurrected Maize God  surrounded by female figures” (p. 88n36). “Significantly, …  the ruler is portrayed not as K’awiil, but as the youthful Maize  God, … a representation celebrating resurrection and  apotheosis” (p. 195). “Both … had a hero god who died  and was resurrected — for the Spaniards, this was Jesus Christ, and  for the Maya, the Maize God” (p. 289). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 9:12; Alma 41:2; Alma 33:22  among many others. There are 57 references to the resurrection of  Jesus Christ in the Book of Mormon. Analysis  of the correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya refer specifically and in detail to a belief in bodily  resurrection. The doctrine of a literal bodily resurrection had  been in retreat in Christianity for centuries — so there was no  intellectual reason for Joseph to put it forward as a prominent  part of the Book of Mormon. Also, as far as we know, the  North American Indians did not believe in resurrection. View of  the Hebrews says nothing about such a belief among the  Indians. How did Joseph Smith correctly “guess” that the  belief might be held by distant ancestors of some of the Mesoamerican  Indians? Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Baptismal rite among the Maya Coe’s  standard: “As soon as possible, the anxious parents [of  a newborn child] went to consult with a priest so as to  learn the destiny of their offspring, and the name which he or she  was to bear until baptism. The Spanish Fathers were quite astounded  that the Maya had a baptismal rite, which took place at an  auspicious time” (p. 233). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 31:13; Mosiah 21:35;  Moroni 6:1‒4 and many others. It is interesting that a new  name was received at the time of baptism in the Book of Mormon  and among the Maya (see above). Analysis  of the correspondence: The practice of baptism is specific and  detailed in both the Book of Mormon and in The Maya. It  is also unusual. If the Spanish Fathers were “astounded” at the  baptismal rite of the Maya, we should be also. Specific, detailed and  unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Ritual walking in straight roads symbolizes acceptable behavior Coe’s  standard: “At the site of Edzna, … occupants had constructed  a massive hydraulic system, consisting of 13.75 miles (22 km) of  canals … (resembling aquatic versions of Maya ritual roads)”  (p. 90). “Coba is … a whole group linked to a central  complex by long, perfectly straight masonry causeways usually called  … sakbe (“white road”). … Some have claimed that the  Maya [Page 129] sakbe were arteries of commerce, but a purely  ceremonial function is far more plausible” (p. 163). “A  causeway, or sakbih, 11.25 miles (18 km) long runs southeast from  Uxmal through the small site of Nohpat to Kabah, so presumably the  three centers were connected at least ceremonially” (p. 182).  “Processional routes, the ‘white roads’ or sakbih described  earlier, carved straight paths across broken landscapes. To walk  along them was to move in acceptable, ritually decorous ways”  (p. 242). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 4:32; 2 Nephi 9:41;  Alma 7:9. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is quite specific in both  the Book of Mormon and The Maya , and it is certainly  unusual. What religious practice did Joseph Smith know of that  resembled this ritual behavior in the least? But details are not  provided in the Book of Mormon, so the practice is specific  and unusual, but not detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Humans obligated to abide by covenants, God usually involved Coe’s  standard: “Ultimately, humans were obligated to abide by  covenants. A covenant, as defined by the ethnographer John  Monaghan, is a binding contract that explains how one should  behave. Gods were usually involved, as in the case of maize  production” (p. 242). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 5:6‒8; Mosiah 6:1‒2; Mosiah  21:31‒32. Analysis  of correspondence: The Maya and the Book of Mormon  share a common understanding of covenants as a binding  contract or agreement between God and man. This is specific and  detailed. It is also unusual. What existing model or pattern did  Joseph Smith rely on to correctly “guess” that covenants  between God and man existed among ancient Mesoamerican Indians? In  the conventional Christianity of Smith’s day, the importance of  covenants was very much downplayed if not absent altogether. So the  practice is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Hereditary priests and Chief Priests Coe’s  standard: “Far more is known of later Maya priests. In contrast  to their Aztec counterparts, they were not celibate. Sons acquired  their fathers’ offices, although some were second sons of lords”  (p. 243). “During the prosperity of Mayapan, a hereditary  Chief Priest resided in that city” (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 29:42; Alma 45:22‒23; Alma 46:6. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya teach clearly of hereditary priests and chief priests. This  correspondence is detailed and specific. It is also unusual.  Joseph Smith’s experience of frontier priests would have been  of the Protestant variety, who were not celibate, but who instead  were “trained for the ministry” and did not inherit their  offices; or of the Catholic variety, who were celibate and therefore  could not pass on [Page 130] their priestly office to a son. How did  Joseph Smith correctly “guess” that among some of the  distant ancestors of the Indians, priests were not celibate and that  priestly office could descend from father to son? Likelihood =  0.02 Existence of opposites is an essential part of creation Coe’s  standard: “A relevant Maya term from these ceramics is tz’ak ,  the idea of ordering. A key part of creation was the  establishment of opposites. These are presented in alternative  spellings for the tz’ak glyph. … The exquisite Tablet of  the 96 Glyphs … lays out a long series of such opposed pairs.  It begins with sun and night, followed by possibly life and death,  then Venus and moon, wind and water” (p. 251). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 2:11‒15. Analysis  of correspondence: The words create or creation are  used six times in these five verses in the Book of Mormon,  all strictly in the context of opposed pairs. The correspondence is  specific and detailed. It is also unusual. What document or religious  teaching could Joseph Smith have possibly used that would have  led him to correctly “guess” this belief shared by the Maya and  the Book of Mormon patriarch Lehi? Specific, detailed and  unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Pantheistic religion and idols Coe’s  standard: “along with the latter three temples, each of these  was consecrated to a single god among the triad of divinities  from whom the Palenque dynasty claimed descent” (p. 157).  “Flanking the tableau are two strange deities with rodent heads”  (p. 160). “On one side, the god K’awiil (left) faces God L,  the deity of tobacco” (p. 166n100). “The face of the Jaguar  God of the Underworld is surmounted by the heads of other deities,  including a Bat God” (p. 166n101). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 7:6; Alma 17:15; Alma 31:1; Helaman  6:31; Mormon 4:14, 21. Analysis  of correspondence: The references to idol gods are specific and  detailed in both the Book of Mormon and The Maya. However, this correspondence is not unusual. The Bible also  clearly refers to this practice, and Joseph would have known of it. Likelihood = 0.1 Sorcery, magic and witchcraft practiced Coe’s  standard: “According to one story, by means of sorcery Hunac  Ceel drove Chak Xib Chak to abduct the bride of the ruler of Izamal”  (p. 218). “or refer to diseases controlled by kings in an  elevated, almost dynastic form of sorcery” (p. 256).  “Witchcraft is an omnipresent danger; the witch takes the form of  an animal alter-ego” (p. 297). “Defeated by the evil magic  of his adversary Tezcatlipoca, the king was forced to leave Tula with  his followers” (p. 201). [Page 131] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 1:32; Mormon 1:19; Mormon 2:10. Analysis  of correspondence: The Maya and the Book of Mormon both  refer specifically, negatively and in some detail to the practice of  magic, sorcery and witchcraft among the peoples described in the two  books. A belief in the practice of evil magic, however, would  probably not be unusual to Joseph Smith. It was part of the  world view during the early 19 th century in backwoods  America. Specific and detailed, Likelihood = 0.1 Ritual for the renewal of the community, including transfer of sacred  objects Coe’s  standard: “The entire religious drama is directed toward  renewal of the universe and of the community, and ends with the  transfer of the sacred objects of office to a new set of  cargo-holders” (p. 295). Book of Mormon  standard: See Mosiah Chapters 1‒6. Analysis  of the correspondence: King Benjamin’s gathering of his people  to the temple, complete with community-wide covenant making at the  time of the transfer of his kingly office to his son, along with the  transfer of sacred objects, is very nearly a perfect fit with  Coe’s standard described above. This is specific, detailed and  unusual. What possible model or contemporary practice could  Joseph Smith have drawn upon to describe King Benjamin’s  gathering of his people so perfectly? Likelihood = 0.02 Blurring/combining priestly and political roles Coe’s  standard: “In other respects, the distinction between priestly  and political roles may have been blurred in the Classic period”  (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 2:1; see also the Foreword to the Book  of Alma. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. Priestly  leadership and political leadership were sometimes combined/blurred  in both books, but not always, as described in correspondence 1.27  above. Also, there is not enough detail provided in either book to  rank this as unusual, so the evidence is weighted as specific only. Likelihood = 0.5 Divination: consulting oracles for secular guidance and assistance Coe’s  standard: “Specialists took charge of these prayers or acts of  divination … to discern messages from the gods and to understand  the imbalances leading to disease, drought, and other problems”  (p. 243). “Later Maya priests [administered] … ‘their  methods of divination … events and the cures for diseases'”  (p. 243). “An important function of all highland shamans is  divination. Along with the mechanism of the 260-day count is the  casting of certain red seeds or maize kernels, a practice deeply  rooted in [Page 132] the pre-Spanish past. … Shamans conduct rituals for both  individuals and the whole community” (p. 292). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 3:11; Alma 16:5‒6;  Helaman 11:12‒17. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in that God is  consulted through his representatives regarding drought and other  problems affecting both individuals and the community. Casting of  lots (or seeds) is mentioned. This practice is also mentioned in the  Bible (for example, Saul and the witch of Endor), so we will not  count it as unusual. It is specific and at least somewhat detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Calendars kept by holy men/priests Coe’s  standard: “The 260 day calendar … still survives in unchanged  form among some indigenous peoples in southern Mexico and the Maya  highlands, under the care of calendar priests” (p. 64). “For  some reason, the calendar priests active in Highland Guatemala today  are almost undetectable in earlier times. … But similar figures  must have existed.” “Later Maya priests’ … list of duties  [included] … ‘computation of the years, months and days'”  (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 8:1‒5. A “just  man” who “did many miracles” was responsible for the reckoning  of time among the people. Analysis  of correspondence: In the Book of Mormon the reference  is specific but not very detailed. It does seem unusual. In the  (highly) unlikely event that Joseph knew of the origin of the  Gregorian calendar (instituted by Pope Gregory XIII), he might also  have known of the Julian calendar (instituted by Julius Caesar). How  would he have chosen correctly between a calendar instituted by  priests or by civil authorities? So we count this one specific and  unusual but not detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Virtuous persons “confess” Coe’s  standard: “Humans existed within a larger set of  expectations. The virtuous person was toj , ‘right’ and  ‘straight,’ at times a literal term that Colonial Mayan  languages tied to cleaning, confession, and prophecy” (p. 242). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 26:29; Alma 17:4; Helaman 5:17. Analysis  of correspondence: Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  clearly tie confession with becoming a virtuous person, becoming  clean. Confession also exists within a larger set of  expectations (for example, baptism in the Book of Mormon).  So the correspondence is specific and detailed. The correspondence  also seems unusual. While confession is a prominent part of the  Roman Catholic faith, it was not prominent in any Protestant  tradition in frontier America in the early 1800s. It was various  forms of Protestantism [Page 133] that Joseph Smith was familiar with. How  did he “guess” correctly to include confession as an important  duty among repentant, virtuous persons? How did he know that some of  the ancient Mesoamericans would view confession in much the same  light? Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Kaminaljuyu … consisted of several hundred temple  mounds” (p. 55). “The lowland Maya almost always built their  temples over older ones” (p. 59). “On top of this …  pyramid had once been a pole-and-thatch building” (p. 82n33).  “Even more advanced temples have been uncovered at Tikal”  (p. 83).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 5:16; Mosiah 9:8; Mosiah  11:8‒10; Helaman 1:21; Helaman 13:4; 3 Nephi 11:1.

Analysis  of correspondence: Temples, ritual centers, were obviously  central to Maya life. So were they also among the Nephites. One of  the very first things that Nephi’s small group does after splitting  off is to build a temple “after the manner of the temple of  Solomon” (2 Nephi 5:16). King Benjamin gathers his people  around the temple. After the great destruction, the Nephites gather  around the temple in the Land of Bountiful, and the risen Lord  appears. While this correspondence is specific and detailed, we do  not count it as unusual, because Joseph Smith might — perhaps,  possibly, conceivably — have gotten the idea from View of the  Hebrews.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Many Colonial-period Maya identified the risen  Christ with the Maize God” (p. 71). “The raised wooden  standard shall come! … Our lord comes, Itza! Our elder brother  comes. … Receive your guests, the bearded men, the men of the east,  the bearers of the sign of God, lord!” (p. 227). “There was  … a great deal of … blending between Spanish and Maya  religious institutions and beliefs, since in many respects they were  so similar” (p. 289).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: From the title page to the last chapter, the  Book of Mormon is, as it claims to be, another witness that  Jesus is the Christ.

[Page 126] Analysis  of correspondence: In both books, the correspondence is specific,  detailed and very unusual. Why would Joseph Smith have “guessed”  that the ancient Mesoamericans had strong elements of Christianity in  their religious practices? View of the Hebrews claims to find  ancient Hebrew elements among American Indian tribes, but not  Christian elements. So this is specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “While the pre-eminence of Kaminaljuyu during the  Late Preclassic period is plain to see, its star began to sink by the  second and third centuries AD, and most of it was left in ruin at the  close of the Late Preclassic” (p. 80), “It is strange that  figurines are absent from most known Chicanel sites, indicating that  there was a change in popular cults [during the Late Preclassic  300 BC to AD 250]” (p. 81).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman Chapters 10 and 11, 3 Nephi (all),  and 4 Nephi 1:20, 35‒40. This is the time period with  which the Book of Mormon deals most intensively, and it  includes many separate events of religious awakening, increased faith  and great prosperity, which are then followed by apostasy and  idolatry. Thus there are indeed many changes in “popular cults,”  including the final one starting in about AD 200. Fourth Nephi  outlines the fall and disintegration of Nephite society, which begins  about this time.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in both books,  but much more detailed in the Book of Mormon than in The  Maya. The timing is also unusual. In the long centuries of Maya  civilization (roughly 1800 BC to 900 AD) the Book of Mormon  correctly “guesses” the period that Coe recognizes as a dramatic  one when “a change in popular cults” occurred. We count this one  as specific and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Rising up the corners of the temple’s substructure  are monstrous faces representing witz or mountains”  (p. 136). “Long thought to be faces of the Maya rain god  Chahk, they are actually iconographic mountains ( witz ), the  descendants of the corner masks placed on Classic-period monuments  like Copan’s Temple 11″ (p. 180).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: 2 Nephi 12:2‒3.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and quite  detailed in both books. The temples are associated with sacred  mountains, for example the Temple Mount in Jerusalem. Although  perhaps Joseph Smith might have gotten the idea from careful  reading of the Bible, nothing in conventional Christianity of his day  would have prepared him to see the [Page 127] association between temples and  holy sacred mountains, a concept shared by the Nephites and by  the Maya. This is specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood =  0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Two of the houses were certainly devoted to village  rituals; Structure 12 in particular had … a collection of  crystals like those used by modern Maya diviners” (p. 107).  “Two types of religious specialists practice here and in other  traditional Yukateko settlements. One is … seemingly imbued with  far greater spiritual and perhaps real power: this is the hmeen ,  ‘he who does or understands things.’ … These specialists still  play an important role in divination and prophecy, using their  crystals to scry the future” (p. 296). “The rite begins  after the hmeen has consulted his zaztun or crystal”  (p. 297).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 8:13‒17; Mosiah 28:13‒16; Ether  3:23‒24, 28.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both the Book of Mormon and The Maya. However, we do  not count it as unusual, although it will certainly appear unusual to  the modern mind. Joseph Smith had his own seer stone before the  coming forth of the Book of Mormon and might have used that  as his model for including seer stones and seers in the book.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “In the great courtyards less private activities took  place, including dances, ritual bloodletting from the penis and  tongue on calendrically important days” (p. 129). “These  were inscribed within a very brief period … and celebrate …  temple dedication rituals such as bloodletting” (p. 184).  “Before and during rituals, … self-mutilation was carried out by  jabbing needles and stingray spines through ears, cheeks, lips,  tongue, and the penis, the blood being spattered on paper or used to  anoint the idols” (p. 243).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jarom 1:5, 11; Alma 25:15‒16; Mosiah  13:27‒28.

Analysis  of the correspondence: Up until AD 33 or so, the Nephites  practiced the Law of Moses, with its temple rituals involving  bloodletting. Presumably they also followed the Abrahamic practice of  circumcision. While the practices described in The Maya and  the Law of Moses correspond in that they involve bloodletting from  both human and animals for religious rituals, the details overlap  only somewhat. Also they would probably not be unusual to  a Bible-reading individual. Specific, but not detailed nor  unusual.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Following their ultimate victory, they resurrected  their father Hun Hunahpu, the Maize God” (p. 71). “Modern  rendering of a wall painting of the resurrected Maize God  surrounded by female figures” (p. 88n36). “Significantly, …  the ruler is portrayed not as K’awiil, but as the youthful Maize  God, … a representation celebrating resurrection and  apotheosis” (p. 195). “Both … had a hero god who died  and was resurrected — for the Spaniards, this was Jesus Christ, and  for the Maya, the Maize God” (p. 289).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 9:12; Alma 41:2; Alma 33:22  among many others. There are 57 references to the resurrection of  Jesus Christ in the Book of Mormon.

Analysis  of the correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya refer specifically and in detail to a belief in bodily  resurrection. The doctrine of a literal bodily resurrection had  been in retreat in Christianity for centuries — so there was no  intellectual reason for Joseph to put it forward as a prominent  part of the Book of Mormon. Also, as far as we know, the  North American Indians did not believe in resurrection. View of  the Hebrews says nothing about such a belief among the  Indians. How did Joseph Smith correctly “guess” that the  belief might be held by distant ancestors of some of the Mesoamerican  Indians? Specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “As soon as possible, the anxious parents [of  a newborn child] went to consult with a priest so as to  learn the destiny of their offspring, and the name which he or she  was to bear until baptism. The Spanish Fathers were quite astounded  that the Maya had a baptismal rite, which took place at an  auspicious time” (p. 233).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 31:13; Mosiah 21:35;  Moroni 6:1‒4 and many others. It is interesting that a new  name was received at the time of baptism in the Book of Mormon  and among the Maya (see above).

Analysis  of the correspondence: The practice of baptism is specific and  detailed in both the Book of Mormon and in The Maya. It  is also unusual. If the Spanish Fathers were “astounded” at the  baptismal rite of the Maya, we should be also. Specific, detailed and  unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “At the site of Edzna, … occupants had constructed  a massive hydraulic system, consisting of 13.75 miles (22 km) of  canals … (resembling aquatic versions of Maya ritual roads)”  (p. 90). “Coba is … a whole group linked to a central  complex by long, perfectly straight masonry causeways usually called  … sakbe (“white road”). … Some have claimed that the  Maya [Page 129] sakbe were arteries of commerce, but a purely  ceremonial function is far more plausible” (p. 163). “A  causeway, or sakbih, 11.25 miles (18 km) long runs southeast from  Uxmal through the small site of Nohpat to Kabah, so presumably the  three centers were connected at least ceremonially” (p. 182).  “Processional routes, the ‘white roads’ or sakbih described  earlier, carved straight paths across broken landscapes. To walk  along them was to move in acceptable, ritually decorous ways”  (p. 242).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 4:32; 2 Nephi 9:41;  Alma 7:9.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is quite specific in both  the Book of Mormon and The Maya , and it is certainly  unusual. What religious practice did Joseph Smith know of that  resembled this ritual behavior in the least? But details are not  provided in the Book of Mormon, so the practice is specific  and unusual, but not detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Ultimately, humans were obligated to abide by  covenants. A covenant, as defined by the ethnographer John  Monaghan, is a binding contract that explains how one should  behave. Gods were usually involved, as in the case of maize  production” (p. 242).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 5:6‒8; Mosiah 6:1‒2; Mosiah  21:31‒32.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Maya and the Book of Mormon  share a common understanding of covenants as a binding  contract or agreement between God and man. This is specific and  detailed. It is also unusual. What existing model or pattern did  Joseph Smith rely on to correctly “guess” that covenants  between God and man existed among ancient Mesoamerican Indians? In  the conventional Christianity of Smith’s day, the importance of  covenants was very much downplayed if not absent altogether. So the  practice is specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Far more is known of later Maya priests. In contrast  to their Aztec counterparts, they were not celibate. Sons acquired  their fathers’ offices, although some were second sons of lords”  (p. 243). “During the prosperity of Mayapan, a hereditary  Chief Priest resided in that city” (p. 243).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 29:42; Alma 45:22‒23; Alma 46:6.

Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya teach clearly of hereditary priests and chief priests. This  correspondence is detailed and specific. It is also unusual.  Joseph Smith’s experience of frontier priests would have been  of the Protestant variety, who were not celibate, but who instead  were “trained for the ministry” and did not inherit their  offices; or of the Catholic variety, who were celibate and therefore  could not pass on [Page 130] their priestly office to a son. How did  Joseph Smith correctly “guess” that among some of the  distant ancestors of the Indians, priests were not celibate and that  priestly office could descend from father to son?

Likelihood =  0.02

Coe’s  standard: “A relevant Maya term from these ceramics is tz’ak ,  the idea of ordering. A key part of creation was the  establishment of opposites. These are presented in alternative  spellings for the tz’ak glyph. … The exquisite Tablet of  the 96 Glyphs … lays out a long series of such opposed pairs.  It begins with sun and night, followed by possibly life and death,  then Venus and moon, wind and water” (p. 251).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 2:11‒15.

Analysis  of correspondence: The words create or creation are  used six times in these five verses in the Book of Mormon,  all strictly in the context of opposed pairs. The correspondence is  specific and detailed. It is also unusual. What document or religious  teaching could Joseph Smith have possibly used that would have  led him to correctly “guess” this belief shared by the Maya and  the Book of Mormon patriarch Lehi? Specific, detailed and  unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “along with the latter three temples, each of these  was consecrated to a single god among the triad of divinities  from whom the Palenque dynasty claimed descent” (p. 157).  “Flanking the tableau are two strange deities with rodent heads”  (p. 160). “On one side, the god K’awiil (left) faces God L,  the deity of tobacco” (p. 166n100). “The face of the Jaguar  God of the Underworld is surmounted by the heads of other deities,  including a Bat God” (p. 166n101).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 7:6; Alma 17:15; Alma 31:1; Helaman  6:31; Mormon 4:14, 21.

Analysis  of correspondence: The references to idol gods are specific and  detailed in both the Book of Mormon and The Maya. However, this correspondence is not unusual. The Bible also  clearly refers to this practice, and Joseph would have known of it.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “According to one story, by means of sorcery Hunac  Ceel drove Chak Xib Chak to abduct the bride of the ruler of Izamal”  (p. 218). “or refer to diseases controlled by kings in an  elevated, almost dynastic form of sorcery” (p. 256).  “Witchcraft is an omnipresent danger; the witch takes the form of  an animal alter-ego” (p. 297). “Defeated by the evil magic  of his adversary Tezcatlipoca, the king was forced to leave Tula with  his followers” (p. 201).

[Page 131] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 1:32; Mormon 1:19; Mormon 2:10.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Maya and the Book of Mormon both  refer specifically, negatively and in some detail to the practice of  magic, sorcery and witchcraft among the peoples described in the two  books. A belief in the practice of evil magic, however, would  probably not be unusual to Joseph Smith. It was part of the  world view during the early 19 th century in backwoods  America. Specific and detailed,

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The entire religious drama is directed toward  renewal of the universe and of the community, and ends with the  transfer of the sacred objects of office to a new set of  cargo-holders” (p. 295).

Book of Mormon  standard: See Mosiah Chapters 1‒6.

Analysis  of the correspondence: King Benjamin’s gathering of his people  to the temple, complete with community-wide covenant making at the  time of the transfer of his kingly office to his son, along with the  transfer of sacred objects, is very nearly a perfect fit with  Coe’s standard described above. This is specific, detailed and  unusual. What possible model or contemporary practice could  Joseph Smith have drawn upon to describe King Benjamin’s  gathering of his people so perfectly?

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “In other respects, the distinction between priestly  and political roles may have been blurred in the Classic period”  (p. 243).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 2:1; see also the Foreword to the Book  of Alma.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. Priestly  leadership and political leadership were sometimes combined/blurred  in both books, but not always, as described in correspondence 1.27  above. Also, there is not enough detail provided in either book to  rank this as unusual, so the evidence is weighted as specific only.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Specialists took charge of these prayers or acts of  divination … to discern messages from the gods and to understand  the imbalances leading to disease, drought, and other problems”  (p. 243). “Later Maya priests [administered] … ‘their  methods of divination … events and the cures for diseases'”  (p. 243). “An important function of all highland shamans is  divination. Along with the mechanism of the 260-day count is the  casting of certain red seeds or maize kernels, a practice deeply  rooted in [Page 132] the pre-Spanish past. … Shamans conduct rituals for both  individuals and the whole community” (p. 292).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 3:11; Alma 16:5‒6;  Helaman 11:12‒17.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in that God is  consulted through his representatives regarding drought and other  problems affecting both individuals and the community. Casting of  lots (or seeds) is mentioned. This practice is also mentioned in the  Bible (for example, Saul and the witch of Endor), so we will not  count it as unusual. It is specific and at least somewhat detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The 260 day calendar … still survives in unchanged  form among some indigenous peoples in southern Mexico and the Maya  highlands, under the care of calendar priests” (p. 64). “For  some reason, the calendar priests active in Highland Guatemala today  are almost undetectable in earlier times. … But similar figures  must have existed.” “Later Maya priests’ … list of duties  [included] … ‘computation of the years, months and days'”  (p. 243).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 8:1‒5. A “just  man” who “did many miracles” was responsible for the reckoning  of time among the people.

Analysis  of correspondence: In the Book of Mormon the reference  is specific but not very detailed. It does seem unusual. In the  (highly) unlikely event that Joseph knew of the origin of the  Gregorian calendar (instituted by Pope Gregory XIII), he might also  have known of the Julian calendar (instituted by Julius Caesar). How  would he have chosen correctly between a calendar instituted by  priests or by civil authorities? So we count this one specific and  unusual but not detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Humans existed within a larger set of  expectations. The virtuous person was toj , ‘right’ and  ‘straight,’ at times a literal term that Colonial Mayan  languages tied to cleaning, confession, and prophecy” (p. 242).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 26:29; Alma 17:4; Helaman 5:17.

Analysis  of correspondence: Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  clearly tie confession with becoming a virtuous person, becoming  clean. Confession also exists within a larger set of  expectations (for example, baptism in the Book of Mormon).  So the correspondence is specific and detailed. The correspondence  also seems unusual. While confession is a prominent part of the  Roman Catholic faith, it was not prominent in any Protestant  tradition in frontier America in the early 1800s. It was various  forms of Protestantism [Page 133] that Joseph Smith was familiar with. How  did he “guess” correctly to include confession as an important  duty among repentant, virtuous persons? How did he know that some of  the ancient Mesoamericans would view confession in much the same  light?

Likelihood = 0.02

Calculation  of overall religious correspondences

There  are 19 separate religious correspondences between the Book of Mormon  and The Maya. Of these, two have a likelihood of 0.5,  eight have a likelihood of 0.1, and nine have a likelihood  of 0.02. Thus the overall likelihood of these 19 positive  correspondences is 0.5 2 x 0.1 8 x 0.02 9 =

1.28 x 10 –24 .

Coe’s  standard: “the opposite of refinement in an unmistakable  dehumanization of reviled enemies, a delight in their pain and  dishonor” (p. 96). “The Leiden Plaque, which once dangled  from a ruler’s belt, has engraved on one face a richly  ornamented Maya lord … trampling underfoot a sorry- looking  captive, a theme repeated on so many Maya stelae of later times”  (pp. 98‒99). “miserable prisoners have been stripped, and  are having the nails torn from their fingers or their hands  lacerated. An important captive sprawls on the steps, perhaps  tortured to exhaustion, and a severed head lies nearby on a bed  of leaves. A naked figure seated on the platform summit pleads  for his life to the central figure, Yajaw Kan Muwaan” (p. 150).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Moroni 9:8‒10.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in both books,  and the details are similar in the sense of torture to death and  extreme, even inhumane, cruelty. Some Indian tribes may have done  similar things, but not all tribes did it at all times to all  captives, and some tribes adopted white children. The Revolutionary  War was not marked with this kind of behavior on either side. So we  think it is specific, detailed but only somewhat unusual. To be  conservative, we assign this one a likelihood of 0.1.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Becan … was completely surrounded by massive  defensive earthworks sometime between the second and fourth centuries  AD. These consist of a ditch and inner rampart, 38 ft (11.6 m)  high, and would have been formidable, according to David Webster, if  the rampart had been surmounted by a palisade” (p. 122).  “Warfare had in fact become a real problem to all the major  Petexbatun sites, and a system of defensive walls … topped by  wooden palisades was constructed around and within them” (p. 151).

[Page 134] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 49:4, 18‒22; Alma 50:1‒5; Alma  53:4.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, it matches  perfectly in the details, and it is highly unusual. What military  example had Joseph Smith ever heard of or seen that was anything  like this defensive arrangement? According to David Webster, the  Conquistador Hernan Cortes marveled when he saw the Maya towns  defended in exactly this fashion (details below). We would  like to give this correspondence a weighting of a million  to one against the likelihood that Joseph Smith guessed it, but  our data weighting approach does not permit a likelihood of  0.000001; instead it is

Likelihood = 0.02

For those  who are interested, here are some additional details from Dr.  Webster’s work that show how exactly Joseph “guessed” this  correspondence, and how amazed Cortes was:

Thus the  Maya at the time of the Spanish Conquest used the same kind of city  defense that Moroni had used about 1600 years earlier, namely (1)  a single entrance to the city, (2) very deep ditches around the  city, (3) banks of earth built above the ditches, (4) strong works of  timbers built on top of these banks of earth above ditches, and (5)  even taller towers built on the timbers. From these works of timbers  and from the towers, the defenders could rain down arrows and  especially rocks (a cheap but effective weapon), on their attackers.  And the attackers couldn’t effectively get at the defenders — so  they were slaughtered.

So  Joseph Smith was either a military genius himself, or he  guessed it. Yes, he guessed it in all this detail. A 24-year- old  farm kid from upstate New York invented this superb defensive  military arrangement, totally unlike anything in the warfare of his  time, and which greatly impressed an experienced soldier like Hernan  Cortes.

Coe’s  standard: “When city walls are found, as at Dos Pilas, Ek’  Balam, and Uxmal, they seem to date to the final years of the Classic  period, when, in places, local conditions became hostile” (p. 126).  “The triple defensive wall that surrounds the site indicates that  conditions in this remote part of the Maya lowlands were dangerously  unsettled in the Terminal Classic” (p. 194). “Mayapan … is  a residential metropolis covering about 2.5 sq. miles (6.5 sq.  km) and completely surrounded by a defensive wall” (p. 216).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 9:8; Helaman 1:21; Helaman 13:4.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, and is  detailed in the sense that the walls seem to appear mostly in time of  war. However, Coe does not see much evidence for the presence of  walls until the late Classic, and since View of the Hebrews also refers to walled towns, we rate this one as merely specific.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Left arms were protected by quilted padding”  (p. 201). “[This is how] Maya warfare was waged. The holkanob ,  or “braves,” were the foot soldiers; they wore cuirasses of  quilted cotton or tapir hide” (p. 236).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 43:19.

[Page 136] Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is both specific and  detailed. In both The Maya and the Book of Mormon,  thick clothing was used as armor. It is also unusual. We know of no  contemporary model or example that Joseph Smith could have  relied upon to correctly “guess” this correspondence. Even today  we doubt that one person in a hundred would know that ancient  Mesoamerican warriors wore heavy cotton clothing as armor.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Taneko found 217 projectile points … [that] had  been used on darts propelled by atlatls, — mute testimony to  a final battle sealing the city’s death” (p. 175). “the  Toltec warrior, … carrying a feather-decorated atlatl in one  hand and a bunch of darts in the other” (p. 201) ” …  carried … darts-with-spearthrower. … [The infantry] rained darts,  arrows, and stones flung from slings” (p. 236).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jarom 1:8.

Analysis  of correspondence : The Book of Mormon and The Maya specifically contrast fighting with bows and arrows or spears as  being different from fighting with “darts.” What experience or  knowledge did Joseph Smith have of fighting with darts? How many  educated people, even today, would know about fighting with  a “dart-thrower” or atlatl? So this correspondence is  specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “there might have been fierce internecine warfare or  perhaps even a popular revolt” (p. 116). “But most Maya  archaeologists now agree that three factors were paramount in the  downfall: endemic internecine warfare” (p. 175). “The Maya  were obsessed with war. The Annals of the Kaqchikels and the Popol Vuh speak of little but intertribal conflict among the  highlanders, while the 16 states of Yucatan were constantly battling  with each other over boundaries and lineage honor” (p. 236).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See, among others, Omni 1:10; Alma 62:39; Mormon  8:8.

Analysis  of correspondence: With a few blessed exceptions, the  Book of Mormon describes continuing war and conflict both  between and among the Nephites and Lamanites, a conflict that  ultimately results in the destruction of both groups. When the  Book of Mormon brings down the curtain, the Lamanites are  at war with each other, and “no one knoweth the end of the war.”  This is in fact “endemic, internecine warfare,” the very words  used by Coe. There was no contemporary example or model that  Joseph Smith could use to “guess” a 1,000-year-long  conflict that finally destroyed all the parties involved, so the  correspondence is also specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood  = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Nor did the Maya fight in the accepted fashion.  Attacking the Spaniards at night, plotting ambushes and traps, they  were jungle guerrillas” (p. 227).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See the whole of chapters 43 and 52 of Alma.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and features  some detail in both books, especially in the Book of Mormon  (in keeping with the fact that the principal editor of the  Book of Mormon was the commander of the armies of his  people during nearly his entire adult life). But it is not unusual.  The Indians of North America were also masters of ambush, and Joseph  would have known this. There is also probably not enough detail in The Maya to upgrade the correspondence to specific and  detailed. Specific only.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Hostilities typically began with an unannounced  guerrilla raid into the enemy camp to take captives. … Lesser  captives ended up as slaves” (p. 236).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 16:3‒4; Alma 60:17; Helaman  11:33.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books. However, it is not unusual. Indians also raided the  whites and each other to take captives/slaves. Joseph Smith  would likely have known of this practice.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Teotihuacan fighting men were armed with atlatl -propelled darts and rectangular shields, and bore  round, decorated, pyrite mosaic mirrors on their backs; with their  eyes sometimes partly hidden by white shell ‘goggles,’ and their  feather headdresses, they must have been terrifying figures to their  opponents” (pp. 99‒100).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 4:7.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. In both books  warriors sometimes dressed to inspire fear in their opponents. But  the details do not line up very well, and this is probably not  unusual. Indian warriors, for example, used war paint in part to  inspire fear. So this correspondence is rated specific only.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “On either side of the war, leaders and the idols  carried into combat under the care of priests [who] flanked the  infantry, from which rained darts, arrows, and stones flung from  slings” (p. 236).

[Page 138] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:36.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is certainly specific and  detailed enough. Stones slung from slings were used to kill  opponents. It also seems unusual. While Joseph Smith could have  gotten the idea from the Bible, why would he correctly “guess”  that some of the ancestors of the Indians fought with stones and  slings? The Indians of northeastern North America, of whom he did  know something, did not fight with stones and slings. Specific,  detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “ In general, only captive lords were considered fit  for sacrifice, or for consumption in cannibalistic rites” (p. 225).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Moroni 9:10.

Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is detailed enough and certainly  specific in both books. However, it probably does not qualify as  unusual. Joseph Smith may have heard of the ritual cannibalism  practiced by the Iroquois.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “By c . 1150 BC, San Lorenzo was destroyed by  an unknown hand, and its monuments mutilated and smashed”  (pp. 52–54). “There are signs of widespread, purposeful  mutilation of public monuments” (p. 116). “Other cities in  the Central Area eventually fell victim to the same cycle of  violence, characterized by the systematic mutilation and smashing of  stone monuments — the eyes and mouths of rulers are often pecked  out, as if to cancel their power” (p. 175).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Enos 1:13‒14; Alma 14:8; Mormon 2:17.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is certainly specific, but  the details as practiced among the Maya seem to be directed toward  stone objects, while in the Book of Mormon the intended  destruction was directed toward the scriptures, both the metal plates  and the combustible scriptures, as in Alma 14:8. The practice seems  unusual. What accessible written source or contemporary practice  would Joseph Smith have known about in which the monuments of  enemies were deliberately destroyed? We do not think this merits  a likelihood of 0.02, but it does merit evidentiary strength  greater than merely specific.

Likelihood = 0.1

Calculation  of overall likelihood of military correspondences

There  are twelve distinct, separate military correspondences between the  Book of Mormon and The Maya. Of these, three have  a likelihood of 0.5, five a likelihood of 0.1, and four  a likelihood of 0.02. Thus the overall likelihood of these  twelve positive correspondences is 0.5 3 x 0.1 5 x 0.02 4 =

2.0 x 10 –13 .

  - Highlands and lowlands exist within the relevant geography Coe’s  standard: “While there are profound differences between the  subsistence base of the lowlands and that of the highlands (p. 13),  … there are really two natural settings in the land of the Maya:  highlands and lowlands” (p. 14). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:13; Mosiah 9:3; Mosiah 28:1; Alma  27:5. Analysis  of correspondence: Dr. Coe’s book repeatedly emphasizes the  importance of highland and lowland populations of Native American  peoples in Mesoamerica. The Book of Mormon also repeatedly  uses the words “go up” and “go down” in reference to moving  geographically in the book. From its very beginning, the  Book of Mormon likewise employs going “up” and going  “down” to movements to and from Jerusalem, which sits at a higher  elevation than most of the surrounding geography. Thus we have strong  reason to believe that that phrase means to ascend or descend in  elevation. The correspondence is specific and quite detailed in both  books, but it is not particularly unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Accurate description of a volcanic eruption Coe’s  standard: “The Maya highlands by definition lie above 1,000 ft.  (305 m) and are dominated by a great backbone of both extinct  and active volcanoes” (p. 14). “They and their relatives,  the Tz’utujil, live in villages along the shores of the  volcano-girt Lake Atitlan” (p. 28). “On an ill-fated day  around AD 595, the nearby Loma Caldera volcano erupted, spewing out  steam, ash, and eventually volcanic bombs that rained down on the  [village of Ceren]” (p. 107). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 8:5‒23. Analysis  of the correspondence: The account in 3 Nephi is an obvious  eye-witness account of a volcanic eruption, with associated  earthquakes, terrible storms and lightning, and thick, choking,  nearly unbreathable air. This account is highly detailed as well as  unusual. Joseph Smith and his contemporaries knew nothing of  what it was like to experience a volcanic eruption, nor did they  have any published accounts to draw upon. View of the Hebrews mentions volcanoes in Mesoamerica, but says nothing at all about  what an eruption is like. This correspondence is therefore specific,  detailed and highly unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Periods of terrible drought separated by decades or centuries with  resulting famines Coe’s  standard: “Nor are these rains reliable; in bad years there may  be severe droughts” (p. 17). “It is small wonder that the  early Colonial chronicles [Page 140] speak much of famines in Yucatan before the  arrival of the Spaniards” (p. 19). “Cave deposits show …  a similar pattern of droughts that lasted for decades. One  episode struck between AD 200 and 300, another from AD 820 to 870,  then two more at AD 1020 to 1100 and AD 1530 to 1580. Shorter, severe  droughts occurred at AD 420, 930, and 1800. … The most dramatic  discovery is the drought from AD 820 to 870. … This period saw the  collapse of Maya civilization in the southern Maya lowlands”  (p. 32). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 9:22; Helaman 11:5‒7; Ether 9:30,  35. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books. It is also probably unusual. Joseph Smith lived in  well-watered country at latitudes that don’t usually experience  droughts. Smith could have learned about famines from the Bible, but  he would not have known, as attested in both The Maya and the  Book of Mormon, that such terrible droughts can last many  years, even decades, and that different periods of drought can be and  are separated by centuries. Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Venomous, aggressive snakes present Coe’s  standard: “Also lurking in milpa and jungle, and to be  avoided at all costs, were vipers such as the dreaded barba  amarilla , or ‘yellow jaw’ ( Bothrops asper ), among the  most aggressive snakes in the world” (p. 19). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 8:24; Ether 9:31. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  Poisonous snakes certainly existed. (No problem: the Book of Mormon  doesn’t claim to take place in Ireland.) While there are not many  venomous snakes in New York, there are a few such species. The  unusual part of this correspondence is that there was at least one  very aggressive venomous snake. Most snakes, even poisonous ones,  will flee from humans. They just aren’t aggressive. But not so the  snakes described in Ether 9:31 or the barba amarilla described  by Dr. Coe. So the correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Easy to get lost, very thick wilderness, cities hidden in the  wilderness Coe’s  standard: “lost and starving among the swampy bajos and  thorny forests of northern Guatemala” (p. 139). “The forests  of southern Campeche and Quintana Roo form the wildest part of the  Maya region” (p. 161). “Safe in the fastness of an almost  impenetrable wilderness, their island stronghold was bypassed by  history” (p. 219). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:4‒5; Mosiah 8:8; Mosiah 21:25;  Mosiah 22:16; Mosiah 23:20, 30, 36. [Page 141] Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya are specific and detailed on this point. In fact, the  Book of Mormon refers to wilderness a total of 212  times. There was very thick wilderness immediately adjacent to  settled areas in which it was possible to get completely lost, even  if ancestors had been in the region for centuries. The Book of Mormon  and The Maya also speak of what amount to lost cities. The  city of Helam was literally bumped into by a Lamanite army as  they pursued the people of Limhi. That same army had to be shown the  way that led to the land/city of Nephi — they did not know how to  get there on their own. How would Joseph Smith have known to put  in this unusual, but correct detail? What did he or anyone in his  community (from whom he might have learned it) know of lost cities  and almost impenetrable wilderness? The American wilderness in which  Joseph lived was sometimes thick but by no means impenetrable. Likelihood = 0.02 Powerful, ancient central city and culture in the highlands Coe’s  standard: “A Late Preclassic rival to Izapa in size and number  of temple mounds and in the splendor of its carved monuments was  Kaminaljuyu during the Verbena and Arenal phases, dating from c .  100 BC to AD 150. This … was once a major ceremonial site on  the western outskirts of Guatemala City. Many of the approximately  200 mounds once to be found there were probably constructed at this  time; Kaminaljuyu’s rulers must have possessed formidable economic  and political power over much of the Maya highlands at this time”  (p. 73). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:1‒4; Mosiah 9:6, 8; Alma 47:20. Analysis  of correspondence: The time period 100 BC to AD 150 fits very  well with the time of the dominance and power of the city of  Lehi-Nephi, or city of Nephi (land of Nephi) in the highlands. This  was the principal city of the Lamanites in the time periods just  before and just after Christ. So the correspondence is specific and  detailed. The exactness of the time, location and dominance of the  city taken as a whole are unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Earthquakes present and important Coe’s  standard: “As the lake dried up, … perhaps due to  exploitation of the land, or even to tectonic movements (the region  is highly earthquake-prone), the city [Kaminaljuyu] dwindled”  (p. 74). “The Aztecs … thought that the universe had passed  through four such ages, and that we were now in the fifth, which  would be destroyed by earthquakes” (p. 249). “The  Zinacanteco world … rests on the shoulders of the Vaxak-Men ,  the four-corner gods; when one of these shifts his burden, there is  an earthquake” (pp. 292‒93). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 5:27, 31‒32; 3 Nephi 8:6,  9‒18. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya are specific and quite detailed about the “shaking of the  earth.” Earthquakes [Page 142] play a significant role in both books.  Since Joseph may have heard about earthquakes, even if he had  probably not experienced one, we would not count this correspondence  as unusual except for one thing: on two separate occasions the  Book of Mormon refers to a particular prison in the  land of Nephi as being shaken violently, one time even to the point  of collapsing. We believe the evidence in the Book of Mormon  and The Maya support the general area of Kaminaljuyu as the  land of Nephi, and Dr. Coe specifically calls out this region as  “highly earthquake-prone.” What a lucky “guess” on  Joseph Smith’s part. Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Deforestation of large areas Coe’s  standard: “The botanists conclude, with one caveat, that the  Tikal Maya had largely demolished the tall monsoon forest by the  740s” (p. 176). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:5‒7. Analysis  of correspondence: In both books, the inhabitants of the land had  rendered it without timber. This correspondence is therefore specific  and detailed, but it is not unusual. Joseph Smith and everyone  around him were also busy deforesting the land. Likelihood = 0.1 Areas set aside for forest regrowth and/or timber shipped in from  a distance Coe’s  standard: “In AD 810, sapodilla was again the species of  choice, but beam widths were far smaller than they had once been.  Apparently Tikal’s rulers had set aside protected groves of their  favorite tree or managed to import it from some distance” (p. 176). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:9‒11. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  In both books, areas were set aside for forest regrowth, and timber  was also shipped in for building cities such as Tikal. The  correspondence is also unusual. There was no contemporary model for  Joseph Smith to follow whereby forests were purposely replanted. Likelihood = 0.02 Precious stones exist (but they are not diamonds, rubies, and pearls) Coe’s  standard: “The volcanic highlands … yielded obsidian —  natural volcanic glass. … Obsidian was to ancient Mesoamerica what  steel is to modern civilization. It was turned into knives, lance and  dart points, … and a host of other tools” (p. 23). “ Jade was surely the compelling reason for this intrusion of  the Olmec [into the Copan valley]. The Classic Maya obtained their  green and often dull-colored jade from alluvial deposits [in Copan],  … but this was not the distinctive blue-green jade so prized by the  Olmec. The mystery of where the Olmec obtained this material has at  long last been solved by the discovery in 2001 of several sources in  the Sierra de las Minas, [Page 143] far above the Motagua. … Control of both  the Motagua and Copan valleys would have given the Olmec a virtual  monopoly of a material that was as important to this primordial  civilization as gold was to be for the Spanish conquistadores “ (p. 60). ” … They went from modestly dressed chieftains  to true kings endowed with fine clothing and jade or turquoise  regalia.” (p. 83). “It is natural that the Maya lavished  upon jade, the most precious substance known to them, their full  artistry” (p. 171). “Not only jade, but also calcite was  worked by the lowland Maya lapidaries; but it must have been a rare  substance, for objects made from it are found infrequently”  (p. 171). “But other items also moved along these trade  networks; the excavators encountered obsidian from the mines in  central Mexico, turquoise which had probably originated in the  American Southwest (a luxury item prized by the Toltecs and their  cultural heirs the Aztecs), and gold from lower Central America”  (p. 215). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:14. Analysis  of correspondence: Bruce Dale, the son of a mining engineer,  grew up in mining towns in Nevada and Arizona, and was an avid rock  hound in his youth. For him, this is a particularly powerful  correspondence. Both the Maya and the Book of Mormon people  had precious stones, which represented great riches to them (Alma  17:14). So this correspondence is specific. It is also  unusual in the details not given in the Book of Mormon.  If Joseph Smith “guessed” the Book of Mormon, he  would very probably have guessed “precious stones” to be the only  precious stones he knew of, namely diamonds, rubies, and perhaps  pearls. But Mesoamerica has no rubies at all, nor does it have any  significant diamond resources. (Mexico has a few small, inferior  diamonds, but no diamond mines.) Joseph Smith would not have  “guessed” the precious stones to be jade, obsidian, turquoise or  calcite. Nor would the names of those stones have meant anything to  all but a very small fraction of those who read the  Book of Mormon. ( Cureloms and cumoms ,  anyone?) But Joseph Smith made neither mistake. He (or rather  the Book of Mormon authors) simply called them, quite  accurately, “precious stones.” We rate this likelihood as 0.02. Likelihood = 0.02 Submerged cities Coe’s  standard: “Lake Amatitlan, a place known for elaborate,  aquatic deposits of Early Classic incense burners” (p. 103). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 8:14; 3 Nephi 9:4,  6, 8; 4 Nephi 1:9. Analysis  of correspondence: Since incense burners are made to burn  incense, and don’t work well under water, the conclusion is pretty  clear. These incense burners were submerged when the waters of the  lake rose to engulf [Page 144] them. (Both Lake Amatitlan and Lake Atitlan cover  sunken cities.) So the correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books. How about  unusual? However unlikely, Joseph Smith may have known of the  story of Atlantis, but why would he “guess” that story would  apply to some of the ancestors of the Indians? And Atlantis was  engulfed by the ocean, not by freshwater lakes. We think this  correspondence is more than specific and detailed, but somewhat less  than unusual. To be conservative we assign a likelihood of 0.1 Likelihood = 0.1 Perishable writing materials Coe’s  standard: “None of these bark-paper books hav[e] survived  except in the most fragmentary form in tombs” (p. 141). “There  must have been many thousands of Classic Maya books written on  bark-paper, but not a single one has come down to us”  (pp. 171, 173). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob 4:1‒2; Alma 14:8; Helaman 3:15. Analysis  of correspondence: Specific and detailed. Both The Maya and  the Book of Mormon speak of many books. These books were  kept on materials that either decay or can be burned. The only thing  that lasts is words written on metal plates. The correspondence is  not unusual. The paper books and documents in Joseph Smith’s  day would also burn or decay. Likelihood = 0.1 Refined gold present Coe’s  standard: “there were no sources of gold and silver in the Maya  lowlands” (p. 22). “the richest array of offerings, …  including … a gold frog (possibly an import from Panama, and  one of the earliest-attested metal objects yet discovered for the  Maya)” (p. 194‒95). “dredged from the muck at the bottom  of the Cenote, … the gold disks already mentioned … The local  lords brought treasures of gold from places as far afield as Panama  to offer to the Cenote” (p. 212). “But other items also  moved along these trade networks; the excavators encountered … gold  from lower Central America” (p. 215). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob 1:16; Ether 10:23; Alma 11. Analysis  of correspondence: Coe resists the idea that the lowland Maya had  much refined gold before about AD 800, well after the Book of Mormon  times. But the Book of Mormon does not claim to be set  among the lowland Maya, so this is irrelevant. There clearly was  refined gold present in both books, even if the lowland Maya had to  import their gold from Central America. So the correspondence is  specific, but it is not detailed nor unusual. Joseph Smith may  well have heard of the treasures of gold plundered by the Spaniards. Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “While there are profound differences between the  subsistence base of the lowlands and that of the highlands (p. 13),  … there are really two natural settings in the land of the Maya:  highlands and lowlands” (p. 14).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:13; Mosiah 9:3; Mosiah 28:1; Alma  27:5.

Analysis  of correspondence: Dr. Coe’s book repeatedly emphasizes the  importance of highland and lowland populations of Native American  peoples in Mesoamerica. The Book of Mormon also repeatedly  uses the words “go up” and “go down” in reference to moving  geographically in the book. From its very beginning, the  Book of Mormon likewise employs going “up” and going  “down” to movements to and from Jerusalem, which sits at a higher  elevation than most of the surrounding geography. Thus we have strong  reason to believe that that phrase means to ascend or descend in  elevation. The correspondence is specific and quite detailed in both  books, but it is not particularly unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The Maya highlands by definition lie above 1,000 ft.  (305 m) and are dominated by a great backbone of both extinct  and active volcanoes” (p. 14). “They and their relatives,  the Tz’utujil, live in villages along the shores of the  volcano-girt Lake Atitlan” (p. 28). “On an ill-fated day  around AD 595, the nearby Loma Caldera volcano erupted, spewing out  steam, ash, and eventually volcanic bombs that rained down on the  [village of Ceren]” (p. 107).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 8:5‒23.

Analysis  of the correspondence: The account in 3 Nephi is an obvious  eye-witness account of a volcanic eruption, with associated  earthquakes, terrible storms and lightning, and thick, choking,  nearly unbreathable air. This account is highly detailed as well as  unusual. Joseph Smith and his contemporaries knew nothing of  what it was like to experience a volcanic eruption, nor did they  have any published accounts to draw upon. View of the Hebrews mentions volcanoes in Mesoamerica, but says nothing at all about  what an eruption is like. This correspondence is therefore specific,  detailed and highly unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Nor are these rains reliable; in bad years there may  be severe droughts” (p. 17). “It is small wonder that the  early Colonial chronicles [Page 140] speak much of famines in Yucatan before the  arrival of the Spaniards” (p. 19). “Cave deposits show …  a similar pattern of droughts that lasted for decades. One  episode struck between AD 200 and 300, another from AD 820 to 870,  then two more at AD 1020 to 1100 and AD 1530 to 1580. Shorter, severe  droughts occurred at AD 420, 930, and 1800. … The most dramatic  discovery is the drought from AD 820 to 870. … This period saw the  collapse of Maya civilization in the southern Maya lowlands”  (p. 32).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 9:22; Helaman 11:5‒7; Ether 9:30,  35.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books. It is also probably unusual. Joseph Smith lived in  well-watered country at latitudes that don’t usually experience  droughts. Smith could have learned about famines from the Bible, but  he would not have known, as attested in both The Maya and the  Book of Mormon, that such terrible droughts can last many  years, even decades, and that different periods of drought can be and  are separated by centuries. Specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Also lurking in milpa and jungle, and to be  avoided at all costs, were vipers such as the dreaded barba  amarilla , or ‘yellow jaw’ ( Bothrops asper ), among the  most aggressive snakes in the world” (p. 19).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 8:24; Ether 9:31.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  Poisonous snakes certainly existed. (No problem: the Book of Mormon  doesn’t claim to take place in Ireland.) While there are not many  venomous snakes in New York, there are a few such species. The  unusual part of this correspondence is that there was at least one  very aggressive venomous snake. Most snakes, even poisonous ones,  will flee from humans. They just aren’t aggressive. But not so the  snakes described in Ether 9:31 or the barba amarilla described  by Dr. Coe. So the correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “lost and starving among the swampy bajos and  thorny forests of northern Guatemala” (p. 139). “The forests  of southern Campeche and Quintana Roo form the wildest part of the  Maya region” (p. 161). “Safe in the fastness of an almost  impenetrable wilderness, their island stronghold was bypassed by  history” (p. 219).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:4‒5; Mosiah 8:8; Mosiah 21:25;  Mosiah 22:16; Mosiah 23:20, 30, 36.

[Page 141] Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya are specific and detailed on this point. In fact, the  Book of Mormon refers to wilderness a total of 212  times. There was very thick wilderness immediately adjacent to  settled areas in which it was possible to get completely lost, even  if ancestors had been in the region for centuries. The Book of Mormon  and The Maya also speak of what amount to lost cities. The  city of Helam was literally bumped into by a Lamanite army as  they pursued the people of Limhi. That same army had to be shown the  way that led to the land/city of Nephi — they did not know how to  get there on their own. How would Joseph Smith have known to put  in this unusual, but correct detail? What did he or anyone in his  community (from whom he might have learned it) know of lost cities  and almost impenetrable wilderness? The American wilderness in which  Joseph lived was sometimes thick but by no means impenetrable.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “A Late Preclassic rival to Izapa in size and number  of temple mounds and in the splendor of its carved monuments was  Kaminaljuyu during the Verbena and Arenal phases, dating from c .  100 BC to AD 150. This … was once a major ceremonial site on  the western outskirts of Guatemala City. Many of the approximately  200 mounds once to be found there were probably constructed at this  time; Kaminaljuyu’s rulers must have possessed formidable economic  and political power over much of the Maya highlands at this time”  (p. 73).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:1‒4; Mosiah 9:6, 8; Alma 47:20.

Analysis  of correspondence: The time period 100 BC to AD 150 fits very  well with the time of the dominance and power of the city of  Lehi-Nephi, or city of Nephi (land of Nephi) in the highlands. This  was the principal city of the Lamanites in the time periods just  before and just after Christ. So the correspondence is specific and  detailed. The exactness of the time, location and dominance of the  city taken as a whole are unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “As the lake dried up, … perhaps due to  exploitation of the land, or even to tectonic movements (the region  is highly earthquake-prone), the city [Kaminaljuyu] dwindled”  (p. 74). “The Aztecs … thought that the universe had passed  through four such ages, and that we were now in the fifth, which  would be destroyed by earthquakes” (p. 249). “The  Zinacanteco world … rests on the shoulders of the Vaxak-Men ,  the four-corner gods; when one of these shifts his burden, there is  an earthquake” (pp. 292‒93).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 5:27, 31‒32; 3 Nephi 8:6,  9‒18.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya are specific and quite detailed about the “shaking of the  earth.” Earthquakes [Page 142] play a significant role in both books.  Since Joseph may have heard about earthquakes, even if he had  probably not experienced one, we would not count this correspondence  as unusual except for one thing: on two separate occasions the  Book of Mormon refers to a particular prison in the  land of Nephi as being shaken violently, one time even to the point  of collapsing. We believe the evidence in the Book of Mormon  and The Maya support the general area of Kaminaljuyu as the  land of Nephi, and Dr. Coe specifically calls out this region as  “highly earthquake-prone.” What a lucky “guess” on  Joseph Smith’s part. Specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “The botanists conclude, with one caveat, that the  Tikal Maya had largely demolished the tall monsoon forest by the  740s” (p. 176).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:5‒7.

Analysis  of correspondence: In both books, the inhabitants of the land had  rendered it without timber. This correspondence is therefore specific  and detailed, but it is not unusual. Joseph Smith and everyone  around him were also busy deforesting the land.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “In AD 810, sapodilla was again the species of  choice, but beam widths were far smaller than they had once been.  Apparently Tikal’s rulers had set aside protected groves of their  favorite tree or managed to import it from some distance” (p. 176).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:9‒11.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  In both books, areas were set aside for forest regrowth, and timber  was also shipped in for building cities such as Tikal. The  correspondence is also unusual. There was no contemporary model for  Joseph Smith to follow whereby forests were purposely replanted.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “The volcanic highlands … yielded obsidian —  natural volcanic glass. … Obsidian was to ancient Mesoamerica what  steel is to modern civilization. It was turned into knives, lance and  dart points, … and a host of other tools” (p. 23). “ Jade was surely the compelling reason for this intrusion of  the Olmec [into the Copan valley]. The Classic Maya obtained their  green and often dull-colored jade from alluvial deposits [in Copan],  … but this was not the distinctive blue-green jade so prized by the  Olmec. The mystery of where the Olmec obtained this material has at  long last been solved by the discovery in 2001 of several sources in  the Sierra de las Minas, [Page 143] far above the Motagua. … Control of both  the Motagua and Copan valleys would have given the Olmec a virtual  monopoly of a material that was as important to this primordial  civilization as gold was to be for the Spanish conquistadores “ (p. 60). ” … They went from modestly dressed chieftains  to true kings endowed with fine clothing and jade or turquoise  regalia.” (p. 83). “It is natural that the Maya lavished  upon jade, the most precious substance known to them, their full  artistry” (p. 171). “Not only jade, but also calcite was  worked by the lowland Maya lapidaries; but it must have been a rare  substance, for objects made from it are found infrequently”  (p. 171). “But other items also moved along these trade  networks; the excavators encountered obsidian from the mines in  central Mexico, turquoise which had probably originated in the  American Southwest (a luxury item prized by the Toltecs and their  cultural heirs the Aztecs), and gold from lower Central America”  (p. 215).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:14.

Analysis  of correspondence: Bruce Dale, the son of a mining engineer,  grew up in mining towns in Nevada and Arizona, and was an avid rock  hound in his youth. For him, this is a particularly powerful  correspondence. Both the Maya and the Book of Mormon people  had precious stones, which represented great riches to them (Alma  17:14). So this correspondence is specific.

It is also  unusual in the details not given in the Book of Mormon.  If Joseph Smith “guessed” the Book of Mormon, he  would very probably have guessed “precious stones” to be the only  precious stones he knew of, namely diamonds, rubies, and perhaps  pearls. But Mesoamerica has no rubies at all, nor does it have any  significant diamond resources. (Mexico has a few small, inferior  diamonds, but no diamond mines.) Joseph Smith would not have  “guessed” the precious stones to be jade, obsidian, turquoise or  calcite. Nor would the names of those stones have meant anything to  all but a very small fraction of those who read the  Book of Mormon. ( Cureloms and cumoms ,  anyone?) But Joseph Smith made neither mistake. He (or rather  the Book of Mormon authors) simply called them, quite  accurately, “precious stones.” We rate this likelihood as 0.02.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Lake Amatitlan, a place known for elaborate,  aquatic deposits of Early Classic incense burners” (p. 103).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 8:14; 3 Nephi 9:4,  6, 8; 4 Nephi 1:9.

Analysis  of correspondence: Since incense burners are made to burn  incense, and don’t work well under water, the conclusion is pretty  clear. These incense burners were submerged when the waters of the  lake rose to engulf [Page 144] them. (Both Lake Amatitlan and Lake Atitlan cover  sunken cities.) So the correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books.

How about  unusual? However unlikely, Joseph Smith may have known of the  story of Atlantis, but why would he “guess” that story would  apply to some of the ancestors of the Indians? And Atlantis was  engulfed by the ocean, not by freshwater lakes. We think this  correspondence is more than specific and detailed, but somewhat less  than unusual. To be conservative we assign a likelihood of 0.1

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “None of these bark-paper books hav[e] survived  except in the most fragmentary form in tombs” (p. 141). “There  must have been many thousands of Classic Maya books written on  bark-paper, but not a single one has come down to us”  (pp. 171, 173).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob 4:1‒2; Alma 14:8; Helaman 3:15.

Analysis  of correspondence: Specific and detailed. Both The Maya and  the Book of Mormon speak of many books. These books were  kept on materials that either decay or can be burned. The only thing  that lasts is words written on metal plates. The correspondence is  not unusual. The paper books and documents in Joseph Smith’s  day would also burn or decay.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “there were no sources of gold and silver in the Maya  lowlands” (p. 22). “the richest array of offerings, …  including … a gold frog (possibly an import from Panama, and  one of the earliest-attested metal objects yet discovered for the  Maya)” (p. 194‒95). “dredged from the muck at the bottom  of the Cenote, … the gold disks already mentioned … The local  lords brought treasures of gold from places as far afield as Panama  to offer to the Cenote” (p. 212). “But other items also  moved along these trade networks; the excavators encountered … gold  from lower Central America” (p. 215).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob 1:16; Ether 10:23; Alma 11.

Analysis  of correspondence: Coe resists the idea that the lowland Maya had  much refined gold before about AD 800, well after the Book of Mormon  times. But the Book of Mormon does not claim to be set  among the lowland Maya, so this is irrelevant. There clearly was  refined gold present in both books, even if the lowland Maya had to  import their gold from Central America. So the correspondence is  specific, but it is not detailed nor unusual. Joseph Smith may  well have heard of the treasures of gold plundered by the Spaniards.

Likelihood = 0.5

[Page 145] Calculation  of physical and geographical correspondences

There  are 13 distinct physical and geographical correspondences between the  Book of Mormon and The Maya. Of these, one has  a likelihood of 0.5, four have a likelihood of 0.1 and  eight have a likelihood of 0.02. Thus the overall likelihood of  these 13 positive correspondences, taken together, is 0.5 1 x 0.1 4 x 0.02 8 =

1.28 x 10 –18 .

Coe’s  standard: “ One view perceives as many as eight to ten million  people in the lowlands c . AD 800; David Webster of  Pennsylvania State University would go as low as two to three  million” (p. 22). “But what happened to the bulk of the  population who once occupied the Central Area, apparently in the  millions?” (p. 177). “What this might mean is that we may  have to double our previous population estimates for the Central  Area, which already run into the many millions” (p. 176).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 6:11‒15; Ether 15:2.

Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya affirm that the populations were large, specifically in the  neighborhood of 10 million people. In 1830, the U. S. census gave  a population of about 13 million. Thus Joseph Smith  correctly “guessed” that his fictional group of Indians was  nearly as large as the entire population of the United States at the  time the Book of Mormon was published. Certainly this is  unusual. What Indian population had Joseph Smith ever seen that  was anywhere near this large?

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “The Maya Long Count, which will be explained in  greater detail in Chapters 3 and 9, is an absolute, day-to-day  calendar which has run like some great clock from a point in the  mythical past (p. 25). “The Maya New Year started with  1 Pop, the next day being 2 Pop, etc. The final day of the month,  however, carried not the coefficient 20, but a sign indicating  the ‘seating’ of the month to follow” (p. 64). “Maya  learning as well as ritual was in their [the Maya priests’] hands.  Among them were ‘computation of the years, months, and days, the  festivals and ceremonies'” (p. 243).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 10:6; Alma 49:1; 3 Nephi 1:1;  3 Nephi 2:7‒8; 3 Nephi 8:5.

Analysis  of correspondence: Specific and detailed. Both the Book of Mormon  peoples and the peoples described in The Maya kept calendars  by day, month and year. The keeping of calendars is also unusual. The  Indian peoples of eastern North America did not keep calendars at  all, and were aware only of [Page 146] the passing of the seasons. How did  Joseph Smith “guess” that any Indians kept an absolute  calendar by day, month and year?

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Meshing with the 260-day count is a ‘Vague  Year’ or Ha’b of 365 days, so called because the actual  length of the solar year is about a quarter-day more. …  Although the Maya were perfectly aware that the Ha’b was  shorter than the tropical year, they did not change the calendar  accordingly. … From this it follows that a particular day in  the 260-day count, such as 1 K’an, also had a position in  the Ha’b , for instance 2 Pop. A day designated as  1 K’an 2 Pop could not return until 52 Ha’b (18,980 days)  had passed. This is the Calendar Round” (pp. 64‒65).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 1:1; 3 Nephi 2:7‒8.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  Not only were multiple calendars kept, both The Maya and  the Book of Mormon describe exactly how they were  kept. If the keeping of one calendar is unusual, then keeping several  different calendars is even more unusual. We would like to give this  a higher weighting than 0.02 (1 in a million?), but cannot  by the constraints we have imposed on ourselves.

Likelihood =  0.02

Coe’s  standard: “And it might be that the province [Yucatan] relied  less upon plant husbandry than upon its famed production of honey,  salt, and slaves” (p. 19). “As he still does today, the Maya  farmer raised the native stingless bees, which are kept in small,  hollow logs closed with mud plaster at either end and stacked up in  A-frames, but wild honey was also much appreciated” (p. 231).  “A few depictions of vessels marked with the term kab ,  ‘honey,’ … Valuable Yucatan exports were honey, cotton mantles  and slaves” (p. 232).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Ether 2:3.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Jaredites specifically brought with them  honeybees, so they had domesticated the bee. The correspondence is  specific, but it is not detailed nor unusual. Bees were domesticated  many thousands of years ago. Coe makes much of the fact that Maya  domestic bees are stingless, versus the Old World bees of genus Apis .  But the Book of Mormon does not say that the Jaredites did  not switch over to keeping native stingless bees when they arrived in  the New World (we two authors would surely have done so!), so Coe’s  point seems irrelevant to the issue. Both The Maya and the  Book of Mormon specifically note domesticated bees, and  this correspondence is also unusual. What Indian tribes did  Joseph Smith know of that practiced beekeeping? There were none.  How did he “guess” this one correctly?

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “more advanced cultural traits … and the painting  of murals” (p. 26). “In one tomb, over 300 objects of the  most beautiful workmanship were placed with the body” (p. 76).  “They went from modestly dressed chieftains to true kings endowed  [in] … jade or turquoise regalia” (p. 83). “[This]  extraordinarily well-preserved fresco … is in fact the earliest  Maya painting known, dating to c. 100 BC or slightly earlier. In its  beauty and sophistication it equals the famous Late Classic murals of  Bonampak” (p. 87). “The finest Maya wood carving known, this  seated figure from Tabasco, Mexico, represents a courtier”  (p. 95n40), … including some marvelously fine jades and the  gold disks already mentioned. [Metals] had now appeared in the Maya  area, although they were probably cast and worked elsewhere and  imported. The many copper bells and other objects from the well were  of Mexican workmanship. The local lords brought treasures of  gold from places as far afield as Panama to offer to the Cenote”  (p. 212). “Santa Rita also yielded an extraordinary set of ear  ornaments in gold and turquoise” (p. 219). “Plazas were the  location for most dances. The stelae that now fill some of them  petrify kings in perpetual dance, as we can tell by their pose,  dress, and explanatory glyphs” (p. 256).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jarom 1:8; Helaman 6:13; Helaman 12:2; Mosiah  11:8‒10, Mosiah 20:1‒5:4 Nephi 1:41.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and in many  cases detailed. Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya speak of art expressed in a variety of materials, including  wood and metals, people adorning themselves with precious things, and  dance. The correspondence is unusual. What Indian tribes known to  Joseph Smith did art work in wood and metal and had fine  jewelry? However, to be conservative, since Dr. Coe reports no  evidence for metal work in the Book of Mormon timeframe, we  will discount this correspondence from specific, detailed and unusual  to merely specific and detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Ancient Maya used lines of sight … to plot the  rising and setting positions of the sun, the moon, and, above all,  the planet Venus. … Maya astronomers had a remarkably accurate  knowledge of the apparent motion of Venus” (p. 193). “Venus  is the only one of the planets for which we can be absolutely sure  the Maya made extensive calculations” (p. 262). “Some have  questioned whether the movements of planets other than Venus were  observed by the Maya, but it is hard to believe that one of the  Dresden tables, listing multiples of 78, can be anything other than  a table for Mars” (pp. 262‒63).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:21; Alma 30:44; Helaman 12:13‒15;  Helaman 14:5‒6; 3 Nephi 1:21.

[Page 148] Analysis  of correspondence: Alma asserts that planets (not just one  planet) “move in their regular form,” agreeing with Coe’s  statement that the Maya knew the movements of Venus and Mars. For the  Book of Mormon people to know that “a new star did  appear,” they would have to know when and where the old stars would  appear. So the correspondence is specific and detailed. It is also  unusual. What Indian tribe of the American Northeast had any such  detailed astronomical knowledge as that reported in The Maya ?

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “All the Mesoamerican Indians shared a number of  traits which were more or less peculiar to them and absent or rare  elsewhere in the New World: hieroglyphic writing” (p. 13).  “The relation between Maya and Isthmian writing remains obscure.  The earliest Maya writing … comes from c . 300 BC, prior to  Isthmian writing. … The genealogy of Mesoamerican writing is  therefore more complicated than formerly thought” (p. 68).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 6:1‒3; Mosiah 24:6;  3 Nephi 26:6; Mormon 9:32‒34.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  The Mesoamerican Indians (not just the Maya) had a rare or  absent trait: they had writing. And so did the Book of Mormon  peoples. Furthermore, the genealogy of their writing is complex. It  is not clear how Mesoamerican writing arose, and the sacred written  language of the Book of Mormon authors was known to them  alone (Mormon 9:34). The correspondence is also unusual. None of the  Indian tribes known to Joseph Smith had writing. Thus it was an  extremely lucky (or foolhardy) “guess” on his part to have  claimed in his “fictional” book that some American Indians did  have writing. But he did claim it, and he was right. This  correspondence also deserves a much smaller likelihood than a 1  in 50 chance, more like 1 in a million. But to be conservative,  we assign a

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: Coe’s book is full of examples of writing on stone.  Here are just a few: “A magnificent stela was found … in  southeastern Veracruz; two Bak’tun 8 dates corresponding  respectively to AD 143 and 156 are inscribed on it. These are  accompanied by a text of about 400 signs … (the famous ‘Tuxtla  Statuette,’ also found in southern Veracruz, is inscribed in the  same script and dates to AD 162)” (p. 68). “It was not just  the ‘stela cult’ — the inscribed glorification of royal  lineages and their achievements” (p. 177).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Omni 1:20.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya both refer specifically to engraved writing on large stones. This  is an unusual [Page 149] correspondence. Writing by itself was unusual, to write  on stone was doubly so. What example or model did Joseph Smith  have to correctly “guess” this correspondence? However, the  Book of Mormon gives only one example of writing on stone,  so it is not detailed. Specific and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Maya priests 2,000 miles away were still chanting  rituals from hieroglyphic books” (p. 219). “Even more  heartbreaking is the loss of thousands of books” (p. 237). “A  few probable coffers exist for books, including the recent find of  a lidded limestone box from Hun Nal Ye cave in Guatemala”  (p. 239).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:15; Mormon 6:6. The entire  Book of Mormon is a collection of shorter books or  excerpts from other books.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is both specific and  detailed. Many books, not just a few, were kept. And in at least  some instances, the books were kept together in repositories,  essentially in libraries (the “coffers” cited above). The  practice is also unusual. What American Indian tribes that  Joseph Smith knew of kept even one book, let alone libraries?  How did he correctly “guess” this fact about the Maya and the  Book of Mormon peoples?

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “All the Mesoamerican Indians shared a number of  traits which were more or less peculiar to them and absent or rare  elsewhere in the New World: … highly specialized markets”  (p. 13). “Trading networks brought vast quantities of these  objects [ manos and metates ] down from … Guatemala. …  The volcanic highlands yielded … obsidian. … Access to salt  sources or to salt trade networks was critical to the growth and  security of Maya states. … The Maya elite had other special needs,  above all jade, quetzal feathers, and marine shells” (pp. 22‒23).  “Its [Lamani’s] location and rich remains attest to its  entrepreneurial importance in ancient Maya trade” (p. 85).  “[control over] … the movement of goods, which now passed into  the hands of trading entrepreneurs or local petty lords” (p. 213).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:7; Helaman 3:10, 14; Helaman 6:8;  3 Nephi 6:11; Ether 10:22.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. Both the  Book of Mormon peoples and the Mesoamerican Indians traded,  a trait that was absent or rare elsewhere in the New World, and  therefore unusual by definition. However, while trading in a variety  of goods is strongly implied by the wording in the Book of Mormon,  only trading in wood is specifically mentioned. So this  correspondence is certainly specific and unusual, but [Page 150] it is not  detailed enough to count as specific, detailed and unusual. To be  conservative, we assign a likelihood of 0.1.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “These somewhat Mexicanized merchant- warriors  controlled the great Gulf Coast entrepot of Xicallanco where Mexican  and Maya traders met” (p. 178). “God M, who was the patron  of merchants, is shown here” (p. 218n138). “Merchants had  a privileged status” (p. 225). “At the top [of the  class structure] were nobles, … wealthy farmers and merchants”  (p. 235).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 6:11‒12.

Analysis  of correspondence: Because this correspondence overlaps somewhat  with correspondence 6.10, we will only count it as specific. However,  the whole interlocking system of trading, merchants and wealth  accumulation through trade is unusual in itself, and perhaps this  correspondence deserves a higher weight. Nonetheless, to be  conservative,

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: Coe makes many references to roads and causeways in  different areas of Mesoamerica. Here are just a few. “There  are two groups of monumental construction, connected by a massive  causeway, and in fact a whole network of causeways radiates out  from El Mirador across the surrounding swampy landscape” (p. 85).  “Archaeologist Rodrigo Liendo Stuardo has even found evidence of  road systems running along the base of those hills, connecting the  far reaches of the Palenque kingdom” (p. 151). “A causeway …  runs southeast from Uxmal through the small site of Nohpat to Kabah”  (p. 182).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 6:8; 3 Nephi 8:13.

Analysis  of correspondence : Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  speak of many roads, not just a few; and the practice of  road-building is widespread in both societies. So this correspondence  is specific and detailed, and also definitely unusual. The Indians  that Joseph Smith knew of did not build roads. However, View  of the Hebrews very briefly mentions road building among the  Indians. However unlikely, Joseph might have read about it there. To  be conservative, this is rated as specific and detailed only.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Also important were the house gardens, still  ubiquitous in Maya villages and hamlets” (p. 22). “A few  cities, such as Chunchucmil in Yucatan, are amazingly dense, with  house lots demarcated by walls; others had extensive space for  gardens” (p. 124).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 7:10.

[Page 151] Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific but not  detailed in the case of the Book of Mormon. Strongly  implied, but not stated, is a garden attached to Nephi’s  house. So we cannot call it detailed. Native Americans taught the  Pilgrims what plants grew well in the New World, so  gardening/ domestic agriculture among the ancestors of the Indians  cannot be called unusual. Specific only,

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “During the Terminal Classic, [Ceibal] seems to have  come under the sway of foreigners, as seen in the strong influence of  non-Maya forms of art and writing. … There are more  ‘foreign’-looking stelae at Ceibal which belong to this period,  with non-Maya calendrical glyphs and iconography; on one, a figure  wears the bird-mask of the central Mexican wind god, Ehecatl, with  a Mexican speech scroll curling from the beak. … This,  however, does not answer the question of the patently Mexican  hieroglyphs on other Ceibal monuments” (p. 178).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:17–18; Mosiah 24:4‒6.

Analysis  of correspondence: Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  refer specifically and in considerable detail to foreigners who  introduce a new language/writing system. This is certainly  unusual. What models or examples did Joseph Smith have available  to him that would have led him to “guess” correctly that  foreigners would impose a new language and writing system on  indigenous peoples? The European settlers in North America were not  trying to impose a new language on the Native Americans, they  were trying to take get rid of the Indians and take their lands.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “The earliest Maya writing, exceedingly difficult to  decode, is quite different from its later versions” (p. 266).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mormon 9:32‒33.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya both refer specifically to a change in writing systems, but  very few details are provided. The practice seems highly unusual.  What change in written English did Joseph Smith know about? What  could he use as a precedent or model? There was nothing. He  might perhaps have known about significant changes in spoken English  from the time, say, of Shakespeare, but not in the way of writing  English. Specific and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The Maya of the lowlands had discovered … if  limestone fragments were burnt, and the resulting powder mixed with  water, a white plaster of great durability was created. Finally,  they quickly realized the [Page 152] structural value of a concrete-like  fill made from limestone rubble and marl” (p. 81). Overall,  there are 61 references to “stucco” in Coe’s book; stucco is  a fine cement.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:7, 9, 11.

Analysis  of correspondence: Specific, detailed and unusual. Both wood and  cement are mentioned as building materials in the Book of Mormon  and in The Maya. While some Indians of northeastern North  America did use wood to build their dwellings (for example, the  Iroquois longhouses), they did not use cement, as did both the Maya  and the Aztecs. How did Joseph Smith “guess” that one?

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Holmul and Xultun, celebrated in recent years for  their … monumental stuccos … and Ek’ Balam, an extraordinary  site in Yucatan with … some of the most astonishing stucco reliefs  ever found” (p. 7). “Many of these were faced with elaborate  stucco friezes and stairways flanked by massive stucco masks”  (p. 81). “This young man is shown in a magnificent,  polychrome stucco relief on a pilaster of Temple XIX”  (p. 160).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:7.

Analysis  of correspondence: Not only were the Maya able to build with  cement/stucco, they were “exceedingly expert” in working it, as  explicitly described in both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya (“astonishing,” “elaborate,” “magnificent” are  the words used by Coe). This is certainly specific and detailed. It  also is clearly unusual. The dominant view of the white settlers  regarding the Indians in the early 1800s was that they were savages.  How did the author of the Book of Mormon correctly “guess”  that these “savages” could work so expertly in cement?

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “the finest Maya wood carving known, this seated  figure from Tabasco, Mexico” (p. 95n40). “Finally, the Late  Classic Maya were … the only American Indians interested in  rendering the uniqueness of individual characters through  portraiture. The Maya artists excelled in low-relief carving. …  Pottery objects of Late Classic manufacture run the gamut [Page 153] from crude  … pots and pans of everyday life to real works of art. Among the  latter are the fantastic supports for incense burners” (p. 164).  (See all of pp. 164‒73.) “The excellence of the workmanship  lavished upon it suggests that the Toltec intruders were better off  in Yucatan” (p. 207).

Analysis  of correspondence: In the Book of Mormon, as in The  Maya, many great workmen practiced excellent workmanship in  a variety of materials (including materials other than  cement/stucco)). So the correspondence is specific and detailed. It  is also highly unusual. As mentioned above, whoever wrote the  Book of Mormon lived in early 19 th century  America, where the Indians were generally deemed to be “savages.”  How did that person correctly “guess” that the ancestors of these  “savages” were great workmen in many different materials?

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “The great majority of goods traveled by sea, since  roads were but poor trails and cargoes heavy. This kind of commerce  was cornered by the Chontal Maya, or Putun, such good seafarers that  Eric Thompson called them ‘the Phoenicians of Middle America'”  (p. 232).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 63:5‒10; Helaman 3:10, 14.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, there was  a lot of trade by sea, and some detail is provided. Joseph Smith  may have known something of the trade between the Iroquois and other  northeastern tribes carried on by canoe. However, the trade by the  Indians of Joseph’s time was via freshwater lakes and rivers and  not ocean shipping, as described in both the Book of Mormon  and The Maya . So the correspondence lacks a bit to be  considered specific, detailed, and unusual, but it is considerably  more than just specific. We count this as  specific and somewhat detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “A few probable coffers exist for books, including  the recent find of a lidded limestone box from Hun Nal Ye cave  in Guatemala” (p. 239).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See p. xi (Introduction and Witnesses).

Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence could hardly be more  specific and detailed. The Book of Mormon was buried below  ground in a lidded stone box. The Maya also (probably) stored  some of their books in lidded stone boxes, the one mentioned in  a cave. The correspondence is also [Page 154] unusual. None of the Indians  of Joseph Smith’s time wrote books, let alone stored them in  stone boxes.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “It has been suggested that the tower was used as an  observatory, but it commands a wide view and could also have  served as a watchtower” (p. 151). “decoration of  perfectly ordinary small ‘palaces’ with high towers imitating the  fronts of temple-pyramids; these towers, however, are solid, the  steps being impossibly narrow and steep, and the ‘doorway’ at the  summit leading to nothing” (p. 161).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 2:7; Mosiah 11:12; Alma 48:1; Helaman  7:10‒11; Moroni 9:7.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon specifically  mentions tall towers being built as watchtowers. The correspondence  is therefore specific and detailed. We would also count it as  unusual. What Indians of Joseph Smith’s time and place built  tall towers? However, View of the Hebrews also contains a very  brief, undetailed mention of towers. So we count this correspondence  as merely specific and detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The supernatural world is ever-present in Chan Kom  [a traditional Maya village] and in the outlying fields and forest.  At the four entrances to the settlement are four pairs of crosses and  four balam (‘jaguar’) spirits” (p. 296).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 22:6; Alma 8:18.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. There were  multiple formal entrances to the villages/towns of the Maya people  and also among the Book of Mormon peoples. However, no  distinctive details are given in the Book of Mormon, nor  does the practice seem unusual. Even small towns on the American  frontier had more than one entrance. Specific only,

Likelihood =  0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Besides jade, the corpse was ornamented with …  rich textiles which have long since rotted away” (p. 106).  “Sadly, nothing remains of all the perishable products which must  have traveled the same routes — textiles” (p. 113). “The  royal corpse had been virtually swaddled, wrapped in layers of lime,  palm, and fine cotton textiles” (p. 144). “Every temple,  every palace room was surely festooned with curtains and wall  hangings” (p. 171).

[Page 155] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 28:13; Mosiah 10:5; Alma  4:6; Helaman 6:13; Helaman 13:28.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is both specific and  detailed. Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya describe  people who had available to them very fine, rich and elaborate  textiles and clothing. The correspondence also seems unusual. The  Indians of Joseph Smith’s time and place wore clothing made  primarily of animal skins and did not have access to the cotton worn  by Indians in warmer climates. Specific, detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02


## Calculation  of technological and miscellaneous correspondences

There  are 23 specific technological/miscellaneous correspondences between  the Book of Mormon and The Maya. Of these, three  have a likelihood of 0.5, eight have a likelihood of 0.1  and twelve have a likelihood of 0.02. Thus the overall  likelihood of these 23 positive correspondences, taken together, is  0.5 3 x 0.1 8 x 0.02 12 =

5.12 x  10 –30 .


## Calculation  of overall likelihood for all 131 correspondences in six categories

The  overall likelihood of these 131 correspondences occurring together is  calculated by multiplying the likelihoods of each of the six  categories, namely 4.99 x 10 –33 x 3.21 x 10 –35 x 1.28 x 10 –24 x 2.0 x 10 –13 x 1.28 x 10 –18 x 5.12 x 10 –30 =

2.69 x 10 –151 .

We  can confirm this calculation by noting that of these 131  correspondences, 23 have a likelihood of 0.5; 57 have  a likelihood of 0.1; and 51 have a likelihood of 0.02. Thus  the overall likelihood can also be computed as 0.5 23 x  0.1 57 x 0.02 51 = 2.69 x 10 –151 .


## Appendix  B Negative Correspondences between the Book of Mormon  and The Maya


## Points  of disagreement between The Maya and the Book of Mormon

  - Horses existed during Book of Mormon (Lehite and Jaredite)  times Coe’s  standard: “It was then a broad, grass-covered plain,  frequented by ‘big game’ — extinct species like horses,  mastodons, camelids, the elephant-like gompothere” (p. 44).  According to Dr. Coe, the horse was extinct in the Americas by  Book of Mormon times. [Page 156] Book of Mormon  correspondence: Alma 18:9‒10, 12; Enos 1:21; and 3 Nephi 4:4,  among others. Analysis  of correspondence: This is specific and detailed. The  Book of Mormon clearly states that there were horses among  the Book of Mormon peoples and that the horses existed in  both Lehite and Jaredite times. Dr. Coe insists that they did not  exist. Likelihood = 50.0 Elephants existed during Book of Mormon (Jaredite) times Coe’s  standard: “It was then a broad, grass-covered plain,  frequented by ‘big game’ — extinct species like horses,  mastodons, camelids, the elephant-like gompothere” (p. 44).  “These great elephants were killed by darts hurled from  spear-throwers” (p. 44). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Ether 9:19. Analysis  of correspondence: The only mention of elephants was in Jaredite  times, many centuries before the Lehites arrived. The elephants may  indeed have been killed off before the Nephites arrived. So this is  specific and detailed without rising to unusual. Likelihood =  10.0 Iron existed during Book of Mormon (Lehite and Jaredite)  times Coe’s  standard: “But the European invaders brought with them more  than their civil and religious order: they imposed a new  economic order as well. Iron and steel tools replaced chipped or  ground stone ones, and the Maya took readily to the Spaniards’  axes, machetes, and billhooks, which in the lowlands enabled them to  cope with the forest as they never had before” (p. 290). Dr.  Coe states that there is no evidence of iron or steel in  Book of Mormon times. Book of Mormon  correspondence: 2 Nephi 5:15; Jarom 1:8; Mosiah  11:3, 8; Ether 10:23. Analysis  of correspondence: There are several mentions of iron and steel  among both Lehite and Jaredite peoples. So this is specific and  detailed. However, there is no description of how widely used these  metals were, so their use could yet be undiscovered. Nonetheless, to  enable a rigorous test of the Book of Mormon, we grant  this correspondence the maximum possible evidentiary weight. Likelihood = 50.0 Steel existed during Book of Mormon (Lehite and Jaredite)  times Coe’s  standard: See 3 above. Book of Mormon  correspondence: 2 Nephi 5:15; Jarom 1:8; Ether 7:9. Analysis  of correspondence: See #3 above. Granted maximum possible weight. Likelihood = 50.0 [Page 157] Copper existed during Book of Mormon (Lehite and Jaredite)  times Coe’s  standard: “The many copper bells and other objects from the  well were of Mexican workmanship” (p. 212). “But exactly how  large trees were felled prior to the adoption of copper axes in the  Postclassic … is unclear” (p. 230). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 8:10; 11:3, 8,10; Ether 10:23. Analysis  of correspondence: Coe says there is no evidence of copper in the  Yucatan prior to the Late Classic, while the Book of Mormon  states clearly that there was copper among the Book of Mormon  peoples during at least part of their history. The Book of Mormon  does not claim to take place exclusively in the Yucatan area, and  there clearly were copper and full metallurgy in northern South  America. Long-distance trade in copper also clearly took place. So  the lack of correspondence seems specific and detailed, but not  unusual. We give this correspondence a weight of 10.0 Likelihood = 10.0 Refined gold and silver existed during Book of Mormon times Coe’s  standard: “a gold frog (possibly an import from Panama, and one  of the earliest-attested metal objects yet discovered for the Maya)”  (pp. 194‒95). “Detail from a gold disk from the Sacred  Cenote, Chichen Itza” (p. 205n126). “Many of the objects  dredged from the muck at the bottom of the Cenote are of Toltec  manufacture, including some marvelously fine jades and the gold disks  already mentioned. … The local lords brought treasures of gold from  places as far afield as Panama” (p. 212). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 11:3, 8‒9; Mosiah 22:12; Ether 10:12,  23. Analysis  of correspondence: The mention of gold and silver in Mosiah 11  and 22 probably took place in highland Guatemala and not the Yucatan.  There is certainly gold and silver in highland Guatemala. We don’t  know where the Book of Ether took place, but much gold and silver  existed in Mexico, so the available gold and silver could have been  distributed by trade to the Maya in Yucatan. Because it is “one  vast shelf” of limestone, the Yucatan has no metals or metal ores.  Since this correspondence is specific and detailed without being  unusual, we give this a weight of 10.0 Likelihood = 10.0

Coe’s  standard: “It was then a broad, grass-covered plain,  frequented by ‘big game’ — extinct species like horses,  mastodons, camelids, the elephant-like gompothere” (p. 44).  According to Dr. Coe, the horse was extinct in the Americas by  Book of Mormon times.

[Page 156] Book of Mormon  correspondence: Alma 18:9‒10, 12; Enos 1:21; and 3 Nephi 4:4,  among others.

Analysis  of correspondence: This is specific and detailed. The  Book of Mormon clearly states that there were horses among  the Book of Mormon peoples and that the horses existed in  both Lehite and Jaredite times. Dr. Coe insists that they did not  exist.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: “It was then a broad, grass-covered plain,  frequented by ‘big game’ — extinct species like horses,  mastodons, camelids, the elephant-like gompothere” (p. 44).  “These great elephants were killed by darts hurled from  spear-throwers” (p. 44).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Ether 9:19.

Analysis  of correspondence: The only mention of elephants was in Jaredite  times, many centuries before the Lehites arrived. The elephants may  indeed have been killed off before the Nephites arrived. So this is  specific and detailed without rising to unusual.

Likelihood =  10.0

Coe’s  standard: “But the European invaders brought with them more  than their civil and religious order: they imposed a new  economic order as well. Iron and steel tools replaced chipped or  ground stone ones, and the Maya took readily to the Spaniards’  axes, machetes, and billhooks, which in the lowlands enabled them to  cope with the forest as they never had before” (p. 290). Dr.  Coe states that there is no evidence of iron or steel in  Book of Mormon times.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: 2 Nephi 5:15; Jarom 1:8; Mosiah  11:3, 8; Ether 10:23.

Analysis  of correspondence: There are several mentions of iron and steel  among both Lehite and Jaredite peoples. So this is specific and  detailed. However, there is no description of how widely used these  metals were, so their use could yet be undiscovered. Nonetheless, to  enable a rigorous test of the Book of Mormon, we grant  this correspondence the maximum possible evidentiary weight.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: See 3 above.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: 2 Nephi 5:15; Jarom 1:8; Ether 7:9.

Analysis  of correspondence: See #3 above. Granted maximum possible weight.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: “The many copper bells and other objects from the  well were of Mexican workmanship” (p. 212). “But exactly how  large trees were felled prior to the adoption of copper axes in the  Postclassic … is unclear” (p. 230).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 8:10; 11:3, 8,10; Ether 10:23.

Analysis  of correspondence: Coe says there is no evidence of copper in the  Yucatan prior to the Late Classic, while the Book of Mormon  states clearly that there was copper among the Book of Mormon  peoples during at least part of their history. The Book of Mormon  does not claim to take place exclusively in the Yucatan area, and  there clearly were copper and full metallurgy in northern South  America. Long-distance trade in copper also clearly took place. So  the lack of correspondence seems specific and detailed, but not  unusual. We give this correspondence a weight of 10.0

Likelihood = 10.0

Coe’s  standard: “a gold frog (possibly an import from Panama, and one  of the earliest-attested metal objects yet discovered for the Maya)”  (pp. 194‒95). “Detail from a gold disk from the Sacred  Cenote, Chichen Itza” (p. 205n126). “Many of the objects  dredged from the muck at the bottom of the Cenote are of Toltec  manufacture, including some marvelously fine jades and the gold disks  already mentioned. … The local lords brought treasures of gold from  places as far afield as Panama” (p. 212).

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 11:3, 8‒9; Mosiah 22:12; Ether 10:12,  23.

Analysis  of correspondence: The mention of gold and silver in Mosiah 11  and 22 probably took place in highland Guatemala and not the Yucatan.  There is certainly gold and silver in highland Guatemala. We don’t  know where the Book of Ether took place, but much gold and silver  existed in Mexico, so the available gold and silver could have been  distributed by trade to the Maya in Yucatan. Because it is “one  vast shelf” of limestone, the Yucatan has no metals or metal ores.  Since this correspondence is specific and detailed without being  unusual, we give this a weight of 10.0

Likelihood = 10.0

We do not  count refined gold and silver separately. In nature, gold is nearly  always accompanied by silver, and thus to refine gold by removing the  silver is to refine the silver also.

Cumulative  strength of these six negative correspondences is 50 3 x 10 3 =

1.25 x 10 8 .


## [Page 158] Points  of disagreement between the Book of Mormon and Dr. Coe in  his Dialogue article and in his podcasts

Coe’s  standard: Coe makes no mention of brass in his book but states in  the podcasts that there is no evidence for it in Mesoamerica.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 5:15; Mosiah 8:10; Mosiah  11:3, 8, 10.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon states clearly  that brass existed among the Book of Mormon peoples, while  Dr. Coe says there is no evidence for it in Mesoamerica. We grant a likelihood of 50 in support of the hypothesis.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: There is no evidence of wheeled vehicles in  Mesoamerica, although wheeled toys have been found, and potter’s  wheels still exist.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 18:9‒10, 12; Alma 20:6; 3 Nephi 3:22.

Analysis  of correspondence: We wonder, given the roads that the Maya and  other Mesoamerican Indians undoubtedly constructed and the wheels  they also made, why on earth they continued to carry their goods on  their backs. We also do not wish to go into the details of what  a “chariot” might be. Other scholars have already dealt with  that issue and can grant to this negative correspondence whatever  weight they choose. We simply grant to this correspondence the  maximum weight of 50.0.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: In the podcasts Dr. Coe states that there is no  evidence of sheep in  Mesoamerica.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Ether 9:18. The only unambiguous reference to  sheep in the Book of Mormon is many centuries BC. The other  references to sheep seem to be of a “religious” nature  rather than specific reference to animal husbandry. There are 70  mentions of the word “flocks” in the Book of Mormon,  but we do not know what animals these flocks consisted of.

Analysis  of correspondence: This is not particularly strong evidence, even  giving the most generous possible interpretation. There is no mention  of sheep during Nephite times, nor evidence that keeping of sheep was  widespread. As evidence, this correspondence cannot be weighted  more than 2.0

Likelihood = 2.0

Coe’s  standard: In the podcasts, Dr. Coe says there is no evidence of  goats or wild goats.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: 1 Nephi 18:25; Enos 1:21; Ether 9:18.

Analysis  of correspondence: As before, we wonder what animals the  Book of Mormon might mean when it refers to “goats” and  “wild goats.” For example, mountain goats are not closely related  to the domestic goat or to the wild goat (these are of the genus Capra ). The domestic goat is descended from the wild goat.  However, goat is the word given in the text of the  Book of Mormon, and goats appear to have been important to  both the Lehites and the Jaredites. So we give this negative  correspondence the maximum possible weight.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: Coe claims that the domestic pig was unknown among the  Maya until the Spanish conquest. However, he also concedes that  modern Maya keep the peccary (New World pig) as pets and a source  of food, although he says they do not domesticate well.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Ether 9:18.

Analysis  of correspondence: The only mention of swine is in Jaredite  times. Given the historical remoteness of that era, it may not be  unusual that better evidence of the domestic pig has not been found.  Also, given the existence of the peccary throughout Mexico, Central  and South America, it can be plausibly argued that it is the peccary  that is referred to in Jaredite times as swine. Specific only.

Likelihood = 2.0

Coe’s  standard: Coe states that wheat has not been found in  Mesoamerica.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 9:9.

Analysis  of correspondence: There is no claim in the Book of Mormon  that those peoples domesticated wheat nor that it was their primary  grain. In fact, the Lehite colony specifically mentions bringing  “seeds” with them, so it is likely that Old World wheat was among  those seeds. Also, the Book of Mormon seems to indicate  corn as the primary grain (see Appendix A, Correspondence 2.22).  Wheat may not have been widely grown, and therefore the evidence for  wheat more difficult to detect centuries later. So at most this  correspondence must be regarded as specific, but it does not rise to  detailed or unusual.

Likelihood = 2.0

Coe’s  standard: Coe states that barley has not been found in the  Americas.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 7:22; Mosiah 9:9; Alma 11:7, 15.

[Page 160] Analysis  of correspondence: As we argued in #6 above for wheat, the  Book of Mormon does not claim that those peoples  domesticated barley, nor that it was their primary grain. In fact,  the Lehite colony specifically mentions bringing “seeds” with  them, so it is possible that Old World barley was among those seeds.  As noted, the Book of Mormon seems to indicate corn as the  primary grain (see Appendix A, Correspondence 2.22), so barley might  not have been a principal crop and therefore not widespread like  corn.

By the  way, barley (and other grains) were the basis of the Nephite monetary  system described in Alma 11. In Han China, officials could be paid in  grain or coin — an interesting “hit” for the Book of Mormon.  So at most this correspondence must be regarded as specific, but it  does not rise to detailed or unusual.

Likelihood = 2.0

Coe’s  standard: Coe claims that cattle ( Bos taurus ) did not  exist in the Americas until the Spanish brought them. Their bones  have never been found.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Enos 1:21; 3 Nephi 4:4; Ether 9:18.

“All  manner of cattle,” the phrase used in Ether 9:18, is likely earlier  English usage. However, to once again be rigorous in our test of the  Book of Mormon, we will assume that the cattle referred in  the book are indeed Bos taurus (including both oxen and cows),  which Dr. Coe says did not exist, and we will grant this negative  correspondence a likelihood of 50.0.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: There is no evidence of silkworm culture. The Spaniards  were very impressed by the fineness of the fabrics the Maya produced.  The Spaniards had no fabrics so fine. The tropical environment has  a strong tendency to destroy fabrics.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: Alma 1:29; Alma 4:6; Ether 9:17; Ether 10:24.

[Page 161] Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Lehites and Jaredites had a fabric  they called silk, and the Maya in particular were able to produce  very fine fabrics. Given the tropical climate and the resulting decay  of organic materials, we believe this negative correspondence is  specific, but not detailed or unusual.

Likelihood = 2.0

Coe’s  standard: Dr. Coe says there is no evidence of asses (donkeys) in  the New World.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: 1 Nephi 18:25; Ether 9:19.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon states that there  were asses in both Jaredite and Lehite times and that they were  useful for man. Since donkeys are hardy animals and can subsist on  marginal feed, their utility would argue for them being somewhat  widespread. So we will grant to this negative correspondence  a likelihood of 50.0.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: Dr. Coe says there is no such hybrid system in the New  World, and that the Maya language/writing system is of local  invention, not an import from the Old World. However, he also notes  that there exist two scripts from ancient America that cannot  currently be read because a bilingual (“Rosetta Stone”) is  lacking.

Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 1:2 and 3:19; Mosiah 1:2,  4; Mormon 9:34.

Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon emphasizes “the  language of the fathers,” an arcane, sacred written language  connected to the language of the Egyptians. It is the language in  which the plates were written and was known to only a few. It  was obviously not the common language. In fact, Moroni (see Moroni  9:34) says that “none other people knoweth our language.” Given  the existence of Mesoamerican scripts that cannot be read, and the  fact that the sacred language of the Nephites was a closely  guarded language, this negative correspondence cannot be regarded as  either detailed or unusual. At most it is specific.

Likelihood =  2.0

Coe’s  standard: Dr. Coe states that he has never seen any evidence that  would convince him of the presence of Middle Eastern DNA in the New  World.

Analysis  of correspondence: It is tempting to simply dismiss this negative  correspondence as having no evidentiary value either for or against  the historicity of the Book of Mormon. At most it is  specific: “No middle Eastern DNA markers have been found in Native  Americans.” But that is not detailed or unusual, given the  scientific issues noted above.

Likelihood = 2.0

Cumulative  strength of these 12 negative correspondences is 50 5 x 10 7 =

3.13 x 10 15 .


## A few  ridiculous objections to the Book of Mormon and a rejoinder  to Dr. Coe

Near  the end of Podcast #907, Dr. Dehlin invited Dr. Coe to unburden  himself about anything that Coe thought should be in the  Book of Mormon, but is not. Dr. Coe mentions four things:  the absence of (1) books, (2) chocolate, (3) turkeys, and (4)  jaguars. Since Dr. Coe does not hesitate to use the word ridiculous to characterize arguments for the Book of Mormon he finds  extremely unconvincing, we do not hesitate to use the same word to  characterize these particular objections. They are, in fact,  ridiculous.

First  of all, the Book of Mormon clearly refers to multiple books  being present (see Appendix A, Correspondence 6.9). If Dr. Coe had  read the Book of Mormon more than once and more recently  than 45 years ago, he might have noticed that fact. As for chocolate,  turkeys, and jaguars, the Book of Mormon does not claim to  be a text on elite foods, poultry, or exotic wild animals. The  Book of Mormon, from beginning to end, is meant to testify  of Christ and bring all humankind to him.

Chapter  6 of 1 Nephi (verses 3‒6) describes the intent and scope  of the Book of Mormon. This is the intent by which the  Book of Mormon should be judged (and not by the standards  of academic curiosity). Verse 6 reads, “Wherefore, I shall  give commandment unto my seed that they shall not occupy these plates  with things which are not of worth unto the children of men.”

Knowledge  of turkeys, jaguars, and consumption of chocolate among the ancient  Mesoamericans is of no real worth. Knowing about Jesus Christ, about  eternal life, about the resurrection, and the mercy that has been  made available to us through Christ are topics of supernal worth.

No,  that would be ridiculous. All books must limit their scope and have  a focus. Every author/editor must decide what to include and  what to leave out. Dr. Coe did so decide in The Maya. So did  the editors and authors of the Book of Mormon: Another  Testament of Jesus Christ.


## Appendix  C Statistical Analysis of Correspondences between Manuscript  Found and The Maya


## The  Spaulding Manuscript in the Oberlin College Library

This  library possesses a manuscript which apparently is in the  handwriting of Solomon Spaulding, since it seems to agree with  fragments of account books which I have seen, and. its  genuineness is certified by a number of people who apparently  examined it about the year 1839. It is not, however, the manuscript  that was said by witnesses to resemble the Book of Mormon,  since that manuscript was always spoken of as having been written in  the style of the sacred scriptures, whereas this is a plain  narrative containing accounts of the wars between the Kentucks and  the Sciotos — Indian tribes ascribed to this country.

The  manuscript which we have was apparently obtained from Spaulding’s  effects at West Amity, Pennsylvania, at some time after the  publication of the Book of Mormon, and seems to have been  found as a result of a search to find whatever remained of  Spaulding’s writings in order to throw light on the question of  whether he was the author of [Page 164] the Book of Mormon, or not.  The manuscript which we have was copied under our supervision and  a typewritten copy furnished to the Shepherd Book Company, Salt  Lake City, Utah, and also to the Reorganized Church of Christ of  Latter Day Saints, then located at Lamoni, Iowa. It was printed and  sold by both branches of the Mormon Church, who gave it the title  “The Manuscript Found” — a title which does not appear in  any way on the manuscript, which simply had pencilled upon the papers  in which it was wrapped, “Manuscript story, Conneaut Creek.”

It  seems to have been taken from West Amity, Pennsylvania, to  Painesville, Ohio, and there to have come into the possession of  a Mr. Hulbert, owner of the “Painesville Telegraph,” in  whose office had been printed the first book against Mormonism, in  1836. Apparently the manuscript, after being examined and found not  to be a manuscript connected with the Book of Mormon,  was laid aside and passed with the files of the office of the  “Painesville Telegraph” when it came into the possession of Mr.  Rice, a man who owned and edited at one time various  anti-slavery papers in northern Ohio. When this Mr. Rice became an  elderly man he removed to Honolulu to live with his daughter,  a graduate of this institution, Mrs. Doctor Whitney. When  President Fairchild visited Honolulu in 1885 he asked this old Mr.  Rice if he did not have some anti-slavery literature which he could  give to the Oberlin College Library for its anti-slavery collection.  This set Mr. Rice to looking over his old papers, and among them this  manuscript of Spaulding’s was found. It was given to President  Fairchild and added to the Oberlin College Library.

It  seems pretty clearly not to have been the manuscript from which the  Book of Mormon was written, as it deals with scenes taking  place in America among Indians, possibly of the Mound Builders  period. Spaulding is known to have been interested in the Indians,  particularly of that period, because of certain mounds which were in  his home lot in Conneaut. The manuscript is thought by some to have  a certain very general resemblance to the outline of the  Book of Mormon, but is not at all written in phraseology  resembling the phraseology of the Bible, which is the characteristic  of the Book of Mormon. The theory of those who believe in  Spaulding’s having written a manuscript which furnished the  basis of the Book of Mormon, is that he wrote another  manuscript in biblical phraseology, which he read to many of his  Conneaut friends and thereby came to be known among the young people  of the town as “And-it-came-to-pass” Spaulding. The theory of  those who accept this explanation is that he subsequently took this  manuscript written [Page 165] in biblical phraseology to Pittsburg, where it  fell into the hands of a Mr. Patterson, in whose office  Sidney Rigdon worked, and that through Sidney Rigdon it came into the  possession of Joseph Smith and was made the basis of the  Book of Mormon. In regard to that question, our manuscript  does not seem to throw very much light.

(From  a letter written by Professor A. S. Root, May 12, 1927.)


## Positive  Correspondences between Manuscript Found and The Maya

  - Governed by kings Coe’s  standard: Among many such references: “Among the highland Maya  there were real kings” (p. 236). “The K’iche’ state was  headed by a king, a king-elect and two ‘captains'”  (p. 226). “It is not unreasonable to see one of its  [Calakmul’s] kings, Yuknoom the Great, as their Charlemagne”  (p. 276). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: References to kings are found all  through this document; see for example pp. 17, 19, 32 and 43,  among others. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, but by no  means detailed or unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 Dogs present and were eaten Coe’s  standard: “One such strain [of dog was] … fattened on corn,  and either eaten or sacrificed” (p. 231). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: pp. 24‒26 refer to the sacrifice  and eating of dogs. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, but also by no  means detailed or unusual. Many Native American tribes also ate dogs. Likelihood = 0.5 Dogs were sacrificed as a religious act Coe’s  standard: “Wild turkeys, deer, dogs … were considered fit  offerings for the Maya gods” (p. 244). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 25‒26 describing  a holocaust offering of black dogs, while white dogs were eaten. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, and seems  unusual for the early 1800s, but it is not detailed in the case of The Maya . Likelihood = 0.1 Ancestors emigrated from the west Coe’s  standard: “It was from the setting sun we came, from Tula, from  beyond the sea” (p. 224). [Page 166] “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: “Their tradition tells them they  emigrated from the westward [from across the sea]” (p. 32). Analysis  of correspondence: We have previously (Correspondence 2.20 in  Appendix A) given this correspondence a likelihood of 0.1, and  so we use that value here also. Likelihood = 0.1 Many cities present Coe’s  standard : To name just a few of the cities mentioned in The  Maya we have Uxmal, Chichen Itza, Coba, Tulum, Acanceh, Ek’ Balam,  Mayapan, Piedras Negras, Ceibal, Palenque, Naranjo, El Mirador,  Bonampak, Uaxactun, Kaminaljuyu, Takalik Abaj, Tikal (p. 9),  “the great Usumacinta, … draining the northern highlands, …  twisting to the northwest past many a ruined Maya city”  (pp. 16‒17). “more advanced cultural traits, … the  construction of cities” (p. 26). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See references to cities on pp. 33,  35, and 46, among others. Analysis  of correspondence: Same as Correspondence 1.5 in Appendix A. Likelihood = 0.1 Wore beautiful feathers Coe’s  standard: “Hundreds of resplendent quetzal feathers fan out  behind his back.” [peaking of a mural]. (p. 189nxvi). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See pp. 56, 57, 96. Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence is specific, but does not  correspond in details, nor is it unusual. The Indians of Joseph’s  time certainly wore feathers. Manuscript Found refers only to  blue feathers, while The Maya refers to the wearing of  multicolored quetzal feathers. Likelihood = 0.5 Raised corn, beans and squashes Coe’s  standard: “In these maize fields … secondary crops like beans  and squashes … are inter-planted” (p. 16). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 37. Analysis  of correspondence: The reference is specific but not detailed or  unusual. These crops were staples of the Indian diet. Likelihood =  0.5 Had domestic turkeys Coe’s  standard: “Both wild and domestic turkeys were known”  (p. 231). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 38. Likelihood  analysis: Wild turkeys and domestic turkeys were known in eastern  North America from very early times. This is specific, but not at all  unusual, nor are any significant details given. Likelihood = 0.5 [Page 167] Used cotton Coe’s  standard: “Cotton was widely grown” (p. 231). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 38. Likelihood  analysis: Specific but no unusual details provided in either  book, nor is either reference at all detailed. Likelihood = 0.5 Wealthy people had decorated pottery Coe’s  standard: “an elite class … imported pottery … to stock  their tombs” (p. 103) . “restored Thin Orange ware  vessel in the form of a seated man” (p. 105n47). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 39. Likelihood  analysis: Specific, but there are no details of the decorations  in Manuscript Found. It would not have been a daring leap  to surmise that wealthy people had luxury goods. Likelihood = 0.5 Handed down both sacred and secular texts Coe’s  standard: “The traditional annals of the peoples of Yucatan …  transcribed into Spanish letters … apparently reach back as far as  the beginning of the Postclassic era. … The ‘Books of Chilam  Balam,’ which derive their name from a Maya savant  [are] said to have predicted the arrival of the Spaniards from the  east” (p. 199). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 52. Likelihood  analysis: Again, specific in both books, but there is little  distinguishing detail in Manuscript Found. Also, this idea was  not unusual. Western society had been handing down sacred and secular  texts for many centuries. Likelihood = 0.5 Took hostages of high rank Coe’s  standard: “Sons were sent … to Calakmul … to serve as  hostages securing their fathers’ good behavior” (p. 95). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 62. Likelihood  analysis: This is the same practice of royal sons being used as  hostages. So it is specific and has corresponding detail in both  books. But it is not unusual. Hostage taking was a well-known  practice. Likelihood = 0.1 Had taxes Coe’s  standard: “The ruler took in tax” (p. 93). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 66. Likelihood  analysis: Well, this one ought to get a probability of  0.99999 or more, as it is highly specific but has no distinguishing  details, and it is so far from unusual as to be commonplace. But to  be conservative in the analysis [Page 168] (that is, give Manuscript Found its greatest chance), we will not discard this evidence. Likelihood  = 0.5 . Hereditary chief priests Coe’s  standard: “During the prosperity of Mayapan, a hereditary  Chief Priest resided in that city” (p. 243). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 66. Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is similar to Correspondence 3.11  in Appendix A, to which we have assigned a likelihood of 0.1 Likelihood = 0.1 Used slings and stones Coe’s  standard: “the infantry, from which rained … stones slung  from slings” (p. 236). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 72 . Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is similar to Correspondence 4.10  in Appendix A, to which we have assigned a likelihood of  0.02. Likelihood = 0.02 Land supported millions of people Coe’s  standard: “One view perceives as many as eight to ten million  people in the lowlands. … [Others] would go as low as two to three  million” (p. 22). “bulk of the population … [was]  apparently in the millions” (p. 177). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 79. Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is specific, and somewhat detailed.  It is also highly unusual. As we did for Correspondence 6.1 in  Appendix A, we assign a likelihood of 0.02 . Likelihood = 0.02 Cities fortified with deep trenches and wooden barriers Coe’s  standard: “Becan … was completely surrounded by massive  defensive earthworks … [consisting of] a ditch and inner  rampart, 38 ft high, and would have been formidable … if the  rampart had been surmounted by a palisade” (p. 122). “A system of defensive walls … topped by wooden palisades was  constructed around, and within them [the Maya cities]” (p. 151). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 80. Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is specific and detailed, but  perhaps not entirely unusual. At least for wooden forts and  palisades, these were well known in early frontier America. The  correspondence does not have nearly the same level of detail as given  in the Book of Mormon and summarized in correspondence 4.2.  So it is specific and unusual, for a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Prophets used a stone to see the future and discover hidden  things Coe’s  standard: “Two of the [Maya] houses were certainly devoted to  village rituals. [One house had] a collection of crystals like  those used by modern Maya diviners” (p. 107). “[One Maya  community religious leader] … is [Page 169] seemingly imbued with far greater  spiritual power: this is the hmeen, “he who does or understands  things” — that is, the shaman. … These specialists still  play an important role in divination and prophecy, using their  crystals to scry the future. … These shamans also engage in  divination, either by using their magic crystal” (pp. 296‒97,  emphasis added). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 107 for a quite  detailed account of the use of such crystals. Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is obviously specific and detailed.  But however odd and unusual it may seem to us, it would definitely  not have been unusual in the early 19 th century when the  use of such stones was an integral part of folk magic. Joseph Smith  himself had a seer stone, as we have summarized in  Correspondence 3.5 in Appendix A. So this correspondence has  a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Instruments blown at the start of battle Coe’s  standard: “More formal battle opened with the dreadful din of  drums, whistles, shell trumpets and war cries” (p. 236). “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 126. Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is specific, but it is not  particularly detailed, nor is it unusual. Horns and trumpets were  part of European warfare, and the shofar trumpets announced  Joshua’s battle against Jericho. Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: Among many such references: “Among the highland Maya  there were real kings” (p. 236). “The K’iche’ state was  headed by a king, a king-elect and two ‘captains'”  (p. 226). “It is not unreasonable to see one of its  [Calakmul’s] kings, Yuknoom the Great, as their Charlemagne”  (p. 276).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: References to kings are found all  through this document; see for example pp. 17, 19, 32 and 43,  among others.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, but by no  means detailed or unusual.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “One such strain [of dog was] … fattened on corn,  and either eaten or sacrificed” (p. 231).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: pp. 24‒26 refer to the sacrifice  and eating of dogs.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, but also by no  means detailed or unusual. Many Native American tribes also ate dogs.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Wild turkeys, deer, dogs … were considered fit  offerings for the Maya gods” (p. 244).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 25‒26 describing  a holocaust offering of black dogs, while white dogs were eaten.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, and seems  unusual for the early 1800s, but it is not detailed in the case of The Maya .

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “It was from the setting sun we came, from Tula, from  beyond the sea” (p. 224).

[Page 166] “ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: “Their tradition tells them they  emigrated from the westward [from across the sea]” (p. 32).

Analysis  of correspondence: We have previously (Correspondence 2.20 in  Appendix A) given this correspondence a likelihood of 0.1, and  so we use that value here also.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard : To name just a few of the cities mentioned in The  Maya we have Uxmal, Chichen Itza, Coba, Tulum, Acanceh, Ek’ Balam,  Mayapan, Piedras Negras, Ceibal, Palenque, Naranjo, El Mirador,  Bonampak, Uaxactun, Kaminaljuyu, Takalik Abaj, Tikal (p. 9),  “the great Usumacinta, … draining the northern highlands, …  twisting to the northwest past many a ruined Maya city”  (pp. 16‒17). “more advanced cultural traits, … the  construction of cities” (p. 26).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See references to cities on pp. 33,  35, and 46, among others.

Analysis  of correspondence: Same as Correspondence 1.5 in Appendix A.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Hundreds of resplendent quetzal feathers fan out  behind his back.” [peaking of a mural]. (p. 189nxvi).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See pp. 56, 57, 96.

Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence is specific, but does not  correspond in details, nor is it unusual. The Indians of Joseph’s  time certainly wore feathers. Manuscript Found refers only to  blue feathers, while The Maya refers to the wearing of  multicolored quetzal feathers.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “In these maize fields … secondary crops like beans  and squashes … are inter-planted” (p. 16).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 37.

Analysis  of correspondence: The reference is specific but not detailed or  unusual. These crops were staples of the Indian diet.

Likelihood =  0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Both wild and domestic turkeys were known”  (p. 231).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 38.

Likelihood  analysis: Wild turkeys and domestic turkeys were known in eastern  North America from very early times. This is specific, but not at all  unusual, nor are any significant details given.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Cotton was widely grown” (p. 231).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 38.

Likelihood  analysis: Specific but no unusual details provided in either  book, nor is either reference at all detailed.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “an elite class … imported pottery … to stock  their tombs” (p. 103) . “restored Thin Orange ware  vessel in the form of a seated man” (p. 105n47).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 39.

Likelihood  analysis: Specific, but there are no details of the decorations  in Manuscript Found. It would not have been a daring leap  to surmise that wealthy people had luxury goods.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “The traditional annals of the peoples of Yucatan …  transcribed into Spanish letters … apparently reach back as far as  the beginning of the Postclassic era. … The ‘Books of Chilam  Balam,’ which derive their name from a Maya savant  [are] said to have predicted the arrival of the Spaniards from the  east” (p. 199).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 52.

Likelihood  analysis: Again, specific in both books, but there is little  distinguishing detail in Manuscript Found. Also, this idea was  not unusual. Western society had been handing down sacred and secular  texts for many centuries.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “Sons were sent … to Calakmul … to serve as  hostages securing their fathers’ good behavior” (p. 95).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 62.

Likelihood  analysis: This is the same practice of royal sons being used as  hostages. So it is specific and has corresponding detail in both  books. But it is not unusual. Hostage taking was a well-known  practice.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The ruler took in tax” (p. 93).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 66.

Likelihood  analysis: Well, this one ought to get a probability of  0.99999 or more, as it is highly specific but has no distinguishing  details, and it is so far from unusual as to be commonplace. But to  be conservative in the analysis [Page 168] (that is, give Manuscript Found its greatest chance), we will not discard this evidence.

Likelihood  = 0.5 .

Coe’s  standard: “During the prosperity of Mayapan, a hereditary  Chief Priest resided in that city” (p. 243).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 66.

Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is similar to Correspondence 3.11  in Appendix A, to which we have assigned a likelihood of 0.1

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “the infantry, from which rained … stones slung  from slings” (p. 236).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: p. 72 .

Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is similar to Correspondence 4.10  in Appendix A, to which we have assigned a likelihood of  0.02.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “One view perceives as many as eight to ten million  people in the lowlands. … [Others] would go as low as two to three  million” (p. 22). “bulk of the population … [was]  apparently in the millions” (p. 177).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 79.

Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is specific, and somewhat detailed.  It is also highly unusual. As we did for Correspondence 6.1 in  Appendix A, we assign a likelihood of 0.02 .

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Becan … was completely surrounded by massive  defensive earthworks … [consisting of] a ditch and inner  rampart, 38 ft high, and would have been formidable … if the  rampart had been surmounted by a palisade” (p. 122). “A system of defensive walls … topped by wooden palisades was  constructed around, and within them [the Maya cities]” (p. 151).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 80.

Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is specific and detailed, but  perhaps not entirely unusual. At least for wooden forts and  palisades, these were well known in early frontier America. The  correspondence does not have nearly the same level of detail as given  in the Book of Mormon and summarized in correspondence 4.2.  So it is specific and unusual, for a likelihood of 0.1.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Two of the [Maya] houses were certainly devoted to  village rituals. [One house had] a collection of crystals like  those used by modern Maya diviners” (p. 107). “[One Maya  community religious leader] … is [Page 169] seemingly imbued with far greater  spiritual power: this is the hmeen, “he who does or understands  things” — that is, the shaman. … These specialists still  play an important role in divination and prophecy, using their  crystals to scry the future. … These shamans also engage in  divination, either by using their magic crystal” (pp. 296‒97,  emphasis added).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 107 for a quite  detailed account of the use of such crystals.

Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is obviously specific and detailed.  But however odd and unusual it may seem to us, it would definitely  not have been unusual in the early 19 th century when the  use of such stones was an integral part of folk magic. Joseph Smith  himself had a seer stone, as we have summarized in  Correspondence 3.5 in Appendix A. So this correspondence has  a likelihood of 0.1.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “More formal battle opened with the dreadful din of  drums, whistles, shell trumpets and war cries” (p. 236).

“ Manuscript  Found” Correspondence: See p. 126.

Likelihood  analysis: This correspondence is specific, but it is not  particularly detailed, nor is it unusual. Horns and trumpets were  part of European warfare, and the shofar trumpets announced  Joshua’s battle against Jericho.

Likelihood = 0.5


## Summary  of the Positive Correspondences

There  are 19 positive correspondences between The Maya and Manuscript Found. Ten of these have a likelihood of 0.5,  seven likelihood of 0.1, and two a likelihood of 0.02. The  product of these is therefore 0.5 10 x 0.1 7 x  0.02 2 =

3.91 x 10 –14 .

These  are evidences that support the hypothesis that Manuscript Found is  an authentic record set in ancient Mesoamerica. The product of these  evidences is multiplied by the initial skeptical prior of one billion  to one that Manuscript Found is not an authentic record  set in ancient Mesoamerica. The result is 3.91 x 10 –5 .

Taken  by itself, this result would change our skeptical prior of a billion  to one against the hypothesis to a positive posterior of more  than a thousand to one that Manuscript Found is an  authentic record of ancient Mesoamerica. However, we have not yet  applied the evidence against the hypothesis, that is, the negative  correspondences between The Maya and Manuscript Found .  We do this now.


## [Page 170] Negative  Correspondences between Manuscript Found and The Maya

  - Manuscript Found claims that the manuscript was found in an  “earthern box.” Coe’s  standard: “A few probable coffers exist for books, including  the recent find of a lidded limestone box” (p. 239). Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: The manuscript was  found in an “earthern box.” See p. 12. Analysis  of correspondence: This is similar to Correspondence 6.20 in  Appendix A, comparing the Book of Mormon to The Maya. We  have assigned a likelihood of 0.02 to this fact as a positive  correspondence. Thus lack of correspondence, or negative  correspondence, in this case must be the reciprocal of the positive  correspondence or likelihood 1.0/0.02 = 50.0. Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that the manuscript was written on  parchment. Coe’s  standard: “These [codices, books] are written on long strips of  bark paper” (p. 239). Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: Parchment, see p. 12. Analysis  of correspondence: If the Reverend Solomon Spaulding, the author  of Manuscript Found, had guessed correctly that the Maya wrote  on bark paper, then that would be specific, detailed and unusual. But  that is not the case, so the likelihood is 50.0. Likelihood = 50.0 Hereafter  we will just refer to Reverend Spaulding (also spelled “Spalding”)  as “the author.” Manuscript Found claims that the manuscript was written in Latin. Coe’s  standard: “At least 15,000 examples of Maya writing have  survived” (p. 237). Authors’ note: there is no suggestion by  Dr. Coe that the Maya ever wrote in Latin. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: Latin, see p. 12. Analysis  of correspondence: If the author of Manuscript Found had  guessed correctly that the Maya wrote in Latin, then that would be  specific, detailed and unusual. But that is not the case, so the likelihood is 50.0 Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that the men wore shoes, long stockings  and waistcoats. Coe’s  standard: No carvings or murals of the Maya show them dressed as  New England gentlemen. They were dressed otherwise. See, for example,  pp. 188‒92. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 39. [Page 171] Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, if the author of Manuscript  Found had guessed correctly that the Maya dressed as New England  gentlemen, then that would be specific, detailed, and (very) unusual.  But he did not guess correctly, so the likelihood is 50.0 Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that the natives raised wheat. Coe’s  standard: There is no mention of wheat among the crops raised by  the Maya. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 37. Analysis  of correspondence: This is a specific guess, but little  detail is given. It is probably unusual. Wheat is one of the staple  grains for humankind and has been for centuries. It would have been  unusual if the author had correctly predicted that the natives did  not grow wheat. Likelihood = 10.0 Manuscript Found claims that the natives had horses and plowed  with them. Coe’s  standard: According to Dr. Coe, there is no evidence that the  Maya ever had horses, let alone that they plowed with them. The Maya  apparently did not plow at all and did not use draft animals. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 37. Analysis  of correspondence: Had this guess been correct, it would  certainly have been specific, detailed and unusual. The Plains  Indians had horses, and the author may have known about those horses,  but the Indians did not plow with horses. Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that the natives manufactured iron. Coe’s  standard: “But the European invaders brought with them more  than their civil and religious order: they imposed a new  economic order as well. Iron and steel tools replaced chipped or  ground stone ones, and the Maya took readily to the Spaniards’  axes, machetes, and billhooks, which in the lowlands enabled them to  cope with the forest as they never had before” (p. 290). Dr.  Coe states that there is no evidence for iron or steel in  Book of Mormon times. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 38. Analysis  of correspondence: As far as we know, none of the Native  Americans of the early 1800s manufactured iron or lead. So if the  author had guessed this correctly, it would have been specific,  detailed and unusual. But he did not. Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that the houses and public buildings  exhibited no elegance or grandeur. Coe’s  standard: Since the Maya society was class-based (even exhibiting  “castes,” p. 225), their houses would have differed sharply  in the degree of [Page 172] elegance or grandeur. But their public buildings  exhibited a great deal of elegance and grandeur. “Their upper  facades and roof-combs were beautifully ornamented with figures in  stucco and stone. Yaxchilan is famous for its many stone lintels,  carved in relief with scenes of conquest and ceremonial life”  (p. 146). “In the rear of [the miniature temple] stands  a magnificent low relief tablet carved with long hieroglyphic  texts” (p. 152). See photographs and drawings of the Temple of  Inscriptions (pp. 158‒59). “Palace at Xpuhil: … The three  towers are completely solid and served no other function than  decoration” (p. 163n97). Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 39. Analysis  of correspondence: Had the author of Manuscript Found guessed  correctly about lack of elegance in public and private buildings,  that would have been specific, detailed, and unusual, since most  societies (and rulers) that could afford to have always gone in for  a lot of elegance and grandeur. But he guessed incorrectly. Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that the houses were one story high,  framed and covered with clapboards or shingles. Coe’s  standard: This is completely unlike actual Maya dwellings. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 39. Analysis  of correspondence: Had New England-style frame houses with  clapboards and shingles ever been found among the Maya, that would  have been specific, detailed, and extremely unusual. But once again,  the author of Manuscript Found guessed wrong. So consequently  the Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that the “whole catalog of ornamental  trumpery is neglected.” Coe’s  standard: In contrast, the Maya really went in for the “whole  catalog of ornamental trumpery.” They were devoted to ornamentation  in dress and architecture. The grandeur of Maya architecture has  already been discussed in Correspondence #8 above. There are many  examples of ornamentation in dress. “Santa Rita also yielded an  extraordinary set of ear ornaments in gold and turquoise” (p. 219),  … “a splendid pair of ground obsidian [earspools]”  (pp. 276‒77). Also see the various representations of  elaborate Maya dress in the figures between pp. 185‒92. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 40. Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, had the author of Manuscript  Found guessed correctly about lack of personal ornamentation and  fancy dress, that would have been specific, detailed, and unusual,  since rich people have usually gone in for expensive and fancy dress.  But he guessed incorrectly. Likelihood = 50.0 [Page 173] Manuscript Found claims that the characters (in their writing  system) represent words. Coe’s  standard: “The Maya were writing in a mixed, logophonetic  system in which phonetic and semantic elements were combined, … but  they also had a fairly complete syllabary” (p. 269). Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 42.  “Characters represent words.” Analysis  of correspondence: The author of Manuscript Found incorrectly  guessed that the writing system was not at least partly phonetic and  syllabic. Had he correctly guessed that a mixed logophonetic  system was used instead, that would have been specific, detailed, and  probably unusual. Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found states how writing was to be read on a page. Coe’s  standard: “Maya writing was to be read in double columns from  left to right, and top to bottom” (p. 265). Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 42. The  natives “wrote from top to bottom, one character below the  preceding one, right to left in columns.” Analysis  of correspondence: The writer of Manuscript Found guessed  wrong in this specific, detailed, and unusual point. Had he guessed  correctly, we would have assigned this correspondence a likelihood  of 0.02. Since he did not guess correctly, the evidence is counted  against the hypothesis for a likelihood of 50.0 Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that the natives worshipped one supreme  omnipotent being. Coe’s  standard: Among the Maya there were many, many gods. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 46. Analysis  of correspondence: This is specific and detailed, but perhaps not  unusual. The author of Manuscript Found was writing in early  19 th century America, where the idea of monotheism was  deeply embedded. Since the writer guessed wrong for one of the three  criteria, the likelihood would be 1/0.1 = 10.0 Likelihood = 10.0 Manuscript Found claims that the natives used shovels and  wheelbarrows. Coe’s  standard: There is no mention of these earth-moving implements  among the Maya or other Mesoamerican Indians, nor is there mention of  wheeled tools like a wheelbarrow. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 59. [Page 174] Analysis  of correspondence: Had the author of Manuscript Found guessed  correctly about the existence of these implements and the wheel in  ancient America, that would certainly have been specific, detailed,  and unusual. But he did not. So the likelihood is 50.0. Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that the natives coined money and limited  its supply. Coe’s  standard: There is no mention of coins in The Maya, and  Dr. Coe specifically emphasizes this point in the podcasts with Dr.  Dehlin: no coins among the Maya or other Mesoamerican Indians. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 66. Analysis  of correspondence: Since no Native Americans were known to use  coins, a correct guess on the part of the author of Manuscript  Found would probably have been specific, detailed, and unusual.  But he did not guess correctly. Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that there were no wars between  neighboring empires for almost 500 years. Coe’s  standard: “The Maya were obsessed with war” (p. 236).  Coe’s book is full of descriptions of war and conquest among the  Maya. A bigger difference between the claims of Manuscript  Found and the actual situation is hard to imagine. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 70. Analysis  of correspondence: Human history is one long catalog of violence  and men reigning with blood and horror on the earth. The Maya  certainly did their part to fill out this dismal catalog of human  cruelty. Had the author of Manuscript Found been correct in  this amazing claim, it would certainly have been specific,  detailed, and unusual. Alas, he was wrong. Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that adulterers were punished by throwing  rotten eggs at them. Coe’s  standard: “Adultery was punished by death” (p. 234). Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 77. Analysis  of correspondence: The practice of throwing rotten eggs at  performers dates to medieval times in England; only later did the  practice migrate to America. If it were practiced among ancient  American Indians as a punishment for adultery, that would  certainly be specific, detailed, and unusual. But that is not what  was done. Likelihood = 50.0 [Page 175] Manuscript Found claims that there was a “happy equality”  among people and “great similarity” in their manner of living. Coe’s  standard: This was very far from being the case among the Maya,  where there was great inequality. See pp. 93, 95, 225 among  others. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 77. Analysis  of correspondence: Such periods of equality among people have  been very rare. Had the author of Manuscript Found been  correct in this guess, it would have been specific, detailed, and  very unusual. But it was not so. Likelihood = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that “governments were not infested  with a thirst for conquest.” Coe’s  standard: Dr. Coe shows over and over again that the Maya  kingdoms were always busy making or preparing for war. “The Maya  were obsessed with war” (p. 236). War and conquest were their  way of life for centuries. Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 78. Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, the author of Manuscript Found simply guessed wrongly. The correspondence is detailed and  specific. Since early America lived in the shadow of the British  Empire, built on conquest, and centuries of conquest in Europe, this  would have been highly unusual, if true. But it was not. Likelihood  = 50.0 Manuscript Found claims that political institutions among the  natives guarded life and property against oppressing injustice and  tyranny. Coe’s  standard: There is no mention and no evidence of such nice  American liberties in The Maya. As mentioned, it was  a strictly hierarchal society with castes and definite ruling  classes (pp. 93, 95, 231). For example, slavery, the epitome of  oppression and tyranny, was widely practiced in ancient Mesoamerica.  (See pp. 19 and 225.) “Other valuable Yucatan exports were  honey, cotton mantles and slaves” (p. 232). Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 78. Analysis  of correspondence: Human beings have, much more often than not,  oppressed, exploited, robbed and enslaved each other. So a society  in which political institutions guarded against such practices would  have been quite rare. No such society is recorded by Dr. Coe in The  Maya. If true, this correspondence would have been specific,  detailed, and unusual. But it was not so. Likelihood = 50.0 [Page 176] Manuscript Found claims that there were no political  intermarriages among neighboring kingdoms. Coe’s  standard: (Speaking of political intrigues among rivals), “when  Bird Jaguar IV, ruler of Yaxchilan, Guatemala, married Lady Mut  Bahlam of Hixwitz, there must have been rejoicing for some and  gnashing of teeth for others” (p. 97). Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 81. Analysis  of correspondence: This is a specific and sufficiently  detailed correspondence. Also, if the author of Manuscript Found had guessed correctly, it would have been unusual. Political  marriages were well known in Europe and Great Britain. So if the  claim were supported by evidence from The Maya, it would have  earned likelihood of 0.02. But the claim was not supported. Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: “A few probable coffers exist for books, including  the recent find of a lidded limestone box” (p. 239).

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: The manuscript was  found in an “earthern box.” See p. 12.

Analysis  of correspondence: This is similar to Correspondence 6.20 in  Appendix A, comparing the Book of Mormon to The Maya. We  have assigned a likelihood of 0.02 to this fact as a positive  correspondence. Thus lack of correspondence, or negative  correspondence, in this case must be the reciprocal of the positive  correspondence or likelihood 1.0/0.02 = 50.0.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: “These [codices, books] are written on long strips of  bark paper” (p. 239).

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: Parchment, see p. 12.

Analysis  of correspondence: If the Reverend Solomon Spaulding, the author  of Manuscript Found, had guessed correctly that the Maya wrote  on bark paper, then that would be specific, detailed and unusual. But  that is not the case, so the likelihood is 50.0.

Likelihood = 50.0

Hereafter  we will just refer to Reverend Spaulding (also spelled “Spalding”)  as “the author.”

Coe’s  standard: “At least 15,000 examples of Maya writing have  survived” (p. 237). Authors’ note: there is no suggestion by  Dr. Coe that the Maya ever wrote in Latin.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: Latin, see p. 12.

Analysis  of correspondence: If the author of Manuscript Found had  guessed correctly that the Maya wrote in Latin, then that would be  specific, detailed and unusual. But that is not the case, so the likelihood is 50.0

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: No carvings or murals of the Maya show them dressed as  New England gentlemen. They were dressed otherwise. See, for example,  pp. 188‒92.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 39.

[Page 171] Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, if the author of Manuscript  Found had guessed correctly that the Maya dressed as New England  gentlemen, then that would be specific, detailed, and (very) unusual.  But he did not guess correctly, so the likelihood is 50.0

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: There is no mention of wheat among the crops raised by  the Maya.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 37.

Analysis  of correspondence: This is a specific guess, but little  detail is given. It is probably unusual. Wheat is one of the staple  grains for humankind and has been for centuries. It would have been  unusual if the author had correctly predicted that the natives did  not grow wheat.

Likelihood = 10.0

Coe’s  standard: According to Dr. Coe, there is no evidence that the  Maya ever had horses, let alone that they plowed with them. The Maya  apparently did not plow at all and did not use draft animals.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 37.

Analysis  of correspondence: Had this guess been correct, it would  certainly have been specific, detailed and unusual. The Plains  Indians had horses, and the author may have known about those horses,  but the Indians did not plow with horses.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: “But the European invaders brought with them more  than their civil and religious order: they imposed a new  economic order as well. Iron and steel tools replaced chipped or  ground stone ones, and the Maya took readily to the Spaniards’  axes, machetes, and billhooks, which in the lowlands enabled them to  cope with the forest as they never had before” (p. 290). Dr.  Coe states that there is no evidence for iron or steel in  Book of Mormon times.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 38.

Analysis  of correspondence: As far as we know, none of the Native  Americans of the early 1800s manufactured iron or lead. So if the  author had guessed this correctly, it would have been specific,  detailed and unusual. But he did not.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: Since the Maya society was class-based (even exhibiting  “castes,” p. 225), their houses would have differed sharply  in the degree of [Page 172] elegance or grandeur. But their public buildings  exhibited a great deal of elegance and grandeur. “Their upper  facades and roof-combs were beautifully ornamented with figures in  stucco and stone. Yaxchilan is famous for its many stone lintels,  carved in relief with scenes of conquest and ceremonial life”  (p. 146). “In the rear of [the miniature temple] stands  a magnificent low relief tablet carved with long hieroglyphic  texts” (p. 152). See photographs and drawings of the Temple of  Inscriptions (pp. 158‒59). “Palace at Xpuhil: … The three  towers are completely solid and served no other function than  decoration” (p. 163n97).

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 39.

Analysis  of correspondence: Had the author of Manuscript Found guessed  correctly about lack of elegance in public and private buildings,  that would have been specific, detailed, and unusual, since most  societies (and rulers) that could afford to have always gone in for  a lot of elegance and grandeur. But he guessed incorrectly.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: This is completely unlike actual Maya dwellings.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 39.

Analysis  of correspondence: Had New England-style frame houses with  clapboards and shingles ever been found among the Maya, that would  have been specific, detailed, and extremely unusual. But once again,  the author of Manuscript Found guessed wrong. So consequently  the

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: In contrast, the Maya really went in for the “whole  catalog of ornamental trumpery.” They were devoted to ornamentation  in dress and architecture. The grandeur of Maya architecture has  already been discussed in Correspondence #8 above. There are many  examples of ornamentation in dress. “Santa Rita also yielded an  extraordinary set of ear ornaments in gold and turquoise” (p. 219),  … “a splendid pair of ground obsidian [earspools]”  (pp. 276‒77). Also see the various representations of  elaborate Maya dress in the figures between pp. 185‒92.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 40.

Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, had the author of Manuscript  Found guessed correctly about lack of personal ornamentation and  fancy dress, that would have been specific, detailed, and unusual,  since rich people have usually gone in for expensive and fancy dress.  But he guessed incorrectly.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: “The Maya were writing in a mixed, logophonetic  system in which phonetic and semantic elements were combined, … but  they also had a fairly complete syllabary” (p. 269).

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 42.  “Characters represent words.”

Analysis  of correspondence: The author of Manuscript Found incorrectly  guessed that the writing system was not at least partly phonetic and  syllabic. Had he correctly guessed that a mixed logophonetic  system was used instead, that would have been specific, detailed, and  probably unusual.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: “Maya writing was to be read in double columns from  left to right, and top to bottom” (p. 265).

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 42. The  natives “wrote from top to bottom, one character below the  preceding one, right to left in columns.”

Analysis  of correspondence: The writer of Manuscript Found guessed  wrong in this specific, detailed, and unusual point. Had he guessed  correctly, we would have assigned this correspondence a likelihood  of 0.02. Since he did not guess correctly, the evidence is counted  against the hypothesis for a likelihood of 50.0

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: Among the Maya there were many, many gods.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 46.

Analysis  of correspondence: This is specific and detailed, but perhaps not  unusual. The author of Manuscript Found was writing in early  19 th century America, where the idea of monotheism was  deeply embedded. Since the writer guessed wrong for one of the three  criteria, the likelihood would be 1/0.1 = 10.0

Likelihood = 10.0

Coe’s  standard: There is no mention of these earth-moving implements  among the Maya or other Mesoamerican Indians, nor is there mention of  wheeled tools like a wheelbarrow.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 59.

[Page 174] Analysis  of correspondence: Had the author of Manuscript Found guessed  correctly about the existence of these implements and the wheel in  ancient America, that would certainly have been specific, detailed,  and unusual. But he did not. So the likelihood is 50.0.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: There is no mention of coins in The Maya, and  Dr. Coe specifically emphasizes this point in the podcasts with Dr.  Dehlin: no coins among the Maya or other Mesoamerican Indians.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 66.

Analysis  of correspondence: Since no Native Americans were known to use  coins, a correct guess on the part of the author of Manuscript  Found would probably have been specific, detailed, and unusual.  But he did not guess correctly.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: “The Maya were obsessed with war” (p. 236).  Coe’s book is full of descriptions of war and conquest among the  Maya. A bigger difference between the claims of Manuscript  Found and the actual situation is hard to imagine.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 70.

Analysis  of correspondence: Human history is one long catalog of violence  and men reigning with blood and horror on the earth. The Maya  certainly did their part to fill out this dismal catalog of human  cruelty. Had the author of Manuscript Found been correct in  this amazing claim, it would certainly have been specific,  detailed, and unusual. Alas, he was wrong.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: “Adultery was punished by death” (p. 234).

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 77.

Analysis  of correspondence: The practice of throwing rotten eggs at  performers dates to medieval times in England; only later did the  practice migrate to America. If it were practiced among ancient  American Indians as a punishment for adultery, that would  certainly be specific, detailed, and unusual. But that is not what  was done.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: This was very far from being the case among the Maya,  where there was great inequality. See pp. 93, 95, 225 among  others.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 77.

Analysis  of correspondence: Such periods of equality among people have  been very rare. Had the author of Manuscript Found been  correct in this guess, it would have been specific, detailed, and  very unusual. But it was not so.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: Dr. Coe shows over and over again that the Maya  kingdoms were always busy making or preparing for war. “The Maya  were obsessed with war” (p. 236). War and conquest were their  way of life for centuries.

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 78.

Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, the author of Manuscript Found simply guessed wrongly. The correspondence is detailed and  specific. Since early America lived in the shadow of the British  Empire, built on conquest, and centuries of conquest in Europe, this  would have been highly unusual, if true. But it was not.

Likelihood  = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: There is no mention and no evidence of such nice  American liberties in The Maya. As mentioned, it was  a strictly hierarchal society with castes and definite ruling  classes (pp. 93, 95, 231). For example, slavery, the epitome of  oppression and tyranny, was widely practiced in ancient Mesoamerica.  (See pp. 19 and 225.) “Other valuable Yucatan exports were  honey, cotton mantles and slaves” (p. 232).

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 78.

Analysis  of correspondence: Human beings have, much more often than not,  oppressed, exploited, robbed and enslaved each other. So a society  in which political institutions guarded against such practices would  have been quite rare. No such society is recorded by Dr. Coe in The  Maya. If true, this correspondence would have been specific,  detailed, and unusual. But it was not so.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: (Speaking of political intrigues among rivals), “when  Bird Jaguar IV, ruler of Yaxchilan, Guatemala, married Lady Mut  Bahlam of Hixwitz, there must have been rejoicing for some and  gnashing of teeth for others” (p. 97).

Negative  correspondence from “Manuscript Found”: See p. 81.

Analysis  of correspondence: This is a specific and sufficiently  detailed correspondence. Also, if the author of Manuscript Found had guessed correctly, it would have been unusual. Political  marriages were well known in Europe and Great Britain. So if the  claim were supported by evidence from The Maya, it would have  earned likelihood of 0.02. But the claim was not supported.

Likelihood = 50.0


## Summary  of the Negative Correspondences

There  are 21 negative correspondences between The Maya and Manuscript Found. Reverend Spaulding was a bold and  uninhibited guesser. However, he guessed incorrectly much more often  than he guessed correctly. Nineteen of these negative correspondences  have a likelihood of 50 and two have a likelihood of 10.  The product of these is therefore 50 19 x 10 2 =  1.91 x 10 34 .

This  number must then be multiplied by 3.91 x 10 –5 , which is  product of the skeptical prior of a billion to one against the  hypothesis and the product of all the likelihoods of the positive  correspondences.

The  final result is

7.47 x 10 29

or  roughly a thousand billion, billion, billion against the  hypothesis that Manuscript Found describes the  same population of facts as The Maya .

Thus  the end result of weighing both the positive and negative  correspondences is that we arrive at a much, much stronger  posterior conclusion against Manuscript Found. This book is  undoubtedly a work of fiction. If Joseph Smith had relied  on Manuscript Found for the factual details of the  Book of Mormon, as some have suggested, he would have  included many grossly wrong details about ancient Mesoamerican  Indians.

But  Joseph Smith did not. Reverend Spaulding guessed his details,  and got some right. He got many, many more wrong. For Joseph Smith,  however, his correct “guesses” are much, much more numerous and  more detailed and powerful than are his incorrect “guesses.”  Joseph Smith was truly the world’s greatest guesser.


## [Page 177] Appendix  D Statistical Analysis of Correspondences between View of  the Hebrews and The Maya

View  of the Hebrews was published in 1823 by the Reverend Ethan Smith,  a Congregationalist minister. It is not deliberate fiction but  it does advocate a particular opinion, namely that the American  Indians are descended from the lost Ten Tribes. The information cited  in the book is nearly always second-, third- and even fourth-hand,  with very little in the way of written, documented sources, as modern  scholarship might require.

Also, View of the Hebrews makes an important caveat about its own  claims, namely, “It is not pretended that all the savages (i.e.,  the American Indians) are in the practice of all these traditions.  They are not. But it is contended that the whole of these things have  been found among their different tribes in our continent, within  a hundred years” (p. 107).

Since View of the Hebrews was published before the Book of Mormon,  an important outcome for our article to consider this book was to  document in some detail what Joseph Smith might have  known about the ancient Mesoamericans. Every specific fact claim in View of the Hebrews that corresponded to a point of  evidence mentioned in The Maya was not classified as “unusual”  in our comparison of The Maya and the Book of Mormon.  We did this because Joseph might have known about that fact from  reading View of the Hebrews , and therefore it would be  specific and detailed without being unusual.

Since View of the Hebrews also contains many claims that run  contrary to facts in The Maya¸ this begs the question “Why  did Joseph Smith not also include those erroneous fact claims  from View of the Hebrews in the Book of Mormon?”  Because we are attempting to be very rigorous in our analysis of the  Book of Mormon, we do not account for the additional lack  of probability involved with Joseph Smith choosing only correct  fact claims from View of the Hebrews and not the incorrect  ones.

The  effect of ruling out these positive correspondences between The  Maya and View of the Hebrews was to reduce the Bayesian  significance of these particular correspondences and thus reduce  their evidentiary weight in favor of the Book of Mormon by  a factor of 59, or about two million. There were nine  such correspondences, including temples, a great flood,  ancestors coming from the west, roads, watchtowers, walled towns,  many cities, volcanoes, and covenants.


## [Page 178] Positive  Correspondences between View of the Hebrews and The Maya

  - Temples among the Indians Coe’s  standard: See pp. 26, 55, 59, 82, 89, among others. Temples  were centrally important ritual centers among the Maya. “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: pp. 31, 41, 50, 77 and 107  mentions temples but associate American Indian temples with the  Hebrew Holy of Holies and observing the Law of Moses Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, but the  details do not correspond between the two books; simply having  a temple is probably not unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 Knowledge of an ancient flood among the Indians Coe’s  standard: See pp. 41 and 249. “[Wicked humankind was]  annihilated, as black rains fell and a great flood swept the  earth.” “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: pp. 31, 47 and 107. No  details are provided about the flood in this book. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, but the  details do not match up. If the details did match up, then the  correspondence would qualify as specific, detailed, and unusual, but  it does not. It is only specific. In the Book of Mormon and  The Maya the flood is sent to destroy the wicked, a key detail. Likelihood = 0.5 Possible migration of ancestors of the Indians through the Bering  Strait Coe’s  standard: “One theory holds [that this hemisphere was populated  by Siberian peoples crossing Beringia]. … The presence or absence  of the Bering Strait is thus not necessarily relevant. … The very  first Americans may well have taken a maritime route” (p. 41). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: pp. 32, 47, 63, 65, 84,  86. The potential value of this correspondence is diluted by the fact  that the time of the migration of the Lost Tribes to this continent  through the Bering Strait as proposed in the book does not accord  with the land bridge disappearing about 10,000 years ago. Analysis  of correspondence: Specific, but not detailed or unusual to  a Bible-reading society. Likelihood = 0.5 Indians say their ancestors came from the west Coe’s  standard: “From the setting sun we came, from Tula, from beyond  the sea” (p. 224). [Page 179] “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See pp. 62, 65. This book  does not say that the ancestors came from beyond the sea, but the  Book of Mormon does. So View of the Hebrews lacks  this detail that is found in both The Maya and the Book of Mormon. Analysis  of correspondence: Specific and perhaps unusual, but not  detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Cotton and corn cultivated Coe’s  standard: There are many references to corn throughout Coe’s  book. This particular quote is important. “[Corn] is so fundamental  today that its cultivation and consumption define what it means to be  Maya” (p. 242). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 74. The Toltecs  cultivated cotton and corn. And of course the North American Indians  also had corn, as mentioned by Reverend Smith. Analysis  of correspondence: Specific but not detailed nor unusual.  Likelihood = 0.5. In contrast, the Book of Mormon puts corn  first among the grains, which it was not for the Europeans, but  certainly was for the Native Americans, as reflected in the quote  from Dr. Coe’s book. Likelihood = 0.5 Roads were laid out Coe’s  standard: “El Mirador, some 8 miles northwest of Nakbe, and  connected to it by a  causeway which crosses the intervening  bajos” (p. 85). “[At Tikal], … building complexes  interconnected by causeways [called] “white roads.” (p. 126)  “road systems running along the base of those hills, connecting the  far reaches of the Palenque kingdom” (p. 151). See also  pp. 163 and 182. “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 74. Toltecs laid out  roads. Analysis  of correspondence: This is specific and unusual for its time.  Most people in the early 1800s would probably not have thought the  Indians to be road builders. Likelihood = 0.1. Therefore, in the  Book of Mormon we will not classify the presence of roads  as unusual, since View of the Hebrews refers to roads (but  only once and without any detail). Likelihood = 0.1 Watchtowers, forts and monuments Coe’s  standard: “The tower … commands a wide view and could  also have served as a watchtower” (p. 151). Dr. Coe does  not use the word fort to describe the Maya defensive  structures. Forts are generally thought of as outposts in hostile  terrain, and that is not the sense in which the Maya “fortified”  their cities. “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 77. The Indians had  forts, watchtowers and monuments. No details are given in this book  on the watchtowers or the monuments, but we limit the Book of Mormon  correspondence for watchtowers to 0.1, since View of the Hebrews mentions it, again only once and with no details. [Page 180] Analysis  of correspondence: Likelihood = 0.1. Specific and unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Walled towns with ditches surrounding them Coe’s  standard: “when city walls are found, as at Dos Pilas, Ek’  Balan and Uxmal” (p. 126). “the triple defensive wall that  surrounds [Ek’ Balam]” (p. 194). “Mayapan … completely  surrounded by a defensive wall” (p. 216). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See pp. 77 and 78. Some  details provided about the size and extent of the walls. Analysis  of correspondence: This seems specific, detailed, and unusual.  Most Americans of the early 1800s probably did not think of the  Indians living within cities surrounded by massive walls. Likelihood  = 0.02. Since walled towns are mentioned in this book, we do not  claim that the Book of Mormon references to walled towns  are unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Had ornamental objects of copper Coe’s  standard: “The many copper bells and other objects from (the  Sacred Cenote) were of Mexican workmanship” (p. 212). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: “Pieces of copper have been  found, … [one] in the form of a cup.” (p. 78). “[A  mound in Ohio contained] ornaments of copper, … medals of copper”  (p. 79). “Many ornaments of silver and copper were found”  (p. 80). Analysis  of correspondence: Most Americans of the early 1800s probably did  not think of the Indians as making copper ornaments and other  objects. So this is specific, detailed and probably unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Many cities built Coe’s  standard: To name just a few of the cities mentioned in The  Maya we have Uxmal, Chichen Itza, Coba, Tulum, Acanceh, Ek’ Balam,  Mayapan, Piedras Negras, Ceibal, Palenque, Naranjo, El Mirador,  Bonampak, Uaxactun, Kaminaljuyu, Takalik Abaj, Tikal (p. 9) “the  great Usumacinta … draining the northern highlands, … twisting to  the northwest past many a ruined Maya city” (pp. 16–17).  “more advanced cultural traits, … the construction of cities”  (p. 26). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 80. Mound builder  culture was said to have built 5,000 cities in the eastern U.S.  Reverend Smith also refers to Mesoamerican Indian cities. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed as  the locations of several of these Native American cities were given.  It would have probably been unusual in 1823 for Americans to think of  the Native Americans as having built thousands of cities. Specific,  detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 [Page 181] Volcanoes noted in Central and South America Coe’s  standard: “The Maya highlands are dominated … by a great  backbone of both extinct and active volcanoes” (p. 14). “the  nearby Loma Caldera volcano [destroyed the village of Ceren”  (p. 107). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 86. Presence of  volcanoes noted in South America. No details are given about what an  eruption and associated earthquakes are like from the point of view  of the person experiencing them. Analysis  of correspondence: This reference to volcanoes is specific, but  not detailed. The existence of volcanoes in Central and South America  was probably not widely known in the early American 1800s. Likelihood = 0.1 Covenants between God and man Coe’s  standard: “Ultimately, humans were obligated to abide by  covenants. A covenant … is a binding contract that  explains how one should behave. Gods were usually involved, as in the  case of maize production.” “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 106. No details are  given of these covenants in this book, for example, of the covenant  of baptism described in the Book of Mormon. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific but not  detailed in Reverend Smith’s book. It would have been unusual  for Americans to think of “savages” entering into covenants with  God. Likelihood = 0.1 Offering of first ripe fruits Coe’s  standard: “The nature gods must be asked for favors, and duly  repaid through … the first fruits of the harvest” (p. 297). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 106. “the general  Indian tradition of offering their first ripe fruits.” Analysis  of correspondence: This is specific, but neither book gives  details. Again, Indian “savages,” following a Hebrew  tradition, would probably have been regarded as unusual by the white  population in the early 1800s. Specific, unusual, but not detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 “Mexicans” (Mesoamerican Indians) were very skilled in carving  wood and stone. Coe’s  standard: Coe’s book is full of examples of stone carving. “No  fewer than 63 stelae were carved and erected in Early and Late  Classic times” (p. 132). “The finest May wood carving known,  this seated figure from Tabasco, Mexico” (pp. 94‒95). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 75. “The Mexicans  have preserved a particular relish for painting, and for the art  of carving in wood or stone.” “We are astonished at what they are  able to execute with a bad knife on the hardest wood.” [Page 182] Analysis  of correspondence: Specific, detailed, and unusual to Americans  in the early 1800s. Likelihood = 0.02 Resemblance of American pyramids to Egyptian pyramids Coe’s  standard: “Thus it seems that the Temple of the Inscriptions  was a funerary monument with exactly the same primary function  as the Egyptian pyramids” (p. 157). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 82. This citation  does not connect the funerary aspect of at least some of the Maya  temples and the Egyptian ones. Analysis  of correspondence: Specific and unusual for the early 1800s, but  not detailed. Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: See pp. 26, 55, 59, 82, 89, among others. Temples  were centrally important ritual centers among the Maya.

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: pp. 31, 41, 50, 77 and 107  mentions temples but associate American Indian temples with the  Hebrew Holy of Holies and observing the Law of Moses

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, but the  details do not correspond between the two books; simply having  a temple is probably not unusual.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: See pp. 41 and 249. “[Wicked humankind was]  annihilated, as black rains fell and a great flood swept the  earth.”

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: pp. 31, 47 and 107. No  details are provided about the flood in this book.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, but the  details do not match up. If the details did match up, then the  correspondence would qualify as specific, detailed, and unusual, but  it does not. It is only specific. In the Book of Mormon and  The Maya the flood is sent to destroy the wicked, a key detail.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “One theory holds [that this hemisphere was populated  by Siberian peoples crossing Beringia]. … The presence or absence  of the Bering Strait is thus not necessarily relevant. … The very  first Americans may well have taken a maritime route” (p. 41).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: pp. 32, 47, 63, 65, 84,  86. The potential value of this correspondence is diluted by the fact  that the time of the migration of the Lost Tribes to this continent  through the Bering Strait as proposed in the book does not accord  with the land bridge disappearing about 10,000 years ago.

Analysis  of correspondence: Specific, but not detailed or unusual to  a Bible-reading society.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “From the setting sun we came, from Tula, from beyond  the sea” (p. 224).

[Page 179] “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See pp. 62, 65. This book  does not say that the ancestors came from beyond the sea, but the  Book of Mormon does. So View of the Hebrews lacks  this detail that is found in both The Maya and the Book of Mormon.

Analysis  of correspondence: Specific and perhaps unusual, but not  detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: There are many references to corn throughout Coe’s  book. This particular quote is important. “[Corn] is so fundamental  today that its cultivation and consumption define what it means to be  Maya” (p. 242).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 74. The Toltecs  cultivated cotton and corn. And of course the North American Indians  also had corn, as mentioned by Reverend Smith.

Analysis  of correspondence: Specific but not detailed nor unusual.  Likelihood = 0.5. In contrast, the Book of Mormon puts corn  first among the grains, which it was not for the Europeans, but  certainly was for the Native Americans, as reflected in the quote  from Dr. Coe’s book.

Likelihood = 0.5

Coe’s  standard: “El Mirador, some 8 miles northwest of Nakbe, and  connected to it by a  causeway which crosses the intervening  bajos” (p. 85). “[At Tikal], … building complexes  interconnected by causeways [called] “white roads.” (p. 126)  “road systems running along the base of those hills, connecting the  far reaches of the Palenque kingdom” (p. 151). See also  pp. 163 and 182.

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 74. Toltecs laid out  roads.

Analysis  of correspondence: This is specific and unusual for its time.  Most people in the early 1800s would probably not have thought the  Indians to be road builders. Likelihood = 0.1. Therefore, in the  Book of Mormon we will not classify the presence of roads  as unusual, since View of the Hebrews refers to roads (but  only once and without any detail).

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The tower … commands a wide view and could  also have served as a watchtower” (p. 151). Dr. Coe does  not use the word fort to describe the Maya defensive  structures. Forts are generally thought of as outposts in hostile  terrain, and that is not the sense in which the Maya “fortified”  their cities.

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 77. The Indians had  forts, watchtowers and monuments. No details are given in this book  on the watchtowers or the monuments, but we limit the Book of Mormon  correspondence for watchtowers to 0.1, since View of the Hebrews mentions it, again only once and with no details.

[Page 180] Analysis  of correspondence: Likelihood = 0.1. Specific and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “when city walls are found, as at Dos Pilas, Ek’  Balan and Uxmal” (p. 126). “the triple defensive wall that  surrounds [Ek’ Balam]” (p. 194). “Mayapan … completely  surrounded by a defensive wall” (p. 216).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See pp. 77 and 78. Some  details provided about the size and extent of the walls.

Analysis  of correspondence: This seems specific, detailed, and unusual.  Most Americans of the early 1800s probably did not think of the  Indians living within cities surrounded by massive walls. Likelihood  = 0.02. Since walled towns are mentioned in this book, we do not  claim that the Book of Mormon references to walled towns  are unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “The many copper bells and other objects from (the  Sacred Cenote) were of Mexican workmanship” (p. 212).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: “Pieces of copper have been  found, … [one] in the form of a cup.” (p. 78). “[A  mound in Ohio contained] ornaments of copper, … medals of copper”  (p. 79). “Many ornaments of silver and copper were found”  (p. 80).

Analysis  of correspondence: Most Americans of the early 1800s probably did  not think of the Indians as making copper ornaments and other  objects. So this is specific, detailed and probably unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: To name just a few of the cities mentioned in The  Maya we have Uxmal, Chichen Itza, Coba, Tulum, Acanceh, Ek’ Balam,  Mayapan, Piedras Negras, Ceibal, Palenque, Naranjo, El Mirador,  Bonampak, Uaxactun, Kaminaljuyu, Takalik Abaj, Tikal (p. 9) “the  great Usumacinta … draining the northern highlands, … twisting to  the northwest past many a ruined Maya city” (pp. 16–17).  “more advanced cultural traits, … the construction of cities”  (p. 26).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 80. Mound builder  culture was said to have built 5,000 cities in the eastern U.S.  Reverend Smith also refers to Mesoamerican Indian cities.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed as  the locations of several of these Native American cities were given.  It would have probably been unusual in 1823 for Americans to think of  the Native Americans as having built thousands of cities. Specific,  detailed and unusual.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “The Maya highlands are dominated … by a great  backbone of both extinct and active volcanoes” (p. 14). “the  nearby Loma Caldera volcano [destroyed the village of Ceren”  (p. 107).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 86. Presence of  volcanoes noted in South America. No details are given about what an  eruption and associated earthquakes are like from the point of view  of the person experiencing them.

Analysis  of correspondence: This reference to volcanoes is specific, but  not detailed. The existence of volcanoes in Central and South America  was probably not widely known in the early American 1800s.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “Ultimately, humans were obligated to abide by  covenants. A covenant … is a binding contract that  explains how one should behave. Gods were usually involved, as in the  case of maize production.”

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 106. No details are  given of these covenants in this book, for example, of the covenant  of baptism described in the Book of Mormon.

Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific but not  detailed in Reverend Smith’s book. It would have been unusual  for Americans to think of “savages” entering into covenants with  God.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: “The nature gods must be asked for favors, and duly  repaid through … the first fruits of the harvest” (p. 297).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 106. “the general  Indian tradition of offering their first ripe fruits.”

Analysis  of correspondence: This is specific, but neither book gives  details. Again, Indian “savages,” following a Hebrew  tradition, would probably have been regarded as unusual by the white  population in the early 1800s. Specific, unusual, but not detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1

Coe’s  standard: Coe’s book is full of examples of stone carving. “No  fewer than 63 stelae were carved and erected in Early and Late  Classic times” (p. 132). “The finest May wood carving known,  this seated figure from Tabasco, Mexico” (pp. 94‒95).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 75. “The Mexicans  have preserved a particular relish for painting, and for the art  of carving in wood or stone.” “We are astonished at what they are  able to execute with a bad knife on the hardest wood.”

[Page 182] Analysis  of correspondence: Specific, detailed, and unusual to Americans  in the early 1800s.

Likelihood = 0.02

Coe’s  standard: “Thus it seems that the Temple of the Inscriptions  was a funerary monument with exactly the same primary function  as the Egyptian pyramids” (p. 157).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 82. This citation  does not connect the funerary aspect of at least some of the Maya  temples and the Egyptian ones.

Analysis  of correspondence: Specific and unusual for the early 1800s, but  not detailed.

Likelihood = 0.1


## Summary  of the Positive Correspondences

There  are 15 positive correspondences between The Maya and View  of the Hebrews. Four of these have a likelihood of 0.5,  seven a likelihood of 0.1, and four a likelihood of 0.02.  The product of these is therefore 0.5 4 x 0.1 7 x  0.02 4 =

1.00 x 10 –15 .

These  are evidence that supports the hypothesis that View of the Hebrews is an authentic record set in ancient Mesoamerica. However, we  have not yet applied the evidence against the hypothesis, that is,  the negative correspondences between The Maya and View of  the Hebrews . To do so, we must consider and weigh these negative  correspondences.


## Negative  Correspondences between View of the Hebrews and The Maya

These  are correspondences or pieces of evidence in favor of the prior  hypothesis, that is, in favor of the hypothesis that the world of the  ancient American Indians as given in The Maya has nothing to  do with the world of the ancient American Indians as given in View  of the Hebrews. Thus the evidence is weighted as 2 (Bayesian  “supportive”), 10 (Bayesian “positive”), and 50 (Bayesian  “strong”).

  - The ancestors of the American Indians observed the Law of Moses Coe’s  standard: Apart from the offering of first fruits, which was  accounted for in the summary of Positive Correspondences above, we do  not see anything in the summary of religious practices among the Maya  that can reasonably be construed as belonging to the Law of Moses. “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 107: succession of high  priests, induction by purification and anointing, yearly atonement,  three annual feasts, bones of sacrifice may not be broken, places of  refuge, etc. [Page 183] Analysis  of correspondence: If the Maya or their neighbors had practiced  the Law of Moses, that would indeed have been specific, detailed, and  unusual, for a likelihood of 0.02. In fact, there is no evidence  that they did so; thus the likelihood is 50.0. Likelihood = 50.0 Language of the native Americans appears to have been Hebrew Coe’s  standard: If the language spoken among the Maya was Hebrew, that  fact has certainly escaped the notice of many hundreds of scholars  over decades. “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: pp. 36, 107. Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, had this claim of View of the  Hebrews been confirmed by The Maya, it would have been  specific, detailed, and unusual. But it has not been confirmed. Again, likelihood is 50.0. Likelihood = 50.0 Indians sometimes practiced circumcision as a religious act Coe’s  standard: See these references among others’ emphasis on  self-sacrifice by blood drawn from … penis” (p. 13). “One  of the four Hunahpus perforates his penis before an offering”  (pp. 88‒89). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 40. The American  Indians at some times have practiced circumcision. Analysis  of correspondence: Penis perforation was practiced by royal or  noble adults among the Maya as an offering to their gods. Among the  Hebrews, circumcision was practiced on infants of all social ranks as  the sign of a covenant. The two practices are not the same. Were  they the same, or if they strongly resembled each other, that would  qualify as specific, detailed, and unusual. But they were not, so  likelihood is 50.0. Likelihood = 50.0 They have acknowledged one, and only one God Coe’s  standard: The Maya were almost unbelievably pantheistic. See  pp. 157, 160, 166, 168, 234. “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: pp. 64, 65. Analysis  of correspondence: Polytheism and pantheism are widespread in  human history, and so is monotheism, so this cannot be unusual. But  it would be specific and detailed if it were observed among both the  Maya and the North American Indians. However, that is not so. Likelihood = 10.0 The Indians have a tribe corresponding to the tribe of Levi Coe’s  standard: The Levites were a landless tribe, with priestly  duties, supported by tithes from the other tribes. There is no  mention in Coe’s book of such a Maya tribe or people. “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See pp. 77 and 78. Some  details provided. [Page 184] Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, this would have been specific,  detailed and unusual, had it been observed among the Maya. But it has  not been observed. Likelihood = 50.0 Indians had a theocracy Coe’s  standard: “A hereditary Chief Priest [resided in Mayapan], but  in no source do we find his authority or that of the priests  superseding civil authority” (p. 243). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 60. No details at  all are given about the supposed Indian theocracy. Analysis  of correspondence: There is no mention in The Maya of rule  by priests. This prediction is specific, but not unusual among  a Bible-reading people who might be aware of the Old Testament  pattern of rule by religious authorities during part of Israelite  history. It is also not detailed in the case of Reverend Smith’s  book. Likelihood = 2.0 Indians used a lunar calendar and had no name for a year Coe’s  standard: The Maya kept their calendars by day, month, and year.  They kept multiple calendars. “The Maya Long Count … is an  absolute, day-to-day calendar which has run like some great clock  from a point in the mythical past” (p. 25). “How the  260 day calendar even came into being is an enigma. … Meshing with  the 260-day count is a ‘Vague Year’ or Ha’b of 365  days. … Within the Ha’b , there were 18 named ‘months’  of 20 days each” (p. 64). “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 61. “They count  time after the manner of the Hebrews. They divide the year into  spring, summer, autumn and winter. They number their year from any  one of those four periods, for they have no name for a year …  and count the year by lunar months.” Analysis  of correspondence: This calendaring system is specific, detailed,  and unusual (to Americans in the early 1800s) for both books, but the  calendaring systems are not in agreement. Likelihood = 50.0 Indians had no historical records Coe’s  standard: The Maya is full of all kinds of historical records  that were kept by the Maya. For just a few examples, see  pp. 177, 226 and 274. “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 77. “total  absence of all historical records.” Analysis  of correspondence: If Reverend Smith’s book had noted the  extent of historical records present among North American tribes that  was present among the Maya, it would have been a specific,  detailed, and unusual correspondence. But it was not so. Thus the  likelihood is 50.0. Likelihood = 50.0 [Page 185] Indians called on the name of Jehovah Coe’s  standard: The Maya gods have many different names. None of them  is Jehovah or anything like that name. “ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 107. Analysis  of correspondence: Had the Maya used this name as one of the  names of their gods, it would certainly have been specific, detailed,  and unusual. But there is no evidence that they did use this name. Thus the likelihood is 50.0. Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: Apart from the offering of first fruits, which was  accounted for in the summary of Positive Correspondences above, we do  not see anything in the summary of religious practices among the Maya  that can reasonably be construed as belonging to the Law of Moses.

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 107: succession of high  priests, induction by purification and anointing, yearly atonement,  three annual feasts, bones of sacrifice may not be broken, places of  refuge, etc.

[Page 183] Analysis  of correspondence: If the Maya or their neighbors had practiced  the Law of Moses, that would indeed have been specific, detailed, and  unusual, for a likelihood of 0.02. In fact, there is no evidence  that they did so; thus the likelihood is 50.0.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: If the language spoken among the Maya was Hebrew, that  fact has certainly escaped the notice of many hundreds of scholars  over decades.

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: pp. 36, 107.

Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, had this claim of View of the  Hebrews been confirmed by The Maya, it would have been  specific, detailed, and unusual. But it has not been confirmed. Again, likelihood is 50.0.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: See these references among others’ emphasis on  self-sacrifice by blood drawn from … penis” (p. 13). “One  of the four Hunahpus perforates his penis before an offering”  (pp. 88‒89).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: p. 40. The American  Indians at some times have practiced circumcision.

Analysis  of correspondence: Penis perforation was practiced by royal or  noble adults among the Maya as an offering to their gods. Among the  Hebrews, circumcision was practiced on infants of all social ranks as  the sign of a covenant. The two practices are not the same. Were  they the same, or if they strongly resembled each other, that would  qualify as specific, detailed, and unusual. But they were not, so  likelihood is 50.0.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: The Maya were almost unbelievably pantheistic. See  pp. 157, 160, 166, 168, 234.

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: pp. 64, 65.

Analysis  of correspondence: Polytheism and pantheism are widespread in  human history, and so is monotheism, so this cannot be unusual. But  it would be specific and detailed if it were observed among both the  Maya and the North American Indians. However, that is not so.

Likelihood = 10.0

Coe’s  standard: The Levites were a landless tribe, with priestly  duties, supported by tithes from the other tribes. There is no  mention in Coe’s book of such a Maya tribe or people.

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See pp. 77 and 78. Some  details provided.

[Page 184] Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, this would have been specific,  detailed and unusual, had it been observed among the Maya. But it has  not been observed.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: “A hereditary Chief Priest [resided in Mayapan], but  in no source do we find his authority or that of the priests  superseding civil authority” (p. 243).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 60. No details at  all are given about the supposed Indian theocracy.

Analysis  of correspondence: There is no mention in The Maya of rule  by priests. This prediction is specific, but not unusual among  a Bible-reading people who might be aware of the Old Testament  pattern of rule by religious authorities during part of Israelite  history. It is also not detailed in the case of Reverend Smith’s  book.

Likelihood = 2.0

Coe’s  standard: The Maya kept their calendars by day, month, and year.  They kept multiple calendars. “The Maya Long Count … is an  absolute, day-to-day calendar which has run like some great clock  from a point in the mythical past” (p. 25). “How the  260 day calendar even came into being is an enigma. … Meshing with  the 260-day count is a ‘Vague Year’ or Ha’b of 365  days. … Within the Ha’b , there were 18 named ‘months’  of 20 days each” (p. 64).

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 61. “They count  time after the manner of the Hebrews. They divide the year into  spring, summer, autumn and winter. They number their year from any  one of those four periods, for they have no name for a year …  and count the year by lunar months.”

Analysis  of correspondence: This calendaring system is specific, detailed,  and unusual (to Americans in the early 1800s) for both books, but the  calendaring systems are not in agreement.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: The Maya is full of all kinds of historical records  that were kept by the Maya. For just a few examples, see  pp. 177, 226 and 274.

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 77. “total  absence of all historical records.”

Analysis  of correspondence: If Reverend Smith’s book had noted the  extent of historical records present among North American tribes that  was present among the Maya, it would have been a specific,  detailed, and unusual correspondence. But it was not so. Thus the  likelihood is 50.0.

Likelihood = 50.0

Coe’s  standard: The Maya gods have many different names. None of them  is Jehovah or anything like that name.

“ View  of the Hebrews” correspondence: See p. 107.

Analysis  of correspondence: Had the Maya used this name as one of the  names of their gods, it would certainly have been specific, detailed,  and unusual. But there is no evidence that they did use this name. Thus the likelihood is 50.0.

Likelihood = 50.0


## Summary  of the Negative Correspondences

There  are nine negative correspondences between The Maya and View  of the Hebrews. Seven of these have a likelihood of 50, one  has a likelihood of 10, and one has a likelihood of 2. The  product of these is therefore 50 7 x 10 1 x 2 1 =

1.56 x 10 13 .

There  is evidence against the hypothesis that View of the Hebrews is  an authentic record set in ancient Mesoamerica. We multiply this  number by the product of the positive correspondences, which is 1.00  x 10 –15 , to obtain 0.0156. This value is then multiplied  by the skeptical prior of a billion to one to obtain about 15.6  million to one, or 15,600,000 to one, posterior odds.

Thus  following the analysis, we have no reason to change our previous  skeptical prior. We do not have any reason to believe that View  of the Hebrews accurately  reflects the world of ancient Mesoamerica as set forth in The  Maya.

---
Notes

[1] [Page 77] Abstract: Dr. Michael Coe is a prominent Mesoamerican scholar and author  of a synthesis and review of ancient Mesoamerican Indian  cultures entitled The Maya . 1 Dr. Coe is also a prominent skeptic of the Book of Mormon.  However, there is in his book strong evidence that favors the  Book of Mormon, which Dr. Coe has not taken into account.  This article analyzes that evidence, using Bayesian statistics. We  apply a strongly skeptical prior assumption that the  Book of Mormon “has little to do with early Indian  cultures,” as Dr. Coe claims. We then compare 131 separate positive  correspondences or points of evidence between the Book of Mormon  and Dr. Coe’s book. We also analyze negative points of evidence  between the Book of Mormon and The  Maya , between the Book of Mormon and a 1973 Dialogue article  written by Dr. Coe, and between the Book of Mormon and  a series of Mormon Stories podcast interviews given by Dr. Coe  to Dr. John Dehlin. After using the Bayesian methodology to analyze  both positive and negative correspondences, we reach an enormously  stronger and very positive conclusion. There is overwhelming evidence  that the Book of Mormon has physical, political,  geographical, religious, military, technological, and cultural roots  in ancient Mesoamerica. As a control, we have also analyzed two  other books dealing with ancient American Indians: View  of the Hebrews and Manuscript  Found . We compare both books with The  Maya using the same statistical methodology and demonstrate  that this methodology [Page 78] leads to rational conclusions about whether or  not such books describe peoples and places similar to those described  in The Maya .

[2] The  ancient American setting of the Book of Mormon is a subject  of debate and discussion. Among the prominent skeptics of the  Book of Mormon is Dr. Michael D. Coe, the Charles J.  McCurdy Professor Emeritus of Anthropology at Yale University. 2 In an article published in Dialogue in 1973, Dr. Coe summarized his opinion regarding an ancient American  setting for the Book of Mormon in these words: “The  picture of this hemisphere between 2,000 bc  and ad  421 presented in the book has little to do with early Indian cultures  as we know them, in spite of much wishful thinking.” 3

[3] Beyond  this article, Dr. Coe does not seem to have written anything else  about the Book of Mormon. An extensive review of his  published papers and books using Google Scholar found only this 1973 Dialogue article that deals with the Book of Mormon . However, in a series of three podcast interviews with John  Dehlin in 2011, Dr. Coe strongly reinforced his essentially negative  view of the historicity of the Book of Mormon. 4 Dr. Coe gave three more podcast interviews to Dr. Dehlin in 2018 in  which he repeated many of his earlier criticisms of the  Book of Mormon and provided some new ones. 5 According to Dr. Coe, “99% of everything that the Book of Mormon  has as details is false.” 6

[4] Dr.  Coe is obviously not a partisan advocate for the Book of Mormon.  In fact, he cannot be. He doesn’t know enough about the  Book of Mormon to offer a valid scholarly opinion one  way or the other. He read the Book of Mormon only once,  more than 45 years ago. 7

[5] There  are strong reasons for suspecting ancient Mesoamerica as the physical  location of Book of Mormon events in the New World. 8 If so, Dr. Coe’s book should correspond with at least some of  the statements asserted as fact in the Book of Mormon,  taking into account that the objective of the Book of Mormon  is to testify of Jesus Christ. The Book of Mormon is not  primarily about the history, wars, geography, culture, etc., of  Book of Mormon peoples, although it nonetheless manages to  tell us a great deal about these topics. Likewise, we do not  expect a book about Italian cuisine to tell us much about  Italian architecture or the politics of the Roman Empire, although it  may incidentally contain a good bit of such information in  context.

[6] Bayesian  statistics provides one approach to the situation in which  mathematically well-defined probabilities do not exist. 9 In fact, Dr. Coe’s book refers to the use of Bayesian statistics to  weight and thereby includes or excludes specific pieces of  archaeological data. 10 In the Bayesian approach, the strength of each piece of evidence is  the likelihood ratio, which is the probability of the evidence  assuming that the hypothesis is true divided by the probability of  the evidence assuming that the hypothesis is false.

[7] The  Bayesian approach is a powerful and general tool for evaluating  hypotheses and then rationally updating one’s prior beliefs in the  face of the new evidence. The Bayesian approach has been applied to  diverse topics [Page 82] ranging from astronomy 11 to zoology. 12 Of particular interest here, Bayesian methods have been applied to  analyze historical document collections, 13 to historical and biblical archaeology, 14 and to the detection of fraud and deception. 15

[8] At  first glance this method may appear similar to the discredited method  of parallels; however, the Bayesian approach overcomes the weaknesses  of the method of parallels. First, the Bayes factor specifically  accounts for the possibility that the evidence may have occurred  under the other hypotheses. This is accomplished in the denominator  of the Bayes factor. Second, by using a numerical Bayes factor,  the person performing the analysis explicitly estimates the strength  of [Page 83] any given piece of evidence. Ultimately, the Bayes method  resembles similarity- based techniques for detecting deception in  online reviews. 16

[9] The  Bayesian approach to data analysis is frequently used in medical  tests. 17 For example, if a disease is somewhat rare, then a randomly  selected individual might have “skeptical prior odds” of 1:1000  against them having the disease. If the test has a likelihood  ratio of 100 (a good medical test for screening), then our posterior  odds following a positive test for the disease would be 1:1000 x  100 = 1:10 against the person actually having the disease. In other  words, the individual piece of evidence given by the test changed our  minds substantially (from 1:1000 against to 1:10 against); but  because we were initially quite skeptical (1:1000) that the person  had that particular rare disease, we still think it is more likely  they do not have the disease (1:10). A rational doctor would  then call for a more definitive test to give additional  information, and we would continue to update our opinion as we  received new information.

[10] Specific  correspondences: 0.5 (Bayesian supportive evidence for the converse  hypothesis). The author of the Book of Mormon might  have learned this fact by study or experience, but it is not obvious:  for example, the fact that people eat food. We aren’t impressed by  the fact that someone ate dinner, but if we know they ate a specific  kind of food on a specific day as a religious observance,  that has value as evidence. One example is the practice of  repopulating old or abandoned cities described in Dr. Coe’s book  and also in the Book of Mormon. Such evidence acts against  the hypothesis that the Book of Mormon is fiction, but it  is not particularly strong evidence. Instead, such evidence is  considered to be merely “supportive.” 18

[11] [Page 86] One  example is the existence of highlands and lowlands within the  relevant geography. Dr. Coe’s book repeatedly emphasizes the  highland and lowland populations of Native American peoples in  Mesoamerica. The Book of Mormon also repeatedly uses the  words “go up” and “go down” when traveling. From its very  beginning, the Book of Mormon likewise employs going “up”  and going “down” when traveling to and from Jerusalem. Jerusalem  sits at a higher elevation than most of the surrounding  geography. Thus we assume that the phrases “go up” or “go down”  mean to ascend or descend in elevation while traveling. Such evidence  is considered to be Bayesian “positive.” 19

[12] Specific,  detailed and unusual correspondences: 0.02 (Bayesian strong evidence  for the converse hypothesis). We believe that facts with a 2%  likelihood (one in 50 chance) are essentially impossible to guess  correctly, given any amount of knowledge or study reasonably  available to the writer of the Book of Mormon. But in order  to rigorously test the Book of Mormon’s claims as  a fact-based record, we assume that the writer had a one in  50 chance of guessing these correspondences correctly. A one in  50 or 2% chance (0.02) is the maximum weight we will allow for  evidence supporting the Book of Mormon’s claims to being  fact-based, even if we think the odds are more like one in a million  or less. Such evidence is considered to be Bayesian “strong”  evidence. 20

[13] The  author’s general knowledge of the ancient Mayan Indians and their  area was exactly zero — which was the case for everyone in the  world in 1830. As Dr. Coe says in one of his podcast interviews,  “until [Stephens and Catherwood] went to the Maya area no one knew  anything about it.” 21 Stephens and Catherwood visited the Mayan area twice between 1839 and  1842. Their book “ Incidents of Travel in Central America,  Chiapas and Yucatan ” was published in 1841, eleven years after  the Book of Mormon was published. 22

[14] We  have assigned one of three different likelihood ratios to each  correspondence. The specific Bayes factor or likelihood assigned to  each correspondence is based on our assessment as to whether the  correspondence is (1) specific or “supportive” according to  Bayesian nomenclature (0.5); (2) specific and detailed, or Bayesian  “positive” (0.10); or (3) specific, detailed, and unusual, or  Bayesian “strong” (0.02), as described above and given in the  literature. 23

[15] Appendix  A summarizes the reasons why we have assigned a specific  likelihood ratio (0.5, 0.1 and 0.02) to each of the 131 supportive  correspondences between the Book of Mormon and The Maya .  For each correspondence, we first state Dr. Coe’s standard of fact  as given in The Maya . Since the Book of Mormon  is available to everyone to study and evaluate without cost, 24 but Dr. Coe’s book is not, we provide direct quotations or  summaries for each of the correspondences from Dr. Coe’s book.  Following the quotations from Dr. Coe’s book, the specific book(s),  chapter(s) and verse(s) from the Book of Mormon where the  correspondence appears are cited. Finally, we provide a few  sentences up to a few paragraphs that justify our choice of the  assigned likelihood ratio.

[16] As  controls, we also analyzed two other books concerned with ancient  American Indians written about the same time as the Book of Mormon.  One book is View of the Hebrews by Reverend Ethan Smith,  published in 1823. 25 The other book is Reverend Solomon Spalding’s unpublished work  titled Manuscript Found . 26 We compared both books with The Maya using Bayesian  statistics, again with a strongly skeptical prior assumption of  a billion to one that these books have little to do with ancient  Indian cultures. These comparisons are summarized in Appendix C for Manuscript Found and Appendix D for View of the Hebrews.

[17] Dr.  Coe seems to share the opinion that Joseph Smith was influenced  by then-popular ideas such as those found in View of the Hebrews and Manuscript Found . He views the Book of Mormon  as “an amalgamation of the rumors and myths, and understandings  about Native Americans” existing at the time. 27 Dr. Coe states that the Book of Mormon was “in the air”  when it was published.

[18] Unfortunately,  we know of no exceptions to this rule, including Dr. Coe, who  read the Book of Mormon just once, about 45 years ago. 28 He missed a few things during that one and only reading.

[19] Political Correspondences Fundamental level of political organization is the independent  city-state Coe’s  standard: “Sylvanus Morley had thought that there was once  a single great political entity, which he called the ‘Old  Empire,’ but once the full significance of Emblem Glyphs had been  recognized, it was clear that there had never been any such thing. In  its stead, Mayanists proposed a more Balkanized model, in which  each ‘city state’ was essentially independent of all the others;  the political power of even large entities like Tikal would have been  confined to a relatively small area, the distance from the  capital to the polity’s borders seldom exceeding a day’s  march” (p. 274). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Throughout the Book of Mormon itself  there is never a reference to “Nephite nation” or to  a “Lamanite nation.” Interestingly, the word nation is used in reference to the Jaredites (Ether 1:43), a very  different people culturally than the Lehites. The Book of Mormon  uses this phrase: “nations, kindreds, tongues and people.” The  Nephites and Lamanites were clearly kindreds. In contrast, the word nation is used frequently in terms of the “nations of the  Gentiles.” The noncanonical Guide to the Scriptures has  eight references to “Nephite nation,” showing how deeply  engrained this idea of nationhood is in modern readers. But the  Book of Mormon never puts those two words together for  Nephite/Lamanite societies. The nation-state is not a political  structure found anywhere in the Book of Mormon. Instead,  the Book of Mormon peoples were organized politically in  city-states. Often one city-state would dominate a group of  other city-states. This dominance is the subject of the next  correspondence Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  There is not a single reference in the text of the  Book of Mormon to “Nephite nation” or “Lamanite  nation.” It is also unusual. Joseph Smith was growing up in  the new nation of America, with a great deal of pride and  self-identity as an independent nation. How did he avoid identifying  the Lamanite or Nephite peoples as “nations”? But he did avoid  it. What a lucky “guess” — over and over again during the  course of the Book of Mormon history. Likelihood = 0.02 “Capital” or leading city-state dominates a cluster of other  communities Coe’s  standard: “Clusters of villages and communities were organized  under a single polity, dominated by a large ‘capital’  village, which could have contained more than 1,000 people. (p. 51).”  “Quirigua lies only 30 miles [Page 100] (48 km) north of Copan; … that  seems, on the basis of its inscriptions, to have periodically been  one of the latter’s suzerainties” (p. 137). “Bonampak,  politically important during the Early Classic, but by the Late  Classic an otherwise insignificant center clearly under the cultural  and political thumb of Yaxchilan” (p. 149). “These are  Tamarindito, Arroyo de Piedras, Punta de Chimino, Aguateca, and Dos  Pilas; the latter city seems to have dominated the rest” (p. 150).  “We now know that not all Maya polities were equal: the kings of  some lesser states were said to be ‘possessed’ by the rulers of  more powerful ones (the phrase y-ajaw , ‘his king,’  specifies this relationship” (p. 275). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:12; Alma 61:8; Helaman 1:27 . Zarahemla is clearly the Nephite capital city in the  Book of Mormon, with 140 mentions in the book. It is to  Zarahemla that the other cities of the Nephites look to for  leadership and supplies in their wars against the Lamanites. When the  Lamanite chieftain Coriantumr invades the Nephite confederation, he  makes straight for Zarahemla, “the capital city,” in the heart of  the Nephite lands, and bypasses all the lesser cities. Later the  city/land of Bountiful seems to become the Nephite capital  city-state. Analysis  of correspondence: This political model was clearly part of  Book of Mormon political arrangements, so it is specific  and detailed in both books. It is also unusual. There is no  corresponding political arrangement in Joseph Smith’s time  which he might have used as a model. Likelihood = 0.02 Some subordinate city-states shift their allegiance to a different  “capital” city Coe’s  standard: “Dos Pilas; the latter city … [began] putting  together a large-scale state as early as the seventh century AD,  when a noble lineage arrived from Tikal and established a royal  dynasty. The family was clearly adroit in its political maneuvers,  switching from an allegiance to their cousins at Tikal to one with  Calakmul, its arch-enemy” (p. 150). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 23:31 and Alma 43:4‒5. The  Amalekites and later the Zoramites, both of whom are Nephites by  birth but have dissented from the Nephites and built their own  cities, go over to the Lamanites as a body. Analysis  of correspondence: The analysis is specific and detailed. In both  cases, whole city-states changed their political allegiance to that  of a former enemy. This does not seem unusual to a modern  reader and probably would not have seemed unusual even to a country  boy in the relatively innocent early 19 th century. Likelihood = 0.1 Complex state institutions Coe’s  standard: “In art, in religion, in state complexity, and  perhaps even in the calendar and astronomy, Olmec models were  transferred to the Maya” [Page 101] (p. 61). “Civilization … has  certainly been achieved by the time that state institutions … have  appeared” (p. 63). “By Classic times, full royal courts came  into view” (p. 93). “closer to the heart of the city itself,  where the dwellings of aristocrats and bureaucrats” (p. 126). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:1‒2; Alma 2:6‒7, 14‒16; Alma  27:21‒22; Alma 30:9; Alma 51:2‒7; Alma 60:7, 11, 21, 24. Both  the Book of Mormon and The Maya clearly show  societies that have large, complex state institutions. For example,  the Nephites had (1) some form of elections, (2) armies supported by  the state, (3) chief judges and lower judges, and (4) kings (at least  part of the time). The Lamanites appear to have had kings at all  times. Dr. Coe (p. 63) notes that state institutions were  developed among the Maya by the Late Preclassic, consistent with  Book of Mormon timing for the references provided. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the British and American civil  governments had large, complex state institutions, but the Native  American societies certainly did not. This comparison is specific,  has quite a bit of detail, and probably would have been unusual  to Joseph Smith. Likelihood = 0.02 Many cities exist Coe’s  standard: To name just a few of the cities mentioned in The Maya we have Uxmal, Chichen Itza, Coba, Tulum,  Acanceh, Ek’ Balam, Mayapan, Piedras Negras, Ceibal, Palenque,  Naranjo, El Mirador, Bonampak, Uaxactun, Kaminaljuyu, Takalik Abaj,  Tikal (p. 9). “the great Usumacinta … draining the northern  highlands, … twisting to the northwest past many a ruined Maya  city” (p. 16‒17). “More advanced cultural traits, … the  construction of cities” (p. 26). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 51:20; Alma 59:5; 3 Nephi 9:3‒10.  Many named cities are mentioned in the Book of Mormon. Analysis  of correspondence: By 1830 America had many cities, but there  were no cities on the frontier where Joseph Smith translated and  published the Book of Mormon. The Native Americans with  whom Joseph was familiar did not build cities, although he might  possibly have learned about some Native American cities by reading View of the Hebrews , so we do not count it as unusual.  Nonetheless, the correspondence is specific and quite detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 City of Laman (Lamanai) “occcupied from earliest times” Coe’s  standard: “Far up the New River … is the important site of  Lamanai, … occupied from earliest times right into the  post-Conquest period” (p. 85). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 9:10. The strong tendency  is for consonants to be preserved in pronouncing words and names. For  example, Beirut (Lebanon) is one of the oldest cities in the world,  settled 5,000 years ago. The name derives from Canaanite-Phoenician be’erot and [Page 102] has been known as “Biruta,” “Berytus”  and now “Beirut,” while always retaining those three consonants  “BRT” in the correct order, and with no intervening consonants. 29 In the  case of the city Lamanai (Laman), all three consonants, and only  these three consonants, namely LMN, are found in the correct order  and are the same consonants as given for the city of Laman mentioned  in the Book of Mormon. This seems to be a “bullseye”  for the Book of Mormon. How did Joseph Smith correctly  “guess” the correct consonants, and only the correct consonants  in the correct order for the name of an important city “occupied  from earliest times?” Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, detailed and  statistically unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Parts of the land were very densely settled Coe’s  standard: “A few cities, such as Chunchucmil in Yucatan, are  amazingly dense” (p. 124). “At Tikal, within a little  over 6 sq. miles … there are c. 3,000 structures” (p. 126).  Recent work not reported in The Maya confirms that some Mayan  cities were very densely populated. 30 Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 1:7. Analysis  of correspondence: The Native Americans with whom Joseph Smith  had direct contact did not have cities, let alone cities so densely  settled. He may have learned about Native American cities from View  of the Hebrews, but that book gives no information about how  densely settled those cities were. So this correspondence is specific  and detailed, but we do not count it as unusual, since Joseph Smith  might have gotten the idea from View of the Hebrews . Likelihood = 0.1 Large-scale public works Coe’s  standard: “Civilization … has certainly been achieved by the  time that state institutions, large-scale public works … have  appeared” (p. 63). Dr. Coe notes that city walls (certainly  a public work) were built “when, in places, local conditions  became hostile” (pp. 126, 194, 216). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:10; Mosiah 11:8‒13; Alma 14:27‒28;  Alma 48:8; Helaman 1:22; 3 Nephi 6:7‒8; Ether 10:5‒6.  The Book of Mormon speaks in some detail about the  large-scale public works that its societies, particularly its more  decadent societies, achieved. [Page 103] Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence is both specific and  detailed. It would also seem unusual. The Native Americans of  Joseph Smith’s time and place did not build public works or  temples. Why would Joseph Smith have written a book that  clearly claimed that “the Indians” did so? However, since View  of the Hebrews references temples and walled towns (not in any  detail), and Joseph Smith might have gotten the idea from that  book, we will only count this correspondence as specific and  detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Some rulers live in luxury Coe’s  standard: “The excavation of two tombs from this period has  thrown much light on the luxury to which these rulers were  accustomed” (p. 74). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 11:3‒15. Analysis  of correspondence: Joseph probably knew that the British royal  court lived in luxury, but the chiefs of the Indian tribes did not.  Why would Joseph have assumed that the ancestors of the Indians had  kings who lived in luxury? The Book of Mormon contrasts the  reign of King Benjamin, who deliberately did not live in luxury, with  decadent rulers who did. So Joseph was correct that some decadent  rulers did live in luxury, but there are few details, and this is not  particularly unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 Elaborate thrones Coe’s  standard: “Its superstructure’s chambers contain a stone  throne in the form of a snarling jaguar, painted red, with eyes  and spots of jade and fangs of shell; atop the throne rested a Toltec  circular back-shield in turquoise mosaic” (p. 206). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 11:9; Ether 10:6. Analysis  of correspondence: Again, Joseph might have known about the  elaborate throne of the British royal family, so it was perhaps not  unusual, but what Native Americans was Joseph familiar with that had  thrones, let alone elaborate thrones? How did he “guess” this one  correctly? To be conservative, however, we will classify this as  a specific and detailed correspondence, but perhaps not an  unusual one. Likelihood = 0.1 Royalty exists, with attendant palaces, courts and nobles Coe’s  standard: “We now know a great deal about … Maya  societies as the seats of royal courts” (p. 7). “By Classic  times, full royal courts came into view” (p. 93). See also  pp. 7, 93, 95, 126, and 209. Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:1‒2; Alma 22:2; Alma 51:7‒8,  21. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya refer repeatedly to these institutions of royalty. So the  correspondence is both specific and detailed. However, it may be  a stretch to call it unusual. While there were no Indian kings,  Joseph certainly knew about British royalty, and [Page 104] might have been  influenced thereby to put it into the Book of Mormon. So to  be conservative, we will not classify this one as unusual, although  it is specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Royal or elite marriages for political purposes Coe’s  standard: “Where such stratagems typically played out was in  royal or noble marriages” (p. 97). “An elite class  consisting of central Mexican foreigners, and the local nobility with  whom they had marriage ties” (p. 103). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:24; Alma 47:35. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific but not  particularly detailed in the case of the Book of Mormon.  Joseph might also have been aware of the political marriages in the  royal houses of England and Europe. So we rate this one as specific  but not detailed or unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 Feasting for political purposes Coe’s  standard: “In courts, feasts and gifts helped to bind alliances  and keep underlings happy, with effects across the kingdom”  (p. 97). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 18:9; Alma 20:9. Analysis  of correspondence: Neither book offers a lot of  distinguishing detail, although the references are specific. The  practice seems unusual in Joseph’s frontier setting in democratic  America. Why would Joseph Smith attribute this practice (unusual  for him) to the ancestors of the Indians? This correspondence is  therefore ranked as specific and unusual but not detailed. Likelihood  = 0.1 . Gifts to the king for political advantage Coe’s  standard: The Maya refers clearly to this practice: “In courts,  feasts and gifts helped to bind alliances and keep underlings happy,  with effects across the kingdom” (p. 97). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 2:12. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon reference to  political gifts is less specific but strongly suggestive. Again, the  practice seems unusual in Joseph’s frontier setting in democratic  America. Why would Joseph Smith attribute this practice (unusual  for him) to the ancestors of the Indians? This correspondence is  therefore ranked as only somewhat specific and unusual. The overall  likelihood is downgraded from specific and unusual to only specific. Likelihood = 0.5 Political factions organize around a member of the elite Coe’s  standard: “courts did not operate by individual actions alone.  They worked instead through factions pivoting around a high  ranking courtier or member of the royal family” (p. 97). [Page 105] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 1:2‒9. Analysis  of correspondence: In America in the early 19 th century, the party system had already been born, and the party often  pivoted around a key political figure like Thomas Jefferson or  John Adams, so this idea was not unusual to Joseph. However, it is  both specific and quite detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Foreigners move in and take over government, often as family  dynasties Coe’s  standard: “[The Founder of Copan] was another stranger coming  in from the west, perhaps from Teotihuacan” (p. 118). “[At  Dos Pilas] … a noble lineage arrived from Tikal and  established a royal dynasty” (p. 150). “Uxmal … was  the seat of the Xiu family, but this was a late lineage of  Mexican origin that could not possibly have built the site”  (p. 180). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:19; Alma 47:35; Helaman 1:16. Analysis  of correspondence: Again, both the Book of Mormon and The Maya specifically refer to this practice and in  considerable detail. However, Joseph Smith might have been aware  of the change in family dynasties in England about a century  earlier when the House of Hanover succeeded the House of Stuart as  kings of Great Britain, and used this as his model (however  unlikely). So the correspondence is specific and detailed, but  perhaps not unusual. To be conservative, we assign this a likelihood  of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 City administrative area with bureaucrats and aristocrats Coe’s  standard : At Tikal “closer to the heart of the city itself,  [were] the dwellings of aristocrats and bureaucrats” (p. 126),  “the palaces were the administrative centers of the city”  (p. 128). At Aguateca the archaeologist was able “to identify  specialized areas, such as a house which was probably that of  the chief scribe of the city” (p. 151). “The House of the  Governor was built, probably to serve as his administrative  headquarters” (p. 182). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 60:19, 22; Helaman 9:1‒7. Analysis  of correspondence: Both books are quite specific on this point,  but the Book of Mormon does not provide a lot of  detail. However, Joseph Smith never saw a state or national  capital city with its administrative center and nearby houses for  officials until well after the the Book of Mormon was published. So  this is unusual and specific. Likelihood = 0.1 Records kept specifically of the reigns of the kings Coe’s  standard: “the ‘stela cult’ — the inscribed glorification  of royal lineages and their achievements” (p. 177). “The  text is completely historical, recounting the king’s descent from  Pakal the Great” (p. 264n169). “The figures that appear in  Classic reliefs are not gods and priests, but dynastic autocrats and  their spouses, children, and subordinates” (p. 273). [Page 106] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 9:4; Jacob 3:13; Jarom  1:14. Analysis  of correspondence: Like The Maya , the Book of Mormon  is very specific and detailed about separate records being kept of  the reigns of the kings. We know of no reason or existing historical  model that would have led Joseph Smith to have correctly  “guessed” that the doings of the kings were kept separately from  the rest of the history of a people. This is a specific,  detailed and unusual correspondence. Likelihood = 0.02 Native leaders incorporated in power structure after subjugation Coe’s  standard: “Mesoamerican ’empires’ such as Teotihuacan’s  were probably not organized along Roman lines; … rather, they were  ‘hegemonic,’ in the sense that conquered bureaucracies were  largely in place” (p. 100). “it seems obvious that many of  the native princes were incorporated into the new power structure”  (p. 206). “Or perhaps Calakmul found it easier … to rule  through local authorities” (p. 276). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 19:26‒27; Mosiah 24:1‒2. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya are both specific and detailed about this practice. As Dr. Coe  suggests, the only model Joseph Smith might conceivably have  heard about for control of subjugated peoples was the Roman one,  which was the opposite of the system used among the Maya, and also  the opposite of the system used in the Book of Mormon. How  did Joseph Smith “guess” that one correctly? Specific,  detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Tribute required of subjects Coe’s  standard: “the ruler took in tax or tribute” (p. 93).  “Scenes with food, drink, and tribute” (p. 97). “displays  of captives or tribute” (p. 124). “On what did the  population live? One answer is tribute” (p. 216). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:15, 22; Mosiah 19:15, 22, 26, 28;  Mosiah 22:7, 10. Also Alma 23:38‒39; Alma 7:22; Alma 24:9. Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, the Book of Mormon and The Maya are both specific and detailed about the practice of  tribute. However, it is possible that Joseph had heard about this  practice either through the Bible or other sources. So we will  classify this correspondence as specific and detailed, but not  unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Limited number of important patrilineages Coe’s  standard: “There were 24 ‘principal’ lineages in Utatlan”  (p. 225). “There were approximately 250 patrilineages in  Yucatan at the time of the Conquest, and we know from Landa how  important they were” (p. 234). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob: 1:13; Alma 47:35; 4 Nephi 1:36‒38;  Mormon 1:8‒9. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya are very specific and detailed about how important it was  to belong to a leading patrilineage. While Joseph Smith  might have picked up this idea from reading the Bible (that is, the  tribes of Israel) we think this is very unlikely. So we regard this  correspondence as specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood =  0.02 King and “king elect” Coe’s  standard: “The K’iche’ state was headed by a king,  a king-elect, and two ‘captains'” (p. 226). “royal  youths … or the ‘great youth,’ … perhaps the heir-designate”  (p. 278). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 1:10; Mosiah 6:3. [Page 107] Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon also refers to  the practice of an heir-designate, so this is a specific  correspondence, but it is not particularly detailed. Also, Joseph may  have been aware of the practice of having heirs to the throne of  Great Britain. To be conservative, we will assign this correspondence  a likelihood of 0.5, although it may perhaps merit  a greater evidentiary strength. Likelihood = 0.5 There are captains serving kings Coe’s  standard: “The K’ iche’ state was headed by a king,  a king-elect and two ‘captains'” (p. 226). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 22:3. Analysis  of correspondence: Gideon clearly serves in the capacity of  a captain to King Limhi, so the idea is specific or highly  suggestive. It also seems unusual. Where would Joseph Smith have  come up with this idea? Because of lack of detail, we will assign  this correspondence a likelihood of 0.5, although it  probably merits a greater strength. Likelihood = 0.5 Political power is exercised by family dynasties Coe’s  standard: “[Spearthrower Owl installed his own son] … as the  tenth ruler of Tikal” (p. 109). “King of the great city of  Palenque [was] the second son of the renowned Palenque [ruler Pakal  the Great]” (p. 161). “There were 24 ‘principal’  lineages in Utatlan, closely identified with the buildings … in  which the lords carried out their affairs” (p. 225). “The  ancient Maya realm was … a class society with political power  … in the hands of an hereditary elite” (p. 234). “the  names of the cities themselves or of the dynasties that ruled over  them” (p. 271). “dynastic record of all Palenque rulers”  (p. 274). Book of Mormon  correspondence: From the beginning of the Book of Mormon,  the key political question was which of sons of Lehi had the right to  exercise political power over the rest of Lehi’s descendants; in  other words, who would be the leader of an hereditary elite? See  Mosiah 1:9; Mosiah 11:1; [Page 108] Mosiah 19:16, 26; Mosiah 28:10; Alma 17:6;  Alma 20:8; Alma 24:3‒4; Alma 50:40; Helaman 1:4‒5; Helaman 2:2;  Ether 6:24. Analysis  of correspondence: Both books very clearly attest to the central  importance of family dynasties. The Lamanite political model was  clearly that of hereditary kings. Even among the supposedly more  democratic Nephites, following the political reforms of King Mosiah,  the office of chief judge (an elected position) often descended from  father to son, for example, Alma to his son Alma, Pahoran to his son  Pahoran, etc. Obviously, there was a de facto hereditary  elite even during a time of popular elections. Likewise, The Maya provides many examples of continuing conflict over  the question of which lineage would exercise political leadership. So  this correspondence is specific and quite detailed. However, it is  not unusual. Joseph might have been aware of the various family  dynasties in Europe and Great Britain, and their unending conflicts.  This correspondence is thus assigned a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Kings rule over subordinate provincial or territorial rulers, some of  noble blood (subkings) Coe’s  standard: “The wily K’uk’ulkan II populated his city with  provincial rulers and their families” (p. 216). “At the head  of each statelet in Yucatan was the … the territorial ruler who had  inherited his post in the male line” (p. 236). “The kings of  some lesser states were said to be ‘possessed’ by the rulers of  more powerful ones” (p. 275). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:2‒3; Alma 17:21; Alma 20:4, 8. Analysis  of correspondence: This pattern is clearly evident among the  Lamanite kings in the Book of Mormon and also as detailed  by Dr. Coe in The Maya . So the correspondence is specific and  quite detailed in both books. We know of no political model in his  time on which Joseph Smith might have relied to correctly  “guess” this correspondence. The kings of Great Britain did not  have provincial rulers of royal blood. Thus this correspondence is  specific, detailed and unusual. However, because of its overlap with  correspondence 1.2, we assign only a likelihood of 0.5 to  this correspondence. This choice is due to the specific additional  information that sometimes these provincial rulers were of royal  blood. Likelihood = 0.5 “Seating” means accession to political power Coe’s  standard: “Epigraphers conclude that pectoral reverse records  the ‘seating’ or accession to power, of the ruler in question”  (p. 91). “Important glyphs now known to relate to dynastic  affairs include … inauguration or ‘seating’ in office”  (p. 274). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 8:12; Helaman 7:4; 3 Nephi 6:19. [Page 109] Analysis  of correspondence: On three separate occasions, the  Book of Mormon uses exactly this word seating or seat to describe the holding of or accession to political  power. So the correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual. It  seems very unlikely that Joseph Smith would have correctly  “guessed” this particular word. Likelihood = 0.02 Separation of civil and religious authority Coe’s  standard: “a hereditary Chief Priest resided in that city, …  but in no source do we find his authority or that of the priests  superseding civil power” (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 4:16‒18. Analysis  of correspondence: Under the leadership of Alma the Younger, the  role of the head of state and the head of the church were separated,  while they had previously been combined. It appears that this was the  pattern afterwards among the Nephites, but we do not know what the  pattern was among the Lamanites. So this correspondence is specific,  but not detailed. Also, this pattern of “separation of church and  state” as practiced in America would not have been unusual to  Joseph Smith. Likelihood = 0.5 Those of noble birth aspire to power Coe’s  standard: “Several courtiers were so mighty as to be magnates,  perhaps descended from collateral royal lines. They needed to be  co-opted and watched, lest their pretensions got out of hand”  (p. 93). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma: 51:5, 8. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Alma describes a continuing  conflict in the Nephite confederation between those who desired  a freely chosen government and those who were of “high birth”  and sought to be kings. So the correspondence is specific, but not  very detailed in either book and probably not unusual to Joseph,  since seeking after power seems to be part of human nature. Likelihood = 0.5 Royal courts imitate their enemies Coe’s  standard: “Courts were often imitative. Through a curious  form of standardization, they emulated each other, even those of  enemies” (p. 95). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 47:23. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon likewise refers  to a specific custom of Lamanite royalty which had been taken  from their Nephite enemies. Dr. Coe himself regards this imitative  feature as “curious”; so we will agree to that point. It is  indeed unusual. However, there is not a lot of detail in either The Maya or the Book of Mormon about these imitative  practices, so we will classify this correspondence as specific and  unusual, but not detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 [Page 110] Royal courts function as “great households” Coe’s  standard : “A final observation is that courts functioned as  ‘great households'” (p. 97). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma Chap. 19 (the whole chapter) Analysis  of correspondence: Alma Chapter 19 describes a somewhat  unusual scene in which many of King Lamoni’s subjects gather to  Lamoni’s “house” (not his palace) in quite a familiar,  quasi-democratic way and are apparently able to bring their swords  along with them. This would certainly not be the case in the court of  Great Britain. So the practice is definitely unusual, but there is  not a lot of detail, and Dr. Coe is not very specific about what  he means by “great households.” However,  there is enough specificity in the concept of royal courts as  households and the idea that King Lamoni had a house, rather  than a palace, to warrant identifying this as a correspondence.  While this may not be a detailed correspondence or  a particularly specific one, it is very unusual. Therefore, we  assign this correspondence a likelihood of 0.5. Likelihood = 0.5 Candidates for high office had to possess hidden knowledge Coe’s  standard: “ Any candidate for high office had to pass an  occult catechism known as the ‘Language of Zuywa.'” (p. 236). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Enos 1:1; Mosiah 1:2. Analysis  of correspondence: King Benjamin “caused that [his sons] should  be taught in the language of his fathers, that thereby they might  become men of understanding.” Later, his son Mosiah became the  ruler of the people. Likewise, Enos (a prince of sorts) was also  taught in the “language” of his father. One is led to ask: “Was  the regular course of education not sufficient for these young men;  was their common language not enough to qualify them to lead?”  Apparently not. This correspondence has some detail, and while it is  specific enough to get our attention, and is definitely unusual, we  do not think it merits a likelihood of 0.02; instead it is  assigned a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Abrupt breaks in dynasties Coe’s  standard: “Thus, we can expect a good deal of local  cultural continuity even in those regions taken over by the great  city; but in the case of the lowland Maya, we shall also see outright  interference in dynastic matters, with profound implications for the  course of Maya history. (p. 100). “there are signs of …  profound breaks in the dynasty” (p. 116). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:1‒19; Alma 24:1‒2. Analysis  of correspondence: The Maya also describes numerous other  instances in which one Maya kingdom invaded another and abruptly  changed the ruling dynasty. The same thing also occurs in the  Book of Mormon, [Page 111] when King Mosiah replaces (peacefully) the  ruler(s) of Zarahemla; and later in Alma 24 when the rebellious  Lamanites depose their hereditary king. So this correspondence is  specific and detailed in both books, but it probably does not qualify  as unusual. Joseph might well have known about the many European  wars, with multiple rulers bent on deposing each other. Likelihood = 0.1 Subservient peoples are said to “possess” the land while ruled by  a dominant power Coe’s  standard: “The kings of some lesser states were said to be  ‘possessed’ by the rulers of more powerful ones” (p. 275). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 19:15. Analysis  of correspondence: It is interesting that this specific word possess is the one used by the Maya to describe subservient  rulership. Likewise the Lehites (for example, 2 Nephi 1:9)  and the Jaredites (for example, Ether 2:8) were instructed that  theirs was a “promised land” and that they would “possess”  it as long as they kept their covenants with their heavenly king.  That same word possess was the relationship the Israelites  were to have with their lands of promise, under God’s rule (for  example, Deuteronomy 11:8, 2 Nephi 24:2) . The  wording here is highly specific, and unusual, but may not be detailed  enough in the case of the Maya to warrant a likelihood of 0.02,  but it does warrant a likelihood of 0.1. How would  Joseph Smith have guessed how appropriate that particular word  was to describe this relationship between a more powerful king  and his subservient kings among the Maya? Likelihood = 0.1 Calculation  of overall likelihood for political correspondences There  are 33 separate political correspondences between the Book of Mormon  and The Maya. Of these, nine have a likelihood of 0.5, 16  have a likelihood of 0.1 and eight have a likelihood of  0.02. Thus the overall likelihood of these 33 positive  correspondences is 0.5 9 x 0.1 16 x 0.02 8 = 4.99 x 10 –33 . Cultural and Social Correspondences Possible ancient origin of Mesoamerican cultures Coe’s  standard: “Given the similarities among the diverse cultures of  Mesoamerica, … its peoples must share a common origin, so far  back in time that it may never be brought to light by archaeology”  (p. 14). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See the Book of Ether. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon specifically  refers to a much earlier migration, the “Jaredites,” from  the Old World to the New World thousands of years before the Lehite  migration. However, the Book of Mormon does not say, as Coe  strongly implies above, that the earlier [Page 112] culture was the common  origin of subsequent cultures. Those details are lacking in the  Book of Mormon. The pattern is, however, unusual. It is one  thing for Joseph Smith to have “guessed” the existence of  the Lehite colony, but to correctly guess another much, much earlier  culture/migration is quite unusual. We rate this specific and unusual  for a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Active interchange of ideas and things among the elite Coe’s  standard: “there must have been an active interchange of ideas  and things among the Mesoamerican elite over many centuries”  (p. 14). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:12‒15; Mosiah 7:9,13; Alma 47:23,  35‒36; Helaman 4:3‒4, 8; Helaman 11: 24‒25; Alma  63:14; 3 Nephi 1:28. Analysis  of correspondence: Coe is very specific and detailed in his  statement. The Book of Mormon is likewise detailed and  specific about the many exchanges of people (especially elite  peoples) and ideas over centuries among the Book of Mormon  peoples. Even a well-educated person, which Joseph Smith  was certainly not, would have a hard time thinking of  a historical model for this behavior, let alone blending it so  seamlessly and unobtrusively into the larger Book of Mormon  history. Therefore it is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood  = 0.02 . Foreign brides for elites Coe’s  standard: “More than a negligible percentage of Tikal’s  population came from elsewhere, including the introduction of foreign  brides for elites” (p. 109). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:24 and Alma 47:35. Analysis  of correspondence: Ammon was a Nephite prince whom the king  of the Lamanites sought as a husband for one of his daughters;  and Ammonihah was a Nephite by birth who became king of the  Lamanites after marrying the queen, so the correspondence is specific  and detailed. There were indeed foreign brides for elites. However,  Joseph might have been aware of the intermarriages among the royal  houses of Europe, where elites also had foreign brides, so it is not  unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Slavery practiced Coe’s  standard: “[Yucatan was famed for] production of honey, salt  and slaves” (p. 19). “Slaves comprised both sentenced  criminals and vassal war captives” (p. 225). “Human  sacrifice was perpetrated on prisoners, slaves, and children”  (pp. 243‒44). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:15; Alma 27:8; 3 Nephi 3:7. Analysis  of correspondence: King Benjamin specifically states that he had not allowed his people to make slaves of one another, strongly  implying that slavery was the usual practice. (Mosiah 2:13). The  Lamanites offered to become slaves until they had recompensed the  wrongs they had done to [Page 113] the Nephites. The Gadiantons offered  a partnership with the Nephites as an alternative to slavery. So  the practice of slavery is specific and detailed in both books. Alas,  slavery has never been unusual, and it was certainly known to  Joseph Smith. Likelihood = 0.1 Different languages found in pockets Coe’s  standard: “Languages other than Mayan were found in isolated  pockets, indicating either intrusions of peoples from foreign lands  or remnant populations engulfed by the expansion of the Mayan  tongues” (p. 31). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:19; Mosiah 9:6‒7; Mosiah 23:30‒35;  Alma 27:22. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon contains examples  of both kinds of linguistic “pockets,” both by intrusion and  engulfment. So the correspondence is specific and detailed. It  perhaps is not unusual, however. Joseph Smith might have  reflected on the intrusion of English into the French peoples of  Canada, or on the immigration of so many Germans during the  Revolutionary War … and then woven this idea seamlessly into the  Book of Mormon. Unlikely in the extreme, but possible. To  be (probably overly) conservative we rate this one as specific and  detailed, but not unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 In their creation stories, a great flood caused by human  wickedness Coe’s  standard. “men made from flesh. … [Humankind] turned to  wickedness and … were in their turn annihilated … as … a great  flood swept the earth” (p. 41). “the last Creation before  our own ended with a great flood” (p. 249). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 5:11, Alma 10:22. Analysis  of correspondence: The Lehite colony had the five books of Moses,  and thus the flood story. Among the Maya and the Lehites, the great  flood was specifically due to the wickedness of men. So the  correspondence was specific and detailed. However, because  Joseph Smith may have read View of the Hebrews (however  unlikely that may be), we are not allowing this correspondence to be  unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Possible settlement of the Americas by seafarers Coe’s  standard: “The presence or absence of the Bering Strait is thus  not necessarily relevant to the problem [of the settlement of the  Americas]: the very first Americans may well have taken a maritime  route” (p. 41). “From the setting sun we came … from  beyond the sea” (p. 224). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 18:8, 23; Omni 1:16; Ether  6:12. Analysis  of correspondence: Coe is specific on this point, but not  particularly detailed, at least as regards his interpretation of the Annals of the Kaqchikels . In contrast, the Annals themselves  seem to be very specific and detailed on [Page 114] this point. According to the  Kaqchikels, their ancestors came from the west, beyond the sea. The  Book of Mormon is specific that both the Jaredite and  Lehite migrations were by sea, and the Lehites came from the west. We  are not told how the Mulekites arrived. In Joseph’s day, most  educated persons believed in a Bering Strait migration of the  ancestors of the American Indians, perhaps by the land bridge. So for  Joseph to say that the Book of Mormon peoples came by sea  was unusual. However, in deference to Coe’s different  interpretation of the Annals from a plain reading of that  quotation, we rate this one as specific and unusual, but not  detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Steep decline and disappearance of an ancient culture a few  hundred years BC Coe’s  standard: “There is some consensus among archaeologists that  the Olmecs of southern Mexico had elaborated many of these traits  beginning over 3,000 years ago, and that much of complex culture in  Mesoamerica has an Olmec origin” (p. 14). “The Olmec  civilization went into a steep decline ca 400 BC”  (p. 61). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:21; Book of Ether, especially chapters  13‒15. Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence is detailed and specific.  It also is unusual. What information or possible model did  Joseph Smith have to “guess” a steep cultural decline  among a very ancient American Indian culture at the same time  the evidence summarized in The Maya says the decline occurred?  In a word, how did he “guess” this one? Likelihood =  0.02 Strong class distinctions based on noble birth, wealth and  specialized learning Coe’s  standard: “The esoteric knowledge of the Maya … served to  separate and elevate people in the know from those denied that  privilege” (p. 96). “Now, while among some other peoples  such kin groups are theoretically equal, among the Maya this was not  so, … for there were strongly demarcated classes” (p. 235).  “At the top were the nobles, … who had private lands and held the  more important political offices, as well as filling the roles of  high-ranking warriors, wealthy farmers and merchants, and clergy. The  commoners were the free workers of the population, … but in all  likelihood even these persons were graded into rich and poor. There  is some indication of a class of serfs, who worked the private  lands of the nobles” (p. 235). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 32:2; Alma 51:21; 3 Nephi 6:11‒12;  4 Nephi 1:26. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, and both the  Book of Mormon and The Maya agree in the details  upon which class distinctions were based, namely birth, wealth, and  learning. While distinctions based on wealth and learning probably  would not have seemed [Page 115] unusual to Joseph Smith (coming from the  working poor class), distinctions based on noble birth might have  seemed unusual. To be conservative, we will not count this as  unusual, only specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Sacrifice of children and others to Maya gods Coe’s  standard: “When the [Temple of the Feathered Serpent] was  dedicated ca AD 200, at least 200 individuals were sacrificed  in its honor” (p. 100). “The honored deceased was buried …  and [was] accompanied not only by rich offerings of pottery and other  artifacts, but also by up to three persons sacrificed for the  occasion (generally children or adolescents)” (p. 104). “Human  sacrifice was perpetrated on … children (bastards or orphans bought  for the occasion), … fit offerings for the Maya gods”  (p. 243‒44). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 4:14‒15, 21. Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is detailed and specific in both  books. However, we do not count it as unusual. The practice of  sacrificing children and infants is described in the Bible, and  Joseph might have learned about it there. Likelihood = 0.1 Multiple correspondences with Egyptian culture and concepts Coe’s  standard: “The function of Maya pyramids as funerary monuments  thus harks back to Preclassic times” (p. 76). “The Temple of  the Inscriptions was a funerary monument with exactly the same  primary function as the Egyptian pyramids” (p. 157). Not  mentioned by Coe are several additional ties with Egypt. First, there  is the fact that both the Egyptians and the Maya regarded the five  days at the end of the year as unlucky. 31 “A much-dreaded interval of 5 unlucky days added at the end”  (p. 64). Second, the Hero Twins in the Maya story “resurrected  their father Hun Hunahpu, the Maize God” (p. 71), just as  Horus, the son of Osiris, resurrected his father in ancient Egyptian  religion. 32 Third and 4th include hieroglyphic writing, and grave goods. We  wonder why Coe, who certainly knows of these additional  correspondences between the Maya and the Egyptians, did not mention  them. So we did it for him. Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 1:2; Alma 10:3; Mormon  9:32. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence here is the tie with Egypt  on multiple levels. The Book of Mormon claims to be written  “in the characters called among us, the reformed Egyptian.” Nephi  starts out his record telling us that he made it “in the language  of the Egyptians.” Furthermore, Lehi was a descendant of  Manasseh, who was born in Egypt of an Egyptian mother. The  correspondences are detailed and specific as far as the Egyptian ties [Page 116] are concerned, and very unusual. Why would Joseph Smith have  “guessed” that the ancestors of the Indians had these ties with  Egypt? This correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual, but  since Dr. Coe mentioned only one of several possible ties with  Egypt, we will downgrade the correspondence from 0.02 (specific,  detailed and unusual) to merely specific, or Likelihood = 0.5 Mobile populations, founding new cities Coe’s  standard: “Many dynasties were founded in the Early Classic  period. Several … appear to have hived off from the southern  Lowlands” (p. 108). “What is clear is that, far more than  once thought, people moved about in the Early Classic periods”  (p. 109). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:12‒15; Alma 8:7; Alma 27:22; Alma  47:35. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya are full of examples in which large and small groups set out on  their own to found new cities. In the Book of Mormon we  have Nephi’s people separating from the other Lehites after their  arrival in the New World; Mosiah and his people leaving the main body  of Lehites and joining the people of Zarahemla; Zeniff and his people  going up to reclaim the land of their first inheritance; the people  of Ammon moving to avoid destruction; the flight of the people who  followed Alma the Elder, and so on. The correspondence is specific  and detailed, but probably not unusual. Joseph Smith and his  family were themselves part of a highly mobile American frontier  population, busy founding new communities. Likelihood = 0.1 Menial workers, extreme inequality, ignorance and oppression Coe’s  standard: “The royal cooks and cleaners or other menials …  did not merit mention” (p. 129). “Among some other peoples  such kin groups are theoretically equal, among the Maya this was not  so. … The commoners were the free workers, … but in all  likelihood even these persons were graded into rich and poor. … And  at the bottom were the slaves who were mostly plebeians taken in war.  … Slavery was hereditary” (p. 235). (See the entirety of  p. 235.) Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:26‒33; Alma 32:4‒5; Alma 35:9;  3 Nephi 6:10 –12 . Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon details the same  sources of inequality as does The Maya : those owing to  education, social status and wealth. So the correspondence is  specific and detailed. Again, alas, this correspondence would  certainly not have been unusual to Joseph and his family … as  relatively poor “commoners [and] free workers,” using Coe’s  words. Since this correspondence has some overlap with 2.9, we reduce  its probative weight from 0.1 to 0.5. Likelihood = 0.5 [Page 117] Marketplaces exist Coe’s  standard: “a variety of men, women and even children involved  in the buying and selling of commodities including shelled maize,  maize tamales , atole (maize gruel), salt and even vases”  (p. 145). “These are unique scenes of daily life within  a bustling marketplace. … Such markets have been found at  a number of other Classic Maya cities” (p. 146). “There  was a great market at Chichen Itza” (p. 233). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 7:10. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon is specific about  the existence of markets, but not detailed, except that there was  a “chief” market in Zarahemla, which was also the leading  city of the Nephite civilization at that time, strongly implying that  there were other, less prominent markets in Zarahemla or elsewhere. The Maya is highly detailed, however. This is undoubtedly  unusual. What North American tribes did Joseph Smith know of  that had settled, stationary marketplaces? So how did he “guess”  that one correctly? Specific and unusual for a likelihood of  0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 People driven from their homes wander searching for a new home Coe’s  standard: “The Itza … were driven from this town … and  wandered east across the land, … where they settled as squatters in  the desolate city [of Chichen Itza]” (p. 216) “Those Itza  who were driven from Chichen Itza [wandered back] to the Lake Peten  Itza” (p. 219). Book of Mormon  correspondence: The Lehites were driven from their Jerusalem home  and wandered for years before they found a home in the New  World. Alma the Elder and his people were driven from their homes by  King Noah and wandered in the wilderness until they found a home.  The Anti-Nephi-Lehis were likewise driven from their homes and had to  seek a new home in a strange land. Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence is specific and detailed  in both books. It also seems unusual. Where would Joseph Smith  have gotten this idea of a wandering people seeking for a new  home? Most people do not read the Aeneid until college, if  they ever read it at all. What other literary work might Joseph have  gotten this idea from? Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood =  0.02 Wasteful architectural extravagance Coe’s  standard: “intensification of inter-elite competition,  manifesting itself in different ways: not only in ‘wasteful  architectural extravagance'” (p. 175). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 11:8‒11. Analysis  of correspondence: In both books, the correspondence is specific  and detailed as to ornamentation and costly excess for the thrones,  palaces, etc., of the elite. Joseph Smith was an unsophisticated  young man who had [Page 118] lived his life as a member of the working  poor. How would he know about such extravagance? How would he know  how to describe such ornate things without going overboard? Where  would he have seen such things? This is certainly unusual. So the  correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood =  0.02 Large northward migrations specifically mentioned Coe’s  standard: “They could have been the Yukateko on their trek  north to Yucatan from the Maya homeland” (p. 47). “Old  thrones toppled in the south as a new political order took shape  in the north; southern cities fell into the dust as northern ones  flourished” (p. 174). “The early Colonial chronicles in  Yukateko speak of a ‘Great Descent’ and ‘Lesser Descent,’  implying two mighty streams of refugees heading north from the  abandoned cities” (p. 177). The Yukateko trek took place many  centuries before the Late Classic migration northward, so this kind  of thing happened in widely different periods. Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 63:4‒9; Helaman 3:3‒12. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon speaks repeatedly  of the “land northward” as the place where the Nephites could  flee or go into to settle. The land northward was where the Nephites  made their last stand and were finally destroyed. These northward  flights also took place over centuries. This is really a “bull’s  eye” for the Book of Mormon: a specific, detailed  and unusual correspondence. Likelihood = 0.02 Constant migrations Coe’s  standard: “At some point … there was a single Mayan  language, Proto-Mayan, perhaps located in the western Guatemalan  highlands. According to one linguistic scenario, Wastekan and  Yukatekan split off from this parent body, with Wastek migrating up  the Gulf Coast to northern Veracruz and Tamaulipas in Mexico, and  Yukatekan occupying the Yucatan Peninsula. … The parent body then  split into two groups, a Western and an Eastern Division. In the  Western group, the ancestral Ch’olan-Tseltalan moved down into the  Central Area, where they split into Ch’olan and Tseltalan. The  subsequent history of the Tseltalans is fairly well known: in  Highland Chiapas, many thousands of their descendants, the Tsotsil  and Tseltal, maintain unchanged the old Maya patterns of life. …  Other Western language groups include Q’anjob’al, Tojol-ab’al,  Mocho’, and Chuj, which stayed close to the probable homeland …  The Eastern Division includes the Mamean group of languages. Mam  itself spilled down to the Pacific coastal plain at an unknown time”  (p. 28). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See: Words of Mormon 1:13; Mosiah 10:10; Alma  2:16, 32; Alma 54:16‒20. [Page 119] Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. Book of Mormon  peoples indeed moved around a lot, just as The Maya describes . But apart from the large northward migrations  already described in 2.17 above, other details are lacking. Also,  this is certainly not unusual. Joseph Smith and his family were  part of a mass westward migration of Americans that had been  going on for a very long time. Likelihood = 0.5 Cities and lands named after founder Coe’s  standard: “an individual called Ek’ Balam, … after whom the  place was anciently named” (p. 194). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 23:31; Alma 8:7; Alma 17:19;  3 Nephi 9:9. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in both the  Book of Mormon and The Maya , but Coe does not  mention many examples of this practice, so it is not detailed to the  same degree it is in the Book of Mormon. Also, in frontier  America it was common practice to name small towns and villages after  the founder or founding family. So this practice would not have been  unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 Maya say their ancestors came from the west, beyond the sea Coe’s  standard: “From the setting sun we came, from Tula, from beyond  the sea” (p. 224). Book of Mormon  correspondence: 1 Nephi 18:8, 23. This is clearly the  claim of the Book of Mormon: the Lehite colony came from  the west from beyond the sea. Analysis  of correspondence: Coe discounts this statement as self-serving  political propaganda by those claiming descent from those hailing  from “the legendary home in the west.” Perhaps, but why would it  have any political power if the claim itself did not somehow matter  to the populace? And since Dr. Coe thinks the Book of Mormon  is fiction (or legend), then the Book of Mormon is accurate  and detailed in also making that claim, even if fictional. Given  similar statements in View of the Hebrews , we do not count  this as unusual, but it is both specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Their sacred writing has poetic parallelisms, repetitions Coe’s  standard: “‘The raised wooden standard shall come! … Our  lord comes, Itza! Our elder brother comes, oh men of Tantun! Receive  your guests, the bearded men, the men of the east, the bearers of the  sign of God, lord!'” (Thus said the prophet Chilam Balam,  p. 227). From one of the books of Chilam Balam as follows: “Eat,  eat, thou hast bread; Drink, drink, thou hast water; On that  day, dust possesses the earth; [Page 120] On that day, a blight is on  the face of the earth, On that day, a cloud rises; On that  day, a mountain rises; On that day, a strong man seizes  the land; On that day, things fall to ruin, On that day, the  tender leaf is destroyed, On that day, the dying eyes are  closed, On that day, three signs are on the tree, On that day,  three generations hang there, On that day, the battle flag is  raised, And they are scattered afar in the forests, On that  day, the battle flag is raised, And they are scattered afar in the  forests.” (p. 229). In the  podcasts, referring specifically to chiasmus and poetic parallelisms,  Coe says that “something like that” exists in Maya literature,  even as little of that literature as we have. And Coe praises  Professor Allen Christenson’s translation of the Popol Vuh as  “wonderful.” 33 Christenson’s translation is explicitly rendered in poetic  parallelisms and chiasms. 34 Book of Mormon  correspondence : The reader is referred to Professor Donald  Parry’s reformatted version of the Book of Mormon in  parallelisms and repetitions. 35 Analysis  of the correspondence : It is simply without doubt that the  Book of Mormon is written in poetic parallelisms and  repetitions. We have Coe’s own citations from Chilam Balam, his  praise of Christenson’s translation of the Popul Vuh, etc., to  confirm that this correspondence is specific, and detailed. As to  “unusual,” Coe says in the podcasts that the fact that the  Book of Mormon has chiasms and poetic parallelisms “means  nothing,” that this type of language is found around the world. 36 Coe thinks  that the Book of Mormon has such language because  Joseph Smith knew the Old Testament “very, very well.” We  disagree completely. The Hebrew [Page 121] chiasms and poetic parallelisms in  the Old Testament were largely erased by the scholars who translated  the King James Bible into English. Even if  Joseph Smith knew about this kind of language, it is entirely  another thing to be able to write (or more challenging yet, dictate)  more than 300 separate chiasms into the Book of Mormon in  such a way that they integrate seamlessly with the message of  the book. Moreover, none of Joseph Smith’s own written sermons  or other writings use these poetic parallelisms. If Dr. Coe is  correct, why did Joseph Smith write these poetic parallelisms  into the Book of Mormon and then completely stop writing  like this? We find this objection inconsistent and uniformed. We invite  Dr. Coe or anyone else to dictate a chiasm like Alma Chapter 36.  They can’t do it. This is unusual in the extreme. We would like to  give it a much higher weight (one in a billion?) but our  own weighting scheme forbids that. Instead, we give it a likelihood  of 0.02. Likelihood = 0.02 Corn first among grains Coe’s  standard: “This crop [maize] is so fundamental today that its  cultivation and consumption define what it means to be Maya”  (p. 242). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:22; Mosiah 9: 9, 14. Analysis  of correspondence: In the Book of Mormon, corn is the  first grain mentioned; and not just once but all three times corn is  mentioned in the Book of Mormon, it is the first or the  only grain mentioned, not wheat. So this correspondence is specific  and detailed. But we do not count it as unusual, because View of  the Hebrews also mentions the primacy of corn among the Indians. Likelihood = 0.1 Multiple wives/concubines especially among the rich Coe’s  standard: “From the ceramics at a site such as El Perú we  get an idea of the palace staff described in Chapter 4: the courtiers  and attendants, royal ladies or concubines” (p. 129).  “Monogamy was the general custom, but important men who could  afford it took more wives” (p. 234). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob 1:15; Jacob 2:27; Mosiah 11:4; Ether  10:5. Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is specific in both books, and is  generally limited to rich men taking more wives. So the practice is  also detailed to that extent. Joseph would have been aware of the  practice of multiple wives among the Biblical patriarchs, and also  with David and Solomon. Among some Indian tribes, important men also  took multiple wives. So it is not unusual. Specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 [Page 122] Important to trace one’s genealogy to a prominent ancestor Coe’s  standard: “ to be able to trace one’s genealogy in both lines  to an ancient ancestry was an important matter, for there were  strongly demarcated classes” (p. 235). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 25:13; Alma 10:1‒3; 3 Nephi 5:20;  Ether 1:6‒33; Ether 6:22‒25; Mormon 1:5; Mormon 8:13. Analysis  of correspondence: Coe describes this practice clearly and in  some detail. The Book of Mormon also describes it clearly  and in great detail. Why would this idea occur to Joseph Smith  in democratic frontier America in the early 1800s? America had  recently thrown off the rule of a class-based society, the  British. So the correspondence also seems unusual. Specific, detailed  and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Genealogies kept very carefully by the priests Coe’s  standard: “According to the early sources, the Maya books  contained histories, prophecies, maps, tribute accounts, songs,  ‘sciences,’ and genealogies” (p. 239). “Far more is  known of later Maya priests. … [They] kept the all-important  genealogies” (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 3:3, 12; 1 Nephi 5:14;  1 Nephi 6:1; Jarom 1:1; Omni 1:1, 18; Alma 37:3. Analysis  of correspondence: This practice of the priests (religious  leaders) carefully keeping genealogies is specific and detailed in  both The Maya and in the Book of Mormon. It is also  unusual. We know of no contemporary practice or model in Joseph’s  Smith’s world that put such emphasis on priests keeping a careful,  written, long-term record of one’s ancestors, a record handed  down over centuries. Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood =  0.02 Homosexuality probably practiced Coe’s  standard: “The latter include … amorous activities that are  probably of a homosexual nature” (p. 258). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 30:18. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon’s reference to  homosexual practices is veiled, but clear enough. How else does a man  commit “whoredoms”? There are no details in either book, and the  practice is not unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 Arcane sacred or prestige language Coe’s  standard: “Ch’olti’an became a literary language of  high prestige among scribes … [and like other prestige languages in  other civilizations] continued to be the preferred written languages  long after the spoken ones had died out or transformed into something  else” (pp. 30‒31). “Ch’olti’ … may well have served  as a lingua franca among elites and surely evolved, as [Page 123] did Medieval Latin and Coptic, into an arcane sacred language used by  few” (p. 270). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 1:2 and 3:19; Mosiah 1:2,  4; Mormon 9:34. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon emphasizes “the  language of the fathers,” a written language connected to the  language of the Egyptians. It is the language in which the plates  were written and was known to very few. It was obviously not the  common language. The reference is specific for both books, detailed  and unusual. Joseph Smith had not even mastered English at the  time the Book of Mormon came forth and certainly knew  nothing of Coptic or Medieval Latin, which he might have used as  a model for this correspondence. Likelihood = 0.02 Practice of repopulating old or abandoned cities Coe’s  standard: “the Itza … moved into the peninsula … in the  thirteenth century, and gave their name to the formerly Toltec site  of Chichen” (p. 202). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 9:8; Helaman 11:20; 4 Nephi 1:7. Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is specific in both books,  although Coe offers only one example for detail while the  Book of Mormon offers several examples. It is doubtful that  Joseph Smith knew of any examples around him that could serve as  a model for this practice. America was being built up by  founding new cities and towns, not repopulating old or abandoned  ones. So the correspondence is specific and unusual. Because Coe  cites only one example, we will not claim it to be detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 World divided into four quarters or quadrants Coe’s  standard: “Another pervasive idea was the division of the world  into sectors [four of them]. … In the Classic period, eagles were  thought to perch in each of the four directions” (p. 246).  “The four walls of spectacular … royal tombs … display distinct  hills. … Placed in the middle, the deceased became the center of  the universe” (p. 247). “a map of world directions, adorned  with gods and sacrifices appropriate to each quarter, …  celebrations … presided over by a set of four young gods,  a nod to the four directions” (p. 249). “The  Zinacanteco world is conceived of as a large quincunx, with four  corners and a ‘navel of the earth’ in the middle”  (p. 292). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 22:25; 3 Nephi 16:5;  Ether 13:11. Analysis  of correspondence: Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  are specific and detailed about the idea that the world is divided  into four quarters. If Joseph Smith was making this up, why not  into halves, or thirds or eighths? Coe (p. 247) notes that this  idea is widespread and very ancient among humankind, which is  probably why we ourselves talk in this way [Page 124] about the four quarters of  the earth, without giving it much thought. Specific and detailed, but  for this reason, not unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Maya fascinated by ancient Olmec culture Coe’s  standard: “there are also good reasons to believe that it was  the Olmecs who devised the elaborate Long Count calendar. … Many  other civilizations, including the Maya, ultimately drew on Olmec  achievements” (p. 54). “In art, in religion, in state  complexity, and perhaps even in the calendar and astronomy, Olmec  models were transferred to the Maya” (p. 61). “The Maya  looked to the west [toward Olmec lands] … as the enduring locus of  civilization” (p. 63). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Because of the 24 gold plates found by the people  of Limhi among the ruins of an ancient civilization, The  Book of Mormon also looks to an ancient, destroyed  civilization as a source of knowledge, but apparently  exclusively as a source of depraved knowledge of “secret  combinations” rather than of useful accomplishments. For example,  see Mosiah 8:9; Alma 37:29, 32; Ether 8:9 and 9:26. It is interesting  that both the Jaredites and the Maya were ultimately destroyed  because of “endemic, internecine warfare” (Coe’s words; see  above). Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is certainly specific, but  the details do not match, perhaps because of the very different  orientations of the two books. The Book of Mormon tells us  that the Nephites were destroyed because of their embrace of the  secret combinations also found in the book of Ether, so the  Book of Mormon probably would not be inclined to tell us if  anything useful and good came from the Jaredite records. It is also  unusual. Why would Joseph Smith “guess” that the ancient  Indians looked toward an even more ancient civilization for guidance,  either for good or bad? This correspondence is specific and unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Lineage histories dominate the written records Coe’s  standard: “It was not just the ‘stela cult’ — the  inscribed glorification of royal lineages and their achievements —  that disappeared with the Collapse” (p. 177), “Native  lineages seem to have deliberately falsified their own histories for  political reasons” (p. 199). “[A postclassic site] …  consists of plazas surrounded by lineage temples” (p. 225n145). Book of Mormon  correspondence: The Book of Mormon is a lineage  history. It begins with the story of Lehi and his family, and was  later edited and compiled by Mormon (“a pure descendant of  Lehi,” 3 Nephi 5:20) and his son Moroni. The Book of  Ether is likewise a lineage history. Ether was a direct  descendant, through many centuries, of Jared. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books. It is also unusual. How could Joseph Smith have  learned about lineage histories, and woven this correspondence into  the fabric of the [Page 125] Book of Mormon in such an unobtrusive and  comprehensive way? How did he “guess” this one correctly? Likelihood = 0.02 Calculation  of overall likelihood for Social and Cultural Correspondences There  are 31 separate social and cultural correspondences between the  Book of Mormon and The Maya. Of these, five have  a likelihood of 0.5, 16 have a likelihood of 0.1, and ten  have a likelihood of 0.02. Thus the overall  likelihood of these  31 positive correspondences is 0.5 5 x 0.1 16 x  0.02 10 = 3.21 x 10 –35 . Religious Correspondences Central role of temples (ritual centers) in society Coe’s  standard: “Kaminaljuyu … consisted of several hundred temple  mounds” (p. 55). “The lowland Maya almost always built their  temples over older ones” (p. 59). “On top of this …  pyramid had once been a pole-and-thatch building” (p. 82n33).  “Even more advanced temples have been uncovered at Tikal”  (p. 83). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 5:16; Mosiah 9:8; Mosiah  11:8‒10; Helaman 1:21; Helaman 13:4; 3 Nephi 11:1. Analysis  of correspondence: Temples, ritual centers, were obviously  central to Maya life. So were they also among the Nephites. One of  the very first things that Nephi’s small group does after splitting  off is to build a temple “after the manner of the temple of  Solomon” (2 Nephi 5:16). King Benjamin gathers his people  around the temple. After the great destruction, the Nephites gather  around the temple in the Land of Bountiful, and the risen Lord  appears. While this correspondence is specific and detailed, we do  not count it as unusual, because Joseph Smith might — perhaps,  possibly, conceivably — have gotten the idea from View of the  Hebrews. Likelihood = 0.1 Strong Christian elements in Maya religion Coe’s  standard: “Many Colonial-period Maya identified the risen  Christ with the Maize God” (p. 71). “The raised wooden  standard shall come! … Our lord comes, Itza! Our elder brother  comes. … Receive your guests, the bearded men, the men of the east,  the bearers of the sign of God, lord!” (p. 227). “There was  … a great deal of … blending between Spanish and Maya  religious institutions and beliefs, since in many respects they were  so similar” (p. 289). Book of Mormon  correspondence: From the title page to the last chapter, the  Book of Mormon is, as it claims to be, another witness that  Jesus is the Christ. [Page 126] Analysis  of correspondence: In both books, the correspondence is specific,  detailed and very unusual. Why would Joseph Smith have “guessed”  that the ancient Mesoamericans had strong elements of Christianity in  their religious practices? View of the Hebrews claims to find  ancient Hebrew elements among American Indian tribes, but not  Christian elements. So this is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Change in popular cults; decline of a great city in the  highlands in the Late Preclassic Coe’s  standard: “While the pre-eminence of Kaminaljuyu during the  Late Preclassic period is plain to see, its star began to sink by the  second and third centuries AD, and most of it was left in ruin at the  close of the Late Preclassic” (p. 80), “It is strange that  figurines are absent from most known Chicanel sites, indicating that  there was a change in popular cults [during the Late Preclassic  300 BC to AD 250]” (p. 81). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman Chapters 10 and 11, 3 Nephi (all),  and 4 Nephi 1:20, 35‒40. This is the time period with  which the Book of Mormon deals most intensively, and it  includes many separate events of religious awakening, increased faith  and great prosperity, which are then followed by apostasy and  idolatry. Thus there are indeed many changes in “popular cults,”  including the final one starting in about AD 200. Fourth Nephi  outlines the fall and disintegration of Nephite society, which begins  about this time. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in both books,  but much more detailed in the Book of Mormon than in The  Maya. The timing is also unusual. In the long centuries of Maya  civilization (roughly 1800 BC to 900 AD) the Book of Mormon  correctly “guesses” the period that Coe recognizes as a dramatic  one when “a change in popular cults” occurred. We count this one  as specific and unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Close association of temples with sacred mountains/hills (pyramids) Coe’s  standard: “Rising up the corners of the temple’s substructure  are monstrous faces representing witz or mountains”  (p. 136). “Long thought to be faces of the Maya rain god  Chahk, they are actually iconographic mountains ( witz ), the  descendants of the corner masks placed on Classic-period monuments  like Copan’s Temple 11″ (p. 180). Book of Mormon  correspondence: 2 Nephi 12:2‒3. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and quite  detailed in both books. The temples are associated with sacred  mountains, for example the Temple Mount in Jerusalem. Although  perhaps Joseph Smith might have gotten the idea from careful  reading of the Bible, nothing in conventional Christianity of his day  would have prepared him to see the [Page 127] association between temples and  holy sacred mountains, a concept shared by the Nephites and by  the Maya. This is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood =  0.02 Seers and seer stones exist Coe’s  standard: “Two of the houses were certainly devoted to village  rituals; Structure 12 in particular had … a collection of  crystals like those used by modern Maya diviners” (p. 107).  “Two types of religious specialists practice here and in other  traditional Yukateko settlements. One is … seemingly imbued with  far greater spiritual and perhaps real power: this is the hmeen ,  ‘he who does or understands things.’ … These specialists still  play an important role in divination and prophecy, using their  crystals to scry the future” (p. 296). “The rite begins  after the hmeen has consulted his zaztun or crystal”  (p. 297). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 8:13‒17; Mosiah 28:13‒16; Ether  3:23‒24, 28. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both the Book of Mormon and The Maya. However, we do  not count it as unusual, although it will certainly appear unusual to  the modern mind. Joseph Smith had his own seer stone before the  coming forth of the Book of Mormon and might have used that  as his model for including seer stones and seers in the book. Likelihood = 0.1 Temple and other religious rituals involve bloodletting Coe’s  standard: “In the great courtyards less private activities took  place, including dances, ritual bloodletting from the penis and  tongue on calendrically important days” (p. 129). “These  were inscribed within a very brief period … and celebrate …  temple dedication rituals such as bloodletting” (p. 184).  “Before and during rituals, … self-mutilation was carried out by  jabbing needles and stingray spines through ears, cheeks, lips,  tongue, and the penis, the blood being spattered on paper or used to  anoint the idols” (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jarom 1:5, 11; Alma 25:15‒16; Mosiah  13:27‒28. Analysis  of the correspondence: Up until AD 33 or so, the Nephites  practiced the Law of Moses, with its temple rituals involving  bloodletting. Presumably they also followed the Abrahamic practice of  circumcision. While the practices described in The Maya and  the Law of Moses correspond in that they involve bloodletting from  both human and animals for religious rituals, the details overlap  only somewhat. Also they would probably not be unusual to  a Bible-reading individual. Specific, but not detailed nor  unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 [Page 128] Belief in resurrection Coe’s  standard: “Following their ultimate victory, they resurrected  their father Hun Hunahpu, the Maize God” (p. 71). “Modern  rendering of a wall painting of the resurrected Maize God  surrounded by female figures” (p. 88n36). “Significantly, …  the ruler is portrayed not as K’awiil, but as the youthful Maize  God, … a representation celebrating resurrection and  apotheosis” (p. 195). “Both … had a hero god who died  and was resurrected — for the Spaniards, this was Jesus Christ, and  for the Maya, the Maize God” (p. 289). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 9:12; Alma 41:2; Alma 33:22  among many others. There are 57 references to the resurrection of  Jesus Christ in the Book of Mormon. Analysis  of the correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya refer specifically and in detail to a belief in bodily  resurrection. The doctrine of a literal bodily resurrection had  been in retreat in Christianity for centuries — so there was no  intellectual reason for Joseph to put it forward as a prominent  part of the Book of Mormon. Also, as far as we know, the  North American Indians did not believe in resurrection. View of  the Hebrews says nothing about such a belief among the  Indians. How did Joseph Smith correctly “guess” that the  belief might be held by distant ancestors of some of the Mesoamerican  Indians? Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Baptismal rite among the Maya Coe’s  standard: “As soon as possible, the anxious parents [of  a newborn child] went to consult with a priest so as to  learn the destiny of their offspring, and the name which he or she  was to bear until baptism. The Spanish Fathers were quite astounded  that the Maya had a baptismal rite, which took place at an  auspicious time” (p. 233). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 31:13; Mosiah 21:35;  Moroni 6:1‒4 and many others. It is interesting that a new  name was received at the time of baptism in the Book of Mormon  and among the Maya (see above). Analysis  of the correspondence: The practice of baptism is specific and  detailed in both the Book of Mormon and in The Maya. It  is also unusual. If the Spanish Fathers were “astounded” at the  baptismal rite of the Maya, we should be also. Specific, detailed and  unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Ritual walking in straight roads symbolizes acceptable behavior Coe’s  standard: “At the site of Edzna, … occupants had constructed  a massive hydraulic system, consisting of 13.75 miles (22 km) of  canals … (resembling aquatic versions of Maya ritual roads)”  (p. 90). “Coba is … a whole group linked to a central  complex by long, perfectly straight masonry causeways usually called  … sakbe (“white road”). … Some have claimed that the  Maya [Page 129] sakbe were arteries of commerce, but a purely  ceremonial function is far more plausible” (p. 163). “A  causeway, or sakbih, 11.25 miles (18 km) long runs southeast from  Uxmal through the small site of Nohpat to Kabah, so presumably the  three centers were connected at least ceremonially” (p. 182).  “Processional routes, the ‘white roads’ or sakbih described  earlier, carved straight paths across broken landscapes. To walk  along them was to move in acceptable, ritually decorous ways”  (p. 242). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 4:32; 2 Nephi 9:41;  Alma 7:9. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is quite specific in both  the Book of Mormon and The Maya , and it is certainly  unusual. What religious practice did Joseph Smith know of that  resembled this ritual behavior in the least? But details are not  provided in the Book of Mormon, so the practice is specific  and unusual, but not detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Humans obligated to abide by covenants, God usually involved Coe’s  standard: “Ultimately, humans were obligated to abide by  covenants. A covenant, as defined by the ethnographer John  Monaghan, is a binding contract that explains how one should  behave. Gods were usually involved, as in the case of maize  production” (p. 242). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 5:6‒8; Mosiah 6:1‒2; Mosiah  21:31‒32. Analysis  of correspondence: The Maya and the Book of Mormon  share a common understanding of covenants as a binding  contract or agreement between God and man. This is specific and  detailed. It is also unusual. What existing model or pattern did  Joseph Smith rely on to correctly “guess” that covenants  between God and man existed among ancient Mesoamerican Indians? In  the conventional Christianity of Smith’s day, the importance of  covenants was very much downplayed if not absent altogether. So the  practice is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Hereditary priests and Chief Priests Coe’s  standard: “Far more is known of later Maya priests. In contrast  to their Aztec counterparts, they were not celibate. Sons acquired  their fathers’ offices, although some were second sons of lords”  (p. 243). “During the prosperity of Mayapan, a hereditary  Chief Priest resided in that city” (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 29:42; Alma 45:22‒23; Alma 46:6. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya teach clearly of hereditary priests and chief priests. This  correspondence is detailed and specific. It is also unusual.  Joseph Smith’s experience of frontier priests would have been  of the Protestant variety, who were not celibate, but who instead  were “trained for the ministry” and did not inherit their  offices; or of the Catholic variety, who were celibate and therefore  could not pass on [Page 130] their priestly office to a son. How did  Joseph Smith correctly “guess” that among some of the  distant ancestors of the Indians, priests were not celibate and that  priestly office could descend from father to son? Likelihood =  0.02 Existence of opposites is an essential part of creation Coe’s  standard: “A relevant Maya term from these ceramics is tz’ak ,  the idea of ordering. A key part of creation was the  establishment of opposites. These are presented in alternative  spellings for the tz’ak glyph. … The exquisite Tablet of  the 96 Glyphs … lays out a long series of such opposed pairs.  It begins with sun and night, followed by possibly life and death,  then Venus and moon, wind and water” (p. 251). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 2:11‒15. Analysis  of correspondence: The words create or creation are  used six times in these five verses in the Book of Mormon,  all strictly in the context of opposed pairs. The correspondence is  specific and detailed. It is also unusual. What document or religious  teaching could Joseph Smith have possibly used that would have  led him to correctly “guess” this belief shared by the Maya and  the Book of Mormon patriarch Lehi? Specific, detailed and  unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Pantheistic religion and idols Coe’s  standard: “along with the latter three temples, each of these  was consecrated to a single god among the triad of divinities  from whom the Palenque dynasty claimed descent” (p. 157).  “Flanking the tableau are two strange deities with rodent heads”  (p. 160). “On one side, the god K’awiil (left) faces God L,  the deity of tobacco” (p. 166n100). “The face of the Jaguar  God of the Underworld is surmounted by the heads of other deities,  including a Bat God” (p. 166n101). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 7:6; Alma 17:15; Alma 31:1; Helaman  6:31; Mormon 4:14, 21. Analysis  of correspondence: The references to idol gods are specific and  detailed in both the Book of Mormon and The Maya. However, this correspondence is not unusual. The Bible also  clearly refers to this practice, and Joseph would have known of it. Likelihood = 0.1 Sorcery, magic and witchcraft practiced Coe’s  standard: “According to one story, by means of sorcery Hunac  Ceel drove Chak Xib Chak to abduct the bride of the ruler of Izamal”  (p. 218). “or refer to diseases controlled by kings in an  elevated, almost dynastic form of sorcery” (p. 256).  “Witchcraft is an omnipresent danger; the witch takes the form of  an animal alter-ego” (p. 297). “Defeated by the evil magic  of his adversary Tezcatlipoca, the king was forced to leave Tula with  his followers” (p. 201). [Page 131] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 1:32; Mormon 1:19; Mormon 2:10. Analysis  of correspondence: The Maya and the Book of Mormon both  refer specifically, negatively and in some detail to the practice of  magic, sorcery and witchcraft among the peoples described in the two  books. A belief in the practice of evil magic, however, would  probably not be unusual to Joseph Smith. It was part of the  world view during the early 19 th century in backwoods  America. Specific and detailed, Likelihood = 0.1 Ritual for the renewal of the community, including transfer of sacred  objects Coe’s  standard: “The entire religious drama is directed toward  renewal of the universe and of the community, and ends with the  transfer of the sacred objects of office to a new set of  cargo-holders” (p. 295). Book of Mormon  standard: See Mosiah Chapters 1‒6. Analysis  of the correspondence: King Benjamin’s gathering of his people  to the temple, complete with community-wide covenant making at the  time of the transfer of his kingly office to his son, along with the  transfer of sacred objects, is very nearly a perfect fit with  Coe’s standard described above. This is specific, detailed and  unusual. What possible model or contemporary practice could  Joseph Smith have drawn upon to describe King Benjamin’s  gathering of his people so perfectly? Likelihood = 0.02 Blurring/combining priestly and political roles Coe’s  standard: “In other respects, the distinction between priestly  and political roles may have been blurred in the Classic period”  (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 2:1; see also the Foreword to the Book  of Alma. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. Priestly  leadership and political leadership were sometimes combined/blurred  in both books, but not always, as described in correspondence 1.27  above. Also, there is not enough detail provided in either book to  rank this as unusual, so the evidence is weighted as specific only. Likelihood = 0.5 Divination: consulting oracles for secular guidance and assistance Coe’s  standard: “Specialists took charge of these prayers or acts of  divination … to discern messages from the gods and to understand  the imbalances leading to disease, drought, and other problems”  (p. 243). “Later Maya priests [administered] … ‘their  methods of divination … events and the cures for diseases'”  (p. 243). “An important function of all highland shamans is  divination. Along with the mechanism of the 260-day count is the  casting of certain red seeds or maize kernels, a practice deeply  rooted in [Page 132] the pre-Spanish past. … Shamans conduct rituals for both  individuals and the whole community” (p. 292). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 3:11; Alma 16:5‒6;  Helaman 11:12‒17. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in that God is  consulted through his representatives regarding drought and other  problems affecting both individuals and the community. Casting of  lots (or seeds) is mentioned. This practice is also mentioned in the  Bible (for example, Saul and the witch of Endor), so we will not  count it as unusual. It is specific and at least somewhat detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Calendars kept by holy men/priests Coe’s  standard: “The 260 day calendar … still survives in unchanged  form among some indigenous peoples in southern Mexico and the Maya  highlands, under the care of calendar priests” (p. 64). “For  some reason, the calendar priests active in Highland Guatemala today  are almost undetectable in earlier times. … But similar figures  must have existed.” “Later Maya priests’ … list of duties  [included] … ‘computation of the years, months and days'”  (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 8:1‒5. A “just  man” who “did many miracles” was responsible for the reckoning  of time among the people. Analysis  of correspondence: In the Book of Mormon the reference  is specific but not very detailed. It does seem unusual. In the  (highly) unlikely event that Joseph knew of the origin of the  Gregorian calendar (instituted by Pope Gregory XIII), he might also  have known of the Julian calendar (instituted by Julius Caesar). How  would he have chosen correctly between a calendar instituted by  priests or by civil authorities? So we count this one specific and  unusual but not detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Virtuous persons “confess” Coe’s  standard: “Humans existed within a larger set of  expectations. The virtuous person was toj , ‘right’ and  ‘straight,’ at times a literal term that Colonial Mayan  languages tied to cleaning, confession, and prophecy” (p. 242). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 26:29; Alma 17:4; Helaman 5:17. Analysis  of correspondence: Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  clearly tie confession with becoming a virtuous person, becoming  clean. Confession also exists within a larger set of  expectations (for example, baptism in the Book of Mormon).  So the correspondence is specific and detailed. The correspondence  also seems unusual. While confession is a prominent part of the  Roman Catholic faith, it was not prominent in any Protestant  tradition in frontier America in the early 1800s. It was various  forms of Protestantism [Page 133] that Joseph Smith was familiar with. How  did he “guess” correctly to include confession as an important  duty among repentant, virtuous persons? How did he know that some of  the ancient Mesoamericans would view confession in much the same  light? Likelihood = 0.02 Calculation  of overall religious correspondences There  are 19 separate religious correspondences between the Book of Mormon  and The Maya. Of these, two have a likelihood of 0.5,  eight have a likelihood of 0.1, and nine have a likelihood  of 0.02. Thus the overall likelihood of these 19 positive  correspondences is 0.5 2 x 0.1 8 x 0.02 9 = 1.28 x 10 –24 . Military Correspondences Extreme cruelty to enemy captives Coe’s  standard: “the opposite of refinement in an unmistakable  dehumanization of reviled enemies, a delight in their pain and  dishonor” (p. 96). “The Leiden Plaque, which once dangled  from a ruler’s belt, has engraved on one face a richly  ornamented Maya lord … trampling underfoot a sorry- looking  captive, a theme repeated on so many Maya stelae of later times”  (pp. 98‒99). “miserable prisoners have been stripped, and  are having the nails torn from their fingers or their hands  lacerated. An important captive sprawls on the steps, perhaps  tortured to exhaustion, and a severed head lies nearby on a bed  of leaves. A naked figure seated on the platform summit pleads  for his life to the central figure, Yajaw Kan Muwaan” (p. 150). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Moroni 9:8‒10. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in both books,  and the details are similar in the sense of torture to death and  extreme, even inhumane, cruelty. Some Indian tribes may have done  similar things, but not all tribes did it at all times to all  captives, and some tribes adopted white children. The Revolutionary  War was not marked with this kind of behavior on either side. So we  think it is specific, detailed but only somewhat unusual. To be  conservative, we assign this one a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Defensive earthworks with deep ditches, breastworks and palisades Coe’s  standard: “Becan … was completely surrounded by massive  defensive earthworks sometime between the second and fourth centuries  AD. These consist of a ditch and inner rampart, 38 ft (11.6 m)  high, and would have been formidable, according to David Webster, if  the rampart had been surmounted by a palisade” (p. 122).  “Warfare had in fact become a real problem to all the major  Petexbatun sites, and a system of defensive walls … topped by  wooden palisades was constructed around and within them” (p. 151). [Page 134] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 49:4, 18‒22; Alma 50:1‒5; Alma  53:4. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, it matches  perfectly in the details, and it is highly unusual. What military  example had Joseph Smith ever heard of or seen that was anything  like this defensive arrangement? According to David Webster, the  Conquistador Hernan Cortes marveled when he saw the Maya towns  defended in exactly this fashion (details below). We would  like to give this correspondence a weighting of a million  to one against the likelihood that Joseph Smith guessed it, but  our data weighting approach does not permit a likelihood of  0.000001; instead it is Likelihood = 0.02 For those  who are interested, here are some additional details from Dr.  Webster’s work that show how exactly Joseph “guessed” this  correspondence, and how amazed Cortes was: Conquistador  Hernan Cortes described fortified cities in the Maya lowlands, as  quoted by Dr. David Webster of Pennsylvania State University. Here is  Cortes’s description of the defenses he encountered among the  Lowland Maya: “There is only one level entrance, the whole  town being surrounded by a deep (dry) moat behind which is  a wooden palisade as high as man’s breast. Behind this  palisade lies a wall of very heavy boards, some twelve feet  tall, with embrasures through which to shoot their arrows; the  lookout posts rise another eight feet above the wall, which likewise  has large towers with many stones to hurl down on the enemy. …  Indeed, it was so well planned with regard to the manner of weapons  they use, they could not be better defended” 37 Dr.  Webster also wrote another relevant, interesting study. Here are some  of Dr. Webster’s findings from his study regarding the dry moat or  defensive ditch that surrounded the city of Becan, in the Yucatan  Peninsula of southeastern Mexico: “The ditch and parapet derive  their main defensive strength from sheer size. What I call the  ‘critical depth’ of the fortifications (the vertical distance  from the top of the embankment to the bottom of the ditch would have  averaged something over 11 meters (about 36 feet). … The steep  angles of the inner ditch and wall and parapet slope could not have  been climbed without the aid of ladders; an enemy force caught in the  bottom of the ditch would have been at the mercy of the defenders,  whose most effective weapon under the circumstances would have been  large rocks. … To throw ‘uphill’ from the outside is almost  impossible. Defenders [Page 135] …could have rained long-distance missiles on  approaching enemies using spear throwers and slings.” 38 Thus the  Maya at the time of the Spanish Conquest used the same kind of city  defense that Moroni had used about 1600 years earlier, namely (1)  a single entrance to the city, (2) very deep ditches around the  city, (3) banks of earth built above the ditches, (4) strong works of  timbers built on top of these banks of earth above ditches, and (5)  even taller towers built on the timbers. From these works of timbers  and from the towers, the defenders could rain down arrows and  especially rocks (a cheap but effective weapon), on their attackers.  And the attackers couldn’t effectively get at the defenders — so  they were slaughtered. So  Joseph Smith was either a military genius himself, or he  guessed it. Yes, he guessed it in all this detail. A 24-year- old  farm kid from upstate New York invented this superb defensive  military arrangement, totally unlike anything in the warfare of his  time, and which greatly impressed an experienced soldier like Hernan  Cortes. Walled cities, especially during wartime Coe’s  standard: “When city walls are found, as at Dos Pilas, Ek’  Balam, and Uxmal, they seem to date to the final years of the Classic  period, when, in places, local conditions became hostile” (p. 126).  “The triple defensive wall that surrounds the site indicates that  conditions in this remote part of the Maya lowlands were dangerously  unsettled in the Terminal Classic” (p. 194). “Mayapan … is  a residential metropolis covering about 2.5 sq. miles (6.5 sq.  km) and completely surrounded by a defensive wall” (p. 216). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 9:8; Helaman 1:21; Helaman 13:4. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, and is  detailed in the sense that the walls seem to appear mostly in time of  war. However, Coe does not see much evidence for the presence of  walls until the late Classic, and since View of the Hebrews also refers to walled towns, we rate this one as merely specific. Likelihood = 0.5 Thick clothing used as armor Coe’s  standard: “Left arms were protected by quilted padding”  (p. 201). “[This is how] Maya warfare was waged. The holkanob ,  or “braves,” were the foot soldiers; they wore cuirasses of  quilted cotton or tapir hide” (p. 236). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 43:19. [Page 136] Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is both specific and  detailed. In both The Maya and the Book of Mormon,  thick clothing was used as armor. It is also unusual. We know of no  contemporary model or example that Joseph Smith could have  relied upon to correctly “guess” this correspondence. Even today  we doubt that one person in a hundred would know that ancient  Mesoamerican warriors wore heavy cotton clothing as armor. Likelihood = 0.02 Fighting with “darts” Coe’s  standard: “Taneko found 217 projectile points … [that] had  been used on darts propelled by atlatls, — mute testimony to  a final battle sealing the city’s death” (p. 175). “the  Toltec warrior, … carrying a feather-decorated atlatl in one  hand and a bunch of darts in the other” (p. 201) ” …  carried … darts-with-spearthrower. … [The infantry] rained darts,  arrows, and stones flung from slings” (p. 236). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jarom 1:8. Analysis  of correspondence : The Book of Mormon and The Maya specifically contrast fighting with bows and arrows or spears as  being different from fighting with “darts.” What experience or  knowledge did Joseph Smith have of fighting with darts? How many  educated people, even today, would know about fighting with  a “dart-thrower” or atlatl? So this correspondence is  specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Endemic, internecine warfare destroyed the societies Coe’s  standard: “there might have been fierce internecine warfare or  perhaps even a popular revolt” (p. 116). “But most Maya  archaeologists now agree that three factors were paramount in the  downfall: endemic internecine warfare” (p. 175). “The Maya  were obsessed with war. The Annals of the Kaqchikels and the Popol Vuh speak of little but intertribal conflict among the  highlanders, while the 16 states of Yucatan were constantly battling  with each other over boundaries and lineage honor” (p. 236). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See, among others, Omni 1:10; Alma 62:39; Mormon  8:8. Analysis  of correspondence: With a few blessed exceptions, the  Book of Mormon describes continuing war and conflict both  between and among the Nephites and Lamanites, a conflict that  ultimately results in the destruction of both groups. When the  Book of Mormon brings down the curtain, the Lamanites are  at war with each other, and “no one knoweth the end of the war.”  This is in fact “endemic, internecine warfare,” the very words  used by Coe. There was no contemporary example or model that  Joseph Smith could use to “guess” a 1,000-year-long  conflict that finally destroyed all the parties involved, so the  correspondence is also specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood  = 0.02 [Page 137] Warfare with ambushes and traps Coe’s  standard: “Nor did the Maya fight in the accepted fashion.  Attacking the Spaniards at night, plotting ambushes and traps, they  were jungle guerrillas” (p. 227). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See the whole of chapters 43 and 52 of Alma. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and features  some detail in both books, especially in the Book of Mormon  (in keeping with the fact that the principal editor of the  Book of Mormon was the commander of the armies of his  people during nearly his entire adult life). But it is not unusual.  The Indians of North America were also masters of ambush, and Joseph  would have known this. There is also probably not enough detail in The Maya to upgrade the correspondence to specific and  detailed. Specific only. Likelihood = 0.5 Raids to take captives/slaves Coe’s  standard: “Hostilities typically began with an unannounced  guerrilla raid into the enemy camp to take captives. … Lesser  captives ended up as slaves” (p. 236). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 16:3‒4; Alma 60:17; Helaman  11:33. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books. However, it is not unusual. Indians also raided the  whites and each other to take captives/slaves. Joseph Smith  would likely have known of this practice. Likelihood = 0.1 Warriors dressing to inspire fear Coe’s  standard: “Teotihuacan fighting men were armed with atlatl -propelled darts and rectangular shields, and bore  round, decorated, pyrite mosaic mirrors on their backs; with their  eyes sometimes partly hidden by white shell ‘goggles,’ and their  feather headdresses, they must have been terrifying figures to their  opponents” (pp. 99‒100). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 4:7. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. In both books  warriors sometimes dressed to inspire fear in their opponents. But  the details do not line up very well, and this is probably not  unusual. Indian warriors, for example, used war paint in part to  inspire fear. So this correspondence is rated specific only. Likelihood = 0.5 Stones and slings used as weapons for fighting Coe’s  standard: “On either side of the war, leaders and the idols  carried into combat under the care of priests [who] flanked the  infantry, from which rained darts, arrows, and stones flung from  slings” (p. 236). [Page 138] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:36. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is certainly specific and  detailed enough. Stones slung from slings were used to kill  opponents. It also seems unusual. While Joseph Smith could have  gotten the idea from the Bible, why would he correctly “guess”  that some of the ancestors of the Indians fought with stones and  slings? The Indians of northeastern North America, of whom he did  know something, did not fight with stones and slings. Specific,  detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Cannibalism practiced on captives Coe’s  standard: “ In general, only captive lords were considered fit  for sacrifice, or for consumption in cannibalistic rites” (p. 225). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Moroni 9:10. Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is detailed enough and certainly  specific in both books. However, it probably does not qualify as  unusual. Joseph Smith may have heard of the ritual cannibalism  practiced by the Iroquois. Likelihood = 0.1 Deliberate destruction of the records/monuments Coe’s  standard: “By c . 1150 BC, San Lorenzo was destroyed by  an unknown hand, and its monuments mutilated and smashed”  (pp. 52–54). “There are signs of widespread, purposeful  mutilation of public monuments” (p. 116). “Other cities in  the Central Area eventually fell victim to the same cycle of  violence, characterized by the systematic mutilation and smashing of  stone monuments — the eyes and mouths of rulers are often pecked  out, as if to cancel their power” (p. 175). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Enos 1:13‒14; Alma 14:8; Mormon 2:17. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is certainly specific, but  the details as practiced among the Maya seem to be directed toward  stone objects, while in the Book of Mormon the intended  destruction was directed toward the scriptures, both the metal plates  and the combustible scriptures, as in Alma 14:8. The practice seems  unusual. What accessible written source or contemporary practice  would Joseph Smith have known about in which the monuments of  enemies were deliberately destroyed? We do not think this merits  a likelihood of 0.02, but it does merit evidentiary strength  greater than merely specific. Likelihood = 0.1 Calculation  of overall likelihood of military correspondences There  are twelve distinct, separate military correspondences between the  Book of Mormon and The Maya. Of these, three have  a likelihood of 0.5, five a likelihood of 0.1, and four  a likelihood of 0.02. Thus the overall likelihood of these  twelve positive correspondences is 0.5 3 x 0.1 5 x 0.02 4 = 2.0 x 10 –13 . [Page 139] Physical and Geographical Correspondences Highlands and lowlands exist within the relevant geography Coe’s  standard: “While there are profound differences between the  subsistence base of the lowlands and that of the highlands (p. 13),  … there are really two natural settings in the land of the Maya:  highlands and lowlands” (p. 14). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:13; Mosiah 9:3; Mosiah 28:1; Alma  27:5. Analysis  of correspondence: Dr. Coe’s book repeatedly emphasizes the  importance of highland and lowland populations of Native American  peoples in Mesoamerica. The Book of Mormon also repeatedly  uses the words “go up” and “go down” in reference to moving  geographically in the book. From its very beginning, the  Book of Mormon likewise employs going “up” and going  “down” to movements to and from Jerusalem, which sits at a higher  elevation than most of the surrounding geography. Thus we have strong  reason to believe that that phrase means to ascend or descend in  elevation. The correspondence is specific and quite detailed in both  books, but it is not particularly unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Accurate description of a volcanic eruption Coe’s  standard: “The Maya highlands by definition lie above 1,000 ft.  (305 m) and are dominated by a great backbone of both extinct  and active volcanoes” (p. 14). “They and their relatives,  the Tz’utujil, live in villages along the shores of the  volcano-girt Lake Atitlan” (p. 28). “On an ill-fated day  around AD 595, the nearby Loma Caldera volcano erupted, spewing out  steam, ash, and eventually volcanic bombs that rained down on the  [village of Ceren]” (p. 107). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 8:5‒23. Analysis  of the correspondence: The account in 3 Nephi is an obvious  eye-witness account of a volcanic eruption, with associated  earthquakes, terrible storms and lightning, and thick, choking,  nearly unbreathable air. This account is highly detailed as well as  unusual. Joseph Smith and his contemporaries knew nothing of  what it was like to experience a volcanic eruption, nor did they  have any published accounts to draw upon. View of the Hebrews mentions volcanoes in Mesoamerica, but says nothing at all about  what an eruption is like. This correspondence is therefore specific,  detailed and highly unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Periods of terrible drought separated by decades or centuries with  resulting famines Coe’s  standard: “Nor are these rains reliable; in bad years there may  be severe droughts” (p. 17). “It is small wonder that the  early Colonial chronicles [Page 140] speak much of famines in Yucatan before the  arrival of the Spaniards” (p. 19). “Cave deposits show …  a similar pattern of droughts that lasted for decades. One  episode struck between AD 200 and 300, another from AD 820 to 870,  then two more at AD 1020 to 1100 and AD 1530 to 1580. Shorter, severe  droughts occurred at AD 420, 930, and 1800. … The most dramatic  discovery is the drought from AD 820 to 870. … This period saw the  collapse of Maya civilization in the southern Maya lowlands”  (p. 32). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 9:22; Helaman 11:5‒7; Ether 9:30,  35. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books. It is also probably unusual. Joseph Smith lived in  well-watered country at latitudes that don’t usually experience  droughts. Smith could have learned about famines from the Bible, but  he would not have known, as attested in both The Maya and the  Book of Mormon, that such terrible droughts can last many  years, even decades, and that different periods of drought can be and  are separated by centuries. Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Venomous, aggressive snakes present Coe’s  standard: “Also lurking in milpa and jungle, and to be  avoided at all costs, were vipers such as the dreaded barba  amarilla , or ‘yellow jaw’ ( Bothrops asper ), among the  most aggressive snakes in the world” (p. 19). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 8:24; Ether 9:31. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  Poisonous snakes certainly existed. (No problem: the Book of Mormon  doesn’t claim to take place in Ireland.) While there are not many  venomous snakes in New York, there are a few such species. The  unusual part of this correspondence is that there was at least one  very aggressive venomous snake. Most snakes, even poisonous ones,  will flee from humans. They just aren’t aggressive. But not so the  snakes described in Ether 9:31 or the barba amarilla described  by Dr. Coe. So the correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Easy to get lost, very thick wilderness, cities hidden in the  wilderness Coe’s  standard: “lost and starving among the swampy bajos and  thorny forests of northern Guatemala” (p. 139). “The forests  of southern Campeche and Quintana Roo form the wildest part of the  Maya region” (p. 161). “Safe in the fastness of an almost  impenetrable wilderness, their island stronghold was bypassed by  history” (p. 219). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:4‒5; Mosiah 8:8; Mosiah 21:25;  Mosiah 22:16; Mosiah 23:20, 30, 36. [Page 141] Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya are specific and detailed on this point. In fact, the  Book of Mormon refers to wilderness a total of 212  times. There was very thick wilderness immediately adjacent to  settled areas in which it was possible to get completely lost, even  if ancestors had been in the region for centuries. The Book of Mormon  and The Maya also speak of what amount to lost cities. The  city of Helam was literally bumped into by a Lamanite army as  they pursued the people of Limhi. That same army had to be shown the  way that led to the land/city of Nephi — they did not know how to  get there on their own. How would Joseph Smith have known to put  in this unusual, but correct detail? What did he or anyone in his  community (from whom he might have learned it) know of lost cities  and almost impenetrable wilderness? The American wilderness in which  Joseph lived was sometimes thick but by no means impenetrable. Likelihood = 0.02 Powerful, ancient central city and culture in the highlands Coe’s  standard: “A Late Preclassic rival to Izapa in size and number  of temple mounds and in the splendor of its carved monuments was  Kaminaljuyu during the Verbena and Arenal phases, dating from c .  100 BC to AD 150. This … was once a major ceremonial site on  the western outskirts of Guatemala City. Many of the approximately  200 mounds once to be found there were probably constructed at this  time; Kaminaljuyu’s rulers must have possessed formidable economic  and political power over much of the Maya highlands at this time”  (p. 73). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:1‒4; Mosiah 9:6, 8; Alma 47:20. Analysis  of correspondence: The time period 100 BC to AD 150 fits very  well with the time of the dominance and power of the city of  Lehi-Nephi, or city of Nephi (land of Nephi) in the highlands. This  was the principal city of the Lamanites in the time periods just  before and just after Christ. So the correspondence is specific and  detailed. The exactness of the time, location and dominance of the  city taken as a whole are unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Earthquakes present and important Coe’s  standard: “As the lake dried up, … perhaps due to  exploitation of the land, or even to tectonic movements (the region  is highly earthquake-prone), the city [Kaminaljuyu] dwindled”  (p. 74). “The Aztecs … thought that the universe had passed  through four such ages, and that we were now in the fifth, which  would be destroyed by earthquakes” (p. 249). “The  Zinacanteco world … rests on the shoulders of the Vaxak-Men ,  the four-corner gods; when one of these shifts his burden, there is  an earthquake” (pp. 292‒93). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 5:27, 31‒32; 3 Nephi 8:6,  9‒18. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya are specific and quite detailed about the “shaking of the  earth.” Earthquakes [Page 142] play a significant role in both books.  Since Joseph may have heard about earthquakes, even if he had  probably not experienced one, we would not count this correspondence  as unusual except for one thing: on two separate occasions the  Book of Mormon refers to a particular prison in the  land of Nephi as being shaken violently, one time even to the point  of collapsing. We believe the evidence in the Book of Mormon  and The Maya support the general area of Kaminaljuyu as the  land of Nephi, and Dr. Coe specifically calls out this region as  “highly earthquake-prone.” What a lucky “guess” on  Joseph Smith’s part. Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Deforestation of large areas Coe’s  standard: “The botanists conclude, with one caveat, that the  Tikal Maya had largely demolished the tall monsoon forest by the  740s” (p. 176). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:5‒7. Analysis  of correspondence: In both books, the inhabitants of the land had  rendered it without timber. This correspondence is therefore specific  and detailed, but it is not unusual. Joseph Smith and everyone  around him were also busy deforesting the land. Likelihood = 0.1 Areas set aside for forest regrowth and/or timber shipped in from  a distance Coe’s  standard: “In AD 810, sapodilla was again the species of  choice, but beam widths were far smaller than they had once been.  Apparently Tikal’s rulers had set aside protected groves of their  favorite tree or managed to import it from some distance” (p. 176). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:9‒11. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  In both books, areas were set aside for forest regrowth, and timber  was also shipped in for building cities such as Tikal. The  correspondence is also unusual. There was no contemporary model for  Joseph Smith to follow whereby forests were purposely replanted. Likelihood = 0.02 Precious stones exist (but they are not diamonds, rubies, and pearls) Coe’s  standard: “The volcanic highlands … yielded obsidian —  natural volcanic glass. … Obsidian was to ancient Mesoamerica what  steel is to modern civilization. It was turned into knives, lance and  dart points, … and a host of other tools” (p. 23). “ Jade was surely the compelling reason for this intrusion of  the Olmec [into the Copan valley]. The Classic Maya obtained their  green and often dull-colored jade from alluvial deposits [in Copan],  … but this was not the distinctive blue-green jade so prized by the  Olmec. The mystery of where the Olmec obtained this material has at  long last been solved by the discovery in 2001 of several sources in  the Sierra de las Minas, [Page 143] far above the Motagua. … Control of both  the Motagua and Copan valleys would have given the Olmec a virtual  monopoly of a material that was as important to this primordial  civilization as gold was to be for the Spanish conquistadores “ (p. 60). ” … They went from modestly dressed chieftains  to true kings endowed with fine clothing and jade or turquoise  regalia.” (p. 83). “It is natural that the Maya lavished  upon jade, the most precious substance known to them, their full  artistry” (p. 171). “Not only jade, but also calcite was  worked by the lowland Maya lapidaries; but it must have been a rare  substance, for objects made from it are found infrequently”  (p. 171). “But other items also moved along these trade  networks; the excavators encountered obsidian from the mines in  central Mexico, turquoise which had probably originated in the  American Southwest (a luxury item prized by the Toltecs and their  cultural heirs the Aztecs), and gold from lower Central America”  (p. 215). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:14. Analysis  of correspondence: Bruce Dale, the son of a mining engineer,  grew up in mining towns in Nevada and Arizona, and was an avid rock  hound in his youth. For him, this is a particularly powerful  correspondence. Both the Maya and the Book of Mormon people  had precious stones, which represented great riches to them (Alma  17:14). So this correspondence is specific. It is also  unusual in the details not given in the Book of Mormon.  If Joseph Smith “guessed” the Book of Mormon, he  would very probably have guessed “precious stones” to be the only  precious stones he knew of, namely diamonds, rubies, and perhaps  pearls. But Mesoamerica has no rubies at all, nor does it have any  significant diamond resources. (Mexico has a few small, inferior  diamonds, but no diamond mines.) Joseph Smith would not have  “guessed” the precious stones to be jade, obsidian, turquoise or  calcite. Nor would the names of those stones have meant anything to  all but a very small fraction of those who read the  Book of Mormon. ( Cureloms and cumoms ,  anyone?) But Joseph Smith made neither mistake. He (or rather  the Book of Mormon authors) simply called them, quite  accurately, “precious stones.” We rate this likelihood as 0.02. Likelihood = 0.02 Submerged cities Coe’s  standard: “Lake Amatitlan, a place known for elaborate,  aquatic deposits of Early Classic incense burners” (p. 103). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 8:14; 3 Nephi 9:4,  6, 8; 4 Nephi 1:9. Analysis  of correspondence: Since incense burners are made to burn  incense, and don’t work well under water, the conclusion is pretty  clear. These incense burners were submerged when the waters of the  lake rose to engulf [Page 144] them. (Both Lake Amatitlan and Lake Atitlan cover  sunken cities.) So the correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books. How about  unusual? However unlikely, Joseph Smith may have known of the  story of Atlantis, but why would he “guess” that story would  apply to some of the ancestors of the Indians? And Atlantis was  engulfed by the ocean, not by freshwater lakes. We think this  correspondence is more than specific and detailed, but somewhat less  than unusual. To be conservative we assign a likelihood of 0.1 Likelihood = 0.1 Perishable writing materials Coe’s  standard: “None of these bark-paper books hav[e] survived  except in the most fragmentary form in tombs” (p. 141). “There  must have been many thousands of Classic Maya books written on  bark-paper, but not a single one has come down to us”  (pp. 171, 173). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob 4:1‒2; Alma 14:8; Helaman 3:15. Analysis  of correspondence: Specific and detailed. Both The Maya and  the Book of Mormon speak of many books. These books were  kept on materials that either decay or can be burned. The only thing  that lasts is words written on metal plates. The correspondence is  not unusual. The paper books and documents in Joseph Smith’s  day would also burn or decay. Likelihood = 0.1 Refined gold present Coe’s  standard: “there were no sources of gold and silver in the Maya  lowlands” (p. 22). “the richest array of offerings, …  including … a gold frog (possibly an import from Panama, and  one of the earliest-attested metal objects yet discovered for the  Maya)” (p. 194‒95). “dredged from the muck at the bottom  of the Cenote, … the gold disks already mentioned … The local  lords brought treasures of gold from places as far afield as Panama  to offer to the Cenote” (p. 212). “But other items also  moved along these trade networks; the excavators encountered … gold  from lower Central America” (p. 215). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob 1:16; Ether 10:23; Alma 11. Analysis  of correspondence: Coe resists the idea that the lowland Maya had  much refined gold before about AD 800, well after the Book of Mormon  times. But the Book of Mormon does not claim to be set  among the lowland Maya, so this is irrelevant. There clearly was  refined gold present in both books, even if the lowland Maya had to  import their gold from Central America. So the correspondence is  specific, but it is not detailed nor unusual. Joseph Smith may  well have heard of the treasures of gold plundered by the Spaniards. Likelihood = 0.5 [Page 145] Calculation  of physical and geographical correspondences There  are 13 distinct physical and geographical correspondences between the  Book of Mormon and The Maya. Of these, one has  a likelihood of 0.5, four have a likelihood of 0.1 and  eight have a likelihood of 0.02. Thus the overall likelihood of  these 13 positive correspondences, taken together, is 0.5 1 x 0.1 4 x 0.02 8 = 1.28 x 10 –18 . Technological and Miscellaneous Correspondences Millions of inhabitants in the area Coe’s  standard: “ One view perceives as many as eight to ten million  people in the lowlands c . AD 800; David Webster of  Pennsylvania State University would go as low as two to three  million” (p. 22). “But what happened to the bulk of the  population who once occupied the Central Area, apparently in the  millions?” (p. 177). “What this might mean is that we may  have to double our previous population estimates for the Central  Area, which already run into the many millions” (p. 176). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 6:11‒15; Ether 15:2. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya affirm that the populations were large, specifically in the  neighborhood of 10 million people. In 1830, the U. S. census gave  a population of about 13 million. Thus Joseph Smith  correctly “guessed” that his fictional group of Indians was  nearly as large as the entire population of the United States at the  time the Book of Mormon was published. Certainly this is  unusual. What Indian population had Joseph Smith ever seen that  was anywhere near this large? Likelihood = 0.02 Calendar kept by day, month and year Coe’s  standard: “The Maya Long Count, which will be explained in  greater detail in Chapters 3 and 9, is an absolute, day-to-day  calendar which has run like some great clock from a point in the  mythical past (p. 25). “The Maya New Year started with  1 Pop, the next day being 2 Pop, etc. The final day of the month,  however, carried not the coefficient 20, but a sign indicating  the ‘seating’ of the month to follow” (p. 64). “Maya  learning as well as ritual was in their [the Maya priests’] hands.  Among them were ‘computation of the years, months, and days, the  festivals and ceremonies'” (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 10:6; Alma 49:1; 3 Nephi 1:1;  3 Nephi 2:7‒8; 3 Nephi 8:5. Analysis  of correspondence: Specific and detailed. Both the Book of Mormon  peoples and the peoples described in The Maya kept calendars  by day, month and year. The keeping of calendars is also unusual. The  Indian peoples of eastern North America did not keep calendars at  all, and were aware only of [Page 146] the passing of the seasons. How did  Joseph Smith “guess” that any Indians kept an absolute  calendar by day, month and year? Likelihood = 0.02 Multiple calendars kept Coe’s  standard: “Meshing with the 260-day count is a ‘Vague  Year’ or Ha’b of 365 days, so called because the actual  length of the solar year is about a quarter-day more. …  Although the Maya were perfectly aware that the Ha’b was  shorter than the tropical year, they did not change the calendar  accordingly. … From this it follows that a particular day in  the 260-day count, such as 1 K’an, also had a position in  the Ha’b , for instance 2 Pop. A day designated as  1 K’an 2 Pop could not return until 52 Ha’b (18,980 days)  had passed. This is the Calendar Round” (pp. 64‒65). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 1:1; 3 Nephi 2:7‒8. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  Not only were multiple calendars kept, both The Maya and  the Book of Mormon describe exactly how they were  kept. If the keeping of one calendar is unusual, then keeping several  different calendars is even more unusual. We would like to give this  a higher weighting than 0.02 (1 in a million?), but cannot  by the constraints we have imposed on ourselves. Likelihood =  0.02 Bee keeping, domesticated bees, honey Coe’s  standard: “And it might be that the province [Yucatan] relied  less upon plant husbandry than upon its famed production of honey,  salt, and slaves” (p. 19). “As he still does today, the Maya  farmer raised the native stingless bees, which are kept in small,  hollow logs closed with mud plaster at either end and stacked up in  A-frames, but wild honey was also much appreciated” (p. 231).  “A few depictions of vessels marked with the term kab ,  ‘honey,’ … Valuable Yucatan exports were honey, cotton mantles  and slaves” (p. 232). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Ether 2:3. Analysis  of correspondence: The Jaredites specifically brought with them  honeybees, so they had domesticated the bee. The correspondence is  specific, but it is not detailed nor unusual. Bees were domesticated  many thousands of years ago. Coe makes much of the fact that Maya  domestic bees are stingless, versus the Old World bees of genus Apis .  But the Book of Mormon does not say that the Jaredites did  not switch over to keeping native stingless bees when they arrived in  the New World (we two authors would surely have done so!), so Coe’s  point seems irrelevant to the issue. Both The Maya and the  Book of Mormon specifically note domesticated bees, and  this correspondence is also unusual. What Indian tribes did  Joseph Smith know of that practiced beekeeping? There were none.  How did he “guess” this one correctly? Likelihood = 0.1 [Page 147] Art including carving, painting, dancing, metalwork, music Coe’s  standard: “more advanced cultural traits … and the painting  of murals” (p. 26). “In one tomb, over 300 objects of the  most beautiful workmanship were placed with the body” (p. 76).  “They went from modestly dressed chieftains to true kings endowed  [in] … jade or turquoise regalia” (p. 83). “[This]  extraordinarily well-preserved fresco … is in fact the earliest  Maya painting known, dating to c. 100 BC or slightly earlier. In its  beauty and sophistication it equals the famous Late Classic murals of  Bonampak” (p. 87). “The finest Maya wood carving known, this  seated figure from Tabasco, Mexico, represents a courtier”  (p. 95n40), … including some marvelously fine jades and the  gold disks already mentioned. [Metals] had now appeared in the Maya  area, although they were probably cast and worked elsewhere and  imported. The many copper bells and other objects from the well were  of Mexican workmanship. The local lords brought treasures of  gold from places as far afield as Panama to offer to the Cenote”  (p. 212). “Santa Rita also yielded an extraordinary set of ear  ornaments in gold and turquoise” (p. 219). “Plazas were the  location for most dances. The stelae that now fill some of them  petrify kings in perpetual dance, as we can tell by their pose,  dress, and explanatory glyphs” (p. 256). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jarom 1:8; Helaman 6:13; Helaman 12:2; Mosiah  11:8‒10, Mosiah 20:1‒5:4 Nephi 1:41. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and in many  cases detailed. Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya speak of art expressed in a variety of materials, including  wood and metals, people adorning themselves with precious things, and  dance. The correspondence is unusual. What Indian tribes known to  Joseph Smith did art work in wood and metal and had fine  jewelry? However, to be conservative, since Dr. Coe reports no  evidence for metal work in the Book of Mormon timeframe, we  will discount this correspondence from specific, detailed and unusual  to merely specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Knowledge of the movement of the stars, planets and moon Coe’s  standard: “Ancient Maya used lines of sight … to plot the  rising and setting positions of the sun, the moon, and, above all,  the planet Venus. … Maya astronomers had a remarkably accurate  knowledge of the apparent motion of Venus” (p. 193). “Venus  is the only one of the planets for which we can be absolutely sure  the Maya made extensive calculations” (p. 262). “Some have  questioned whether the movements of planets other than Venus were  observed by the Maya, but it is hard to believe that one of the  Dresden tables, listing multiples of 78, can be anything other than  a table for Mars” (pp. 262‒63). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:21; Alma 30:44; Helaman 12:13‒15;  Helaman 14:5‒6; 3 Nephi 1:21. [Page 148] Analysis  of correspondence: Alma asserts that planets (not just one  planet) “move in their regular form,” agreeing with Coe’s  statement that the Maya knew the movements of Venus and Mars. For the  Book of Mormon people to know that “a new star did  appear,” they would have to know when and where the old stars would  appear. So the correspondence is specific and detailed. It is also  unusual. What Indian tribe of the American Northeast had any such  detailed astronomical knowledge as that reported in The Maya ? Likelihood = 0.02 Writing is present, but its genealogy is complicated and poorly  understood Coe’s  standard: “All the Mesoamerican Indians shared a number of  traits which were more or less peculiar to them and absent or rare  elsewhere in the New World: hieroglyphic writing” (p. 13).  “The relation between Maya and Isthmian writing remains obscure.  The earliest Maya writing … comes from c . 300 BC, prior to  Isthmian writing. … The genealogy of Mesoamerican writing is  therefore more complicated than formerly thought” (p. 68). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 6:1‒3; Mosiah 24:6;  3 Nephi 26:6; Mormon 9:32‒34. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  The Mesoamerican Indians (not just the Maya) had a rare or  absent trait: they had writing. And so did the Book of Mormon  peoples. Furthermore, the genealogy of their writing is complex. It  is not clear how Mesoamerican writing arose, and the sacred written  language of the Book of Mormon authors was known to them  alone (Mormon 9:34). The correspondence is also unusual. None of the  Indian tribes known to Joseph Smith had writing. Thus it was an  extremely lucky (or foolhardy) “guess” on his part to have  claimed in his “fictional” book that some American Indians did  have writing. But he did claim it, and he was right. This  correspondence also deserves a much smaller likelihood than a 1  in 50 chance, more like 1 in a million. But to be conservative,  we assign a Likelihood = 0.02 Engraved writing on stone Coe’s  standard: Coe’s book is full of examples of writing on stone.  Here are just a few: “A magnificent stela was found … in  southeastern Veracruz; two Bak’tun 8 dates corresponding  respectively to AD 143 and 156 are inscribed on it. These are  accompanied by a text of about 400 signs … (the famous ‘Tuxtla  Statuette,’ also found in southern Veracruz, is inscribed in the  same script and dates to AD 162)” (p. 68). “It was not just  the ‘stela cult’ — the inscribed glorification of royal  lineages and their achievements” (p. 177). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Omni 1:20. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya both refer specifically to engraved writing on large stones. This  is an unusual [Page 149] correspondence. Writing by itself was unusual, to write  on stone was doubly so. What example or model did Joseph Smith  have to correctly “guess” this correspondence? However, the  Book of Mormon gives only one example of writing on stone,  so it is not detailed. Specific and unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Many books present, some were kept in repositories Coe’s  standard: “Maya priests 2,000 miles away were still chanting  rituals from hieroglyphic books” (p. 219). “Even more  heartbreaking is the loss of thousands of books” (p. 237). “A  few probable coffers exist for books, including the recent find of  a lidded limestone box from Hun Nal Ye cave in Guatemala”  (p. 239). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:15; Mormon 6:6. The entire  Book of Mormon is a collection of shorter books or  excerpts from other books. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is both specific and  detailed. Many books, not just a few, were kept. And in at least  some instances, the books were kept together in repositories,  essentially in libraries (the “coffers” cited above). The  practice is also unusual. What American Indian tribes that  Joseph Smith knew of kept even one book, let alone libraries?  How did he correctly “guess” this fact about the Maya and the  Book of Mormon peoples? Likelihood = 0.02 Trading in a variety of goods Coe’s  standard: “All the Mesoamerican Indians shared a number of  traits which were more or less peculiar to them and absent or rare  elsewhere in the New World: … highly specialized markets”  (p. 13). “Trading networks brought vast quantities of these  objects [ manos and metates ] down from … Guatemala. …  The volcanic highlands yielded … obsidian. … Access to salt  sources or to salt trade networks was critical to the growth and  security of Maya states. … The Maya elite had other special needs,  above all jade, quetzal feathers, and marine shells” (pp. 22‒23).  “Its [Lamani’s] location and rich remains attest to its  entrepreneurial importance in ancient Maya trade” (p. 85).  “[control over] … the movement of goods, which now passed into  the hands of trading entrepreneurs or local petty lords” (p. 213). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:7; Helaman 3:10, 14; Helaman 6:8;  3 Nephi 6:11; Ether 10:22. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. Both the  Book of Mormon peoples and the Mesoamerican Indians traded,  a trait that was absent or rare elsewhere in the New World, and  therefore unusual by definition. However, while trading in a variety  of goods is strongly implied by the wording in the Book of Mormon,  only trading in wood is specifically mentioned. So this  correspondence is certainly specific and unusual, but [Page 150] it is not  detailed enough to count as specific, detailed and unusual. To be  conservative, we assign a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Many merchants Coe’s  standard: “These somewhat Mexicanized merchant- warriors  controlled the great Gulf Coast entrepot of Xicallanco where Mexican  and Maya traders met” (p. 178). “God M, who was the patron  of merchants, is shown here” (p. 218n138). “Merchants had  a privileged status” (p. 225). “At the top [of the  class structure] were nobles, … wealthy farmers and merchants”  (p. 235). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 6:11‒12. Analysis  of correspondence: Because this correspondence overlaps somewhat  with correspondence 6.10, we will only count it as specific. However,  the whole interlocking system of trading, merchants and wealth  accumulation through trade is unusual in itself, and perhaps this  correspondence deserves a higher weight. Nonetheless, to be  conservative, Likelihood = 0.5 Roads and causeways built Coe’s  standard: Coe makes many references to roads and causeways in  different areas of Mesoamerica. Here are just a few. “There  are two groups of monumental construction, connected by a massive  causeway, and in fact a whole network of causeways radiates out  from El Mirador across the surrounding swampy landscape” (p. 85).  “Archaeologist Rodrigo Liendo Stuardo has even found evidence of  road systems running along the base of those hills, connecting the  far reaches of the Palenque kingdom” (p. 151). “A causeway …  runs southeast from Uxmal through the small site of Nohpat to Kabah”  (p. 182). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 6:8; 3 Nephi 8:13. Analysis  of correspondence : Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  speak of many roads, not just a few; and the practice of  road-building is widespread in both societies. So this correspondence  is specific and detailed, and also definitely unusual. The Indians  that Joseph Smith knew of did not build roads. However, View  of the Hebrews very briefly mentions road building among the  Indians. However unlikely, Joseph might have read about it there. To  be conservative, this is rated as specific and detailed only. Likelihood = 0.1 Houses with attached gardens Coe’s  standard: “Also important were the house gardens, still  ubiquitous in Maya villages and hamlets” (p. 22). “A few  cities, such as Chunchucmil in Yucatan, are amazingly dense, with  house lots demarcated by walls; others had extensive space for  gardens” (p. 124). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 7:10. [Page 151] Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific but not  detailed in the case of the Book of Mormon. Strongly  implied, but not stated, is a garden attached to Nephi’s  house. So we cannot call it detailed. Native Americans taught the  Pilgrims what plants grew well in the New World, so  gardening/ domestic agriculture among the ancestors of the Indians  cannot be called unusual. Specific only, Likelihood = 0.5 Foreigners/new rulers introduce/impose a new language/writing  system on indigenous peoples Coe’s  standard: “During the Terminal Classic, [Ceibal] seems to have  come under the sway of foreigners, as seen in the strong influence of  non-Maya forms of art and writing. … There are more  ‘foreign’-looking stelae at Ceibal which belong to this period,  with non-Maya calendrical glyphs and iconography; on one, a figure  wears the bird-mask of the central Mexican wind god, Ehecatl, with  a Mexican speech scroll curling from the beak. … This,  however, does not answer the question of the patently Mexican  hieroglyphs on other Ceibal monuments” (p. 178). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:17–18; Mosiah 24:4‒6. Analysis  of correspondence: Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  refer specifically and in considerable detail to foreigners who  introduce a new language/writing system. This is certainly  unusual. What models or examples did Joseph Smith have available  to him that would have led him to “guess” correctly that  foreigners would impose a new language and writing system on  indigenous peoples? The European settlers in North America were not  trying to impose a new language on the Native Americans, they  were trying to take get rid of the Indians and take their lands. Likelihood = 0.02 Writing system changed significantly over time Coe’s  standard: “The earliest Maya writing, exceedingly difficult to  decode, is quite different from its later versions” (p. 266). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mormon 9:32‒33. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya both refer specifically to a change in writing systems, but  very few details are provided. The practice seems highly unusual.  What change in written English did Joseph Smith know about? What  could he use as a precedent or model? There was nothing. He  might perhaps have known about significant changes in spoken English  from the time, say, of Shakespeare, but not in the way of writing  English. Specific and unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Buildings of cement Coe’s  standard: “The Maya of the lowlands had discovered … if  limestone fragments were burnt, and the resulting powder mixed with  water, a white plaster of great durability was created. Finally,  they quickly realized the [Page 152] structural value of a concrete-like  fill made from limestone rubble and marl” (p. 81). Overall,  there are 61 references to “stucco” in Coe’s book; stucco is  a fine cement. Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:7, 9, 11. Analysis  of correspondence: Specific, detailed and unusual. Both wood and  cement are mentioned as building materials in the Book of Mormon  and in The Maya. While some Indians of northeastern North  America did use wood to build their dwellings (for example, the  Iroquois longhouses), they did not use cement, as did both the Maya  and the Aztecs. How did Joseph Smith “guess” that one? Likelihood = 0.02 By the  way, cement results from burning limestone and mixing the resulting  powder with water. Cement is used to bind all kinds of aggregates  (stone, clay, etc.) to produce concrete. There is no justification  for being picky about the details of hydraulic vs. nonhydraulic  cements. Even experts disagree on what constitutes “true”  cement. 39 Great skill in the working of cement (stucco) Coe’s  standard: “Holmul and Xultun, celebrated in recent years for  their … monumental stuccos … and Ek’ Balam, an extraordinary  site in Yucatan with … some of the most astonishing stucco reliefs  ever found” (p. 7). “Many of these were faced with elaborate  stucco friezes and stairways flanked by massive stucco masks”  (p. 81). “This young man is shown in a magnificent,  polychrome stucco relief on a pilaster of Temple XIX”  (p. 160). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:7. Analysis  of correspondence: Not only were the Maya able to build with  cement/stucco, they were “exceedingly expert” in working it, as  explicitly described in both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya (“astonishing,” “elaborate,” “magnificent” are  the words used by Coe). This is certainly specific and detailed. It  also is clearly unusual. The dominant view of the white settlers  regarding the Indians in the early 1800s was that they were savages.  How did the author of the Book of Mormon correctly “guess”  that these “savages” could work so expertly in cement? Likelihood = 0.02 Excellent workmanship practiced Coe’s  standard: “the finest Maya wood carving known, this seated  figure from Tabasco, Mexico” (p. 95n40). “Finally, the Late  Classic Maya were … the only American Indians interested in  rendering the uniqueness of individual characters through  portraiture. The Maya artists excelled in low-relief carving. …  Pottery objects of Late Classic manufacture run the gamut [Page 153] from crude  … pots and pans of everyday life to real works of art. Among the  latter are the fantastic supports for incense burners” (p. 164).  (See all of pp. 164‒73.) “The excellence of the workmanship  lavished upon it suggests that the Toltec intruders were better off  in Yucatan” (p. 207). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 5:15‒16; Jarom 1:8; Ether  10:7, 27. The archaic meaning of “curious” is “made or prepared  skillfully, done with painstaking accuracy or attention to detail.” 40 Analysis  of correspondence: In the Book of Mormon, as in The  Maya, many great workmen practiced excellent workmanship in  a variety of materials (including materials other than  cement/stucco)). So the correspondence is specific and detailed. It  is also highly unusual. As mentioned above, whoever wrote the  Book of Mormon lived in early 19 th century  America, where the Indians were generally deemed to be “savages.”  How did that person correctly “guess” that the ancestors of these  “savages” were great workmen in many different materials? Likelihood = 0.02 Trade goods traveled by sea Coe’s  standard: “The great majority of goods traveled by sea, since  roads were but poor trails and cargoes heavy. This kind of commerce  was cornered by the Chontal Maya, or Putun, such good seafarers that  Eric Thompson called them ‘the Phoenicians of Middle America'”  (p. 232). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 63:5‒10; Helaman 3:10, 14. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, there was  a lot of trade by sea, and some detail is provided. Joseph Smith  may have known something of the trade between the Iroquois and other  northeastern tribes carried on by canoe. However, the trade by the  Indians of Joseph’s time was via freshwater lakes and rivers and  not ocean shipping, as described in both the Book of Mormon  and The Maya . So the correspondence lacks a bit to be  considered specific, detailed, and unusual, but it is considerably  more than just specific. We count this as  specific and somewhat detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Books stored underground in lidded stone boxes Coe’s  standard: “A few probable coffers exist for books, including  the recent find of a lidded limestone box from Hun Nal Ye cave  in Guatemala” (p. 239). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See p. xi (Introduction and Witnesses). Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence could hardly be more  specific and detailed. The Book of Mormon was buried below  ground in a lidded stone box. The Maya also (probably) stored  some of their books in lidded stone boxes, the one mentioned in  a cave. The correspondence is also [Page 154] unusual. None of the Indians  of Joseph Smith’s time wrote books, let alone stored them in  stone boxes. Likelihood = 0.02 The Maya were not the only  Mesoamerican Indians who stored sacred objects in stone boxes. So did  the Aztecs. 41 Towers built, some very tall, possibly watchtowers Coe’s  standard: “It has been suggested that the tower was used as an  observatory, but it commands a wide view and could also have  served as a watchtower” (p. 151). “decoration of  perfectly ordinary small ‘palaces’ with high towers imitating the  fronts of temple-pyramids; these towers, however, are solid, the  steps being impossibly narrow and steep, and the ‘doorway’ at the  summit leading to nothing” (p. 161). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 2:7; Mosiah 11:12; Alma 48:1; Helaman  7:10‒11; Moroni 9:7. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon specifically  mentions tall towers being built as watchtowers. The correspondence  is therefore specific and detailed. We would also count it as  unusual. What Indians of Joseph Smith’s time and place built  tall towers? However, View of the Hebrews also contains a very  brief, undetailed mention of towers. So we count this correspondence  as merely specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Multiple formal entrances to villages Coe’s  standard: “The supernatural world is ever-present in Chan Kom  [a traditional Maya village] and in the outlying fields and forest.  At the four entrances to the settlement are four pairs of crosses and  four balam (‘jaguar’) spirits” (p. 296). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 22:6; Alma 8:18. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. There were  multiple formal entrances to the villages/towns of the Maya people  and also among the Book of Mormon peoples. However, no  distinctive details are given in the Book of Mormon, nor  does the practice seem unusual. Even small towns on the American  frontier had more than one entrance. Specific only, Likelihood =  0.5 Fine fabrics and textiles, elaborate clothing Coe’s  standard: “Besides jade, the corpse was ornamented with …  rich textiles which have long since rotted away” (p. 106).  “Sadly, nothing remains of all the perishable products which must  have traveled the same routes — textiles” (p. 113). “The  royal corpse had been virtually swaddled, wrapped in layers of lime,  palm, and fine cotton textiles” (p. 144). “Every temple,  every palace room was surely festooned with curtains and wall  hangings” (p. 171). [Page 155] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 28:13; Mosiah 10:5; Alma  4:6; Helaman 6:13; Helaman 13:28. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is both specific and  detailed. Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya describe  people who had available to them very fine, rich and elaborate  textiles and clothing. The correspondence also seems unusual. The  Indians of Joseph Smith’s time and place wore clothing made  primarily of animal skins and did not have access to the cotton worn  by Indians in warmer climates. Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02

[20] Fundamental level of political organization is the independent  city-state Coe’s  standard: “Sylvanus Morley had thought that there was once  a single great political entity, which he called the ‘Old  Empire,’ but once the full significance of Emblem Glyphs had been  recognized, it was clear that there had never been any such thing. In  its stead, Mayanists proposed a more Balkanized model, in which  each ‘city state’ was essentially independent of all the others;  the political power of even large entities like Tikal would have been  confined to a relatively small area, the distance from the  capital to the polity’s borders seldom exceeding a day’s  march” (p. 274). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Throughout the Book of Mormon itself  there is never a reference to “Nephite nation” or to  a “Lamanite nation.” Interestingly, the word nation is used in reference to the Jaredites (Ether 1:43), a very  different people culturally than the Lehites. The Book of Mormon  uses this phrase: “nations, kindreds, tongues and people.” The  Nephites and Lamanites were clearly kindreds. In contrast, the word nation is used frequently in terms of the “nations of the  Gentiles.” The noncanonical Guide to the Scriptures has  eight references to “Nephite nation,” showing how deeply  engrained this idea of nationhood is in modern readers. But the  Book of Mormon never puts those two words together for  Nephite/Lamanite societies. The nation-state is not a political  structure found anywhere in the Book of Mormon. Instead,  the Book of Mormon peoples were organized politically in  city-states. Often one city-state would dominate a group of  other city-states. This dominance is the subject of the next  correspondence Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  There is not a single reference in the text of the  Book of Mormon to “Nephite nation” or “Lamanite  nation.” It is also unusual. Joseph Smith was growing up in  the new nation of America, with a great deal of pride and  self-identity as an independent nation. How did he avoid identifying  the Lamanite or Nephite peoples as “nations”? But he did avoid  it. What a lucky “guess” — over and over again during the  course of the Book of Mormon history. Likelihood = 0.02 “Capital” or leading city-state dominates a cluster of other  communities Coe’s  standard: “Clusters of villages and communities were organized  under a single polity, dominated by a large ‘capital’  village, which could have contained more than 1,000 people. (p. 51).”  “Quirigua lies only 30 miles [Page 100] (48 km) north of Copan; … that  seems, on the basis of its inscriptions, to have periodically been  one of the latter’s suzerainties” (p. 137). “Bonampak,  politically important during the Early Classic, but by the Late  Classic an otherwise insignificant center clearly under the cultural  and political thumb of Yaxchilan” (p. 149). “These are  Tamarindito, Arroyo de Piedras, Punta de Chimino, Aguateca, and Dos  Pilas; the latter city seems to have dominated the rest” (p. 150).  “We now know that not all Maya polities were equal: the kings of  some lesser states were said to be ‘possessed’ by the rulers of  more powerful ones (the phrase y-ajaw , ‘his king,’  specifies this relationship” (p. 275). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:12; Alma 61:8; Helaman 1:27 . Zarahemla is clearly the Nephite capital city in the  Book of Mormon, with 140 mentions in the book. It is to  Zarahemla that the other cities of the Nephites look to for  leadership and supplies in their wars against the Lamanites. When the  Lamanite chieftain Coriantumr invades the Nephite confederation, he  makes straight for Zarahemla, “the capital city,” in the heart of  the Nephite lands, and bypasses all the lesser cities. Later the  city/land of Bountiful seems to become the Nephite capital  city-state. Analysis  of correspondence: This political model was clearly part of  Book of Mormon political arrangements, so it is specific  and detailed in both books. It is also unusual. There is no  corresponding political arrangement in Joseph Smith’s time  which he might have used as a model. Likelihood = 0.02 Some subordinate city-states shift their allegiance to a different  “capital” city Coe’s  standard: “Dos Pilas; the latter city … [began] putting  together a large-scale state as early as the seventh century AD,  when a noble lineage arrived from Tikal and established a royal  dynasty. The family was clearly adroit in its political maneuvers,  switching from an allegiance to their cousins at Tikal to one with  Calakmul, its arch-enemy” (p. 150). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 23:31 and Alma 43:4‒5. The  Amalekites and later the Zoramites, both of whom are Nephites by  birth but have dissented from the Nephites and built their own  cities, go over to the Lamanites as a body. Analysis  of correspondence: The analysis is specific and detailed. In both  cases, whole city-states changed their political allegiance to that  of a former enemy. This does not seem unusual to a modern  reader and probably would not have seemed unusual even to a country  boy in the relatively innocent early 19 th century. Likelihood = 0.1 Complex state institutions Coe’s  standard: “In art, in religion, in state complexity, and  perhaps even in the calendar and astronomy, Olmec models were  transferred to the Maya” [Page 101] (p. 61). “Civilization … has  certainly been achieved by the time that state institutions … have  appeared” (p. 63). “By Classic times, full royal courts came  into view” (p. 93). “closer to the heart of the city itself,  where the dwellings of aristocrats and bureaucrats” (p. 126). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:1‒2; Alma 2:6‒7, 14‒16; Alma  27:21‒22; Alma 30:9; Alma 51:2‒7; Alma 60:7, 11, 21, 24. Both  the Book of Mormon and The Maya clearly show  societies that have large, complex state institutions. For example,  the Nephites had (1) some form of elections, (2) armies supported by  the state, (3) chief judges and lower judges, and (4) kings (at least  part of the time). The Lamanites appear to have had kings at all  times. Dr. Coe (p. 63) notes that state institutions were  developed among the Maya by the Late Preclassic, consistent with  Book of Mormon timing for the references provided. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the British and American civil  governments had large, complex state institutions, but the Native  American societies certainly did not. This comparison is specific,  has quite a bit of detail, and probably would have been unusual  to Joseph Smith. Likelihood = 0.02 Many cities exist Coe’s  standard: To name just a few of the cities mentioned in The Maya we have Uxmal, Chichen Itza, Coba, Tulum,  Acanceh, Ek’ Balam, Mayapan, Piedras Negras, Ceibal, Palenque,  Naranjo, El Mirador, Bonampak, Uaxactun, Kaminaljuyu, Takalik Abaj,  Tikal (p. 9). “the great Usumacinta … draining the northern  highlands, … twisting to the northwest past many a ruined Maya  city” (p. 16‒17). “More advanced cultural traits, … the  construction of cities” (p. 26). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 51:20; Alma 59:5; 3 Nephi 9:3‒10.  Many named cities are mentioned in the Book of Mormon. Analysis  of correspondence: By 1830 America had many cities, but there  were no cities on the frontier where Joseph Smith translated and  published the Book of Mormon. The Native Americans with  whom Joseph was familiar did not build cities, although he might  possibly have learned about some Native American cities by reading View of the Hebrews , so we do not count it as unusual.  Nonetheless, the correspondence is specific and quite detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 City of Laman (Lamanai) “occcupied from earliest times” Coe’s  standard: “Far up the New River … is the important site of  Lamanai, … occupied from earliest times right into the  post-Conquest period” (p. 85). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 9:10. The strong tendency  is for consonants to be preserved in pronouncing words and names. For  example, Beirut (Lebanon) is one of the oldest cities in the world,  settled 5,000 years ago. The name derives from Canaanite-Phoenician be’erot and [Page 102] has been known as “Biruta,” “Berytus”  and now “Beirut,” while always retaining those three consonants  “BRT” in the correct order, and with no intervening consonants. 29 In the  case of the city Lamanai (Laman), all three consonants, and only  these three consonants, namely LMN, are found in the correct order  and are the same consonants as given for the city of Laman mentioned  in the Book of Mormon. This seems to be a “bullseye”  for the Book of Mormon. How did Joseph Smith correctly  “guess” the correct consonants, and only the correct consonants  in the correct order for the name of an important city “occupied  from earliest times?” Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, detailed and  statistically unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Parts of the land were very densely settled Coe’s  standard: “A few cities, such as Chunchucmil in Yucatan, are  amazingly dense” (p. 124). “At Tikal, within a little  over 6 sq. miles … there are c. 3,000 structures” (p. 126).  Recent work not reported in The Maya confirms that some Mayan  cities were very densely populated. 30 Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 1:7. Analysis  of correspondence: The Native Americans with whom Joseph Smith  had direct contact did not have cities, let alone cities so densely  settled. He may have learned about Native American cities from View  of the Hebrews, but that book gives no information about how  densely settled those cities were. So this correspondence is specific  and detailed, but we do not count it as unusual, since Joseph Smith  might have gotten the idea from View of the Hebrews . Likelihood = 0.1 Large-scale public works Coe’s  standard: “Civilization … has certainly been achieved by the  time that state institutions, large-scale public works … have  appeared” (p. 63). Dr. Coe notes that city walls (certainly  a public work) were built “when, in places, local conditions  became hostile” (pp. 126, 194, 216). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:10; Mosiah 11:8‒13; Alma 14:27‒28;  Alma 48:8; Helaman 1:22; 3 Nephi 6:7‒8; Ether 10:5‒6.  The Book of Mormon speaks in some detail about the  large-scale public works that its societies, particularly its more  decadent societies, achieved. [Page 103] Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence is both specific and  detailed. It would also seem unusual. The Native Americans of  Joseph Smith’s time and place did not build public works or  temples. Why would Joseph Smith have written a book that  clearly claimed that “the Indians” did so? However, since View  of the Hebrews references temples and walled towns (not in any  detail), and Joseph Smith might have gotten the idea from that  book, we will only count this correspondence as specific and  detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Some rulers live in luxury Coe’s  standard: “The excavation of two tombs from this period has  thrown much light on the luxury to which these rulers were  accustomed” (p. 74). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 11:3‒15. Analysis  of correspondence: Joseph probably knew that the British royal  court lived in luxury, but the chiefs of the Indian tribes did not.  Why would Joseph have assumed that the ancestors of the Indians had  kings who lived in luxury? The Book of Mormon contrasts the  reign of King Benjamin, who deliberately did not live in luxury, with  decadent rulers who did. So Joseph was correct that some decadent  rulers did live in luxury, but there are few details, and this is not  particularly unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 Elaborate thrones Coe’s  standard: “Its superstructure’s chambers contain a stone  throne in the form of a snarling jaguar, painted red, with eyes  and spots of jade and fangs of shell; atop the throne rested a Toltec  circular back-shield in turquoise mosaic” (p. 206). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 11:9; Ether 10:6. Analysis  of correspondence: Again, Joseph might have known about the  elaborate throne of the British royal family, so it was perhaps not  unusual, but what Native Americans was Joseph familiar with that had  thrones, let alone elaborate thrones? How did he “guess” this one  correctly? To be conservative, however, we will classify this as  a specific and detailed correspondence, but perhaps not an  unusual one. Likelihood = 0.1 Royalty exists, with attendant palaces, courts and nobles Coe’s  standard: “We now know a great deal about … Maya  societies as the seats of royal courts” (p. 7). “By Classic  times, full royal courts came into view” (p. 93). See also  pp. 7, 93, 95, 126, and 209. Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:1‒2; Alma 22:2; Alma 51:7‒8,  21. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya refer repeatedly to these institutions of royalty. So the  correspondence is both specific and detailed. However, it may be  a stretch to call it unusual. While there were no Indian kings,  Joseph certainly knew about British royalty, and [Page 104] might have been  influenced thereby to put it into the Book of Mormon. So to  be conservative, we will not classify this one as unusual, although  it is specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Royal or elite marriages for political purposes Coe’s  standard: “Where such stratagems typically played out was in  royal or noble marriages” (p. 97). “An elite class  consisting of central Mexican foreigners, and the local nobility with  whom they had marriage ties” (p. 103). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:24; Alma 47:35. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific but not  particularly detailed in the case of the Book of Mormon.  Joseph might also have been aware of the political marriages in the  royal houses of England and Europe. So we rate this one as specific  but not detailed or unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 Feasting for political purposes Coe’s  standard: “In courts, feasts and gifts helped to bind alliances  and keep underlings happy, with effects across the kingdom”  (p. 97). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 18:9; Alma 20:9. Analysis  of correspondence: Neither book offers a lot of  distinguishing detail, although the references are specific. The  practice seems unusual in Joseph’s frontier setting in democratic  America. Why would Joseph Smith attribute this practice (unusual  for him) to the ancestors of the Indians? This correspondence is  therefore ranked as specific and unusual but not detailed. Likelihood  = 0.1 . Gifts to the king for political advantage Coe’s  standard: The Maya refers clearly to this practice: “In courts,  feasts and gifts helped to bind alliances and keep underlings happy,  with effects across the kingdom” (p. 97). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 2:12. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon reference to  political gifts is less specific but strongly suggestive. Again, the  practice seems unusual in Joseph’s frontier setting in democratic  America. Why would Joseph Smith attribute this practice (unusual  for him) to the ancestors of the Indians? This correspondence is  therefore ranked as only somewhat specific and unusual. The overall  likelihood is downgraded from specific and unusual to only specific. Likelihood = 0.5 Political factions organize around a member of the elite Coe’s  standard: “courts did not operate by individual actions alone.  They worked instead through factions pivoting around a high  ranking courtier or member of the royal family” (p. 97). [Page 105] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 1:2‒9. Analysis  of correspondence: In America in the early 19 th century, the party system had already been born, and the party often  pivoted around a key political figure like Thomas Jefferson or  John Adams, so this idea was not unusual to Joseph. However, it is  both specific and quite detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Foreigners move in and take over government, often as family  dynasties Coe’s  standard: “[The Founder of Copan] was another stranger coming  in from the west, perhaps from Teotihuacan” (p. 118). “[At  Dos Pilas] … a noble lineage arrived from Tikal and  established a royal dynasty” (p. 150). “Uxmal … was  the seat of the Xiu family, but this was a late lineage of  Mexican origin that could not possibly have built the site”  (p. 180). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:19; Alma 47:35; Helaman 1:16. Analysis  of correspondence: Again, both the Book of Mormon and The Maya specifically refer to this practice and in  considerable detail. However, Joseph Smith might have been aware  of the change in family dynasties in England about a century  earlier when the House of Hanover succeeded the House of Stuart as  kings of Great Britain, and used this as his model (however  unlikely). So the correspondence is specific and detailed, but  perhaps not unusual. To be conservative, we assign this a likelihood  of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 City administrative area with bureaucrats and aristocrats Coe’s  standard : At Tikal “closer to the heart of the city itself,  [were] the dwellings of aristocrats and bureaucrats” (p. 126),  “the palaces were the administrative centers of the city”  (p. 128). At Aguateca the archaeologist was able “to identify  specialized areas, such as a house which was probably that of  the chief scribe of the city” (p. 151). “The House of the  Governor was built, probably to serve as his administrative  headquarters” (p. 182). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 60:19, 22; Helaman 9:1‒7. Analysis  of correspondence: Both books are quite specific on this point,  but the Book of Mormon does not provide a lot of  detail. However, Joseph Smith never saw a state or national  capital city with its administrative center and nearby houses for  officials until well after the the Book of Mormon was published. So  this is unusual and specific. Likelihood = 0.1 Records kept specifically of the reigns of the kings Coe’s  standard: “the ‘stela cult’ — the inscribed glorification  of royal lineages and their achievements” (p. 177). “The  text is completely historical, recounting the king’s descent from  Pakal the Great” (p. 264n169). “The figures that appear in  Classic reliefs are not gods and priests, but dynastic autocrats and  their spouses, children, and subordinates” (p. 273). [Page 106] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 9:4; Jacob 3:13; Jarom  1:14. Analysis  of correspondence: Like The Maya , the Book of Mormon  is very specific and detailed about separate records being kept of  the reigns of the kings. We know of no reason or existing historical  model that would have led Joseph Smith to have correctly  “guessed” that the doings of the kings were kept separately from  the rest of the history of a people. This is a specific,  detailed and unusual correspondence. Likelihood = 0.02 Native leaders incorporated in power structure after subjugation Coe’s  standard: “Mesoamerican ’empires’ such as Teotihuacan’s  were probably not organized along Roman lines; … rather, they were  ‘hegemonic,’ in the sense that conquered bureaucracies were  largely in place” (p. 100). “it seems obvious that many of  the native princes were incorporated into the new power structure”  (p. 206). “Or perhaps Calakmul found it easier … to rule  through local authorities” (p. 276). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 19:26‒27; Mosiah 24:1‒2. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya are both specific and detailed about this practice. As Dr. Coe  suggests, the only model Joseph Smith might conceivably have  heard about for control of subjugated peoples was the Roman one,  which was the opposite of the system used among the Maya, and also  the opposite of the system used in the Book of Mormon. How  did Joseph Smith “guess” that one correctly? Specific,  detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Tribute required of subjects Coe’s  standard: “the ruler took in tax or tribute” (p. 93).  “Scenes with food, drink, and tribute” (p. 97). “displays  of captives or tribute” (p. 124). “On what did the  population live? One answer is tribute” (p. 216). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:15, 22; Mosiah 19:15, 22, 26, 28;  Mosiah 22:7, 10. Also Alma 23:38‒39; Alma 7:22; Alma 24:9. Analysis  of correspondence: Once again, the Book of Mormon and The Maya are both specific and detailed about the practice of  tribute. However, it is possible that Joseph had heard about this  practice either through the Bible or other sources. So we will  classify this correspondence as specific and detailed, but not  unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Limited number of important patrilineages Coe’s  standard: “There were 24 ‘principal’ lineages in Utatlan”  (p. 225). “There were approximately 250 patrilineages in  Yucatan at the time of the Conquest, and we know from Landa how  important they were” (p. 234). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob: 1:13; Alma 47:35; 4 Nephi 1:36‒38;  Mormon 1:8‒9. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya are very specific and detailed about how important it was  to belong to a leading patrilineage. While Joseph Smith  might have picked up this idea from reading the Bible (that is, the  tribes of Israel) we think this is very unlikely. So we regard this  correspondence as specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood =  0.02 King and “king elect” Coe’s  standard: “The K’iche’ state was headed by a king,  a king-elect, and two ‘captains'” (p. 226). “royal  youths … or the ‘great youth,’ … perhaps the heir-designate”  (p. 278). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 1:10; Mosiah 6:3. [Page 107] Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon also refers to  the practice of an heir-designate, so this is a specific  correspondence, but it is not particularly detailed. Also, Joseph may  have been aware of the practice of having heirs to the throne of  Great Britain. To be conservative, we will assign this correspondence  a likelihood of 0.5, although it may perhaps merit  a greater evidentiary strength. Likelihood = 0.5 There are captains serving kings Coe’s  standard: “The K’ iche’ state was headed by a king,  a king-elect and two ‘captains'” (p. 226). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 22:3. Analysis  of correspondence: Gideon clearly serves in the capacity of  a captain to King Limhi, so the idea is specific or highly  suggestive. It also seems unusual. Where would Joseph Smith have  come up with this idea? Because of lack of detail, we will assign  this correspondence a likelihood of 0.5, although it  probably merits a greater strength. Likelihood = 0.5 Political power is exercised by family dynasties Coe’s  standard: “[Spearthrower Owl installed his own son] … as the  tenth ruler of Tikal” (p. 109). “King of the great city of  Palenque [was] the second son of the renowned Palenque [ruler Pakal  the Great]” (p. 161). “There were 24 ‘principal’  lineages in Utatlan, closely identified with the buildings … in  which the lords carried out their affairs” (p. 225). “The  ancient Maya realm was … a class society with political power  … in the hands of an hereditary elite” (p. 234). “the  names of the cities themselves or of the dynasties that ruled over  them” (p. 271). “dynastic record of all Palenque rulers”  (p. 274). Book of Mormon  correspondence: From the beginning of the Book of Mormon,  the key political question was which of sons of Lehi had the right to  exercise political power over the rest of Lehi’s descendants; in  other words, who would be the leader of an hereditary elite? See  Mosiah 1:9; Mosiah 11:1; [Page 108] Mosiah 19:16, 26; Mosiah 28:10; Alma 17:6;  Alma 20:8; Alma 24:3‒4; Alma 50:40; Helaman 1:4‒5; Helaman 2:2;  Ether 6:24. Analysis  of correspondence: Both books very clearly attest to the central  importance of family dynasties. The Lamanite political model was  clearly that of hereditary kings. Even among the supposedly more  democratic Nephites, following the political reforms of King Mosiah,  the office of chief judge (an elected position) often descended from  father to son, for example, Alma to his son Alma, Pahoran to his son  Pahoran, etc. Obviously, there was a de facto hereditary  elite even during a time of popular elections. Likewise, The Maya provides many examples of continuing conflict over  the question of which lineage would exercise political leadership. So  this correspondence is specific and quite detailed. However, it is  not unusual. Joseph might have been aware of the various family  dynasties in Europe and Great Britain, and their unending conflicts.  This correspondence is thus assigned a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Kings rule over subordinate provincial or territorial rulers, some of  noble blood (subkings) Coe’s  standard: “The wily K’uk’ulkan II populated his city with  provincial rulers and their families” (p. 216). “At the head  of each statelet in Yucatan was the … the territorial ruler who had  inherited his post in the male line” (p. 236). “The kings of  some lesser states were said to be ‘possessed’ by the rulers of  more powerful ones” (p. 275). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:2‒3; Alma 17:21; Alma 20:4, 8. Analysis  of correspondence: This pattern is clearly evident among the  Lamanite kings in the Book of Mormon and also as detailed  by Dr. Coe in The Maya . So the correspondence is specific and  quite detailed in both books. We know of no political model in his  time on which Joseph Smith might have relied to correctly  “guess” this correspondence. The kings of Great Britain did not  have provincial rulers of royal blood. Thus this correspondence is  specific, detailed and unusual. However, because of its overlap with  correspondence 1.2, we assign only a likelihood of 0.5 to  this correspondence. This choice is due to the specific additional  information that sometimes these provincial rulers were of royal  blood. Likelihood = 0.5 “Seating” means accession to political power Coe’s  standard: “Epigraphers conclude that pectoral reverse records  the ‘seating’ or accession to power, of the ruler in question”  (p. 91). “Important glyphs now known to relate to dynastic  affairs include … inauguration or ‘seating’ in office”  (p. 274). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 8:12; Helaman 7:4; 3 Nephi 6:19. [Page 109] Analysis  of correspondence: On three separate occasions, the  Book of Mormon uses exactly this word seating or seat to describe the holding of or accession to political  power. So the correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual. It  seems very unlikely that Joseph Smith would have correctly  “guessed” this particular word. Likelihood = 0.02 Separation of civil and religious authority Coe’s  standard: “a hereditary Chief Priest resided in that city, …  but in no source do we find his authority or that of the priests  superseding civil power” (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 4:16‒18. Analysis  of correspondence: Under the leadership of Alma the Younger, the  role of the head of state and the head of the church were separated,  while they had previously been combined. It appears that this was the  pattern afterwards among the Nephites, but we do not know what the  pattern was among the Lamanites. So this correspondence is specific,  but not detailed. Also, this pattern of “separation of church and  state” as practiced in America would not have been unusual to  Joseph Smith. Likelihood = 0.5 Those of noble birth aspire to power Coe’s  standard: “Several courtiers were so mighty as to be magnates,  perhaps descended from collateral royal lines. They needed to be  co-opted and watched, lest their pretensions got out of hand”  (p. 93). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma: 51:5, 8. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Alma describes a continuing  conflict in the Nephite confederation between those who desired  a freely chosen government and those who were of “high birth”  and sought to be kings. So the correspondence is specific, but not  very detailed in either book and probably not unusual to Joseph,  since seeking after power seems to be part of human nature. Likelihood = 0.5 Royal courts imitate their enemies Coe’s  standard: “Courts were often imitative. Through a curious  form of standardization, they emulated each other, even those of  enemies” (p. 95). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 47:23. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon likewise refers  to a specific custom of Lamanite royalty which had been taken  from their Nephite enemies. Dr. Coe himself regards this imitative  feature as “curious”; so we will agree to that point. It is  indeed unusual. However, there is not a lot of detail in either The Maya or the Book of Mormon about these imitative  practices, so we will classify this correspondence as specific and  unusual, but not detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 [Page 110] Royal courts function as “great households” Coe’s  standard : “A final observation is that courts functioned as  ‘great households'” (p. 97). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma Chap. 19 (the whole chapter) Analysis  of correspondence: Alma Chapter 19 describes a somewhat  unusual scene in which many of King Lamoni’s subjects gather to  Lamoni’s “house” (not his palace) in quite a familiar,  quasi-democratic way and are apparently able to bring their swords  along with them. This would certainly not be the case in the court of  Great Britain. So the practice is definitely unusual, but there is  not a lot of detail, and Dr. Coe is not very specific about what  he means by “great households.” However,  there is enough specificity in the concept of royal courts as  households and the idea that King Lamoni had a house, rather  than a palace, to warrant identifying this as a correspondence.  While this may not be a detailed correspondence or  a particularly specific one, it is very unusual. Therefore, we  assign this correspondence a likelihood of 0.5. Likelihood = 0.5 Candidates for high office had to possess hidden knowledge Coe’s  standard: “ Any candidate for high office had to pass an  occult catechism known as the ‘Language of Zuywa.'” (p. 236). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Enos 1:1; Mosiah 1:2. Analysis  of correspondence: King Benjamin “caused that [his sons] should  be taught in the language of his fathers, that thereby they might  become men of understanding.” Later, his son Mosiah became the  ruler of the people. Likewise, Enos (a prince of sorts) was also  taught in the “language” of his father. One is led to ask: “Was  the regular course of education not sufficient for these young men;  was their common language not enough to qualify them to lead?”  Apparently not. This correspondence has some detail, and while it is  specific enough to get our attention, and is definitely unusual, we  do not think it merits a likelihood of 0.02; instead it is  assigned a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Abrupt breaks in dynasties Coe’s  standard: “Thus, we can expect a good deal of local  cultural continuity even in those regions taken over by the great  city; but in the case of the lowland Maya, we shall also see outright  interference in dynastic matters, with profound implications for the  course of Maya history. (p. 100). “there are signs of …  profound breaks in the dynasty” (p. 116). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:1‒19; Alma 24:1‒2. Analysis  of correspondence: The Maya also describes numerous other  instances in which one Maya kingdom invaded another and abruptly  changed the ruling dynasty. The same thing also occurs in the  Book of Mormon, [Page 111] when King Mosiah replaces (peacefully) the  ruler(s) of Zarahemla; and later in Alma 24 when the rebellious  Lamanites depose their hereditary king. So this correspondence is  specific and detailed in both books, but it probably does not qualify  as unusual. Joseph might well have known about the many European  wars, with multiple rulers bent on deposing each other. Likelihood = 0.1 Subservient peoples are said to “possess” the land while ruled by  a dominant power Coe’s  standard: “The kings of some lesser states were said to be  ‘possessed’ by the rulers of more powerful ones” (p. 275). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 19:15. Analysis  of correspondence: It is interesting that this specific word possess is the one used by the Maya to describe subservient  rulership. Likewise the Lehites (for example, 2 Nephi 1:9)  and the Jaredites (for example, Ether 2:8) were instructed that  theirs was a “promised land” and that they would “possess”  it as long as they kept their covenants with their heavenly king.  That same word possess was the relationship the Israelites  were to have with their lands of promise, under God’s rule (for  example, Deuteronomy 11:8, 2 Nephi 24:2) . The  wording here is highly specific, and unusual, but may not be detailed  enough in the case of the Maya to warrant a likelihood of 0.02,  but it does warrant a likelihood of 0.1. How would  Joseph Smith have guessed how appropriate that particular word  was to describe this relationship between a more powerful king  and his subservient kings among the Maya? Likelihood = 0.1

[21] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 9:10. The strong tendency  is for consonants to be preserved in pronouncing words and names. For  example, Beirut (Lebanon) is one of the oldest cities in the world,  settled 5,000 years ago. The name derives from Canaanite-Phoenician be’erot and [Page 102] has been known as “Biruta,” “Berytus”  and now “Beirut,” while always retaining those three consonants  “BRT” in the correct order, and with no intervening consonants. 29

[22] Coe’s  standard: “A few cities, such as Chunchucmil in Yucatan, are  amazingly dense” (p. 124). “At Tikal, within a little  over 6 sq. miles … there are c. 3,000 structures” (p. 126).  Recent work not reported in The Maya confirms that some Mayan  cities were very densely populated. 30

[23] Possible ancient origin of Mesoamerican cultures Coe’s  standard: “Given the similarities among the diverse cultures of  Mesoamerica, … its peoples must share a common origin, so far  back in time that it may never be brought to light by archaeology”  (p. 14). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See the Book of Ether. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon specifically  refers to a much earlier migration, the “Jaredites,” from  the Old World to the New World thousands of years before the Lehite  migration. However, the Book of Mormon does not say, as Coe  strongly implies above, that the earlier [Page 112] culture was the common  origin of subsequent cultures. Those details are lacking in the  Book of Mormon. The pattern is, however, unusual. It is one  thing for Joseph Smith to have “guessed” the existence of  the Lehite colony, but to correctly guess another much, much earlier  culture/migration is quite unusual. We rate this specific and unusual  for a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Active interchange of ideas and things among the elite Coe’s  standard: “there must have been an active interchange of ideas  and things among the Mesoamerican elite over many centuries”  (p. 14). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:12‒15; Mosiah 7:9,13; Alma 47:23,  35‒36; Helaman 4:3‒4, 8; Helaman 11: 24‒25; Alma  63:14; 3 Nephi 1:28. Analysis  of correspondence: Coe is very specific and detailed in his  statement. The Book of Mormon is likewise detailed and  specific about the many exchanges of people (especially elite  peoples) and ideas over centuries among the Book of Mormon  peoples. Even a well-educated person, which Joseph Smith  was certainly not, would have a hard time thinking of  a historical model for this behavior, let alone blending it so  seamlessly and unobtrusively into the larger Book of Mormon  history. Therefore it is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood  = 0.02 . Foreign brides for elites Coe’s  standard: “More than a negligible percentage of Tikal’s  population came from elsewhere, including the introduction of foreign  brides for elites” (p. 109). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:24 and Alma 47:35. Analysis  of correspondence: Ammon was a Nephite prince whom the king  of the Lamanites sought as a husband for one of his daughters;  and Ammonihah was a Nephite by birth who became king of the  Lamanites after marrying the queen, so the correspondence is specific  and detailed. There were indeed foreign brides for elites. However,  Joseph might have been aware of the intermarriages among the royal  houses of Europe, where elites also had foreign brides, so it is not  unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Slavery practiced Coe’s  standard: “[Yucatan was famed for] production of honey, salt  and slaves” (p. 19). “Slaves comprised both sentenced  criminals and vassal war captives” (p. 225). “Human  sacrifice was perpetrated on prisoners, slaves, and children”  (pp. 243‒44). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:15; Alma 27:8; 3 Nephi 3:7. Analysis  of correspondence: King Benjamin specifically states that he had not allowed his people to make slaves of one another, strongly  implying that slavery was the usual practice. (Mosiah 2:13). The  Lamanites offered to become slaves until they had recompensed the  wrongs they had done to [Page 113] the Nephites. The Gadiantons offered  a partnership with the Nephites as an alternative to slavery. So  the practice of slavery is specific and detailed in both books. Alas,  slavery has never been unusual, and it was certainly known to  Joseph Smith. Likelihood = 0.1 Different languages found in pockets Coe’s  standard: “Languages other than Mayan were found in isolated  pockets, indicating either intrusions of peoples from foreign lands  or remnant populations engulfed by the expansion of the Mayan  tongues” (p. 31). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:19; Mosiah 9:6‒7; Mosiah 23:30‒35;  Alma 27:22. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon contains examples  of both kinds of linguistic “pockets,” both by intrusion and  engulfment. So the correspondence is specific and detailed. It  perhaps is not unusual, however. Joseph Smith might have  reflected on the intrusion of English into the French peoples of  Canada, or on the immigration of so many Germans during the  Revolutionary War … and then woven this idea seamlessly into the  Book of Mormon. Unlikely in the extreme, but possible. To  be (probably overly) conservative we rate this one as specific and  detailed, but not unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 In their creation stories, a great flood caused by human  wickedness Coe’s  standard. “men made from flesh. … [Humankind] turned to  wickedness and … were in their turn annihilated … as … a great  flood swept the earth” (p. 41). “the last Creation before  our own ended with a great flood” (p. 249). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 5:11, Alma 10:22. Analysis  of correspondence: The Lehite colony had the five books of Moses,  and thus the flood story. Among the Maya and the Lehites, the great  flood was specifically due to the wickedness of men. So the  correspondence was specific and detailed. However, because  Joseph Smith may have read View of the Hebrews (however  unlikely that may be), we are not allowing this correspondence to be  unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Possible settlement of the Americas by seafarers Coe’s  standard: “The presence or absence of the Bering Strait is thus  not necessarily relevant to the problem [of the settlement of the  Americas]: the very first Americans may well have taken a maritime  route” (p. 41). “From the setting sun we came … from  beyond the sea” (p. 224). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 18:8, 23; Omni 1:16; Ether  6:12. Analysis  of correspondence: Coe is specific on this point, but not  particularly detailed, at least as regards his interpretation of the Annals of the Kaqchikels . In contrast, the Annals themselves  seem to be very specific and detailed on [Page 114] this point. According to the  Kaqchikels, their ancestors came from the west, beyond the sea. The  Book of Mormon is specific that both the Jaredite and  Lehite migrations were by sea, and the Lehites came from the west. We  are not told how the Mulekites arrived. In Joseph’s day, most  educated persons believed in a Bering Strait migration of the  ancestors of the American Indians, perhaps by the land bridge. So for  Joseph to say that the Book of Mormon peoples came by sea  was unusual. However, in deference to Coe’s different  interpretation of the Annals from a plain reading of that  quotation, we rate this one as specific and unusual, but not  detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Steep decline and disappearance of an ancient culture a few  hundred years BC Coe’s  standard: “There is some consensus among archaeologists that  the Olmecs of southern Mexico had elaborated many of these traits  beginning over 3,000 years ago, and that much of complex culture in  Mesoamerica has an Olmec origin” (p. 14). “The Olmec  civilization went into a steep decline ca 400 BC”  (p. 61). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:21; Book of Ether, especially chapters  13‒15. Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence is detailed and specific.  It also is unusual. What information or possible model did  Joseph Smith have to “guess” a steep cultural decline  among a very ancient American Indian culture at the same time  the evidence summarized in The Maya says the decline occurred?  In a word, how did he “guess” this one? Likelihood =  0.02 Strong class distinctions based on noble birth, wealth and  specialized learning Coe’s  standard: “The esoteric knowledge of the Maya … served to  separate and elevate people in the know from those denied that  privilege” (p. 96). “Now, while among some other peoples  such kin groups are theoretically equal, among the Maya this was not  so, … for there were strongly demarcated classes” (p. 235).  “At the top were the nobles, … who had private lands and held the  more important political offices, as well as filling the roles of  high-ranking warriors, wealthy farmers and merchants, and clergy. The  commoners were the free workers of the population, … but in all  likelihood even these persons were graded into rich and poor. There  is some indication of a class of serfs, who worked the private  lands of the nobles” (p. 235). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 32:2; Alma 51:21; 3 Nephi 6:11‒12;  4 Nephi 1:26. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, and both the  Book of Mormon and The Maya agree in the details  upon which class distinctions were based, namely birth, wealth, and  learning. While distinctions based on wealth and learning probably  would not have seemed [Page 115] unusual to Joseph Smith (coming from the  working poor class), distinctions based on noble birth might have  seemed unusual. To be conservative, we will not count this as  unusual, only specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Sacrifice of children and others to Maya gods Coe’s  standard: “When the [Temple of the Feathered Serpent] was  dedicated ca AD 200, at least 200 individuals were sacrificed  in its honor” (p. 100). “The honored deceased was buried …  and [was] accompanied not only by rich offerings of pottery and other  artifacts, but also by up to three persons sacrificed for the  occasion (generally children or adolescents)” (p. 104). “Human  sacrifice was perpetrated on … children (bastards or orphans bought  for the occasion), … fit offerings for the Maya gods”  (p. 243‒44). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 4:14‒15, 21. Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is detailed and specific in both  books. However, we do not count it as unusual. The practice of  sacrificing children and infants is described in the Bible, and  Joseph might have learned about it there. Likelihood = 0.1 Multiple correspondences with Egyptian culture and concepts Coe’s  standard: “The function of Maya pyramids as funerary monuments  thus harks back to Preclassic times” (p. 76). “The Temple of  the Inscriptions was a funerary monument with exactly the same  primary function as the Egyptian pyramids” (p. 157). Not  mentioned by Coe are several additional ties with Egypt. First, there  is the fact that both the Egyptians and the Maya regarded the five  days at the end of the year as unlucky. 31 “A much-dreaded interval of 5 unlucky days added at the end”  (p. 64). Second, the Hero Twins in the Maya story “resurrected  their father Hun Hunahpu, the Maize God” (p. 71), just as  Horus, the son of Osiris, resurrected his father in ancient Egyptian  religion. 32 Third and 4th include hieroglyphic writing, and grave goods. We  wonder why Coe, who certainly knows of these additional  correspondences between the Maya and the Egyptians, did not mention  them. So we did it for him. Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 1:2; Alma 10:3; Mormon  9:32. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence here is the tie with Egypt  on multiple levels. The Book of Mormon claims to be written  “in the characters called among us, the reformed Egyptian.” Nephi  starts out his record telling us that he made it “in the language  of the Egyptians.” Furthermore, Lehi was a descendant of  Manasseh, who was born in Egypt of an Egyptian mother. The  correspondences are detailed and specific as far as the Egyptian ties [Page 116] are concerned, and very unusual. Why would Joseph Smith have  “guessed” that the ancestors of the Indians had these ties with  Egypt? This correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual, but  since Dr. Coe mentioned only one of several possible ties with  Egypt, we will downgrade the correspondence from 0.02 (specific,  detailed and unusual) to merely specific, or Likelihood = 0.5 Mobile populations, founding new cities Coe’s  standard: “Many dynasties were founded in the Early Classic  period. Several … appear to have hived off from the southern  Lowlands” (p. 108). “What is clear is that, far more than  once thought, people moved about in the Early Classic periods”  (p. 109). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:12‒15; Alma 8:7; Alma 27:22; Alma  47:35. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya are full of examples in which large and small groups set out on  their own to found new cities. In the Book of Mormon we  have Nephi’s people separating from the other Lehites after their  arrival in the New World; Mosiah and his people leaving the main body  of Lehites and joining the people of Zarahemla; Zeniff and his people  going up to reclaim the land of their first inheritance; the people  of Ammon moving to avoid destruction; the flight of the people who  followed Alma the Elder, and so on. The correspondence is specific  and detailed, but probably not unusual. Joseph Smith and his  family were themselves part of a highly mobile American frontier  population, busy founding new communities. Likelihood = 0.1 Menial workers, extreme inequality, ignorance and oppression Coe’s  standard: “The royal cooks and cleaners or other menials …  did not merit mention” (p. 129). “Among some other peoples  such kin groups are theoretically equal, among the Maya this was not  so. … The commoners were the free workers, … but in all  likelihood even these persons were graded into rich and poor. … And  at the bottom were the slaves who were mostly plebeians taken in war.  … Slavery was hereditary” (p. 235). (See the entirety of  p. 235.) Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:26‒33; Alma 32:4‒5; Alma 35:9;  3 Nephi 6:10 –12 . Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon details the same  sources of inequality as does The Maya : those owing to  education, social status and wealth. So the correspondence is  specific and detailed. Again, alas, this correspondence would  certainly not have been unusual to Joseph and his family … as  relatively poor “commoners [and] free workers,” using Coe’s  words. Since this correspondence has some overlap with 2.9, we reduce  its probative weight from 0.1 to 0.5. Likelihood = 0.5 [Page 117] Marketplaces exist Coe’s  standard: “a variety of men, women and even children involved  in the buying and selling of commodities including shelled maize,  maize tamales , atole (maize gruel), salt and even vases”  (p. 145). “These are unique scenes of daily life within  a bustling marketplace. … Such markets have been found at  a number of other Classic Maya cities” (p. 146). “There  was a great market at Chichen Itza” (p. 233). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 7:10. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon is specific about  the existence of markets, but not detailed, except that there was  a “chief” market in Zarahemla, which was also the leading  city of the Nephite civilization at that time, strongly implying that  there were other, less prominent markets in Zarahemla or elsewhere. The Maya is highly detailed, however. This is undoubtedly  unusual. What North American tribes did Joseph Smith know of  that had settled, stationary marketplaces? So how did he “guess”  that one correctly? Specific and unusual for a likelihood of  0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 People driven from their homes wander searching for a new home Coe’s  standard: “The Itza … were driven from this town … and  wandered east across the land, … where they settled as squatters in  the desolate city [of Chichen Itza]” (p. 216) “Those Itza  who were driven from Chichen Itza [wandered back] to the Lake Peten  Itza” (p. 219). Book of Mormon  correspondence: The Lehites were driven from their Jerusalem home  and wandered for years before they found a home in the New  World. Alma the Elder and his people were driven from their homes by  King Noah and wandered in the wilderness until they found a home.  The Anti-Nephi-Lehis were likewise driven from their homes and had to  seek a new home in a strange land. Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence is specific and detailed  in both books. It also seems unusual. Where would Joseph Smith  have gotten this idea of a wandering people seeking for a new  home? Most people do not read the Aeneid until college, if  they ever read it at all. What other literary work might Joseph have  gotten this idea from? Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood =  0.02 Wasteful architectural extravagance Coe’s  standard: “intensification of inter-elite competition,  manifesting itself in different ways: not only in ‘wasteful  architectural extravagance'” (p. 175). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 11:8‒11. Analysis  of correspondence: In both books, the correspondence is specific  and detailed as to ornamentation and costly excess for the thrones,  palaces, etc., of the elite. Joseph Smith was an unsophisticated  young man who had [Page 118] lived his life as a member of the working  poor. How would he know about such extravagance? How would he know  how to describe such ornate things without going overboard? Where  would he have seen such things? This is certainly unusual. So the  correspondence is specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood =  0.02 Large northward migrations specifically mentioned Coe’s  standard: “They could have been the Yukateko on their trek  north to Yucatan from the Maya homeland” (p. 47). “Old  thrones toppled in the south as a new political order took shape  in the north; southern cities fell into the dust as northern ones  flourished” (p. 174). “The early Colonial chronicles in  Yukateko speak of a ‘Great Descent’ and ‘Lesser Descent,’  implying two mighty streams of refugees heading north from the  abandoned cities” (p. 177). The Yukateko trek took place many  centuries before the Late Classic migration northward, so this kind  of thing happened in widely different periods. Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 63:4‒9; Helaman 3:3‒12. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon speaks repeatedly  of the “land northward” as the place where the Nephites could  flee or go into to settle. The land northward was where the Nephites  made their last stand and were finally destroyed. These northward  flights also took place over centuries. This is really a “bull’s  eye” for the Book of Mormon: a specific, detailed  and unusual correspondence. Likelihood = 0.02 Constant migrations Coe’s  standard: “At some point … there was a single Mayan  language, Proto-Mayan, perhaps located in the western Guatemalan  highlands. According to one linguistic scenario, Wastekan and  Yukatekan split off from this parent body, with Wastek migrating up  the Gulf Coast to northern Veracruz and Tamaulipas in Mexico, and  Yukatekan occupying the Yucatan Peninsula. … The parent body then  split into two groups, a Western and an Eastern Division. In the  Western group, the ancestral Ch’olan-Tseltalan moved down into the  Central Area, where they split into Ch’olan and Tseltalan. The  subsequent history of the Tseltalans is fairly well known: in  Highland Chiapas, many thousands of their descendants, the Tsotsil  and Tseltal, maintain unchanged the old Maya patterns of life. …  Other Western language groups include Q’anjob’al, Tojol-ab’al,  Mocho’, and Chuj, which stayed close to the probable homeland …  The Eastern Division includes the Mamean group of languages. Mam  itself spilled down to the Pacific coastal plain at an unknown time”  (p. 28). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See: Words of Mormon 1:13; Mosiah 10:10; Alma  2:16, 32; Alma 54:16‒20. [Page 119] Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. Book of Mormon  peoples indeed moved around a lot, just as The Maya describes . But apart from the large northward migrations  already described in 2.17 above, other details are lacking. Also,  this is certainly not unusual. Joseph Smith and his family were  part of a mass westward migration of Americans that had been  going on for a very long time. Likelihood = 0.5 Cities and lands named after founder Coe’s  standard: “an individual called Ek’ Balam, … after whom the  place was anciently named” (p. 194). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 23:31; Alma 8:7; Alma 17:19;  3 Nephi 9:9. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in both the  Book of Mormon and The Maya , but Coe does not  mention many examples of this practice, so it is not detailed to the  same degree it is in the Book of Mormon. Also, in frontier  America it was common practice to name small towns and villages after  the founder or founding family. So this practice would not have been  unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 Maya say their ancestors came from the west, beyond the sea Coe’s  standard: “From the setting sun we came, from Tula, from beyond  the sea” (p. 224). Book of Mormon  correspondence: 1 Nephi 18:8, 23. This is clearly the  claim of the Book of Mormon: the Lehite colony came from  the west from beyond the sea. Analysis  of correspondence: Coe discounts this statement as self-serving  political propaganda by those claiming descent from those hailing  from “the legendary home in the west.” Perhaps, but why would it  have any political power if the claim itself did not somehow matter  to the populace? And since Dr. Coe thinks the Book of Mormon  is fiction (or legend), then the Book of Mormon is accurate  and detailed in also making that claim, even if fictional. Given  similar statements in View of the Hebrews , we do not count  this as unusual, but it is both specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Their sacred writing has poetic parallelisms, repetitions Coe’s  standard: “‘The raised wooden standard shall come! … Our  lord comes, Itza! Our elder brother comes, oh men of Tantun! Receive  your guests, the bearded men, the men of the east, the bearers of the  sign of God, lord!'” (Thus said the prophet Chilam Balam,  p. 227). From one of the books of Chilam Balam as follows: “Eat,  eat, thou hast bread; Drink, drink, thou hast water; On that  day, dust possesses the earth; [Page 120] On that day, a blight is on  the face of the earth, On that day, a cloud rises; On that  day, a mountain rises; On that day, a strong man seizes  the land; On that day, things fall to ruin, On that day, the  tender leaf is destroyed, On that day, the dying eyes are  closed, On that day, three signs are on the tree, On that day,  three generations hang there, On that day, the battle flag is  raised, And they are scattered afar in the forests, On that  day, the battle flag is raised, And they are scattered afar in the  forests.” (p. 229). In the  podcasts, referring specifically to chiasmus and poetic parallelisms,  Coe says that “something like that” exists in Maya literature,  even as little of that literature as we have. And Coe praises  Professor Allen Christenson’s translation of the Popol Vuh as  “wonderful.” 33 Christenson’s translation is explicitly rendered in poetic  parallelisms and chiasms. 34 Book of Mormon  correspondence : The reader is referred to Professor Donald  Parry’s reformatted version of the Book of Mormon in  parallelisms and repetitions. 35 Analysis  of the correspondence : It is simply without doubt that the  Book of Mormon is written in poetic parallelisms and  repetitions. We have Coe’s own citations from Chilam Balam, his  praise of Christenson’s translation of the Popul Vuh, etc., to  confirm that this correspondence is specific, and detailed. As to  “unusual,” Coe says in the podcasts that the fact that the  Book of Mormon has chiasms and poetic parallelisms “means  nothing,” that this type of language is found around the world. 36 Coe thinks  that the Book of Mormon has such language because  Joseph Smith knew the Old Testament “very, very well.” We  disagree completely. The Hebrew [Page 121] chiasms and poetic parallelisms in  the Old Testament were largely erased by the scholars who translated  the King James Bible into English. Even if  Joseph Smith knew about this kind of language, it is entirely  another thing to be able to write (or more challenging yet, dictate)  more than 300 separate chiasms into the Book of Mormon in  such a way that they integrate seamlessly with the message of  the book. Moreover, none of Joseph Smith’s own written sermons  or other writings use these poetic parallelisms. If Dr. Coe is  correct, why did Joseph Smith write these poetic parallelisms  into the Book of Mormon and then completely stop writing  like this? We find this objection inconsistent and uniformed. We invite  Dr. Coe or anyone else to dictate a chiasm like Alma Chapter 36.  They can’t do it. This is unusual in the extreme. We would like to  give it a much higher weight (one in a billion?) but our  own weighting scheme forbids that. Instead, we give it a likelihood  of 0.02. Likelihood = 0.02 Corn first among grains Coe’s  standard: “This crop [maize] is so fundamental today that its  cultivation and consumption define what it means to be Maya”  (p. 242). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 7:22; Mosiah 9: 9, 14. Analysis  of correspondence: In the Book of Mormon, corn is the  first grain mentioned; and not just once but all three times corn is  mentioned in the Book of Mormon, it is the first or the  only grain mentioned, not wheat. So this correspondence is specific  and detailed. But we do not count it as unusual, because View of  the Hebrews also mentions the primacy of corn among the Indians. Likelihood = 0.1 Multiple wives/concubines especially among the rich Coe’s  standard: “From the ceramics at a site such as El Perú we  get an idea of the palace staff described in Chapter 4: the courtiers  and attendants, royal ladies or concubines” (p. 129).  “Monogamy was the general custom, but important men who could  afford it took more wives” (p. 234). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jacob 1:15; Jacob 2:27; Mosiah 11:4; Ether  10:5. Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is specific in both books, and is  generally limited to rich men taking more wives. So the practice is  also detailed to that extent. Joseph would have been aware of the  practice of multiple wives among the Biblical patriarchs, and also  with David and Solomon. Among some Indian tribes, important men also  took multiple wives. So it is not unusual. Specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 [Page 122] Important to trace one’s genealogy to a prominent ancestor Coe’s  standard: “ to be able to trace one’s genealogy in both lines  to an ancient ancestry was an important matter, for there were  strongly demarcated classes” (p. 235). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 25:13; Alma 10:1‒3; 3 Nephi 5:20;  Ether 1:6‒33; Ether 6:22‒25; Mormon 1:5; Mormon 8:13. Analysis  of correspondence: Coe describes this practice clearly and in  some detail. The Book of Mormon also describes it clearly  and in great detail. Why would this idea occur to Joseph Smith  in democratic frontier America in the early 1800s? America had  recently thrown off the rule of a class-based society, the  British. So the correspondence also seems unusual. Specific, detailed  and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Genealogies kept very carefully by the priests Coe’s  standard: “According to the early sources, the Maya books  contained histories, prophecies, maps, tribute accounts, songs,  ‘sciences,’ and genealogies” (p. 239). “Far more is  known of later Maya priests. … [They] kept the all-important  genealogies” (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 3:3, 12; 1 Nephi 5:14;  1 Nephi 6:1; Jarom 1:1; Omni 1:1, 18; Alma 37:3. Analysis  of correspondence: This practice of the priests (religious  leaders) carefully keeping genealogies is specific and detailed in  both The Maya and in the Book of Mormon. It is also  unusual. We know of no contemporary practice or model in Joseph’s  Smith’s world that put such emphasis on priests keeping a careful,  written, long-term record of one’s ancestors, a record handed  down over centuries. Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood =  0.02 Homosexuality probably practiced Coe’s  standard: “The latter include … amorous activities that are  probably of a homosexual nature” (p. 258). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 30:18. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon’s reference to  homosexual practices is veiled, but clear enough. How else does a man  commit “whoredoms”? There are no details in either book, and the  practice is not unusual. Likelihood = 0.5 Arcane sacred or prestige language Coe’s  standard: “Ch’olti’an became a literary language of  high prestige among scribes … [and like other prestige languages in  other civilizations] continued to be the preferred written languages  long after the spoken ones had died out or transformed into something  else” (pp. 30‒31). “Ch’olti’ … may well have served  as a lingua franca among elites and surely evolved, as [Page 123] did Medieval Latin and Coptic, into an arcane sacred language used by  few” (p. 270). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 1:2 and 3:19; Mosiah 1:2,  4; Mormon 9:34. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon emphasizes “the  language of the fathers,” a written language connected to the  language of the Egyptians. It is the language in which the plates  were written and was known to very few. It was obviously not the  common language. The reference is specific for both books, detailed  and unusual. Joseph Smith had not even mastered English at the  time the Book of Mormon came forth and certainly knew  nothing of Coptic or Medieval Latin, which he might have used as  a model for this correspondence. Likelihood = 0.02 Practice of repopulating old or abandoned cities Coe’s  standard: “the Itza … moved into the peninsula … in the  thirteenth century, and gave their name to the formerly Toltec site  of Chichen” (p. 202). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 9:8; Helaman 11:20; 4 Nephi 1:7. Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is specific in both books,  although Coe offers only one example for detail while the  Book of Mormon offers several examples. It is doubtful that  Joseph Smith knew of any examples around him that could serve as  a model for this practice. America was being built up by  founding new cities and towns, not repopulating old or abandoned  ones. So the correspondence is specific and unusual. Because Coe  cites only one example, we will not claim it to be detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 World divided into four quarters or quadrants Coe’s  standard: “Another pervasive idea was the division of the world  into sectors [four of them]. … In the Classic period, eagles were  thought to perch in each of the four directions” (p. 246).  “The four walls of spectacular … royal tombs … display distinct  hills. … Placed in the middle, the deceased became the center of  the universe” (p. 247). “a map of world directions, adorned  with gods and sacrifices appropriate to each quarter, …  celebrations … presided over by a set of four young gods,  a nod to the four directions” (p. 249). “The  Zinacanteco world is conceived of as a large quincunx, with four  corners and a ‘navel of the earth’ in the middle”  (p. 292). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 22:25; 3 Nephi 16:5;  Ether 13:11. Analysis  of correspondence: Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  are specific and detailed about the idea that the world is divided  into four quarters. If Joseph Smith was making this up, why not  into halves, or thirds or eighths? Coe (p. 247) notes that this  idea is widespread and very ancient among humankind, which is  probably why we ourselves talk in this way [Page 124] about the four quarters of  the earth, without giving it much thought. Specific and detailed, but  for this reason, not unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Maya fascinated by ancient Olmec culture Coe’s  standard: “there are also good reasons to believe that it was  the Olmecs who devised the elaborate Long Count calendar. … Many  other civilizations, including the Maya, ultimately drew on Olmec  achievements” (p. 54). “In art, in religion, in state  complexity, and perhaps even in the calendar and astronomy, Olmec  models were transferred to the Maya” (p. 61). “The Maya  looked to the west [toward Olmec lands] … as the enduring locus of  civilization” (p. 63). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Because of the 24 gold plates found by the people  of Limhi among the ruins of an ancient civilization, The  Book of Mormon also looks to an ancient, destroyed  civilization as a source of knowledge, but apparently  exclusively as a source of depraved knowledge of “secret  combinations” rather than of useful accomplishments. For example,  see Mosiah 8:9; Alma 37:29, 32; Ether 8:9 and 9:26. It is interesting  that both the Jaredites and the Maya were ultimately destroyed  because of “endemic, internecine warfare” (Coe’s words; see  above). Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is certainly specific, but  the details do not match, perhaps because of the very different  orientations of the two books. The Book of Mormon tells us  that the Nephites were destroyed because of their embrace of the  secret combinations also found in the book of Ether, so the  Book of Mormon probably would not be inclined to tell us if  anything useful and good came from the Jaredite records. It is also  unusual. Why would Joseph Smith “guess” that the ancient  Indians looked toward an even more ancient civilization for guidance,  either for good or bad? This correspondence is specific and unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Lineage histories dominate the written records Coe’s  standard: “It was not just the ‘stela cult’ — the  inscribed glorification of royal lineages and their achievements —  that disappeared with the Collapse” (p. 177), “Native  lineages seem to have deliberately falsified their own histories for  political reasons” (p. 199). “[A postclassic site] …  consists of plazas surrounded by lineage temples” (p. 225n145). Book of Mormon  correspondence: The Book of Mormon is a lineage  history. It begins with the story of Lehi and his family, and was  later edited and compiled by Mormon (“a pure descendant of  Lehi,” 3 Nephi 5:20) and his son Moroni. The Book of  Ether is likewise a lineage history. Ether was a direct  descendant, through many centuries, of Jared. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books. It is also unusual. How could Joseph Smith have  learned about lineage histories, and woven this correspondence into  the fabric of the [Page 125] Book of Mormon in such an unobtrusive and  comprehensive way? How did he “guess” this one correctly? Likelihood = 0.02

[24] Coe’s  standard: “The function of Maya pyramids as funerary monuments  thus harks back to Preclassic times” (p. 76). “The Temple of  the Inscriptions was a funerary monument with exactly the same  primary function as the Egyptian pyramids” (p. 157). Not  mentioned by Coe are several additional ties with Egypt. First, there  is the fact that both the Egyptians and the Maya regarded the five  days at the end of the year as unlucky. 31 “A much-dreaded interval of 5 unlucky days added at the end”  (p. 64). Second, the Hero Twins in the Maya story “resurrected  their father Hun Hunahpu, the Maize God” (p. 71), just as  Horus, the son of Osiris, resurrected his father in ancient Egyptian  religion. 32 Third and 4th include hieroglyphic writing, and grave goods. We  wonder why Coe, who certainly knows of these additional  correspondences between the Maya and the Egyptians, did not mention  them. So we did it for him.

[25] In the  podcasts, referring specifically to chiasmus and poetic parallelisms,  Coe says that “something like that” exists in Maya literature,  even as little of that literature as we have. And Coe praises  Professor Allen Christenson’s translation of the Popol Vuh as  “wonderful.” 33 Christenson’s translation is explicitly rendered in poetic  parallelisms and chiasms. 34

[26] Book of Mormon  correspondence : The reader is referred to Professor Donald  Parry’s reformatted version of the Book of Mormon in  parallelisms and repetitions. 35

[27] Analysis  of the correspondence : It is simply without doubt that the  Book of Mormon is written in poetic parallelisms and  repetitions. We have Coe’s own citations from Chilam Balam, his  praise of Christenson’s translation of the Popul Vuh, etc., to  confirm that this correspondence is specific, and detailed. As to  “unusual,” Coe says in the podcasts that the fact that the  Book of Mormon has chiasms and poetic parallelisms “means  nothing,” that this type of language is found around the world. 36

[28] Extreme cruelty to enemy captives Coe’s  standard: “the opposite of refinement in an unmistakable  dehumanization of reviled enemies, a delight in their pain and  dishonor” (p. 96). “The Leiden Plaque, which once dangled  from a ruler’s belt, has engraved on one face a richly  ornamented Maya lord … trampling underfoot a sorry- looking  captive, a theme repeated on so many Maya stelae of later times”  (pp. 98‒99). “miserable prisoners have been stripped, and  are having the nails torn from their fingers or their hands  lacerated. An important captive sprawls on the steps, perhaps  tortured to exhaustion, and a severed head lies nearby on a bed  of leaves. A naked figure seated on the platform summit pleads  for his life to the central figure, Yajaw Kan Muwaan” (p. 150). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Moroni 9:8‒10. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific in both books,  and the details are similar in the sense of torture to death and  extreme, even inhumane, cruelty. Some Indian tribes may have done  similar things, but not all tribes did it at all times to all  captives, and some tribes adopted white children. The Revolutionary  War was not marked with this kind of behavior on either side. So we  think it is specific, detailed but only somewhat unusual. To be  conservative, we assign this one a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Defensive earthworks with deep ditches, breastworks and palisades Coe’s  standard: “Becan … was completely surrounded by massive  defensive earthworks sometime between the second and fourth centuries  AD. These consist of a ditch and inner rampart, 38 ft (11.6 m)  high, and would have been formidable, according to David Webster, if  the rampart had been surmounted by a palisade” (p. 122).  “Warfare had in fact become a real problem to all the major  Petexbatun sites, and a system of defensive walls … topped by  wooden palisades was constructed around and within them” (p. 151). [Page 134] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 49:4, 18‒22; Alma 50:1‒5; Alma  53:4. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, it matches  perfectly in the details, and it is highly unusual. What military  example had Joseph Smith ever heard of or seen that was anything  like this defensive arrangement? According to David Webster, the  Conquistador Hernan Cortes marveled when he saw the Maya towns  defended in exactly this fashion (details below). We would  like to give this correspondence a weighting of a million  to one against the likelihood that Joseph Smith guessed it, but  our data weighting approach does not permit a likelihood of  0.000001; instead it is Likelihood = 0.02 For those  who are interested, here are some additional details from Dr.  Webster’s work that show how exactly Joseph “guessed” this  correspondence, and how amazed Cortes was: Conquistador  Hernan Cortes described fortified cities in the Maya lowlands, as  quoted by Dr. David Webster of Pennsylvania State University. Here is  Cortes’s description of the defenses he encountered among the  Lowland Maya: “There is only one level entrance, the whole  town being surrounded by a deep (dry) moat behind which is  a wooden palisade as high as man’s breast. Behind this  palisade lies a wall of very heavy boards, some twelve feet  tall, with embrasures through which to shoot their arrows; the  lookout posts rise another eight feet above the wall, which likewise  has large towers with many stones to hurl down on the enemy. …  Indeed, it was so well planned with regard to the manner of weapons  they use, they could not be better defended” 37 Dr.  Webster also wrote another relevant, interesting study. Here are some  of Dr. Webster’s findings from his study regarding the dry moat or  defensive ditch that surrounded the city of Becan, in the Yucatan  Peninsula of southeastern Mexico: “The ditch and parapet derive  their main defensive strength from sheer size. What I call the  ‘critical depth’ of the fortifications (the vertical distance  from the top of the embankment to the bottom of the ditch would have  averaged something over 11 meters (about 36 feet). … The steep  angles of the inner ditch and wall and parapet slope could not have  been climbed without the aid of ladders; an enemy force caught in the  bottom of the ditch would have been at the mercy of the defenders,  whose most effective weapon under the circumstances would have been  large rocks. … To throw ‘uphill’ from the outside is almost  impossible. Defenders [Page 135] …could have rained long-distance missiles on  approaching enemies using spear throwers and slings.” 38 Thus the  Maya at the time of the Spanish Conquest used the same kind of city  defense that Moroni had used about 1600 years earlier, namely (1)  a single entrance to the city, (2) very deep ditches around the  city, (3) banks of earth built above the ditches, (4) strong works of  timbers built on top of these banks of earth above ditches, and (5)  even taller towers built on the timbers. From these works of timbers  and from the towers, the defenders could rain down arrows and  especially rocks (a cheap but effective weapon), on their attackers.  And the attackers couldn’t effectively get at the defenders — so  they were slaughtered. So  Joseph Smith was either a military genius himself, or he  guessed it. Yes, he guessed it in all this detail. A 24-year- old  farm kid from upstate New York invented this superb defensive  military arrangement, totally unlike anything in the warfare of his  time, and which greatly impressed an experienced soldier like Hernan  Cortes. Walled cities, especially during wartime Coe’s  standard: “When city walls are found, as at Dos Pilas, Ek’  Balam, and Uxmal, they seem to date to the final years of the Classic  period, when, in places, local conditions became hostile” (p. 126).  “The triple defensive wall that surrounds the site indicates that  conditions in this remote part of the Maya lowlands were dangerously  unsettled in the Terminal Classic” (p. 194). “Mayapan … is  a residential metropolis covering about 2.5 sq. miles (6.5 sq.  km) and completely surrounded by a defensive wall” (p. 216). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 9:8; Helaman 1:21; Helaman 13:4. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, and is  detailed in the sense that the walls seem to appear mostly in time of  war. However, Coe does not see much evidence for the presence of  walls until the late Classic, and since View of the Hebrews also refers to walled towns, we rate this one as merely specific. Likelihood = 0.5 Thick clothing used as armor Coe’s  standard: “Left arms were protected by quilted padding”  (p. 201). “[This is how] Maya warfare was waged. The holkanob ,  or “braves,” were the foot soldiers; they wore cuirasses of  quilted cotton or tapir hide” (p. 236). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 43:19. [Page 136] Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is both specific and  detailed. In both The Maya and the Book of Mormon,  thick clothing was used as armor. It is also unusual. We know of no  contemporary model or example that Joseph Smith could have  relied upon to correctly “guess” this correspondence. Even today  we doubt that one person in a hundred would know that ancient  Mesoamerican warriors wore heavy cotton clothing as armor. Likelihood = 0.02 Fighting with “darts” Coe’s  standard: “Taneko found 217 projectile points … [that] had  been used on darts propelled by atlatls, — mute testimony to  a final battle sealing the city’s death” (p. 175). “the  Toltec warrior, … carrying a feather-decorated atlatl in one  hand and a bunch of darts in the other” (p. 201) ” …  carried … darts-with-spearthrower. … [The infantry] rained darts,  arrows, and stones flung from slings” (p. 236). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jarom 1:8. Analysis  of correspondence : The Book of Mormon and The Maya specifically contrast fighting with bows and arrows or spears as  being different from fighting with “darts.” What experience or  knowledge did Joseph Smith have of fighting with darts? How many  educated people, even today, would know about fighting with  a “dart-thrower” or atlatl? So this correspondence is  specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Endemic, internecine warfare destroyed the societies Coe’s  standard: “there might have been fierce internecine warfare or  perhaps even a popular revolt” (p. 116). “But most Maya  archaeologists now agree that three factors were paramount in the  downfall: endemic internecine warfare” (p. 175). “The Maya  were obsessed with war. The Annals of the Kaqchikels and the Popol Vuh speak of little but intertribal conflict among the  highlanders, while the 16 states of Yucatan were constantly battling  with each other over boundaries and lineage honor” (p. 236). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See, among others, Omni 1:10; Alma 62:39; Mormon  8:8. Analysis  of correspondence: With a few blessed exceptions, the  Book of Mormon describes continuing war and conflict both  between and among the Nephites and Lamanites, a conflict that  ultimately results in the destruction of both groups. When the  Book of Mormon brings down the curtain, the Lamanites are  at war with each other, and “no one knoweth the end of the war.”  This is in fact “endemic, internecine warfare,” the very words  used by Coe. There was no contemporary example or model that  Joseph Smith could use to “guess” a 1,000-year-long  conflict that finally destroyed all the parties involved, so the  correspondence is also specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood  = 0.02 [Page 137] Warfare with ambushes and traps Coe’s  standard: “Nor did the Maya fight in the accepted fashion.  Attacking the Spaniards at night, plotting ambushes and traps, they  were jungle guerrillas” (p. 227). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See the whole of chapters 43 and 52 of Alma. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and features  some detail in both books, especially in the Book of Mormon  (in keeping with the fact that the principal editor of the  Book of Mormon was the commander of the armies of his  people during nearly his entire adult life). But it is not unusual.  The Indians of North America were also masters of ambush, and Joseph  would have known this. There is also probably not enough detail in The Maya to upgrade the correspondence to specific and  detailed. Specific only. Likelihood = 0.5 Raids to take captives/slaves Coe’s  standard: “Hostilities typically began with an unannounced  guerrilla raid into the enemy camp to take captives. … Lesser  captives ended up as slaves” (p. 236). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 16:3‒4; Alma 60:17; Helaman  11:33. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed in  both books. However, it is not unusual. Indians also raided the  whites and each other to take captives/slaves. Joseph Smith  would likely have known of this practice. Likelihood = 0.1 Warriors dressing to inspire fear Coe’s  standard: “Teotihuacan fighting men were armed with atlatl -propelled darts and rectangular shields, and bore  round, decorated, pyrite mosaic mirrors on their backs; with their  eyes sometimes partly hidden by white shell ‘goggles,’ and their  feather headdresses, they must have been terrifying figures to their  opponents” (pp. 99‒100). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 4:7. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. In both books  warriors sometimes dressed to inspire fear in their opponents. But  the details do not line up very well, and this is probably not  unusual. Indian warriors, for example, used war paint in part to  inspire fear. So this correspondence is rated specific only. Likelihood = 0.5 Stones and slings used as weapons for fighting Coe’s  standard: “On either side of the war, leaders and the idols  carried into combat under the care of priests [who] flanked the  infantry, from which rained darts, arrows, and stones flung from  slings” (p. 236). [Page 138] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 17:36. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is certainly specific and  detailed enough. Stones slung from slings were used to kill  opponents. It also seems unusual. While Joseph Smith could have  gotten the idea from the Bible, why would he correctly “guess”  that some of the ancestors of the Indians fought with stones and  slings? The Indians of northeastern North America, of whom he did  know something, did not fight with stones and slings. Specific,  detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02 Cannibalism practiced on captives Coe’s  standard: “ In general, only captive lords were considered fit  for sacrifice, or for consumption in cannibalistic rites” (p. 225). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Moroni 9:10. Analysis  of correspondence: The practice is detailed enough and certainly  specific in both books. However, it probably does not qualify as  unusual. Joseph Smith may have heard of the ritual cannibalism  practiced by the Iroquois. Likelihood = 0.1 Deliberate destruction of the records/monuments Coe’s  standard: “By c . 1150 BC, San Lorenzo was destroyed by  an unknown hand, and its monuments mutilated and smashed”  (pp. 52–54). “There are signs of widespread, purposeful  mutilation of public monuments” (p. 116). “Other cities in  the Central Area eventually fell victim to the same cycle of  violence, characterized by the systematic mutilation and smashing of  stone monuments — the eyes and mouths of rulers are often pecked  out, as if to cancel their power” (p. 175). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Enos 1:13‒14; Alma 14:8; Mormon 2:17. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is certainly specific, but  the details as practiced among the Maya seem to be directed toward  stone objects, while in the Book of Mormon the intended  destruction was directed toward the scriptures, both the metal plates  and the combustible scriptures, as in Alma 14:8. The practice seems  unusual. What accessible written source or contemporary practice  would Joseph Smith have known about in which the monuments of  enemies were deliberately destroyed? We do not think this merits  a likelihood of 0.02, but it does merit evidentiary strength  greater than merely specific. Likelihood = 0.1

[29] Conquistador  Hernan Cortes described fortified cities in the Maya lowlands, as  quoted by Dr. David Webster of Pennsylvania State University. Here is  Cortes’s description of the defenses he encountered among the  Lowland Maya: “There is only one level entrance, the whole  town being surrounded by a deep (dry) moat behind which is  a wooden palisade as high as man’s breast. Behind this  palisade lies a wall of very heavy boards, some twelve feet  tall, with embrasures through which to shoot their arrows; the  lookout posts rise another eight feet above the wall, which likewise  has large towers with many stones to hurl down on the enemy. …  Indeed, it was so well planned with regard to the manner of weapons  they use, they could not be better defended” 37

[30] Dr.  Webster also wrote another relevant, interesting study. Here are some  of Dr. Webster’s findings from his study regarding the dry moat or  defensive ditch that surrounded the city of Becan, in the Yucatan  Peninsula of southeastern Mexico: “The ditch and parapet derive  their main defensive strength from sheer size. What I call the  ‘critical depth’ of the fortifications (the vertical distance  from the top of the embankment to the bottom of the ditch would have  averaged something over 11 meters (about 36 feet). … The steep  angles of the inner ditch and wall and parapet slope could not have  been climbed without the aid of ladders; an enemy force caught in the  bottom of the ditch would have been at the mercy of the defenders,  whose most effective weapon under the circumstances would have been  large rocks. … To throw ‘uphill’ from the outside is almost  impossible. Defenders [Page 135] …could have rained long-distance missiles on  approaching enemies using spear throwers and slings.” 38

[31] Millions of inhabitants in the area Coe’s  standard: “ One view perceives as many as eight to ten million  people in the lowlands c . AD 800; David Webster of  Pennsylvania State University would go as low as two to three  million” (p. 22). “But what happened to the bulk of the  population who once occupied the Central Area, apparently in the  millions?” (p. 177). “What this might mean is that we may  have to double our previous population estimates for the Central  Area, which already run into the many millions” (p. 176). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mormon 6:11‒15; Ether 15:2. Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya affirm that the populations were large, specifically in the  neighborhood of 10 million people. In 1830, the U. S. census gave  a population of about 13 million. Thus Joseph Smith  correctly “guessed” that his fictional group of Indians was  nearly as large as the entire population of the United States at the  time the Book of Mormon was published. Certainly this is  unusual. What Indian population had Joseph Smith ever seen that  was anywhere near this large? Likelihood = 0.02 Calendar kept by day, month and year Coe’s  standard: “The Maya Long Count, which will be explained in  greater detail in Chapters 3 and 9, is an absolute, day-to-day  calendar which has run like some great clock from a point in the  mythical past (p. 25). “The Maya New Year started with  1 Pop, the next day being 2 Pop, etc. The final day of the month,  however, carried not the coefficient 20, but a sign indicating  the ‘seating’ of the month to follow” (p. 64). “Maya  learning as well as ritual was in their [the Maya priests’] hands.  Among them were ‘computation of the years, months, and days, the  festivals and ceremonies'” (p. 243). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 10:6; Alma 49:1; 3 Nephi 1:1;  3 Nephi 2:7‒8; 3 Nephi 8:5. Analysis  of correspondence: Specific and detailed. Both the Book of Mormon  peoples and the peoples described in The Maya kept calendars  by day, month and year. The keeping of calendars is also unusual. The  Indian peoples of eastern North America did not keep calendars at  all, and were aware only of [Page 146] the passing of the seasons. How did  Joseph Smith “guess” that any Indians kept an absolute  calendar by day, month and year? Likelihood = 0.02 Multiple calendars kept Coe’s  standard: “Meshing with the 260-day count is a ‘Vague  Year’ or Ha’b of 365 days, so called because the actual  length of the solar year is about a quarter-day more. …  Although the Maya were perfectly aware that the Ha’b was  shorter than the tropical year, they did not change the calendar  accordingly. … From this it follows that a particular day in  the 260-day count, such as 1 K’an, also had a position in  the Ha’b , for instance 2 Pop. A day designated as  1 K’an 2 Pop could not return until 52 Ha’b (18,980 days)  had passed. This is the Calendar Round” (pp. 64‒65). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 1:1; 3 Nephi 2:7‒8. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  Not only were multiple calendars kept, both The Maya and  the Book of Mormon describe exactly how they were  kept. If the keeping of one calendar is unusual, then keeping several  different calendars is even more unusual. We would like to give this  a higher weighting than 0.02 (1 in a million?), but cannot  by the constraints we have imposed on ourselves. Likelihood =  0.02 Bee keeping, domesticated bees, honey Coe’s  standard: “And it might be that the province [Yucatan] relied  less upon plant husbandry than upon its famed production of honey,  salt, and slaves” (p. 19). “As he still does today, the Maya  farmer raised the native stingless bees, which are kept in small,  hollow logs closed with mud plaster at either end and stacked up in  A-frames, but wild honey was also much appreciated” (p. 231).  “A few depictions of vessels marked with the term kab ,  ‘honey,’ … Valuable Yucatan exports were honey, cotton mantles  and slaves” (p. 232). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Ether 2:3. Analysis  of correspondence: The Jaredites specifically brought with them  honeybees, so they had domesticated the bee. The correspondence is  specific, but it is not detailed nor unusual. Bees were domesticated  many thousands of years ago. Coe makes much of the fact that Maya  domestic bees are stingless, versus the Old World bees of genus Apis .  But the Book of Mormon does not say that the Jaredites did  not switch over to keeping native stingless bees when they arrived in  the New World (we two authors would surely have done so!), so Coe’s  point seems irrelevant to the issue. Both The Maya and the  Book of Mormon specifically note domesticated bees, and  this correspondence is also unusual. What Indian tribes did  Joseph Smith know of that practiced beekeeping? There were none.  How did he “guess” this one correctly? Likelihood = 0.1 [Page 147] Art including carving, painting, dancing, metalwork, music Coe’s  standard: “more advanced cultural traits … and the painting  of murals” (p. 26). “In one tomb, over 300 objects of the  most beautiful workmanship were placed with the body” (p. 76).  “They went from modestly dressed chieftains to true kings endowed  [in] … jade or turquoise regalia” (p. 83). “[This]  extraordinarily well-preserved fresco … is in fact the earliest  Maya painting known, dating to c. 100 BC or slightly earlier. In its  beauty and sophistication it equals the famous Late Classic murals of  Bonampak” (p. 87). “The finest Maya wood carving known, this  seated figure from Tabasco, Mexico, represents a courtier”  (p. 95n40), … including some marvelously fine jades and the  gold disks already mentioned. [Metals] had now appeared in the Maya  area, although they were probably cast and worked elsewhere and  imported. The many copper bells and other objects from the well were  of Mexican workmanship. The local lords brought treasures of  gold from places as far afield as Panama to offer to the Cenote”  (p. 212). “Santa Rita also yielded an extraordinary set of ear  ornaments in gold and turquoise” (p. 219). “Plazas were the  location for most dances. The stelae that now fill some of them  petrify kings in perpetual dance, as we can tell by their pose,  dress, and explanatory glyphs” (p. 256). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Jarom 1:8; Helaman 6:13; Helaman 12:2; Mosiah  11:8‒10, Mosiah 20:1‒5:4 Nephi 1:41. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and in many  cases detailed. Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya speak of art expressed in a variety of materials, including  wood and metals, people adorning themselves with precious things, and  dance. The correspondence is unusual. What Indian tribes known to  Joseph Smith did art work in wood and metal and had fine  jewelry? However, to be conservative, since Dr. Coe reports no  evidence for metal work in the Book of Mormon timeframe, we  will discount this correspondence from specific, detailed and unusual  to merely specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Knowledge of the movement of the stars, planets and moon Coe’s  standard: “Ancient Maya used lines of sight … to plot the  rising and setting positions of the sun, the moon, and, above all,  the planet Venus. … Maya astronomers had a remarkably accurate  knowledge of the apparent motion of Venus” (p. 193). “Venus  is the only one of the planets for which we can be absolutely sure  the Maya made extensive calculations” (p. 262). “Some have  questioned whether the movements of planets other than Venus were  observed by the Maya, but it is hard to believe that one of the  Dresden tables, listing multiples of 78, can be anything other than  a table for Mars” (pp. 262‒63). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:21; Alma 30:44; Helaman 12:13‒15;  Helaman 14:5‒6; 3 Nephi 1:21. [Page 148] Analysis  of correspondence: Alma asserts that planets (not just one  planet) “move in their regular form,” agreeing with Coe’s  statement that the Maya knew the movements of Venus and Mars. For the  Book of Mormon people to know that “a new star did  appear,” they would have to know when and where the old stars would  appear. So the correspondence is specific and detailed. It is also  unusual. What Indian tribe of the American Northeast had any such  detailed astronomical knowledge as that reported in The Maya ? Likelihood = 0.02 Writing is present, but its genealogy is complicated and poorly  understood Coe’s  standard: “All the Mesoamerican Indians shared a number of  traits which were more or less peculiar to them and absent or rare  elsewhere in the New World: hieroglyphic writing” (p. 13).  “The relation between Maya and Isthmian writing remains obscure.  The earliest Maya writing … comes from c . 300 BC, prior to  Isthmian writing. … The genealogy of Mesoamerican writing is  therefore more complicated than formerly thought” (p. 68). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 6:1‒3; Mosiah 24:6;  3 Nephi 26:6; Mormon 9:32‒34. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific and detailed.  The Mesoamerican Indians (not just the Maya) had a rare or  absent trait: they had writing. And so did the Book of Mormon  peoples. Furthermore, the genealogy of their writing is complex. It  is not clear how Mesoamerican writing arose, and the sacred written  language of the Book of Mormon authors was known to them  alone (Mormon 9:34). The correspondence is also unusual. None of the  Indian tribes known to Joseph Smith had writing. Thus it was an  extremely lucky (or foolhardy) “guess” on his part to have  claimed in his “fictional” book that some American Indians did  have writing. But he did claim it, and he was right. This  correspondence also deserves a much smaller likelihood than a 1  in 50 chance, more like 1 in a million. But to be conservative,  we assign a Likelihood = 0.02 Engraved writing on stone Coe’s  standard: Coe’s book is full of examples of writing on stone.  Here are just a few: “A magnificent stela was found … in  southeastern Veracruz; two Bak’tun 8 dates corresponding  respectively to AD 143 and 156 are inscribed on it. These are  accompanied by a text of about 400 signs … (the famous ‘Tuxtla  Statuette,’ also found in southern Veracruz, is inscribed in the  same script and dates to AD 162)” (p. 68). “It was not just  the ‘stela cult’ — the inscribed glorification of royal  lineages and their achievements” (p. 177). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Omni 1:20. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya both refer specifically to engraved writing on large stones. This  is an unusual [Page 149] correspondence. Writing by itself was unusual, to write  on stone was doubly so. What example or model did Joseph Smith  have to correctly “guess” this correspondence? However, the  Book of Mormon gives only one example of writing on stone,  so it is not detailed. Specific and unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Many books present, some were kept in repositories Coe’s  standard: “Maya priests 2,000 miles away were still chanting  rituals from hieroglyphic books” (p. 219). “Even more  heartbreaking is the loss of thousands of books” (p. 237). “A  few probable coffers exist for books, including the recent find of  a lidded limestone box from Hun Nal Ye cave in Guatemala”  (p. 239). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:15; Mormon 6:6. The entire  Book of Mormon is a collection of shorter books or  excerpts from other books. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is both specific and  detailed. Many books, not just a few, were kept. And in at least  some instances, the books were kept together in repositories,  essentially in libraries (the “coffers” cited above). The  practice is also unusual. What American Indian tribes that  Joseph Smith knew of kept even one book, let alone libraries?  How did he correctly “guess” this fact about the Maya and the  Book of Mormon peoples? Likelihood = 0.02 Trading in a variety of goods Coe’s  standard: “All the Mesoamerican Indians shared a number of  traits which were more or less peculiar to them and absent or rare  elsewhere in the New World: … highly specialized markets”  (p. 13). “Trading networks brought vast quantities of these  objects [ manos and metates ] down from … Guatemala. …  The volcanic highlands yielded … obsidian. … Access to salt  sources or to salt trade networks was critical to the growth and  security of Maya states. … The Maya elite had other special needs,  above all jade, quetzal feathers, and marine shells” (pp. 22‒23).  “Its [Lamani’s] location and rich remains attest to its  entrepreneurial importance in ancient Maya trade” (p. 85).  “[control over] … the movement of goods, which now passed into  the hands of trading entrepreneurs or local petty lords” (p. 213). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 24:7; Helaman 3:10, 14; Helaman 6:8;  3 Nephi 6:11; Ether 10:22. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. Both the  Book of Mormon peoples and the Mesoamerican Indians traded,  a trait that was absent or rare elsewhere in the New World, and  therefore unusual by definition. However, while trading in a variety  of goods is strongly implied by the wording in the Book of Mormon,  only trading in wood is specifically mentioned. So this  correspondence is certainly specific and unusual, but [Page 150] it is not  detailed enough to count as specific, detailed and unusual. To be  conservative, we assign a likelihood of 0.1. Likelihood = 0.1 Many merchants Coe’s  standard: “These somewhat Mexicanized merchant- warriors  controlled the great Gulf Coast entrepot of Xicallanco where Mexican  and Maya traders met” (p. 178). “God M, who was the patron  of merchants, is shown here” (p. 218n138). “Merchants had  a privileged status” (p. 225). “At the top [of the  class structure] were nobles, … wealthy farmers and merchants”  (p. 235). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 6:11‒12. Analysis  of correspondence: Because this correspondence overlaps somewhat  with correspondence 6.10, we will only count it as specific. However,  the whole interlocking system of trading, merchants and wealth  accumulation through trade is unusual in itself, and perhaps this  correspondence deserves a higher weight. Nonetheless, to be  conservative, Likelihood = 0.5 Roads and causeways built Coe’s  standard: Coe makes many references to roads and causeways in  different areas of Mesoamerica. Here are just a few. “There  are two groups of monumental construction, connected by a massive  causeway, and in fact a whole network of causeways radiates out  from El Mirador across the surrounding swampy landscape” (p. 85).  “Archaeologist Rodrigo Liendo Stuardo has even found evidence of  road systems running along the base of those hills, connecting the  far reaches of the Palenque kingdom” (p. 151). “A causeway …  runs southeast from Uxmal through the small site of Nohpat to Kabah”  (p. 182). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 3 Nephi 6:8; 3 Nephi 8:13. Analysis  of correspondence : Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  speak of many roads, not just a few; and the practice of  road-building is widespread in both societies. So this correspondence  is specific and detailed, and also definitely unusual. The Indians  that Joseph Smith knew of did not build roads. However, View  of the Hebrews very briefly mentions road building among the  Indians. However unlikely, Joseph might have read about it there. To  be conservative, this is rated as specific and detailed only. Likelihood = 0.1 Houses with attached gardens Coe’s  standard: “Also important were the house gardens, still  ubiquitous in Maya villages and hamlets” (p. 22). “A few  cities, such as Chunchucmil in Yucatan, are amazingly dense, with  house lots demarcated by walls; others had extensive space for  gardens” (p. 124). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 7:10. [Page 151] Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific but not  detailed in the case of the Book of Mormon. Strongly  implied, but not stated, is a garden attached to Nephi’s  house. So we cannot call it detailed. Native Americans taught the  Pilgrims what plants grew well in the New World, so  gardening/ domestic agriculture among the ancestors of the Indians  cannot be called unusual. Specific only, Likelihood = 0.5 Foreigners/new rulers introduce/impose a new language/writing  system on indigenous peoples Coe’s  standard: “During the Terminal Classic, [Ceibal] seems to have  come under the sway of foreigners, as seen in the strong influence of  non-Maya forms of art and writing. … There are more  ‘foreign’-looking stelae at Ceibal which belong to this period,  with non-Maya calendrical glyphs and iconography; on one, a figure  wears the bird-mask of the central Mexican wind god, Ehecatl, with  a Mexican speech scroll curling from the beak. … This,  however, does not answer the question of the patently Mexican  hieroglyphs on other Ceibal monuments” (p. 178). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Omni 1:17–18; Mosiah 24:4‒6. Analysis  of correspondence: Both The Maya and the Book of Mormon  refer specifically and in considerable detail to foreigners who  introduce a new language/writing system. This is certainly  unusual. What models or examples did Joseph Smith have available  to him that would have led him to “guess” correctly that  foreigners would impose a new language and writing system on  indigenous peoples? The European settlers in North America were not  trying to impose a new language on the Native Americans, they  were trying to take get rid of the Indians and take their lands. Likelihood = 0.02 Writing system changed significantly over time Coe’s  standard: “The earliest Maya writing, exceedingly difficult to  decode, is quite different from its later versions” (p. 266). Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mormon 9:32‒33. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon and The Maya both refer specifically to a change in writing systems, but  very few details are provided. The practice seems highly unusual.  What change in written English did Joseph Smith know about? What  could he use as a precedent or model? There was nothing. He  might perhaps have known about significant changes in spoken English  from the time, say, of Shakespeare, but not in the way of writing  English. Specific and unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Buildings of cement Coe’s  standard: “The Maya of the lowlands had discovered … if  limestone fragments were burnt, and the resulting powder mixed with  water, a white plaster of great durability was created. Finally,  they quickly realized the [Page 152] structural value of a concrete-like  fill made from limestone rubble and marl” (p. 81). Overall,  there are 61 references to “stucco” in Coe’s book; stucco is  a fine cement. Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:7, 9, 11. Analysis  of correspondence: Specific, detailed and unusual. Both wood and  cement are mentioned as building materials in the Book of Mormon  and in The Maya. While some Indians of northeastern North  America did use wood to build their dwellings (for example, the  Iroquois longhouses), they did not use cement, as did both the Maya  and the Aztecs. How did Joseph Smith “guess” that one? Likelihood = 0.02 By the  way, cement results from burning limestone and mixing the resulting  powder with water. Cement is used to bind all kinds of aggregates  (stone, clay, etc.) to produce concrete. There is no justification  for being picky about the details of hydraulic vs. nonhydraulic  cements. Even experts disagree on what constitutes “true”  cement. 39 Great skill in the working of cement (stucco) Coe’s  standard: “Holmul and Xultun, celebrated in recent years for  their … monumental stuccos … and Ek’ Balam, an extraordinary  site in Yucatan with … some of the most astonishing stucco reliefs  ever found” (p. 7). “Many of these were faced with elaborate  stucco friezes and stairways flanked by massive stucco masks”  (p. 81). “This young man is shown in a magnificent,  polychrome stucco relief on a pilaster of Temple XIX”  (p. 160). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Helaman 3:7. Analysis  of correspondence: Not only were the Maya able to build with  cement/stucco, they were “exceedingly expert” in working it, as  explicitly described in both the Book of Mormon and The  Maya (“astonishing,” “elaborate,” “magnificent” are  the words used by Coe). This is certainly specific and detailed. It  also is clearly unusual. The dominant view of the white settlers  regarding the Indians in the early 1800s was that they were savages.  How did the author of the Book of Mormon correctly “guess”  that these “savages” could work so expertly in cement? Likelihood = 0.02 Excellent workmanship practiced Coe’s  standard: “the finest Maya wood carving known, this seated  figure from Tabasco, Mexico” (p. 95n40). “Finally, the Late  Classic Maya were … the only American Indians interested in  rendering the uniqueness of individual characters through  portraiture. The Maya artists excelled in low-relief carving. …  Pottery objects of Late Classic manufacture run the gamut [Page 153] from crude  … pots and pans of everyday life to real works of art. Among the  latter are the fantastic supports for incense burners” (p. 164).  (See all of pp. 164‒73.) “The excellence of the workmanship  lavished upon it suggests that the Toltec intruders were better off  in Yucatan” (p. 207). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 5:15‒16; Jarom 1:8; Ether  10:7, 27. The archaic meaning of “curious” is “made or prepared  skillfully, done with painstaking accuracy or attention to detail.” 40 Analysis  of correspondence: In the Book of Mormon, as in The  Maya, many great workmen practiced excellent workmanship in  a variety of materials (including materials other than  cement/stucco)). So the correspondence is specific and detailed. It  is also highly unusual. As mentioned above, whoever wrote the  Book of Mormon lived in early 19 th century  America, where the Indians were generally deemed to be “savages.”  How did that person correctly “guess” that the ancestors of these  “savages” were great workmen in many different materials? Likelihood = 0.02 Trade goods traveled by sea Coe’s  standard: “The great majority of goods traveled by sea, since  roads were but poor trails and cargoes heavy. This kind of commerce  was cornered by the Chontal Maya, or Putun, such good seafarers that  Eric Thompson called them ‘the Phoenicians of Middle America'”  (p. 232). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 63:5‒10; Helaman 3:10, 14. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific, there was  a lot of trade by sea, and some detail is provided. Joseph Smith  may have known something of the trade between the Iroquois and other  northeastern tribes carried on by canoe. However, the trade by the  Indians of Joseph’s time was via freshwater lakes and rivers and  not ocean shipping, as described in both the Book of Mormon  and The Maya . So the correspondence lacks a bit to be  considered specific, detailed, and unusual, but it is considerably  more than just specific. We count this as  specific and somewhat detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.1 Books stored underground in lidded stone boxes Coe’s  standard: “A few probable coffers exist for books, including  the recent find of a lidded limestone box from Hun Nal Ye cave  in Guatemala” (p. 239). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See p. xi (Introduction and Witnesses). Analysis  of correspondence: This correspondence could hardly be more  specific and detailed. The Book of Mormon was buried below  ground in a lidded stone box. The Maya also (probably) stored  some of their books in lidded stone boxes, the one mentioned in  a cave. The correspondence is also [Page 154] unusual. None of the Indians  of Joseph Smith’s time wrote books, let alone stored them in  stone boxes. Likelihood = 0.02 The Maya were not the only  Mesoamerican Indians who stored sacred objects in stone boxes. So did  the Aztecs. 41 Towers built, some very tall, possibly watchtowers Coe’s  standard: “It has been suggested that the tower was used as an  observatory, but it commands a wide view and could also have  served as a watchtower” (p. 151). “decoration of  perfectly ordinary small ‘palaces’ with high towers imitating the  fronts of temple-pyramids; these towers, however, are solid, the  steps being impossibly narrow and steep, and the ‘doorway’ at the  summit leading to nothing” (p. 161). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 2:7; Mosiah 11:12; Alma 48:1; Helaman  7:10‒11; Moroni 9:7. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon specifically  mentions tall towers being built as watchtowers. The correspondence  is therefore specific and detailed. We would also count it as  unusual. What Indians of Joseph Smith’s time and place built  tall towers? However, View of the Hebrews also contains a very  brief, undetailed mention of towers. So we count this correspondence  as merely specific and detailed. Likelihood = 0.1 Multiple formal entrances to villages Coe’s  standard: “The supernatural world is ever-present in Chan Kom  [a traditional Maya village] and in the outlying fields and forest.  At the four entrances to the settlement are four pairs of crosses and  four balam (‘jaguar’) spirits” (p. 296). Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Mosiah 22:6; Alma 8:18. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is specific. There were  multiple formal entrances to the villages/towns of the Maya people  and also among the Book of Mormon peoples. However, no  distinctive details are given in the Book of Mormon, nor  does the practice seem unusual. Even small towns on the American  frontier had more than one entrance. Specific only, Likelihood =  0.5 Fine fabrics and textiles, elaborate clothing Coe’s  standard: “Besides jade, the corpse was ornamented with …  rich textiles which have long since rotted away” (p. 106).  “Sadly, nothing remains of all the perishable products which must  have traveled the same routes — textiles” (p. 113). “The  royal corpse had been virtually swaddled, wrapped in layers of lime,  palm, and fine cotton textiles” (p. 144). “Every temple,  every palace room was surely festooned with curtains and wall  hangings” (p. 171). [Page 155] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 28:13; Mosiah 10:5; Alma  4:6; Helaman 6:13; Helaman 13:28. Analysis  of correspondence: The correspondence is both specific and  detailed. Both the Book of Mormon and The Maya describe  people who had available to them very fine, rich and elaborate  textiles and clothing. The correspondence also seems unusual. The  Indians of Joseph Smith’s time and place wore clothing made  primarily of animal skins and did not have access to the cotton worn  by Indians in warmer climates. Specific, detailed and unusual. Likelihood = 0.02

[32] By the  way, cement results from burning limestone and mixing the resulting  powder with water. Cement is used to bind all kinds of aggregates  (stone, clay, etc.) to produce concrete. There is no justification  for being picky about the details of hydraulic vs. nonhydraulic  cements. Even experts disagree on what constitutes “true”  cement. 39

[33] Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 5:15‒16; Jarom 1:8; Ether  10:7, 27. The archaic meaning of “curious” is “made or prepared  skillfully, done with painstaking accuracy or attention to detail.” 40

[34] The Maya were not the only  Mesoamerican Indians who stored sacred objects in stone boxes. So did  the Aztecs. 41

[35] Brass existed during Book of Mormon (Lehite and Jaredite)  times Coe’s  standard: Coe makes no mention of brass in his book but states in  the podcasts that there is no evidence for it in Mesoamerica. Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 2 Nephi 5:15; Mosiah 8:10; Mosiah  11:3, 8, 10. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon states clearly  that brass existed among the Book of Mormon peoples, while  Dr. Coe says there is no evidence for it in Mesoamerica. We grant a likelihood of 50 in support of the hypothesis. Likelihood = 50.0 Chariots existed during Book of Mormon (Lehite) times Coe’s  standard: There is no evidence of wheeled vehicles in  Mesoamerica, although wheeled toys have been found, and potter’s  wheels still exist. Book of Mormon  correspondence: See Alma 18:9‒10, 12; Alma 20:6; 3 Nephi 3:22. Analysis  of correspondence: We wonder, given the roads that the Maya and  other Mesoamerican Indians undoubtedly constructed and the wheels  they also made, why on earth they continued to carry their goods on  their backs. We also do not wish to go into the details of what  a “chariot” might be. Other scholars have already dealt with  that issue and can grant to this negative correspondence whatever  weight they choose. We simply grant to this correspondence the  maximum weight of 50.0. Likelihood = 50.0 Sheep existed during Book of Mormon (Jaredite) times Coe’s  standard: In the podcasts Dr. Coe states that there is no  evidence of sheep in  Mesoamerica. Book of Mormon  correspondence: Ether 9:18. The only unambiguous reference to  sheep in the Book of Mormon is many centuries BC. The other  references to sheep seem to be of a “religious” nature  rather than specific reference to animal husbandry. There are 70  mentions of the word “flocks” in the Book of Mormon,  but we do not know what animals these flocks consisted of. Analysis  of correspondence: This is not particularly strong evidence, even  giving the most generous possible interpretation. There is no mention  of sheep during Nephite times, nor evidence that keeping of sheep was  widespread. As evidence, this correspondence cannot be weighted  more than 2.0 Likelihood = 2.0 [Page 159] Goats existed during Book of Mormon (Jaredite and Lehite)  times Coe’s  standard: In the podcasts, Dr. Coe says there is no evidence of  goats or wild goats. Book of Mormon  correspondence: 1 Nephi 18:25; Enos 1:21; Ether 9:18. Analysis  of correspondence: As before, we wonder what animals the  Book of Mormon might mean when it refers to “goats” and  “wild goats.” For example, mountain goats are not closely related  to the domestic goat or to the wild goat (these are of the genus Capra ). The domestic goat is descended from the wild goat.  However, goat is the word given in the text of the  Book of Mormon, and goats appear to have been important to  both the Lehites and the Jaredites. So we give this negative  correspondence the maximum possible weight. Likelihood = 50.0 Swine existed during Book of Mormon (Jaredite) times Coe’s  standard: Coe claims that the domestic pig was unknown among the  Maya until the Spanish conquest. However, he also concedes that  modern Maya keep the peccary (New World pig) as pets and a source  of food, although he says they do not domesticate well. Book of Mormon  correspondence: Ether 9:18. Analysis  of correspondence: The only mention of swine is in Jaredite  times. Given the historical remoteness of that era, it may not be  unusual that better evidence of the domestic pig has not been found.  Also, given the existence of the peccary throughout Mexico, Central  and South America, it can be plausibly argued that it is the peccary  that is referred to in Jaredite times as swine. Specific only. Likelihood = 2.0 Wheat existed during Book of Mormon times Coe’s  standard: Coe states that wheat has not been found in  Mesoamerica. Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 9:9. Analysis  of correspondence: There is no claim in the Book of Mormon  that those peoples domesticated wheat nor that it was their primary  grain. In fact, the Lehite colony specifically mentions bringing  “seeds” with them, so it is likely that Old World wheat was among  those seeds. Also, the Book of Mormon seems to indicate  corn as the primary grain (see Appendix A, Correspondence 2.22).  Wheat may not have been widely grown, and therefore the evidence for  wheat more difficult to detect centuries later. So at most this  correspondence must be regarded as specific, but it does not rise to  detailed or unusual. Likelihood = 2.0 Barley existed during Book of Mormon times Coe’s  standard: Coe states that barley has not been found in the  Americas. Book of Mormon  correspondence: Mosiah 7:22; Mosiah 9:9; Alma 11:7, 15. [Page 160] Analysis  of correspondence: As we argued in #6 above for wheat, the  Book of Mormon does not claim that those peoples  domesticated barley, nor that it was their primary grain. In fact,  the Lehite colony specifically mentions bringing “seeds” with  them, so it is possible that Old World barley was among those seeds.  As noted, the Book of Mormon seems to indicate corn as the  primary grain (see Appendix A, Correspondence 2.22), so barley might  not have been a principal crop and therefore not widespread like  corn. By the  way, barley (and other grains) were the basis of the Nephite monetary  system described in Alma 11. In Han China, officials could be paid in  grain or coin — an interesting “hit” for the Book of Mormon.  So at most this correspondence must be regarded as specific, but it  does not rise to detailed or unusual. Likelihood = 2.0 Cattle (oxen and cows) existed during Book of Mormon times Coe’s  standard: Coe claims that cattle ( Bos taurus ) did not  exist in the Americas until the Spanish brought them. Their bones  have never been found. Book of Mormon  correspondence: Enos 1:21; 3 Nephi 4:4; Ether 9:18. Analysis  of correspondence: Here we really do need to worry about what the  word cattle means. Cattle is an Anglo-French word,  related to our word modern English word chattel, meaning  simply private or personal property. It has evolved to include  “domestic quadrupeds,” more narrowly animals of the bovine  variety. But the Book of Mormon may use it in the earlier  sense of “quadrupeds,” animals used for tillage, labor, or food  for humans. Thus in its primary sense, the word may include a variety  of domesticated beasts. 42 “All  manner of cattle,” the phrase used in Ether 9:18, is likely earlier  English usage. However, to once again be rigorous in our test of the  Book of Mormon, we will assume that the cattle referred in  the book are indeed Bos taurus (including both oxen and cows),  which Dr. Coe says did not exist, and we will grant this negative  correspondence a likelihood of 50.0. Likelihood = 50.0 Silk existed during Book of Mormon times Coe’s  standard: There is no evidence of silkworm culture. The Spaniards  were very impressed by the fineness of the fabrics the Maya produced.  The Spaniards had no fabrics so fine. The tropical environment has  a strong tendency to destroy fabrics. Book of Mormon  correspondence: Alma 1:29; Alma 4:6; Ether 9:17; Ether 10:24. [Page 161] Analysis  of correspondence: Both the Lehites and Jaredites had a fabric  they called silk, and the Maya in particular were able to produce  very fine fabrics. Given the tropical climate and the resulting decay  of organic materials, we believe this negative correspondence is  specific, but not detailed or unusual. Likelihood = 2.0 Asses (donkeys) existed during Book of Mormon times Coe’s  standard: Dr. Coe says there is no evidence of asses (donkeys) in  the New World. Book of Mormon  correspondence: 1 Nephi 18:25; Ether 9:19. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon states that there  were asses in both Jaredite and Lehite times and that they were  useful for man. Since donkeys are hardy animals and can subsist on  marginal feed, their utility would argue for them being somewhat  widespread. So we will grant to this negative correspondence  a likelihood of 50.0. Likelihood = 50.0 Hybrid Egyptian/Hebrew language/writing system Coe’s  standard: Dr. Coe says there is no such hybrid system in the New  World, and that the Maya language/writing system is of local  invention, not an import from the Old World. However, he also notes  that there exist two scripts from ancient America that cannot  currently be read because a bilingual (“Rosetta Stone”) is  lacking. Book of Mormon  correspondence: See 1 Nephi 1:2 and 3:19; Mosiah 1:2,  4; Mormon 9:34. Analysis  of correspondence: The Book of Mormon emphasizes “the  language of the fathers,” an arcane, sacred written language  connected to the language of the Egyptians. It is the language in  which the plates were written and was known to only a few. It  was obviously not the common language. In fact, Moroni (see Moroni  9:34) says that “none other people knoweth our language.” Given  the existence of Mesoamerican scripts that cannot be read, and the  fact that the sacred language of the Nephites was a closely  guarded language, this negative correspondence cannot be regarded as  either detailed or unusual. At most it is specific. Likelihood =  2.0 Lack of Middle Eastern DNA in the New World Coe’s  standard: Dr. Coe states that he has never seen any evidence that  would convince him of the presence of Middle Eastern DNA in the New  World. Book of Mormon  correspondence: Dr. Ugo Perego has written extensively on this  DNA issue. 43 There are many reasons why the genetic endowment brought by the  Lehite, Jaredite and Mulekite colonies may not be detectable [Page 162] today  among Native Americans, not the least of which is the massive die-off  of Native Americans, owing to European diseases post-contact.  A critical scientific problem is the lack of an appropriate  Book of Mormon “control” group against which Native  American DNA can be tested. In other words, how will we know “Lehite”  DNA if we actually find it? Analysis  of correspondence: It is tempting to simply dismiss this negative  correspondence as having no evidentiary value either for or against  the historicity of the Book of Mormon. At most it is  specific: “No middle Eastern DNA markers have been found in Native  Americans.” But that is not detailed or unusual, given the  scientific issues noted above. Likelihood = 2.0

[36] Analysis  of correspondence: Here we really do need to worry about what the  word cattle means. Cattle is an Anglo-French word,  related to our word modern English word chattel, meaning  simply private or personal property. It has evolved to include  “domestic quadrupeds,” more narrowly animals of the bovine  variety. But the Book of Mormon may use it in the earlier  sense of “quadrupeds,” animals used for tillage, labor, or food  for humans. Thus in its primary sense, the word may include a variety  of domesticated beasts. 42

[37] Book of Mormon  correspondence: Dr. Ugo Perego has written extensively on this  DNA issue. 43 There are many reasons why the genetic endowment brought by the  Lehite, Jaredite and Mulekite colonies may not be detectable [Page 162] today  among Native Americans, not the least of which is the massive die-off  of Native Americans, owing to European diseases post-contact.  A critical scientific problem is the lack of an appropriate  Book of Mormon “control” group against which Native  American DNA can be tested. In other words, how will we know “Lehite”  DNA if we actually find it?

[38] [Page 163] If  we are to take seriously Dr. Coe’s objections to the lack of equal  time given to subjects as chocolate, jaguars, and turkeys in the  Book of Mormon, we have an objection for him about his own  book. Bruce and Brian Dale are both engineers, which means we love  applied mathematics. Dr. Coe does not mention the extensive use of  the “golden section” or phi ratio in Maya architecture,  although it is clearly present. 44 Why did Dr. Coe not mention this “golden section” in his book The  Maya ? Shall we disbelieve the rest of his book because of this  omission?

[39] The  Oberlin College Archives provide this useful introduction to the  Spaulding Manuscript (aka Manuscript Found ). 45

