[Page 25] Abstract: The Mormon Theology Seminar has produced two volumes of essays  exploring 1 Nephi 1 on Lehi’s initial visions, and  Jacob 7 on the encounter with Sherem. These essays provide  valuable insights from a range of perspectives and raise  questions for further discussion both of issues raised and regarding  different paradigms in which scholars operate that readers must  navigate.

The  Maxwell Institute recently published two new volumes of scripture  studies, each based on the proceedings of the Mormon Theology  Seminar. These events bring together groups of Latter day Saint  scholars for close readings of scripture, in these cases of 1 Nephi 1  on Lehi’s initial visions and first public preaching; and Jacob 7,  on the encounter with Sherem. The volumes each contain an  introduction, an essay [Page 26] summarizing the findings of that seminar, and  essays by contributors. A Dream,  a Rock, and a Pillar of Fire: Reading 1 Nephi 1 contains seven essays on Lehi’s initial visions. Christ  and Antichrist: Reading Jacob 7 contains eight essays on Jacob 7 and the encounter with Sherem.

We  get different perspectives from male and female authors who draw on  a range of backgrounds — including biblical studies,  philosophy, humanities, and mathematics — offering fresh and  interesting observations. For instance, the volume on 1 Nephi 1  includes essays by New Testament scholar Julie M. Smith on the  possible influence of Huldah’s encounter with the Book of the Law  on Lehi’s experience with the heavenly book, and Joe Spencer’s  investigation of what Messianism might mean for Lehi in Jerusalem  circa 600 BCE. Adam Miller writes on “how it is possible to see  many afflictions and still be highly favored” (M, 29).  George Handley offers a philosophical meditation on the mediation of the sacred through imperfect and indirect human  transmission and interpretation. Miranda Wilcox provides  a historical walking tour on the expression “tender mercies”  through a wide range of scriptural texts and translations.  Michael Ulrich explores the experience of “joining the heavenly  chorus” (M, 111). Benjamin Peters ponders the significance of the  Book of Mormon as a text encountered in the absence of  the original medium.

The  volume on Jacob 7 includes Jana Riess examining the Sherem story  in light of René Girard’s theories of the scapegoat, as well as  Adam Miller on Jacob as defending “the doctrine of Christ  against the letter of the Mosaic law in a way that, in itself,  seems in lockstep with the letter of the law” (M, 22). Kimberly  Berkey looks at the implications of Jacob’s two prayers compared  to the Lord’s prayer. Jacob Rennaker looks at how Jacob has  a dreamlike view of time, compared to Sherem’s orientation  toward the past. Jeremy Walker suggests that Jacob’s treatment of  time “suggests a form of salvation available now in lived  experience, a form of salvation that is recursive rather than  linear and that, as a result, is capable of addressing the  vicissitudes of human experience” (M, 59). Joseph Spencer offers an  essay on “Weeping for Zion” as “consecrated melancholy” (M,  82). Sharon Harris writes on “Covenant Obligation to Scripture as  Covenant Obligation to Family” (M, 111). Jenny Webb writes on how  “Jacob 7 is haunted in unacknowledged ways by Jacob’s own  family” (M, 127) and makes fresh and notable observations that tie  Jacob 7 to 2 Nephi 4. (M, 135‒36). The volumes are  attractively produced, and each is about the size and price of an  issue of BYU Studies . The series overall looks to be  a valuable resource.


## [Page 27] Huldah  and Lehi in Jerusalem

Regardless  of whether or not a person agrees with every author or  everything in the essays, the books have value both in themselves and  as a sampling of what is going on among a significant group  of Latter day Saint scholars. For instance, in the volume on  1 Nephi 1 , A Dream, a Rock, and a Pillar  of Fire , Julie Smith provides an essay on Huldah, the  prophetess mentioned in 2 Kings 22:14‒20 and  2 Chronicles 34:22‒28.

> And  the king [Josiah] commanded Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of  Shaphan, and Achbor the son of Michaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and  Asahiah a servant of the king’s, saying, Go  ye, inquire of the Lord for me, and for the people, and for all  Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found: for great is  the wrath of the Lord that is kindled against us, because our fathers  have not hearkened unto the words of this book, to do according unto  all that which is written concerning us. So  Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asahiah,  went unto Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of  Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in  Jerusalem in the college;) and they communed with her. And  she said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Tell the man  that sent you to me, Thus  saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and  upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the book which  the king of Judah hath read: Because  they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that  they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands;  therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, and shall not  be quenched. But  to the king of Judah which sent you to inquire of the Lord, thus  shall ye say to him, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, As touching  the words which thou hast heard; Because  thine heart was tender, and thou hast humbled thyself before the  Lord, when thou heardest what I spake against this place, and  against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation  and a curse, and hast rent thy clothes, and wept before me;  I also have heard thee, saith the Lord. [Page 28] Behold  therefore, I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt  be gathered into thy grave in peace; and thine eyes shall not see all  the evil which I will bring upon this place. And they brought  the king word again. (2 Kings 22:12‒20)

Temporally,  the Book of Mormon account we have begins in the “first  year of the reign of Zedekiah [a son of Josiah, installed as King by  Babylon], … Lehi, having dwelt at Jerusalem in all his days”  (1 Nephi 1:4). At that point Lehi was old enough to have  three sons older than the young but “large in stature” Nephi  (2 Nephi 2:5), who could wear the armor of the adult Laban.  So Lehi would not be the frail graybeard depicted in the Friberg  paintings of the discovery of the Liahona. Lehi and Sariah must be  young enough at the start of 1 Nephi to be able to parent Jacob and  Joseph shortly before departing from Bountiful by sea after eight  years in the wilderness (1 Nephi 18:7, 18). That leaves us  a prime-of-life Lehi old enough to have married and sired at  least four sons and possibly daughters (2 Nephi 5:6) before  the reign of Jehoiakim, another son of Josiah, who had been installed  as king by the Egyptians who [Page 29] had killed Josiah (2 Kings 23:34).  Put it all together, and we have Lehi married and with at least four  sons born some years before the 31-year reign of Josiah ended  (2 Kings 22:1) and who grew to adolescence and manhood  during Jehoiakim’s 11-year reign. On her page 2 footnote 4, Smith  cites evidence that Lehi lived in the same part of Jerusalem that was  home to many who had previously migrated from the north and therefore  in Huldah’s neighborhood. So Lehi probably witnessed parts of the  reforms, probably as a small child, possibly participated in the  Passover, and perhaps knew Huldah.

Given  my own background and interests, I do have some concerns and  questions. For instance, she discusses the report in  Jeremiah 44:15‒18 concerning debate whether the judgments on  Jerusalem came as “the result of people’s wicked idolatry or  whether God was punishing people for getting rid of their idols.”  Here is a key section of the Jeremiah 44 passage in  question, which does not specify idolatry or idols .

> As  for the word that thou [Jeremiah] hast spoken unto us in the name of  the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. But  we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own  mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out  drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our  kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of  Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw  no evil. [Page 30] But  since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour  out drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have  been consumed by the sword, and by the famine. And  when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink  offerings unto her, did we make her cakes to worship her, and pour  out drink offerings unto her, without our men? (Jeremiah 44:16‒19)

[Page 32] pour drink offerings  to the queen of heaven in order to secure peace and plenty of  victuals, let alone to practice idolatry?

For  my part, when I published on Jeremiah 44, I wrote  this:


## Different  Grounds for Dismissing or Exploring Barker’s Claims

A central  point of Richard Elliot Friedman’s Who Wrote the Bible? was  to demonstrate that an edition of the Deuteronomist History (that is,  Joshua, Judges, and the books of Samuel and Kings) was written and  edited during Josiah’s lifetime to honor him and justify his  actions. After his unexpected death, additions were made to describe  subsequent events and to assign blame for what went wrong. Much of  Barker’s work has cast light on how the state of the  biblical texts and translations and editions that we have, in  relation to both archeology and nonbiblical

That  is, there is a pattern of selection, editing within the canon,  suppression of texts like 1 Enoch , and corruption in Bible  passages that also happen to resonate with the themes of 1 Nephi 1.

The  closer I look at how Barker explores the issues surrounding the  controversies from the time of the reform, as reflected in the state  and themes of the Bible texts, the more clearly the themes of  1 Nephi 1 emerge. Indeed, I think it remarkable that  the first chapter of the Book of Mormon takes us directly  into the world that she worked to recover via sources that were  unavailable to anyone in Joseph Smith’s day.

Barker  also considers shifts in the contexts applied to text by Bible  readers:

It  should be of interest that this priestly blessing in Numbers turns up  in “Excavations in the late 1970s” of “First Temple period  tombs at Ketef Hinnom, near Jerusalem. Among the artifacts discovered  in this dig were two small silver plates dating to the seventh  century BC, containing the priestly benedictions found in  Numbers 6:24‒26 and representing the

It  also does nothing to account for or explain the elaborate convergence  between her approach and the Book of Mormon.

> And  after that in the fifth week, at its close, The house of glory and  dominion shall be built for ever. And  after that in the sixth week all who live in it shall be blinded ,  And the hearts of all of them shall godlessly forsake wisdom .  And in it a man shall ascend; And at its close the house of  dominion shall be burnt with fire, And the whole race of the chosen  root shall be dispersed. (1 Enoch 93:7‒8, emphasis added)

Jeremiah,  and Ezekiel, Zephaniah, Nephi, and Jacob all report that many in  Jerusalem were blind and that blindness and loss of wisdom are always  contrasted with “seeing” and prophetic theophany. As  a consequence of that blindness, according to Jacob, those at  Jerusalem “looked beyond the mark.” The nature of that mark leads  me to a second essay that deserves further discussion.


## Messiah  as Political King or as Atoning High Priest

> Creation:  (1 Nephi 1‒18), that is, up to the arrival in the land of  promise. Fall:  (1 Nephi 19 to 2 Nephi 5), that is, up to the  division into Nephites and Lamanites. Atonement:  (2 Nephi 6‒30), that is, from Jacob’s Day of Atonement  discourse to the gathering of Israel. Veil:  2 Nephi 31‒33, culminating with speaking with the tongues  of angels, that is, to be able to participate in the same manner as  Lehi and Alma amid the numberless concourses of angels.

Spencer  discerns this overall pattern as being prefigured in the first verse  of the Book of Mormon:

> [Creation]:  I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was  taught somewhat in all the learning of my father; [Fall]:  and having seen many afflictions in the course of my days, [Atonement]:  nevertheless, having been highly favored of the Lord in all my days; [Veil]:  yea, having had a great knowledge of the goodness and the  mysteries of God, therefore I make a record of my  proceedings in my days.

[Page 45] Spencer’s  title in A Dream, a Rock, and a Pillar of Fire is  “Potent Messianism: Textual, Historical, and Theological Notes on  1 Nephi 1:18‒20” and the topic of Lehi’s public  discourse on “a messiah, and the redemption of the world” in  1 Nephi 1:19. After discussing the Old World backgrounds  and the Book of Mormon narrative, Spencer eventually says  that “Nephite Christology does not appear from the beginning of the  Book of Mormon as a full blown phenomenon more or less  borrowed from the clear writings of Old World prophets. Rather, it is  presented as slowly developed from a number of distinct sources  distinguished from what can be found in today’s Hebrew Bible” (M,  61).

Like  Ezekiel, his exact contemporary Jacob is a consecrated temple  priest in exile (2 Nephi 6:2). It seems to me this high  priestly anointing that designated some as a messiah gives the  clear meaning of Jacob’s mark in a passage that I take as  a direct comment on the reform:

> Behold  the Name of Yahweh cometh from far, Burning in his anger and thick  rising smoke; His lips are full of indignation and his tongue  is like a devouring fire.

And  this context has implications for how we ought to understand Jacob’s  report in 2 Nephi 10:3, 7:

> Wherefore,  as I said unto you, it must needs be expedient that Christ —  for in the last night the angel spake unto me that this should be his  name — should come among the Jews … and they shall crucify him,  … and there is none other nation on earth that would crucify their  God. … But  behold, thus saith the Lord God: When … they shall believe in me,  that I am Christ, then I have covenanted with their  fathers.


## Human  Personality in Revelation and in Scholarship

And  this leads me to a third essay to discuss, George B. Handley’s  “Dreams, Visions, and Foolish Imaginations: Alternative History as  Sacred History in the Book of Mormon.” He addresses the  common assumption that “a revealed text is believed to be  distinguished from a secular one because it descends upon us,  originating in an absolute sense from outside and above the context  of human language” (M, 30). This would be a plenary view of  scripture: that it is complete, inerrant, and sufficient, inherently  transcendent of human taint, and not requiring any effort at  contextualization, just harmonization and elucidation. In contrast to  this, Handley observes that not only has the “Bible … been  tainted by the fingerprints of humanity, human culture, time,  language, politics, bias, and so on” (M, 33), but also that the  Book of Mormon “wants to directly confront the fact of  human personality, culture, and language and how it relates to  revelation. Its radical message appears to be that our humanity is  not the obstacle but rather the very medium of revelation” (M, 32).  Overall, Handley provides a provocative and interesting  meditation, shedding valuable light along the way.

[Page 53] In  passing, when discussing the response to the Book of Mormon  by believers and critics, he compares those who seek to “authenticate  the foundational narrative of the religion by means of historicizing  the text” (M, 31) to critics who want to “debunk the book’s  sacred status by reducing it to the psychology and life and times of  Joseph Smith” (M, 32n1), suggesting that both groups  operate under the “same methodology” (M, 32n1). After an  interesting meditation on the humanity of the text, drawing on some  William Faulkner for perspective, he finally observes that “our  only escape from conflict and tribalism is to learn to read with  enough charity to understand and extend a revelation’s  universal relevance beyond our own small set of circumstances” (M,  46).

In  setting himself up in opposition to the those mostly unnamed  apologists who risk “painting themselves into … corners” (M,  32n1) with their reductionism, he does not accurately represent why  we all do what we do. The labeling of trying to authenticate and then  saying we are the mirror image of skeptics, and risk painting  ourselves “into similar corners” (M, 32n1) feels to me more like  a tribal dismissal than an enlightening insight. We’re not  trying to authenticate but to understand and defend. Most of us  acquired testimonies long before we involved ourselves with  scholarship. Most of us have learned that anyone can easily dismiss  anything and everything we produce, so the notion of “proof” is  far less meaningful than “cause to believe” (Alma 32:18‒19,),  which cannot coerce but may invite. What we want is not repetition  and reinforcement and static, approved thinking, but expansion,  puzzle solving, testing, enlightenment, enlargement, more growth, the  taste of more delicious fruit, and to discover promising questions to  explore (see Alma 32). As Barker so aptly put it, “We seek to  stand where they stood, to look where they looked so as to glimpse  what they saw.” The interesting thing about “standing where they  stood” is that we can’t predict in advance of doing so the  difference that it may make — what we might see that we did not see  before.


## Jacob 7  and the Paths Explored and the Potential for Type-Scenes

Christ  and Antichrist: Reading Jacob 7 offers a range of  essays that strive to shed light, and they successfully do so in  a range of interesting ways, generally through close reading and  commentary rather than attempts at any larger contextualization. I do  notice a few roads not taken, questions not explored. That is,  I notice a number of essays mentioning that Sherem is  “defender of the received tradition” (M&S, 23), which [Page 54] are  both accurate and important, but not one essay mentions the  Deuteronomist Reforms, even though a few footnotes mention Glimpses of Lehi’s Jerusalem , where Margaret Barker and  I both raise the issue of their obvious and crucial influence.  And while a few essays mention John Welch’s “The Case  of Sherem” in his important book on The Legal Cases in the  Book of Mormon , no one builds on his insights. Whereas  Welch’s detailed and insightful essay focuses on the legal aspects  of the encounter, Riess, Miller, and Berkey focus on the intensely  personal aspects. As one who has read both, I can synthesize  both, and I appreciate how the different approaches increase the  definition and depth and resonance of my understanding and  appreciation. Each author in this volume stakes out an approach and  lays claim to a bit of territory, but the tendency here neglects  the context of a broader, inclusive picture. This is not  necessarily a bad thing but just a notable observation,  a consequence of exclusion due to focus elsewhere, of selection  and emphasis, notice and value, and the boundaries of attention and  interest.

For  a contrasting approach that does pay attention to variation,  John Welch introduces a legal context neither Roberts nor  Thomas had (or could have) considered, and concludes:

So  Welch discovers much of interest in variations and significance in  the ancient legal context. However, if we consider Alter and the  notion of the variations in type-scene as important and telling, why  not also consider the variant Book of Mormon narratives in  which the heretic does not die ? For example, Alma the Elder  was a wicked priest, Alma the Younger sought to destroy the  church, and Zeezrom sought to discredit Alma and Amulek, but they do  not die, even though all three came close. They recover and convert.  And there are variations among converts, where Alma the Elder and  Zeezrom repent in response to oral testimony, and Alma the younger  encountered an angel and famously described himself as being born  again while “nigh unto death” (Mosiah 27:28). And in  considering the encounter with an angel that led to Alma’s  repentance, why not consider the variant story in which Laman and  Lemuel see an angel but do not fully repent nor do they die? If we  compare the angel stories, the differences in response turn out to be  crucially telling. We ought to notice that what makes the difference  in Alma’s full conversion and Laman and Lemuel’s recurrent lapses  and eventual complete apostasy is not the angel but the life review.  Whereas Alma looks to his own sins (Alma 36:12‒17), as Zeezrom  had done without an angel (Alma 12:1, 14:6‒7), Laman and  Lemuel look to their own fears (1 Nephi 3:31) and  resentments (1 Nephi 7:16, 16:35‒38). And that lines up  with the insights of 12 Step Recovery, noting the importance of  a “searching and fearless” personal inventory (where Alma’s  NDE life review also corresponds to the fourth step in recovery) and  the importance of “dismantling the grievance story,” to stop  using fear and resentment as Laman and Lemuel do to justify their  actions.

So  if we permit ourselves to pay attention to variations and to notice  how different stories provide telling contrasts and points of  comparison, we might conclude that an organizing notion of “dying  heretics” too narrowly restricts our inquiry.

We  could examine the varied responses to “Liminal Encounter” as the  more appropriate type-scene, rather than just dying heretics, and  explore how different people in the Book of Mormon respond  when confronted with some form of testimony and witness. How do  people react on the threshold of a potentially life-changing  invitation from God? And that reframing opens up the whole of the  Book of Mormon as not just separate incidents that can be  fully studied in isolation but invites us to consider how the stories  holographically comment on one another by means of pattern and  variation. In every dictionary, words are defined by means of  comparison and contrast, what they are like and not like. The roots  and contrasts and comparisons produce definition and therefore  distinct meaning.


## Reiss  using Alter and Girard to Explore Sherem’s Encounter with Jacob

And  it is not just different Book of Mormon accounts that  provide room to consider how different Book of Mormon  stories reflect on one another but also how different scholars do the  same thing. Consider, for instance, how Jana Riess’s fascinating  essay “There Came a Man: Sherem, Scapegoating, and the  Inversion of Prophetic Tradition” implicitly follows Alter’s  type-scene and allusion approach (without mentioning Alter) and  tellingly applies René Girard’s theory of the scapegoat. This not  only resonates effectively with the essays by Miller and Berkey in Christ and Antichrist but also happens to intersect with the  approaches of Welch and Gardner.

Riess  begins by looking at different Bible narratives “where similar  language is used and similar situations become apparent” (M&S,  2). She offers readings of a story of Eli’s sons, an account  of a man of God who confronted Jeroboam, and another who  confronted Ahab. She notes how these stories concern “wrong worship  committed by people who inherited their responsibilities and were not  directly called by God” (M&S, 4‒5). These stories are  introduced by the phrase “there came a man of God,” whereas  in Jacob, when Sherem appears, the [Page 58] phrase “there came a man.”  Riess notes the foreshadowing and allusive significance of the “of  God” not appearing “even though the story bears many of the  external trappings of other man-of-God tales in which the outsider  speaks truth to power. By choosing to craft his story in this way,  Jacob not only highlights the fact that the stranger is a heretic  but also calls attention to his own diminished and religious  position. … Jacob’s sermonizing has fallen on deaf ears” (M&S,  8).

In  a section aptly titled “Sherem and the Inversion of the  Prophetic Tradition,” Riess notes that “Sherem does not accuse  Jacob of being non religious, but wrong -religious.  Jacob forsakes the religion of the past, the one based on Mosaic law,  in favor of some unknown, unproven diety. … When Sherem says there  will be no Christ, he has logic and tradition and religion on  his side” (M&S, 7). This is where some discussion of the  Deuteronomists and First Temple could cast some light on whose  religion and whose past and whose tradition are being invoked, but  here those issues remain in the shade. The insights on type-scene,  allusion, and ironic reversal are brilliant and notable, but I think  we could have had more on the historical background of the traditions  that Sherem and Jacob represent. Even so, Riess concludes the section  with another astute insight based on type-scene comparison when she  observes that “Sherem reveals that he is not a true ‘man of  God’ when he asks Jacob for a sign rather than delivering one  himself” (M&S, 9).

From  here she introduces René Girard’s theory of the scapegoat, a fresh  and telling framework for examining the Sherem story which  intensifies the sense of ironic reversal so evident in her type-scene  comparisons. As Riess explains, according to Girard,

> When  one person or group claims an object or privilege, suddenly the other  wants it too, imitating the first person’s desire. It’s called  mimetic desire because of this imitative function; if someone else  values the thing, the thing itself must be valuable, and therefore we  should want it too. The only way to restore order is if a third  party functions as a scapegoat to end the conflict. … Girard’s  five necessary steps of scapegoating intersect in interesting ways in  the story of Sherem. (M&S, 10)

The  first of the five steps is (1) a social crisis, involving  political instability, social chaos and looming danger, and “a  blurring of boundaries of the boundaries and identity markers between  people and groups,” perhaps intensified when Jacob claimed that in  some ways, the Lamanites were more righteous, would scourge the  Nephites, and would find favor and blessing from the Lord (M&S,  11‒12).


## [Page 60] Thoughts  on Swimmers and Different Streams

I find  the most valuable scholarship to be the kind that expands my mind and  offers insights on important topics and issues I would not have  considered if left to myself. Such enlightening experiences renew the  scriptures in a way that repetition of the conventional and  obvious simply does not provide. It leaves me excited by both the new  insight and the rekindled awareness that there may be more to find in  texts I thought I knew well. Both these books provide this  expansive experience, and the overall series seems committed to doing  so. So there is light. And diverging interpretations and interests  are displayed, and that, I think, is partly due to the effects  of the social networks involved, mine included. Whom do we trust and  why? How do we measure the value or reliability of what we see and  hear from different sources that claim to cast valuable light? On the  one hand, the authors of the essays in these books and I have  a lot in common as scholars, as believing Latter day  Saints, and as people who value the Book of Mormon. So in  that sense, we belong to the same community.

On  the other hand, we also have some clear differences and work in  somewhat different communities.

In  politics, this is “controlling the narrative.” It turns out to be  akin, as Barker explains, to one of the meanings of the word mašal ,  translated as parable :

So  the people and work and stories and exemplary texts or standard  textbooks provide the models that define a community’s methods  and social boundaries. While some may be compatible or have  significant overlap or applicability within different communities,  others may define very different communities.

The  differences in approach between different communities and within  a community is not necessarily always a bad thing. Kuhn  explains that

One  issue for both individuals and groups is how we deal with information  that does not come from our in-group, not from the teachers and  traditions with which we are more familiar and that we already trust.

I will  never forget a moment at the Salt Lake City Sunstone Symposium  in 2002 when I spotted an acquaintance passing down the hall.  I greeted her, and she asked what I was doing there. For an  answer, I held up a copy of my newly published Paradigms  Regained: A Survey of Margaret Barker’s Scholarship and Its  Significance for Mormon Studies . She said, “Before you say  anything, the Book of Mormon is a 19th  century fiction, and nothing you say could ever change my mind.  I never read anything from FARMS. It makes me mad.” Taken  aback, I asked if my Journal of Book of Mormon  Studies essay on Near Death Experience research and the  Book of Mormon had made her mad, and she admitted that it  hadn’t, but then she had no more to say. It was obvious that the  only way she could judge material she refused to read on grounds that  it “made her mad” is via the opinions drawn from her trusted  social network, that is, secondhand gossip rather than firsthand  exploration. It happens that this person, a lifetime member and  a professional lawyer who ought to know about witness and  testimony and evidence, had also once reported that she had never  personally read the Book of Mormon. And though I had  been an acquaintance for more than ten years, clearly I was not  part of that trusted network.

In  another case, I recall a scholar on a Latter day Saint  blog commenting that he was not inclined to join the growing  enthusiasm for Barker’s work among other Latter day Saint  scholars on the grounds that “no one I know takes her  seriously.” Given that people like Rowan Williams, the  Archbishop of Canterbury, and His Holiness Patriarch Bartholomew take  her seriously, we can conclude that they were not part of this  student’s trusted network.

Jesus  observed that “No man also having drunk old wine straightway  desireth new: for he saith, The old is better” (Luke 5:39).  Alma encourages his listeners to “arouse your faculties, even to an  experiment upon my words” even if “Ye cannot know of their surety  at first, unto perfection” (Alma 32:26‒27). Both teachers  emphasize that what should matter most is not the initial skepticism  and resistance to what is new and contrary to preconception, but the  nature and results of subsequent experiments upon the word.

This  approach has the form of scholarship, but it avoids the power thereof  by avoiding genuine risk, offering a dismissal as “Not us!”  rather than framing the investigation in terms of “Why us?”  A “Why us?” approach, a search for greater light and  knowledge beyond current orthodoxy, invites risk and comes in the  form of a fair comparison that acknowledges the influence of its  own ideology and human limitations. It consciously strives to apply  values not completely paradigm dependent; that is, testability,  accuracy of key predictions, comprehensiveness and coherence,  fruitfulness, simplicity and aesthetics, and future promise. It  recognizes that paradigm choice always involves deciding which  problems are more significant to have solved, that any decision about  which paradigm is better also involves decisions about the standards  chosen and applied to measure better.

Smith  explains how she will draw on Douglas’s work:

Smith  also discusses how “we can arrange the holy days in the following  chiastic structure”:

All  of this points to the centrality of the atonement and the  importance of the role of the anointed high priest. This turns out to  be consistent with Barker’s work overall, not just in her essay on  atonement. Whereas Smith attempts a close reading of  Leviticus in light of Mary Douglas’s scholarship, Barker’s  approach characteristically offers a wider range of sources,  including not only Douglas on atonement but also Milgrom on  Leviticus, Robert Murray on The Cosmic Covenant , and  discussion of the significance of 1 Enoch , Isaiah 53, and  the Qumran Melchizedek texts.

If  Barker is correct, then we should also find these themes in the  Book of Mormon and the revelations to Joseph Smith.  This is at least an experiment worth doing, and the basic shared  assumption can be a starting point in exploring the importance  of the high priest and the meaning of atonement.

---
Notes

[1] Review  of Adam S. Miller, ed., A Dream, a Rock, and a Pillar  of Fire: Reading 1 Nephi 1 (Provo, Utah: Maxwell  Institute, 2017), 140 pp., $15.95. 1 Review of Adam S. Miller and Joseph M. Spencer, eds., Christ  and Antichrist: Reading Jacob 7 (Provo, Utah: Maxwell  Institute, 2017), 148 pp., $15.95. 2

[2] [I]t  would be foolish to ignore an avenue that could potentially provide  new insights into the Book of Mormon narrative. 3

[3] Smith  discusses the account in the context of the discovery of the Book of  the Law as reported in 2 Kings, and Josiah’s response to reading  that book, Huldah’s status and prophecy. Smith raises the  possibility that “Lehi was one of the people present at King  Josiah’s covenant renewal ceremony” and comments that “it only  makes sense to consider how this event would have shaped the  background to 1 Nephi 1; it would be foolish to ignore an  avenue that could potentially provide new insights into the  Book of Mormon narrative” (M, 12). She even postulates  that Lehi and Huldah might have known one another, though I expect  he would have been quite young and obscure when Huldah spoke, still  decades from his own call as a prophet, while she, given her  evident social status, had considerable maturity. Josiah became king  at age eight, and in 2 Kings 22:3 “in the eighteenth year  of King Josiah,” he began repairing the temple, with the discovery  of the Book of the Law that led to the purge. It is not clear whether  that is the 18th year of his age or of his reign. The  2 Chronicles 34 account has Josiah beginning a purge  in the 12th year of his reign, and the discovery of the  Book of the Law in the 18th year of his reign. 4

[4] Smith  discusses Huldah’s reading of the Book of the Law and her  prophesies concerning Jerusalem and the King, the difficulties  presented by both in light of subsequent events, and the nature of  mercy. And she compares this with Lehi’s later experience in  reading the heavenly book and preaching in Jerusalem. This is all  worth doing; her essay sheds valuable light and is recommended  reading. Julie Smith has produced important work in the past  (for example, a notable reading of the anointing scene in Mark, 5 a well-reviewed book on the gospels, 6 and an award winning Interpreter essay 7 ),  and I trust she will continue to do so in the future.

[5] Smith  comments that “this viewpoint — quoted disapprovingly in Jeremiah  — has been making a comeback among Latter day Saints  under the influence of Margaret Barker, who argues that Josiah’s  reforms negated earlier, more correct, worship practices” (M,  5n13). Her comment, offered without any details or supporting  references, does not cast light on Margaret Barker’s arguments and  significance nor on the views of many Latter day Saint scholars  who have explored her work. The lack of any reference is surprising,  because one of her footnotes cites Glimpses of Lehi’s Jerusalem ,  which includes Barker’s important 2003 essay “What King Josiah  Reformed,” and my own “The Temple, Monarchy, and Wisdom: Lehi’s  World and the Scholarship of Margaret Barker” (M, 2n4). Smith  also overlooks the importance and influence of Raphael Patai’s The  Hebrew Goddess and William Dever’s Did God Have a Wife? ,  the most conspicuous among many others who have also explored the  textual and archeological evidence for the Hebrew Queen of Heaven.  For instance, Daniel Peterson reports that the catalyst for “Nephi  and His Asherah” was the work of Biblical scholar Mark Smith,  though he later acknowledged the convergence with and the importance  of Barker’s work. 8 Important essays comparing the Latter day Saint teachings about  a Heavenly Mother with scripture and archeological findings  appeared before Margaret Barker’s work became known among  Latter day Saint scholars, including a FAIR essay by Kevin  Barney, which cites a range of Biblical scholarship and  archeology and provides close reading of the Hebrew. 9 For the Latter day Saint tradition, Barney

[6] [Page 31] cites Linda Wilcox’s  earlier essay on “The Mormon Concept of a Mother in Heaven.” 10

[7] All  this demonstrates that Barker is not responsible for Latter day  Saint interest in a Hebrew Goddess. Rather, our interests  converge in unexpectedly complex and interesting ways. Indeed, for  most Latter day Saints, the interest in a Heavenly Mother  goes back, not to Barker’s recent books, or Patai, or Dever, or  even to Latter day Saint scholars like Barney, Peterson, Wilcox,  or Carol Lynn Pearson’s performances of her play Mother Wove the  Morning , or to Janice Allred’s untethered theological  speculations, but rather to Eliza Snow’s famous hymn Oh, My  Father , and the approving comments of orthodox Latter day  Saint leadership. 11

[8] Readers  looking for light on Margaret Barker’s case should look to her most  extensive commentary on Josiah and Jeremiah in The Mother of the  Lord, Volume 1: The Lady in the Temple . 12 Barker shows that the book of Jeremiah itself was subject to  editorial battles, and the Jeremiah texts we have contain much more  to consider about Jeremiah’s relationship to both the reform and  Lady Wisdom than is or can be illuminated by this single proof-text.

[9] I have  published on the significance of Barker’s work for the  Book of Mormon 13 and have read the work of many other Latter day Saint scholars  who draw on her work, ranging from Daniel Peterson to M. Catherine  Thomas, from Kevin Barney to Jon Hall, and Alyson Skabelund Von Feldt  and D. John Butler and Eugene Seaich, from John Tvedtnes  and Frederich Huchel to Zina Peterson, from Brant Gardner and  John Welch to Fiona Givens and Neal Rappleye, from Jeffrey  Bradshaw, Noel Reynolds, David Larsen, Barry Bickmore, Martin Tanner,  and LeGrand Baker, to Stephen Ricks, David Paulson, Hal Boyd, Val  Larsen, Jeff Lindsay, Don Bradley, and several others. It is true  that many of these scholars, including me, have been intrigued by  Barker’s approach to Josiah, but who among us and where have any of  us suggested that we ought to burn incense and

[10] When  Jeremiah reproves those in Egypt who were “baking cakes to the  Queen of Heaven” in Jeremiah 44, we should compare that with  his complaints about those who trusted in the temple without taking  care to “thoroughly amend your ways and your doings,” that is,  trusting ritual without repentance and sacrifices without personal  obedience. Jeremiah does look forward to valid worship in the house  of the Lord (Jeremiah 33:11). Despite describing its status then  as a “den of robbers” (Jeremiah 7:11), he is not  anti-temple. He is against those who would forsake “the fountain of  living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can  hold no water.” 14 (Jeremiah 2:13)

[11] Indeed,  Kevin Barney states directly , “I will not suggest pouring out  drink offerings to Asherah poles or any such observance,” 15 but rather concludes by stating, “I can think of no finer, or  profound way to worship our Mother in Heaven than to participate in  temple worship.” 16 One reason Smith does not cite specific authors and texts on this  point is that matching specific publications and claims to support  her general charge against Latter day Saint scholars like myself  would be difficult.

[12] Smith  comments that “there are solid reasons to dispute Barker’s thesis  [regarding Josiah’s reform], not the least of which is that it  requires taking the position that a vast portion of the Hebrew  Bible advocates false religion” (M, 5n13). Again, Smith does not  divulge any details of Barker’s case by mention or citation. 17 In a talk given at the Joseph Smith

[13] [Page 33] Conference in  Washington, DC, in 2005, Barker commented that “one of the great  moments of my own journey of discovery was reading an article  published in 1980, showing that the religion of Abraham must have  survived until the reign of King Josiah because that is part of what  he purged from his kingdom.” 18 That is, important portions of the Bible as we have it advocate  religious practices that Josiah overthrew. The evidence of conflict  between different writers, editors, interpreters, and portions of the  Bible does not go away by treating the question of difference as  unthinkable. Barker asks:

[14] Is  it possible that almost all the kings in Jerusalem were misguided  apostates, as the Deuteronomists claim, who permitted and even  encouraged alien cults in their kingdom? And what would those kings  have considered alien? And who has the right to make the judgement?  History, as it is well known, is written, and rewritten by the  winners, especially if they are also the publishers. Almost  all that Josiah swept away can be found in the older religion, even  as it is described in the current Hebrew Scriptures. It was the  religion of the patriarchs and prophets, not the alien cults of  Canaan — if they really were alien. 19

[15] While  both Jeremiah and Lehi quote Deuteronomy, 20 which shows they knew and respected a version of it, they both  contradict Deuteronomy

[16] [Page 34] on the issues that Barker identifies as key to  her understanding of the reform. 21 In The Great Angel , she writes,

[17] First,  they were to have the Law instead of Wisdom (Deut. 4:6). … What was  the Wisdom which the Law replaced? Second, they were to think only of  the formless voice of God sounding from the fire and giving the Law  (Deut. 19:12). Israel had long had a belief in the vision of  God, when the glory had been visible on the throne in human form,  surrounded by the heavenly hosts. What happened to the visions of  God? And third, they were to leave the veneration of the host of  heaven to peoples not chosen by Yahweh (Deuteronomy 4:19–20).  Israel had long regarded Yahweh as the Lord of the hosts of heaven,  but the title Yahweh of Hosts was not used by the Deuteronomists.  What happened to the hosts, the angels? 22

[18] In The Revelation of Jesus Christ , she added these points: that  the Jews were not to “enquire after secret things which belonged  only to the Lord (Deut. 29:29). Their duty was to obey the  commandments brought down from Sinai and not to seek someone who  would ascend to heaven for them to discover remote and hidden things  (Deut. 30:11).” 23 It should be obvious that these features also appear in Jeremiah and  the Book of Mormon and do so despite their affinity for  a version of Deuteronomy. 24

[19] [Page 35] texts, is also part of  the story. 25 She draws on sources outside the canon, such as the Damascus  Document, 1 Enoch , and Baruch to give a broader picture, 26 and to supplement her close reading of Kings, Chronicles, and  Jeremiah. Barker’s willingness to consider such noncanonical  sources in considering Josiah and Jeremiah is one important factor  that distinguishes her approach from Richard Elliot Friedman’s Who  Wrote the Bible? and Marvin Sweeny’s King Josiah of Judah:  Lost Messiah of Israel . She also considers many key passages from  scripture that they do not cite or discuss , such as those in  which Jeremiah and Lehi contradict their stated agenda and  Jeremiah 1:19 on his call as a prophet, the year after the  reform began against the kings, the social elites who implemented the  reform, and the people of the land who installed the eight-year-old  Josiah as king. 27

[20] Important  parts of her case involve the tensions between different books and  even different sections in the same book, for example, Third Isaiah’s  condemnation of the returning exiles. 28 But these parts of the story can be recognized only if we explore the  evidence rather than place the question as out-of-bounds. Barker  calls attention to significant book selection and book suppression, 29 differing versions of books (Masoretic Hebrew, Aramaic Targums,  Greek, and Dead Sea Scrolls Hebrew), tensions between the Kings and  Chronicles accounts, 30 variant passages, alternate readings, and the presence of opaque  texts (that is, unreadable in the Hebrew), not as random occurrences,  but in passages that were important to the Christians. 31

[21] The  MT has changed “sons of God” to “servants,” and removed all  explicit references to the heavenly beings who were to be judged. It  is important to remember that the changes in the [Page 36] MT always follow the  same pattern, and that this pattern distinguishes it from much at  Qumran, and also from much in the New Testament. 32

[22] Texts  dealing with Holy Ones and the Holy One have significant elements in  common: theophany, judgement, triumph for Yahweh, triumph for his  anointed son, ascent to a throne in heaven, conflict with  beasts, and with angel princes caught up in the destinies of earthly  kingdoms. Many of these texts are corrupted; much of their subject  matter is that of the “lost” tradition thought to underlie the  apocalyptic texts. The textual corruption and the lost tradition are  aspects of the same question. 33

[23] All  the texts in the chosen canon would have had an original context,  which presupposed a certain pattern of shared beliefs within  which the text was set. The context was as much a part of the  meaning as the words themselves . Set in a new context, the  same text would soon acquire a new meaning. 34

[24] She  has explored the trends and fashions and ideologies at work in the  history of the Bible and in Biblical scholarship, and how that  affects what is read, not read, which questions are asked, which  questions are not asked, what is assumed, what is explored, and what  is overlooked and therefore dismissed without question. 35

[25] [Page 37] Any  form of faith commitment in biblical scholarship, any attempt to work  within a theological framework can be suspect. One ploy is to  keep one’s biblical study in a separate compartment of one’s  life, to pursue the most radically destructive investigations of  biblical texts and then go to evensong. People of commitment often  take refuge in safe areas like Hebrew, or archaeology, although that  is no longer “safe” as I shall show in a moment. Let me  quote now from the introduction to Francis Watson’s recent book Text and Truth 1997, “It is believed that theological  concerns have an inevitable tendency to distort the autonomous  processes of biblical exegesis, a prejudice so strong that to  identify a theological motivation underlying an exegetical  position is often held to be sufficient refutation.” 36

[26] Barker  explores tensions within the Bible on basic questions such as whether  it was possible to see God. 37

[27] Deuteronomy  denies emphatically that the Lord was seen by Moses at Sinai: ‘You  heard the sound of words but you saw no form’ (Deut.4:12). The  earlier account in Exodus 24 says that Moses and the elders did see the God of Israel. We assume that the Deuteronomists would also  have denied Isaiah’s claim that he had seen the Lord in the  temple, and disagreed with Jesus when he said that the pure in heart  would see God. 38 One  of the secrets of the priesthood must have been experiencing  theophany, something described in the ancient priestly blessing: “May  the LORD make his face/presence shine on you” (Numbers 6:25‒26).  At the end of the second temple period, this was one of the forbidden  texts, which could be read in public, but not explained. ( m.  Megillah 4:10) 39

[28] [Page 38] ‘earliest fragments of  the biblical text known up to the present.’” 40 That is, the oldest Biblical text known not only turns out to be  writing on metal dating to Lehi’s day and quoting from a Book  of Moses (making it relevant to the story of the Brass Plates), but  it also contains a passage central to a key controversy  from that time, faithfully reflected in 1 Nephi 1:8, and  relevant to a climactic moment of the Book of Mormon  as a whole in 3 Nephi 19:25, 30 when Jesus as Lord is  present and shining at the temple.

[29] Barker  explores many conflicting Bible passages, versions, and textual  corruption in key verses; and even shows patterns hidden underneath  the pointing of the Hebrew. 41

[30] Here  we come across one of the methods used to hide the temple in the  Hebrew Scriptures: repointing. In Hebrew, the vowels were not written  in the text but supplied by the reader, and so by choosing to  pronounce the consonants differently, it was possible to change the  meaning of a word and so of a whole text. The “prostitutes”  that Josiah removed from the temple, with a change of vowel,  become holy ones, angels: qed e shim are  prostitutes , qed o shim are holy ones. The  angels vanished from the text, and so reading the text according to  the later vowels does not reveal what Josiah actually did. 42

[31] She  shows how the Hebrew Bible we have now is different from what the  earliest Christians used and provides historical and textual evidence  that the Masoretic Hebrew text was selected and edited in response to  the rise of Christianity. 43 The state of the texts, the selection of texts, and their  contextualization are part of the story, and that story can be read,  contextualized, and carefully considered in the same way as the  surface narrative. Barker’s complex argument ought to be recognized  and referenced as such. A name drop and blanket dismissal is not  enough. At least it is not enough for me. Obviously a different  school of thought can have different interests and values.

[32] The  Book of Mormon itself in 1 Nephi 13:23‒41  offers its own view of what happened to Bible texts in transmission  but also on the significance of other texts that have emerged since  the publication of [Page 39] the Book of Mormon. It happens that  Barker’s essay “Text and Context” on the transmission of  Biblical texts and 1 Nephi 13:23‒42 tell the same story,  including not only the importance of nonbiblical texts emerging after  the publication of the Book of Mormon, but also the  convergence in Nephi’s declaration that the other texts would  restore plain and precious truths, including the specific claim that  “the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father,” which happens  to be the overall argument of Barker’s The Great Angel: A Study  of Israel’s Second God, and The Revelation of Jesus Christ ,  that Yahweh was seen as not only the Son of El Elyon but also  the servant and lamb. I’ve made a case that Barker’s work  fulfills prophesy in 1 Nephi 13 on the restoration of plain  and precious things relevant to Lehi’s preaching what he “saw and  heard” concerning “a messiah and the redemption of the world”  (1 Nephi 1:19). 44 In contrast to what Lehi “saw and heard,” and expressed plainly,  I take Jacob 4:14 on “blindness” and “looking beyond  the mark” in Jerusalem as a direct comment on the reform, and  I read the encounter with Sherem as an important echo of the  main issues.

[33] In  her next sentence after her citationless dismissal of Barker,  Julie Smith does offer some balance by saying, “At the same  time, it is worth noting that one of the items specifically mentioned  as being destroyed in Josiah’s purging of idols is a tree that  symbolized the divine feminine” (see 2 Kings 23:6 on the  Asherah, and she refers to Daniel Peterson’s groundbreaking  essay “Nephi and His Asherah” 45 ).  Smith continues, “So it may be that Josiah’s reforms were  fundamentally sound but slightly excessive, and Lehi’s experience  offers a recorrection of Josiah’s over correction.” 46

[34] Some  prominent Latter day Saint scholars who appreciate Barker’s  work can and do agree with Smith’s favorable approach to Josiah and  the reform. The Latter day Saint Old Testament manuals that  mention Josiah accept the story at face value and do not discuss the  controversy at all. William Hamblin, a Latter day Saint scholar  who approves of much in Barker’s work, published an essay  “Vindicating Josiah” in Interpreter . 47 [Page 40] John Gee, for another, has blogged favorably on Hamblin’s  efforts to defend Josiah, though like Hamblin he finds much of value  in Barker’s work overall. 48 Aaron P. Schade’s essay in Glimpses of Lehi’s Jerusalem accepts a favorable view of Josiah’s reform. 49 For that matter, when I wrote “Paradigms Regained” I largely  followed Richard Elliot Friedman’s picture of the reform  occurring in waves of activity as new kings arrived and political and  social upheavals occurred. In that light I supposed that the  later waves of activity by the Deuteronomists accounted for most of  the differences with the Book of Mormon. I did so  because I was relatively new even to thinking about Josiah.  Friedman’s Who Wrote the Bible?, rather than Latter day  Saint background, was my entry point before I encountered  Barker’s The Great Angel in 1999. (I cannot remember Josiah  ever being discussed in any Latter day Saint classroom, book, or  sermon before that time.) To defend her view of Josiah to a  Latter day Saint audience familiar with Barker’s work, Smith  could at least have referenced Hamblin’s essay rather than leave  the argument to mostly unspecified “good reasons.”

[35] My  views on Josiah changed as I have examined the question in more  detail, as my subsequent essays demonstrate, including the one in Glimpses of Lehi’s Jerusalem, which precedes and introduces  Barker’s “What King Josiah Reformed” in that volume. I  later wrote a defense of my updated perspectives on the reform  in Interpreter as a counterpoint to Hamblin’s case. 50 Among other things, I note that Jeremiah was called in response  to the reform the year after it began and against the kings, the  princes, the priests, and the people of the land who had installed  Josiah as King (Jeremiah 1:2, 18‒19 and 2 Chronicles 34:3).  Compare that list of groups with those in Ezekiel’s tirade that  includes details of their misbehavior in Ezekiel 22:6‒31.  Zephaniah also called in the days of Josiah (Zephaniah 1:1),  mentions the blindness (Zephaniah 1:17), describes the princes  as wolves, the prophets as treacherous, priests as having “polluted  the sanctuary and done violence to the law” (Zephaniah 3‒4),  and speaks of “gathering her who was driven out” (Zephaniah 3:  14, 19).

[36] [Page 41] I have  read a variety of books about Josiah by a range of  non- Latter day Saint scholars, including those by Friedman,  Doorly, Sweeny, Barrick, and others, and I have concluded that  in comparison, The Mother of the Lord offers by far the most  wide-ranging, insightful, powerful, relevant, and persuasive case  regarding Josiah, Jeremiah, and the reform. And beyond this, there is  the inescapable fact that the Book of Mormon agrees with  Barker’s findings in unexpected, elaborate, interconnected,  meaningful convergences that extend far beyond the presence of a tree  in Lehi’s dream. 51 It is not just that Latter day Saint scholars have noticed an  elaborate convergence between Barker’s approach and the  Book of Mormon but that Barker has also publicly  acknowledged and extended that case in her 2005 talk on the  Book of Mormon published in BYU Studies . 52 So Lehi’s vision of the Asherah is just the most obvious bit of  low-hanging fruit on one branch of a beautiful, fruitful, lush,  dense, deeply rooted, and still growing tree. To dismiss Barker as  “not mainstream” misses the point that she deliberately and  consciously offers her approach as an alternative to the mainstream.  It does not acknowledge the interest in her work by such notables as  the Archbishop of Canterbury, His Holiness Patriarch Bartholomew, and  others.

[37] In  evaluating Huldah’s story we should not ignore the nature of that  reform relative to Jeremiah and Lehi. If the violence and upheaval of  the reform is directed by God, then Huldah’s comments have that  context. On the other hand, if the violence and upheaval of the  reform is what Jeremiah was called against (Jeremiah 1:2, 18)  and involved the answer to his question “Hath a nation changed  their Gods?” and his declaration that “my people have committed  two evils; they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and  hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water”  (Jeremiah 2:11, 13), then that too provides context. In either  case, it was not Huldah’s reform, not Jeremiah’s, not Lehi’s,  not Zephaniah’s, and not even Hilkiah’s, but King Josiah’s,  whether we follow the version in 2 Kings 22, where the  discovery of the book leads to the reform; or the version in  2 Chronicles 34, where the reform leads to the discovery of  the book. It is clear that (1) by delivering uncompromisingly [Page 42] bad  news that Huldah spoke in defiance of the desires and expectations  for Jerusalem of those who came to see her regarding the book, and  (2), what she said regarding Josiah’s death is problematic, given  that he died in battle, not at peace. 53 And (3), part of the context for the reports we have includes the  agenda of the people who reported Huldah’s story. They were not  dispassionate reporters. 54 Indeed, the willingness of the Deuteronomist writers to include  unflattering information should not be taken as de facto evidence of  their dispassionate objectivity and honesty.

[38] Whoever  wrote [the Deuteronomic Histories] was clearly setting out to  discredit what had existed in Jerusalem in the time of the first  temple: it was the voice of a new regime. Their description of  the temple does not include items such as the veil and chariot  throne, which appear in the Chronicler’s account and were important  elements of priestly theology. Other sources are mentioned, but they  have not survived. Isaiah is the only one of the latter prophets who  appears in this account. 55

[39] I think  that Josiah and Huldah did what they understood to be best, given  their upbringing and circumstances. A person can be sincere and  mistaken at the same time. 56 (That is something I have to consider personally every time  I see a mirror, and broadly whenever I think about  contemporary American politics.) I think Josiah’s upbringing  from age [Page 43] eight after the assassination of his father Amon 57 had a great deal to do with the set of values he acquired that  underlies his reform, itself an echo of an earlier reform attempted  by Hezekiah. 58 Friedman discusses rival priestly families whose influence rose and  ebbed, depending on the favor of the Kings. 59 And the Book of Mormon makes the point that God is more  merciful and tolerant with respect to the circumstances of our  upbringing than we care to notice (e.g., Jacob 3:7). Still,  there were many during the time of Jeremiah (Jeremiah 5:21) and  Nephi (1 Nephi 13:32) and Ezekiel (Ezekiel 12:2) who had eyes  but did not see, and ears that did not hear what the prophets were  saying. Margaret Barker often refers to passages in the Book of Enoch  that describe a condition of blindness that prevailed in  Jerusalem at that time.

[40] This  is Joe Spencer’s essay, “Potent Messianism: Textual, Historical,  and Theological Notes on 1 Nephi 1:18–20.” Like  Julie Smith, Spencer has published significant, even  path-breaking work, and like her, he has become a scholar to  watch in Latter day Saint circles. His An Other [Page 44] Testament is a brilliant reading of the Book of Mormon. In that  book, he identifies an important structure that underlies Nephi’s  writing. 60

[41] This  is a profound illumination and just one of many notable insights  in this and others of his books. Spencer himself reports being  surprised and impressed, after working on this structure for years,  to read Barker’s Temple Theology and to find her chapters  organized as “creation, (broken) covenant, atonement, (divine)  wisdom.” 61 Personally, I don’t think the convergence of themes centered  on the Temple is accidental; rather the fruit of common inspiration  toward convergent insight. So I came to Spencer’s essay with  great respect and high hopes for new light.

[42] It  is true that one of Spencer’s insights in his An Other Testament involves his case that Nephi and Abinadi offered somewhat different  views of the Messiah, and that in 3 Nephi, Jesus reconciles those  differences. In arguing for slow development relevant to his case in  “Potent Messianism,” Spencer mentions but does not explore the  discourse in 1 Nephi 10 as it pertains to the politically  centered Davidic model he offers (M, 61). Lehi’s words in  1 Nephi 10 come subsequent to his obtaining the brass  plates (which, to be fair, includes sources distinguished from what  became the Hebrew Bible) and also subsequent to Lehi’s having his  vision of the tree of life (an authentically ancient Wisdom/Temple  symbol meaningful in Lehi’s Jerusalem). Still, chronologically the  1 Nephi 10 account seems to me to come within a year  of the end of Lehi’s public preaching in Jerusalem, 62 and that has implications for whether or not Lehite teaching  developed slowly over the course of the Book of Mormon  account, and from what beginnings. In 1 Nephi 10 Lehi  himself adds other significant titles that ought to contextualize  what he, very early in the Book of Mormon account,  understood as “a messiah.”

[43] However,  in casting about for reliable light on the subject, at least with the  purpose of building a case regarding how Lehi’s listeners  would have thought about a messiah, Spencer says, “I think it  best to trust secular historians of the ancient world about what  messianic belief in Lehi’s day would have looked like, rather than  to interpret the text solely according to our own received  expectations” (M, 62). I agree [Page 46] that we ought to challenge our  “received expectations” as part of what Jesus calls casting out  “the beam out of thine own eye” (Matt 7:3‒5), a necessary  prelude to seeing clearly. This is consistent with Nephi’s comments  on the implications of being taught “after the manner” of the  Jews (2 Nephi 25:1‒5) to understand how they did. But why  suppose the secular historians would have clearest vision regarding  a messiah? Spencer argues that the ten words from verse 19 sound  more like a secular reconstruction of seventh and sixth century  views of what “a messiah” involved, in which “the redemption of  the world” involves political and military prowess as expected of  a Davidic king. I think the reflex to turn to a secular  approach for light is part of why Spencer overlooks the implications  of 1 Nephi 10, despite the close proximity in time to  Lehi’s preaching in 1 Nephi 1:19. It happens that Kings  of Israel shared the titles Lehi uses in 1 Nephi 10,  although not in their political or military roles but specifically  when they acted in their roles as anointed Melchizedek High Priests  in the temple. 63 Spencer’s attempt here to cast light on the meaning of a messiah  via politics and secular scholarship overlooks any discussion of the  anointed Melchizedek priesthood of the first temple. 64

[44] Spencer  claims that the “sort of messianism that would have been known to  Lehi’s Jerusalem would have focused much more intensely on the  then-still-existent Davidic dynasty than on anything else”; that  is, according to Spencer’s reading here, a messiah had to do  with Davidic Kings and politics because messiah means  “anointed,” and Kings were anointed, and we can trust this thesis  based on the objectivity and insight of secular historians. That  premise, I think, can be tested and questioned. Lehi descended  from the Northern Kingdom (2 Nephi 5:14, Alma 10:3),  and one of the distinguishing traits of that tradition is  a diminished concern and respect for David and the Davidic  covenant. 65 Spencer cites [Page 47] Brueggman on Isaiah 1‒39 on a Davidic and  political approach and refers to Isaiah 9:6‒7 as describing “a  new king ascending to the throne and being adopted by the Lord as he  fulfills the hopes the Davidic dynasty” (M, 64). This is the famous  passage on the “wonderful counselor, the mighty God, the  everlasting father, the prince of peace” as well as “the throne  of David, and his kingdom.” Barker, who has also published  formidable commentaries on Isaiah, 66 observes that in the Septuagint, these four throne names are replaced  with one, “the Angel of Great Counsel.” 67 She shows that the four titles Isaiah uses were equivalent to the  meanings of the angel names Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and Uriel,  each title and name representing an aspect or role of the Lord. 68 The “Angel of Great Counsel” title converges with the  implications of Lehi’s council vision in 1 Nephi 1 and  also leads directly to all the divine titles Lehi uses in 1 Nephi 10,  given a First Temple and priesthood context. The political  interpretation Spencer cites does not.

[45] In  1 Nephi 10, Lehi gives us “a Savior of the world” (1  Nephi 10:4), “this Redeemer of the world” (10:5) and “the Lamb  of God, who should take away the sins of the world” (10:10), who  would be “slain” by the Jews and then would “rise from the  dead” (10:11) and the true Messiah would be “their Lord and their  Redeemer” (10:14), that “the Son of God was the Messiah who  should come” (10:17). All of this points directly to the Temple and  the Day of Atonement ritual as the dramatic enactment of the  redemption of the world and ties directly and profoundly to the [Page 48] First  Temple theology Margaret Barker has worked to recover. 69 The Day of Atonement has everything to do with theological redemption  of the world, the Everlasting Covenant, 70 and not primarily with politics and secular deliverance. So the  question is not only “which interpretation is better?” but also  “How do we go about measuring better?” In making and defending  a decision, we simultaneously expose our ideological and  evidential basis for deciding.

[46] Spencer  argues that on the basis of a political context, what Lehi’s  hearers would “have heard in his preaching would most likely have  been heard in his preaching a hope that Zedekiah would be  replaced by a miraculous Judean king who would lead the Jews in  a successful revolt that would mark the beginning of political  independence — or even political ascendancy. To many, it would  likely have seemed better that one such wild-eyed prophet should  perish than that the whole Judean nation should dwindle and perish in  a sustained Babylonian siege” (M, 66). Spencer grants  that “Lehi seems to have been in the earliest stages of developing  a fully Christian messianism, but his listeners likely could  make little sense of his message” (M, 66). So to the degree that  Spencer talks about why some of Lehi’s listeners may have  misunderstood what he said, there are also grounds for considering  the difference between those who see and hear and understand, and  those who are blind. 71

[47] However,  to me, the negative response to Lehi’s first public discourse on “a  messiah and the redemption of the world” makes the most sense in  light of Barker’s elaborate and well-supported case that the  reformers, however sincere, zealous, and well-intended, had recently  changed the role of the high priest so that he was no longer  anointed, literally no longer “a messiah” and that they had  removed the Day of Atonement from the sacred calendar in  Deuteronomy 16. (Barker observes that in Zechariah 3,  Joshua the High Priest is clothed but not anointed, and she points to  Rabbinic tradition that the second temple priests were clothed but  not anointed, since the oil had been lost with the first temple.) On  the Day of Atonement, the anointed high priest of the First Temple  ritually [Page 49] enacted the redemption of the world by representing Yahweh  offering his life to heal the creation. 72 The reformers had violently removed these aspects of worship in  Jerusalem, and Lehi, by stating that they would return, immediately,  and understandably in this context became a target. In  discussing the Book of Mormon, Barker states that

[48] the  original temple tradition was that Yahweh, the Lord, was the Son of  God Most High, and present on earth as the Messiah. This means that  the older religion in Israel would have taught about the Messiah.  Thus finding Christ in the Old Testament is exactly what we should  expect. This is, I suggest, one aspect of the restoration of  “the plain and precious things, which would have been taken away  from them” (1 Nephi 13:40). The Jehovah of the Old  Testament is the Christ [that is, the Messiah, literally, the  “anointed”] of the Book of Mormon (Mosiah 3:8;  3 Nephi 15:5). 73

[49] Ezekiel 9  discusses “a mark upon the foreheads” of certain men and his  contemporary, fellow exiled temple priests; Jacob also discusses the  “mark”(Jacob 4:14) and what had been “manifest plainly”  (a direct allusion to that which ties the content of Lehi’s first  public discourses in 1 Nephi 1:19 to Jacob’s own  statements in Jacob 4: 4‒12 on his foreknowledge of Christ).  However, Spencer defers to the anointing of Davidic kings without  considering their priestly roles 74 and refers to discussion points offered by secular historians who  focus on politics. Barker characteristically looks at the temple  priesthood in a way that illuminates the significance of Jacob’s  mark as the anointing behind the title of Messiah:

[50] An  angel was sent to mark the faithful: “Go through the city, through  Jerusalem, and put a mark upon the foreheads of the men who  groan and sigh over all the abominations that are committed in it”  (Ezekiel 9:4). The Lord then spoke to the other six angels:  “Pass through the city after him and smite … [Page 50] but touch no one  upon whom is the mark. … “ (Ezekiel 9.5‒6). The mark on  the forehead was protection against the wrath. “Mark,” however  conceals what that mark was. The Hebrew says that the angel marked  the foreheads with the letter tau , the  last letter of the Hebrew alphabet. In the ancient Hebrew script  Ezekiel would have used, this letter was a diagonal cross, and  the significance of this becomes apparent from the much later  tradition about the high priests. The rabbis remembered that the oil  for anointing the high priest had been lost when the first temple was  destroyed and that the high priests of the second temple were only  “priests of many garments,” a reference to the eight  garments worn on the Day of Atonement. The rabbis also remembered  that the anointed high priests of the first temple had been anointed  on the forehead with the sign of a diagonal cross. This diagonal  cross was the sign of the Name on their foreheads, the mark which  Ezekiel described as the letter tau . 75

[51] But  behold, the Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they despised  the words of plainness, and killed the prophets, and sought for  things that they could not understand. Wherefore, because of their  blindness, which blindness came from looking beyond the mark, they  must needs fall; for God hath taken away his plainness from them. 76

[52] As  we have seen, Jeremiah, Nephi, Ezekiel, Zephaniah, and 1 Enoch  also describe the blindness in Jerusalem in Lehi’s day and do so in  express contrast to the seeing and hearing that came with their own  theophanies. When Jacob attempts to cast light on the meaning of  Messiah, he adds other titles, affirming that “the Lord God, the  Holy One of Israel, should manifest himself unto them in the flesh,”  and they shall “crucify him” (2 Nephi 6:9). Jacob’s  discourse, as Professor Hamblin has observed, contains themes [Page 51] consistent with the Day of Atonement. 77 In 2 Nephi 9: 5, the Creator will show himself to those at  Jerusalem and die and provide an infinite atonement (2 Nephi 6:7).  In the passages in Jacob 4 leading up to the discussion of the  mark and the blindness in Jerusalem, Jacob’s themes also happen to  resonate with the wisdom tradition that Barker works to recover. 78

[53] The  First Temple High Priests were quite literally anointed with the  name, and the symbolism of this act was so profound that “older  texts suggest that before the reform, the Name had been simply  a synonym for the presence of Yahweh, and not a substitute.” 79 Barker cites Isaiah 30:27 as an example:

[54] Here  is the equivalence of the anointed [the Christ] and the Name as the  visible presence of the Lord God who had covenanted with the Jews.  Notice that this contextual reading does not require us to explain  that this is the first time an angel explained to Jacob that Christ  is his personal name while skipping over the fact that Christ ,  like Messiah , means “anointed one,” and is not a personal name. Notice too that [Page 52] John Welch and Terrence  Szink have compared Benjamin’s discourse to the Day of Atonement  rituals, observing that the expanded name Lord God is used  seven times as an equivalent to the sacred name YHWH and that Christ  is also used exactly seven times. 80

[55] There  is a reason why Nephi says, “there is none other people that  understand the things which were spoken unto the Jews like unto them,  save it be that they are taught after the manner of the things of the  Jew” (2 Nephi 25:5). There is a reason why, in  reference to the parable of the sower, the same seeds (words) can  generate vastly differing yields, depending on soil, nurture, and  time. Jesus says, “Know ye not this parable? and how then will ye  know all parables?” (Mark 4:13). And there is a reason  why Barker herself explains that we seek to stand where they  stood, to look where they looked so as to glimpse what they saw.” 81

[56] A few  authors mention the notion of Sherem as an outsider, but none explore  the potential Mesoamerican social developments and historical  contextualization that would provide Sherem with a motive for  confronting Jacob, other than theological disagreement with Sherem as  “a watchman over public piety” (M&S, 6). Brant Gardner had  suggested that Sherem represented economic interests who wanted to  eliminate Jacob’s interference in trade. 82 Kimberly Berkey mentions the frequent thematic grouping of Sherem,  Nehor, and Korihor and mentions studies by B. H. Roberts, Mark  Thomas, and John W. Welch (M&S, 28n1). She also observes with  this footnoted context that Jacob 7 becomes a “kind of  type-scene for subsequent portions of Nephite history” (M&S,  28). However, the insights regarding Jacob’s prayers that she  pursues in her interesting essay do not elaborate on the notion of  type-scenes. I’ve elsewhere cited this passage on type-scenes from  Robert Alter:

[57] Since  biblical narrative characteristically catches its protagonists only  at the critical and revealing points in their lives, the biblical  type-scene occurs not in the rituals of daily existence but at the  crucial junctures in the lives of the heroes. … Some of the most  commonly repeated biblical type-scenes I have been able to  identify are the following: the annunciation … of the birth of the  hero to his barren mother; the encounter [Page 55] with the future betrothed at  a well; the epiphany in the field; the initiatory trial; danger  in the desert and the discovery of a well or other source of  sustenance; the testament of the dying hero. 83

[58] Alter  observes that not only the individual type-scenes, but also the set  of available type-scenes “are the lineaments of a purposefully  deployed literary convention,” where “the variations in parallel  episodes are not at all random ” but purposeful. 84 Alter explains that “the type-scene is not merely a way of  formally recognizing a particular kind of narrative moment; it  is also a means of attaching that moment to a larger  pattern of historical and theological meaning.” 85 And as Alter explains, the way the biblical writers attach meaning is  not just in repetition but in the variations and how they provide the  basis for mutual comparison and contrast that reveal character and  provide implicit commentary. We should consider “what is done in  each individual application of the scheme to give it a sudden  tilt of innovation or even to refashion it radically for the  imaginative purposes at hand.” 86

[59] In  his Digging in Cumorah , Mark Thomas (following Brodie and  B. H. Roberts), while grouping Sherem with Korihor and Nehor,  titles his discussion “Dying Heretics.” He concludes his chapter  by saying that “from aesthetic, religious, and logical  perspectives, the dying heretic is the weakest narrative form in the  Book of Mormon.” 87 The reason he reaches that conclusion is that despite citing Alter,  he focuses on similarities rather than the telling variations.

[60] Thus,  on careful inspection, the accounts of the cases of Sherem, Nehor,  and Korihor differ in many respects; and given their time and  circumstances, they differ in precisely the ways one could expect  them to differ. Each proceeding was tailored to the individual facts  and circumstances of the case. Some [Page 56] surprising and unique twists and  turns occurred and different legal issues were encountered in each  case. Above all, the historical or jurisprudential value of each case  was to establish different results: each proceeding raised legal  problems of first impression that were of pressing importance for  that particular moment in Nephite legal and religious history. 88

[61] [Page 57] There  is always danger of a metaphor once adopted becoming the master  instead of the servant. 89

[62] [Page 59] In  step (2), “the scapegoat must be slandered and accused” (M&S,  12‒13), and Riess makes the case that this is what Jacob does,  going so far as to observe that Jacob declares that Sherem is “under  ‘the power of the devil’” (M&S, 13). Riess also says that  “Sherem never launches the same accusation back at Jacob,”  arguing that “Sherem believes Jacob has misunderstood the law”  but does not “anathematize his interlocutor” (M&S, 13). On  this last point I am not so sure, and that is because I come  to her reading with my awareness of Welch and Gardner’s  observations. Welch explains in great detail that Sherem’s  accusations were to prove that Jacob was “violating the laws of  God,” an order to remove Jacob from his High Priestly role, “since  he would be denounced, removed, and punished.” 90 Welch explains that Sherem’s accusations involved the three crimes  of (1) public apostasy, (2) blasphemy, and (3) false prophecy,” all  capital crimes. 91 As Gardner observes, “Assuming that Sherem was the ‘hired gun’  for the powerful Nephites, the result of this confrontation might  have done more than discredit Jacob. It could have legally put him to  death.” 92 Riess’s points about the scapegoat patterns are correct and  valuable, but I think we ought to recognize that both Jacob and  Sherem are potential scapegoats, depending on the outcome of the  confrontation.

[63] Riess  walks through Girard’s remaining steps, (3) the trial and guilt of  the scapegoat (M&S, 14), and (4) the scapegoat being killed or  banned (M&S, 14‒16), and the result, (5) where social order is  restored (M&S, 16‒17). Overall, this is a notable use of  Girard to cast light on a Book of Mormon account.  Others have done so in the past, 93 and this successful application should encourage more. And in the Christ and Antichrist volume, the subsequent essays by Miller  and Berkey shed more light on Jacob’s personality and intimate  concerns and on the ironies involved in the confrontation with  Sherem. Collectively, these essays intensify and deepen the insights  of one another.

[64] Men  [and women] whose research is based on shared paradigms are committed  to the same rules and standards for scientific practice. That  commitment and the apparent consensus it produces are prerequisites  for normal science. 94

[65] No  wonder, then, that in the early stages of the development of any  science different men [and women] confronting the same range of  phenomena, but not usually all the same particular phenomena,  describe and interpret them in different ways. 95

[66] Why  do Julie Smith and I have such very different views of the  value of Margaret Barker’s scholarship? And why did the community  of scholars who discussed her work for the seminar accept her one  sentence dismissal of Barker without asking her to provide so much as  a footnote in explanation or defense? Clearly, the larger  Latter day Saint communities to which we primarily belong have  subdivisions as well as overlap. And of course, when people point to  mainstream scholarship as the standard against which to measure  Barker, it turns out that closer observation will [Page 61] reveal deep  subdivisions and controversy there as well. 96 The available facts do not and cannot by themselves force everyone  into a uniform conformity and unanimous interpretation.  Paradigms, which we define by our selection of the standard examples  scholarship that we follow, provide the controlling frameworks in  which we subsequently order and interpret our experiences.  A different standard example, say of Latter day Saint  apologetics following Nibley 97 or Sorenson, or of religious studies approaches that seeks acceptance  within secular university academia, 98 or Barker writing as a Christian believer, will lead not only to  the formation of different communities but also to different  scholarship.

[67] Paradigms  provide scientists not only with a map but with some of the  directions essential for map-making. In learning a paradigm the  scientist acquires theory, methods, and standards together, usually  in an inextricable mixture. Therefore, when paradigms change, there  are usually significant shifts in the criteria for determining the  legitimacy both of problems and of proposed solutions. 99

[68] The  Hebrew lexicon lists three apparently distinct meanings for this  word: to rule or have dominion; to be like, or cause to be like; and  to speak in parables or poetry —the two latter clearly aspects of  the same meaning. But in fact all three are [Page 62] the same: the one who  “rules” in this sense is the one who determines how and what  things are, and does this by making or maintaining the  correspondences. 100

[69] Joseph  Campbell had explained that one of the functions of a mythology  is “supporting and validating a certain social order.” 101 The exemplary stories told by a community model the ways things  ought to be done, the acceptable thoughts and questions, the basis  for addressing and resolving conflicts; and for exploring unanswered  questions, and defining what we can ask, and what we should not ask.

[70] The  scientist, by virtue of an accepted paradigm, knew what a datum  was, what instruments might be used to retrieve it, and what concepts  were relevant to its interpretation. 102

[71] Like  the choice between competing political institutions, that between  competing paradigms proves to be a choice between incompatible  modes of community life. … When paradigms enter, as they must, into  a debate about paradigm choice, their role is necessarily  circular. Each group uses its own paradigm to argue in that  paradigm’s defense. 103

[72] if  all members of a scientific community responded to each new  anomaly as a source of crisis or embraced each new theory  advanced by a colleague, science would cease. If, on the other  hand, no one reacted to anomalies or to brand-new theories in high  risk ways, there would be few or no revolutions. In matters like  these the resort to shared values rather than to shared rules  governing individual choice may [Page 63] be the community’s way of  distributing risk and assuring the long-term success of its  enterprise. 104

[73] When  people dismiss Barker as “not mainstream,” my response includes  my recognition that this is her point: she deliberately offers her  work as an alternative to the mainstream and makes a serious  effort to explain and justify that alternative. 105 A part of my own response is that Mormonism is not mainstream  either. If just being part of the mainstream, being orthodox, is the  first and great value upon which all judgments ought to be made, then  it’s hard to justify my covenant adherence to a community that  is unpopular, demanding, restrictive, controversial, expensive, and  a minority. Yet I can at least argue on other grounds  besides popular acceptance that my choice of faith communities has  a reasonable substance beyond my heritage, prejudice, naivety,  and tribalism. 106 And I can also argue the same for my currently favored sources  of academic enlightenment, including Margaret Barker, John Sorenson,  Hugh Nibley, Ninian Smart, René Girard, Thomas Kuhn, Alan Goff, Ian  Barbor, Robert Alter, Brant Gardner, and Terryl Givens, to name a few  whose work I take as paradigmatic.

[74] But  there are two very different phenomena at play here, each of which  subverts the flow of information in very distinct ways. Let’s call  them echo chambers and epistemic bubbles . Both are  social structures that systematically exclude sources of information.  Both exaggerate their members’ confidence in their beliefs. But  they work in entirely different ways, and they require very different  modes of intervention. An epistemic bubble is when you don’t hear people from the other side. An [Page 64] echo chamber is what happens when  you don’t trust people from the other side. 107

[75] In  dealing with differing opinions, I want to evaluate persons and  arguments fairly rather than settle for tribal dismissals, arguments  that [Page 65] really amount to saying, “Not us,” not the “orthodox  religion,” not the in group to which I belong or aspire.  This can be overt, as simple as applying a label such as “Fake  News” or “Witch Hunt” or “Apologist” rather than “honest  and objective” or “faith-promoting” or “doctrinally sound.” 108 It can be covert, where the judgment comes in the form of  a paradigm-dependent argument and ideologically driven sources  as “each group uses its own paradigm in that paradigm’s  defense.” 109

[76] So  if trust in social networks is a key issue here, how can we go  about encouraging trust among different scholars operating under  different assumptions, using different methods, and wanting to appeal  to different audiences? According to Nguyen, whereas epistemic  bubbles can be broken simply by adding new information, the challenge  with echo chambers involves encouraging trust. That takes time and  involves an effort to follow Brigham Young’s advice to “understand  men and women as they are, and not understand them as you are.” 110 To at least start in [Page 66] a meaningful way, Ian Barbour observes that  adherents “of rival theories can seek a common core of overlap  … to which both can retreat.” 111

[77] One  approach to reconciling at least some differences in Smith and Barker  would be to compare Barker’s 1994 essay “Atonement: The Rite of  Healing” 112 and Julie Smith’s 2009 essay “Lessons from Leviticus: Point  our Souls to Christ.” 113 Both authors draw not only on Leviticus, but specifically on the work  of anthropologist Mary Douglas. Indeed, Barker reports,

[78] I  had the great privilege of knowing the late great Mary Douglas,  the anthropologist and a wonderful, wonderful lady. She has been  dead for some six or seven years now. But she was just an experience.  She was at that stage of writing about atonement in Leviticus. When  I was listening to her talking about atonement, all sorts of  things clicked into place for me. That’s when the characteristic  treatment I had of atonement came about. 114

[79] In  recent years, the study of Leviticus has been galvanized by the late  Mary Douglas, an anthropologist. Douglas’s central insight was that  Leviticus relies on analogical thinking, which means that each part  of the law cannot be understood on its own but only by comparing it  with other parts of the law of Moses. … Analogical reading helps us  make sense of a document that, relative to the rest of the Old  Testament, has very few imperatives or commandments. Herein I will  employ an analogical reading of Leviticus to demonstrate what the  Book of Mormon prophets already knew: that the Law of  Moses, even in its details, points our souls to Christ. 115

[80] In  the case of these two essays, Barker and Smith employ different  techniques, but the overall conclusions complement and reenforce one  another. Smith relies on close reading of Leviticus and pays  attention to [Page 67] literary techniques such as chiasmus, all in light of  Douglas’s analogical reading, “which means that each part of the  law cannot be understood on its own but only by comparing it with  other parts of the law of Moses.” 116 For example, Smith looks at the first three chapters in Leviticus on  offerings in three categories, meat, cereal, and peace, each with  three subcategories. She discusses how the structure focuses  attention on how the key offering is made only when the high priest  is anointed: “A perceptive reader realizes that the role of the  high priest — which is, fundamentally, to make atonement — is  central to worship in ancient Israel.” 117

[81] A Sabbath  Day (23:3) B Passover  (23:5‒8) C  Firstfruits (23:10‒14) D Festival  of Weeks (23:15‒22) E Horn  Blasts (23:24‒25) E’ Day  of Atonement (23:27‒32) 118 D’ Festival of Tabernacles (23:34‒43) C’  Perpetual Fire/Bread (24:2‒9) B’  Sabbath Year (25:2…7) A’  Jubilee Year (25:8‒55) 119

[82] B Passover  (23:5‒8) C  Firstfruits (23:10‒14) D Festival  of Weeks (23:15‒22) E Horn  Blasts (23:24‒25) E’ Day  of Atonement (23:27‒32) 118 D’ Festival of Tabernacles (23:34‒43) C’  Perpetual Fire/Bread (24:2‒9) B’  Sabbath Year (25:2…7)

[83] C  Firstfruits (23:10‒14) D Festival  of Weeks (23:15‒22) E Horn  Blasts (23:24‒25) E’ Day  of Atonement (23:27‒32) 118 D’ Festival of Tabernacles (23:34‒43) C’  Perpetual Fire/Bread (24:2‒9)

[84] D Festival  of Weeks (23:15‒22) E Horn  Blasts (23:24‒25) E’ Day  of Atonement (23:27‒32) 118 D’ Festival of Tabernacles (23:34‒43)

[85] E Horn  Blasts (23:24‒25) E’ Day  of Atonement (23:27‒32) 118

[86] These  six are the bases for any investigation of atonement: first, that it  could be illuminated by the Enoch texts; second, that the [Page 68] atonement  was associated with the eternal covenant; third, that the temple  service was the service of heaven; fourth, that the temple  represented the entire system of heaven and earth; fifth, that the  blood was life; and sixth, that it was the places within the temple  complex that were “repaired”to remove the effects of sin. 120

[87] Before  considering the differences in approaches, notice the common ground  as both scholars focus on the role of the high priest in the  atonement rituals. Some critics complain that Barker uses late  sources, though not often considering her arguments about why some  sources popularly regarded as late might actually be quite early and  why other sources represent memories of very old traditions as  confirmed by earlier sources. 121 For example in the case of 1 Enoch as casting light on the  atonement rituals, Barker writes that “we do not date the biblical  texts on the basis of either their actual MS remains, or of the  latest redaction or allusion discernible within them. Such  a procedure would be recognized as ludicrous, yet it is the one  scholars employ to decide the date of the Enochic material.” 122 The oldest manuscripts of both 1 Enoch and Isaiah come from  Qumran. She observes that in 1 Enoch we have “clear  evidence of prophetic and wisdom forms used together within the  framework of the angel mythology, in conflict with Deuteronomic  ideology, indicating a deep-rooted dispute among the heirs to  the traditions of Israel.” 123 Among other things, she notices that “before Hezekiah built the  tunnel that brought [the Gihon’s water] into the city  (2 Kings 20:20; 2 Chronicles 32:20), the water of  the Gihon created a real stream in the Kidron Valley. It is  interesting that Enoch’s journey [ 1 Enoch 26:1‒2]  describes accurately the geography of Jerusalem before the time of  Hezekiah, that is, in the ministry of Isaiah.” 124 In her atonement essay, and at greater length and detail in The  Older Testament , Barker also explores ties between 1 Enoch and  Isaiah. All this contributes to Barker’s assertion that

[88] [Page 69] the  new paradigm is that the Enoch tradition is ancient, as it claims,  and that it was the original myth of the Jerusalem temple, long  before Moses became the key figure and the Exodus the defining  history. The world of the first temple was the taproot of  Christianity, and that is why the young Church treated Enoch as  Scripture. Those who preserved the Enoch traditions were a formative  influence on Christianity and its key concepts: the Kingdom and the  resurrected Messiah. Since Enoch was a high priest figure, and  Jesus was declared to be “a great high priest” (Hebrews 4.14),  we should also concern ourselves with the high priesthood. 125

