[Page 179] Abstract: Marjorie Newton’s Mormon and  Maori is a version of her 1998 thesis in which she rejects  key elements of the Māori Latter-day Saint historical narrative.  This contrasts with her earlier, faith-affirming Tiki  and Temple . In Mormon  and Maori Newton targets what she sees as Māori/missionary  mythology. She has written for different audiences; one was for  secular religious studies scholars, while the other was for faithful  Saints. Midgley rejects Newton’s claim that a Mormon American  cultural imperialism requires Māori to abandon noble elements of  their culture. Faithful Saints are liberated from the soul destroying  behavior that results from the loss of traditional Māori moral  restraints. Midgley insists that Newton has little understanding of  the deeper structures of Māori culture.

Review  of Marjorie Newton, Mormon and Maori (Salt Lake City:  Greg Kofford Books, 2014). 248 pp. $24.95 (paperback).

Two  years after Tiki and Temple was published, the bulk of her  1998 thesis was published as Mormon and Maori . In both these  works she claims there has been much Māori/LDS missionary mythmaking  as well as connivance in fabricating miracle stories. In addition,  she claims that “American Mormon cultural imperialism” has  required Māori Saints to abandon large portions of their culture.  Hence, Marjorie Newton asserts in both her thesis and in Mormon  and Maori , “The LDS Church’s success in New Zealand was not  achieved without cost to the culture and traditional way of life  (Maoritanga) of its Maori converts” (MNZ, v;  M&M, xii).

Clues  to solving this puzzle are found in a remark in Mormon and  Maori about Tiki and Temple :

> That  book, addressed primarily to a Latter-day Saint audience, was  honored by the Mormon History Association with its Best International  Book Award for 2012. However, it does not deal with deeper or more  scholarly issues. Mormon and Maori was originally written as  a Ph.D. thesis (dissertation) for the School of Studies in  Religion at the University of Sydney and is accordingly a more  objective and more academic examination of the interaction of  Mormonism and Maoritanga. (M&M, vii, emphasis added)

In Tiki and Temple , she indicates, she “does not attempt to  address the recent scientific debate over Maori origins or current  LDS teachings on the subject, but rather explains what the Mormon  missionaries believed and taught in their own day and how those  teachings resonated with their Maori converts” (T&T, xiv). This  appears to be her own justification for publishing both  a faith-affirming account of Māori Latter-day Saints and also  a “more objective and more academic” account in which she  challenges the traditional Māori Latter-day Saint historical  narrative as “faithful history,” fashioned by “Mormon  apologists,” and hence mythical, fictitious and false.


## Māori  Saints and Mormon Cultural Imperialism

In  her concluding remarks in Mormon and Maori , Newton opines that  “for a small minority” of Māori Saints, “the costs of  being a Maori [Page 183] Mormon may be too high” (M&M, 180). Why? In  her thesis she claims that: “The Mormon Church still speaks with an  American voice in its foreign missions and stakes … Although the  Mormon Church may not demand ‘cultural suicide’ from its  converts, New Zealand Mormons, in common with all members of the  international LDS Church, are implicitly expected to commit what Rana  Kabbani termed ‘cultural treason’ if they wish to identify fully  with Mormonism” (MNZ, 353).

At  the end of her thesis she highlights issues with American cultural  imperialism, a crucial version of which is “Mormon cultural  imperialism” (MNZ, 316–56). She clearly has a dim view of  the impact of American culture outside of the United States, an  example of which is the following:

> What  remains to be seen is how much the present blurring of cultural  differences in the industrialized world will trivialize cultural  tensions; if American “pop” culture, variously referred to as  “Coca-colonization” or the “McDonald’s culture,” continues  to conquer the world at its present pace, preservation of Maoritanga or any other culture may become an academic question. (MNZ, 355.)

My  own review of all 29 of Newton’s publications suggests that it is  not individual Americans, some of whom she knows and likes, who  ground her concern about “cultural conflict.” Instead, she seems  deeply concerned about the enormous social and economic changes that  have, especially since WW II, opened large parts of the world to  a mixing and blending of cultures. Additionally, she is certain  that an alien American church has increasingly insisted that Māori  pay a high cultural price if they desire to be faithful  Latter-day Saints.

However,  in the penultimate paragraph in Mormon and Maori , she grants  that most Saints do not see it her way:

> Nevertheless,  despite the problematical issues described in this book, the Mormon  Church has grown steadily in New Zealand in both numbers and status  until it now occupies a respectable place in New Zealand society  … While there are many thousands of recent converts, there is also  a considerable base of multi-generation Maori families  strengthening the LDS Church in New Zealand. Most find spiritual  satisfaction and happiness in Church attendance, participation in  Church programs, and the Mormon way of life (M&M, 181).

She  adds the following lament: “Most New Zealand Mormons, both Maori  and Pakeha, accept Church teachings unquestionably and remain  untouched by [Page 184] deeper or more difficult issues” (M&M, 181) in  both her thesis and in Mormon and Maori . I will address  these difficult issues she refers to later.


## Newton’s  Agenda

In  her thesis, Newton focuses on what she calls “cultural conflict”  between Māori ways and what was brought to them by American Saints.  There is little or none of this in Tiki and Temple , but it is  a major focus of Mormon and Maori . In its Preface she  insists that

> never  before have their leaders and missionaries faced the problems  associated with socialising converts from such a wide spectrum  of cultures. Resurgent nationalism and indigenisation philosophy in  many nations also pose problems for Mormon leaders, and recent  attempts to strip the LDS Church of its American cultural overtones  have been only partially successful. Thus, the history of Mormonism’s  impact on its Maori converts and their culture is surprisingly  relevant to the wider Church today (M&M, xi.)

What  I have also discovered is that when Newton tells the truly  heroic story of the long, very difficult struggle to bring the Church  of Jesus Christ to Australia and then later to New Zealand, there is  no sign of her concern about a clash between American and native  Australian and New Zealand cultures. In her excellent essays on  Australian Latter day Saints (see items 1, 4, 5, 9, 15, 21, and  23 in the Appendix), there are no signs of concern about Mormon  cultural imperialism. However, in several other essays on the Church  of Jesus Christ in Australia (see items 3, 6, 7, 8, and 13 in the  Appendix, below) there is an overt concern about cultural conflict.

[Page 185] The  difference might be either her intended audience or the venue in  which she sought to publish. The cultural imperialism about which she  complains only seems to rise to the fore when she is discussing the  sudden expansion of the Church of Jesus Christ in Australia that  began in the decade after WW II. However, concern about cultural  conflict becomes dominant when she discusses the faith of Māori  Saints.


## Some  Bungling

> Fluid  and ultimately porous though Diderot’s cultures may have been, they  were also thought of as integral and discrete. It is only  possible , as we have seen, to travel in one direction. As  with Lery’s Norman translators, any possibility of return has  been pre-empted by the journey itself. At best he (or she) who  has undergone the trial of travel will be condemned, like Gulliver,  to perpetual isolation from those who had once been his fellows.  (Pagden, 172)

Pagden’s  point seems to be that the difficult experiences of the first  Europeans to encounter the indigenous peoples in America and the  Pacific led to a personal “trial by travel,” which included  getting there [Page 186] (and then getting back home again) and also  communicating what they had experienced to others.

Writers  like Diderot came to believe that cultures, though porous, are not  commensurable, which they also believed “was underpinned by the  concept of providential order in which all humans should be in  harmony with nature” (Pagden, 172). This may also entail the  assumption that God does not want a fluid mixing of cultures.  Pagden also indicates that Johann Gottfried Herder, a German  nationalist, thought that “religion” might somehow “unite all  peoples” (Pagden, 172).

Why  focus on Newton’s concluding paragraph? It illustrates the problem  she has when she shifts from narrations, which she does remarkably  well (see the Appendix items 1, 2, 4, 5, 9, 15, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,  25, 27, and 28), to analyses and arguments, which she does not, in  either her PhD thesis or Mormon and Maori . She is very skilled  at archival research, and she can tell a good story, but she  becomes unreliable when she speculates about abstractions like  “cultural conflict.”


## A  Passion to Publish; Hitting Some Snags

Newton  explains how she came to write Tiki and Temple in the following way:


## Confusion  over Hagoth

In Mormon and Maori , Newton advances what she believes is the  primary reason why some Māori, beginning in 1882, rapidly became  faithful Latter-day Saints:

> [Page 188] Undoubtedly  the Mormon doctrine that had the greatest impact on Maori conversion  and that underlay most other reasons for the appeal of the Mormon  message for Maori, was the belief that Polynesians are descendants of  the expatriate Israelites of the Book of Mormon and are therefore  eligible for the redemptive blessings promised to scattered Israel.  (M&M, 12)

I consider  it a “red flag” when I see words like undoubtedly begin what should be an inductive argument intended to yield  a conclusion. Newton provides no textual evidence to support her  assertion about what is presumably beyond doubt. Instead, she claims  that LDS missionaries believed that “Book of Mormon prophecies …  would be fulfilled, and the Lamanites on the isles of the sea, like  those in the Americas, would be regenerated” (M&M, 12, emphasis  supplied). However, what some LDS missionaries may have believed is  not necessarily evidence for her opinion about what had “the  greatest impact on Maori conversion.”

She  introduces, in the next paragraph, what she claims is a widespread  belief that the Māori are the very remote descendants of Hagoth  (M&M, 13). I must stress that Hagoth, who is mentioned  briefly in Alma 63:5–8, was a Nephite shipbuilder and mariner  — both he and his associates are specifically said to be Nephites;  they are not Lamanites. In addition, Hagoth, we are told, built an  “exceedingly large ship … and launched it forth into the west  sea” (v5), and “many Nephites … did enter therein … and took  their course northward” (v6). “This man built other ships”  (v7). “And … one other ship also did sail forth” (v8). Newton  states: “It was upon the basis of this fragmentary Book of Mormon  story [in Alma 63:5–8] that Mormon missionaries found success among  the Maori” (M&M 13).

She  also claims that a “prior widespread acceptance by Maori of  Christian speculation about their Israelitish origin provided  a fertile field in which the Mormon missionary message  flourished” (M&M, 13). There was, in fact, some Pākeha  (European) speculation about the Māori being a remnant of  Israel. Māori also tended to see their own very dim situation  resulting from the ravages of colonial intrusion explained in stories  found in the Old Testament, which had been made available to them by  Christian missionaries. She then asserts that,

> Although  many Mormons (including many Maori Mormons) think that the LDS Church  is unique in its belief that Polynesians are related to Native  Americans and that both are remnants of Israel, such beliefs were  neither new nor unique when the Book of Mormon was published in 1830.  (M&M, 12–13)

[Page 189] However,  she neglects to mention that Pākeha speculation about the Māori  being a very remote remnant of ancient Israel did not link them  with any indigenous peoples in America. Instead, the belief that the  Māori are somehow linked to America is a unique Latter-day  Saint belief, rooted in the idea that they are at least partly the  decendents of Nephite mariners mentioned in the Book of Mormon.

At  least 25 times in the first chapter of Mormon and Maori , when  Newton refers to Hagoth, she identifies him and his associates as  Lamanites, even though twice she correctly identifies Hagoth and  those mariners as Nephites (M&M, 12, 32). She seems to ignore the  fact that Hagoth was Nephite in her argument that, by teaching  the Māori that they were Lamanites , LDS missionaries clashed  with what she calls maoritanga , and thereby challenged both  Māori traditions about their own origins as well as recent secular  speculation about such matters.


## Wrongly  Insisting on “Lamanite Descent”

Mormon  and Maori ends with a chapter entitled “Mormon and Maori?”  (M&M, 149–81). The chapter title is an interrogative that  signals that there is a radical tension between being  a Latter-day Saint and being a Māori. However, she grants  that

> for  the majority of today’s Maori Latter-day Saints, many of whom are  third-, fourth-, or fifth-generation descendants of early Maori  converts who accepted the Mormon gospel because of this teaching,  Lamanite descent is still a fundamental element of their  self-identification. (M&M, 180, emphasis supplied)

The  fact is that Māori Latter-day Saints actually both venerate and read  the Book of Mormon. She knows this is the case, since she quotes  Grant Underwood as follows:


## Confused  by the Debate over DNA

In  this same section of Mormon and Maori , Newton indicates that  “orthodox Mormons are still expected to subscribe to the literal  historicity of the Book of Mormon. ‘On this we draw a line in  the sand,’ stated Mormon Apostle Jeffrey Holland in 1994” (M&M,  33). Then she adds the following:

Newton  argues that belief in literal descent from Nephites adds another  “layer of unquestioning faith required of Maori Saints.” Having  to “subscribe to the literal historicity of the Book of Mormon”  is already [Page 192] presumably a sufficient burden. Removing this  additional burden would thus be a blessing to Māori and other  Polynesian and Native American Saints, if indeed it has been  disproved by Southerton and Murphy.

The  flatly false assertion that DNA studies by Southerton and Murphy led  John Sorenson to fashion a limited geography for the Book of  Mormon leads to the following:

> Coupled  with increasing scientific evidence of multiple migrations to  America, and continuing lack of archaeological and linguistic  evidence for the existence of Book of Mormon peoples in the Americas,  many Mormon apologists began to re-examine traditional assumptions  about the Book of Mormon.” (M&M, 27)

However,  increasing “evidence of multiple migrations to America” only  enhances the plausibility of the three migrations to America  described in the Book of Mormon.

What  Newton described in 2012 as the “recent scientific debate over  Maori origins or current LDS teachings on the subject” (T&T,  xiv) thus turns out to be the debate over DNA and the Book of Mormon.  Without being aware of what Latter-day Saint geneticists have  published about population genetics and the Book of Mormon, she  insists that the Brethren ought to officially jettison any idea that  remote descendants of Lehites exist outside a limited area in  Mesoamerica. She makes this claim based on what she believes is  a false belief about Māori origins, supported by DNA evidence,  but she misunderstands what Mormon apologists have written in  response about DNA and the Book of Mormon.

Despite  her comments about Book of Mormon historicity, she does not deny that  there were Lehites. Instead, she seems to assume that Southerton has  only proven that remote descendants of Lehi cannot now be outside  the limited area of Mesoamerica . This false assumption seems to  be why she takes exception with John Sorenson’s argument for [Page 193] a limited geography (see M&M, 27–2 8) with what she sees  as official approval and also for a Mesoamerican location of the  bulk of the events depicted in the Book of Mormon.

She  insists that because the Brethren seemingly approved John Sorenson’s  limited geography, they now can and should officially jettison the  idea that there are any remote descendants of Lehites outside of  a limited area in Mesoamerica. She wrongly assumes that no  Lehites could ever have traveled outside of the area where they  initially lived. In addition, she does not address the fact that  Southerton’s attack was on the historical authenticity of the Book  of Mormon and hence was not an argument that confines Lehites and  their remote ancestors to a limited area. She also argues that  the belief that some of the remote ancestors of the Māori (and other  Polynesians) were Nephite mariners would be easy to officially  jettison because it never has been canonized. However, it is texts  that are canonized, not interpretations of texts.

Newton  attempts to respond to Southerton’s claim “that LDS leaders,  faced with unanswerable scientific data about Native American and  Polynesian origins, are trapped in a situation in which they cannot make fundamental doctrinal changes without damaging the  faith of millions of adherents” (M&M, 178). She does so by  asserting that “[a]ccepting a changed perspective on their  origins may be difficult, but not devastating, for the majority of  Maori Saints” (M&M, 180). She then mentions that some past  practices, like taking the sacrament emblems only with the right  hand, have been abandoned without the Saints even noticing (M&M,  178–79).

She  also claims that a “formal retreat” from the teachings that  some of the ancestors of the Māori were Lamanites through Hagoth,  “would in no wise mean that Maori were not Israelites in the eyes  of the Mormon Church” (M&M, 180). However, in her own  assessment of the early Pākeha speculation about Māori origins, she  debunks the belief that the Māori could actually be a very  remote remnant of ancient Israel (see M&M, 13–15).


## Trashing  the Māori Latter-day Saint Historical Narrative

McDonnel  then returned to Auckland, but Bromley soon summoned him back to  Cambridge to interpret for other Māori anxious to hear the [Page 195] LDS  missionary message, which took place on Sunday, 31 December 1882.  On the following day, six more baptisms took place. These and  additional conversions led to the establishment of the first Māori  LDS branch, which was located in tiny Waotu, 18 miles south of  Cambridge.

One  cannot fashion even a murky narrative of the very first  conversions of Māori to the Church of Jesus Christ in New Zealand  without mentioning the encounter of Bromley, Cox, and McDonnel, who  served as translator with Hare Teimana, and those subsequent  baptisms. However, in her thesis, Marjorie Newton made some critical  factual errors. For instance, in her thesis, she located those  crucial events at least once in Huntly (MNZ, 15), which is 35 miles  north of Cambridge, but also on the Waikato River. She also missed  other details of that important event.

In  the section entitled “The First Maori Branch” in “Newton’s  Unpublished Manuscript,” she wrote the following:

> In  August 1882, Thomas and Hannah Cox, English emigrants who joined the  Mormon Church in Auckland in 1880, moved to Cambridge in the Waikato,  where Thomas set up business as a boot and shoemaker. Here they  became friendly with the local Maori tribe. Seeing an opportunity,  they invited President Bromley to spend Christmas with them. On  Christmas Eve, a Sunday, they were joined by McDonnel, and the  three men spent the evening preaching to a group of Maori. Later  that evening, after discussing Mormon doctrine in a chief’s  home, they laid hands on and blessed his sick daughter who quickly  recovered. On Christmas Day in 1882, the Maori chief Hare Teimana,  his wife Pare and another Maori, possibly Hare Katere (Harry Carter)  were baptized in the nearby river. (“Chapter 2 – 1878–1 887,”  29.)

Some  of the more problematic details in this paragraph include the  following:

In  her PhD thesis, she tells a slightly different version of this  important story. She begins by mentioning that Bromley “set apart”  McDonnel “to take the Mormon message to the Maori,” after which  he eventually baptized Ngataki (MNZ, 15), then writes:

> Fifteen  months later, Bromley and McDonnel baptized several Maori near  Huntly . McDonnel’s story of the December 1882 visit there  implies that he was suddenly inspired to follow the mission  president, who was visiting Church members Thomas and Hannah Cox in  the Waikato town; that, meeting the Maori who had been prepared by  a vision, he and Bromley taught them the gospel that evening (24  December) and baptized the first of them on Christmas Day. (MNZ, 15,  emphasis supplied)

Then  Newton adds that Samuel Cox “later stated that his father had  become very friendly with the local Maori tribe and that the three  baptized were already prepared and waiting when Bromley and McDonnel  arrived in Cambridge” (“Chapter 2 — 1878–1887,” 30). In  this account, Newton uses this letter, written 75 years after the  events it presumably describes, to trump Bromley’s detailed  contemporary diary and the later reminiscences of William McDonnel  and Thomas Cox, Samuel’s father.


## A Step  Forward

Those  who were then at the Smith Institute must be praised for insisting  that Marjorie Newton produce the much more accurate narrative history  that was eventually published as Tiki and Temple . In this book  she correctly indicates that Māori Saints were prepared by their own  prophets for their initial encounters with the message of Latter-day  Saint missionaries. She even included a slightly more accurate  version of the story about Hare Teimana’s encounter with (or dream  of) the Apostle Peter (T&T, 32–33). She explains that Māori  “prophets” played a role in generating a Māori  community of Saints (see T&T, 23–2 4, 37, 41–4 3). [Page 198] However,  in her first attempt to fashion a narrative account of the faith  of Māori Saints, she never mentions Arama Toiroa, Paora Potangaroa,  or other Māori seers.


## Downplaying  Specific Prophecies

The  prophetic proclamation by Arama Toiroa in 1830 was that the true  messengers would raise both arms over their heads when they prayed,  which is how Alma Greenwood, Ira Hinckley, and William Stewart prayed  at Korongata/Bridge Pa where some who were familiar with Toiroa’s  prophecies then lived. This, and several other very distinctive  behaviors, quickly led to the conversion of those at Korongata and  then elsewhere among those familiar with Toiroa’s words.


## Failure  to Fully Consider Alternative Viewpoints

In  fact, in Mormon and Maori , Newton cites Professor Joseph’s  essay in her bibliography (M&M, 200) and then quotes portions of  the opening paragraph of his essay, where she indicates that he “has  summarized some … often overlooked consequences of the imbalance  resulting from the introduction of Western culture into colonial New  Zealand” (M&M, 159).

Professor  Joseph began his essay with a Māori prophecy. His English  translation read as follows:

What  followed was a detailed account of some of the Māori seers who  played a crucial role in the story of the faith of Māori  Saints. Newton, however, does not seem to be even aware of the names  of some of these Māori matakite . In addition, though she  quotes language out of context from Professor Joseph’s essay, she  never hints that he provided valuable new information on the Māori  seers who opened the way for the Latter-day Saint missionaries and  their message.

Instead  of engaging Professor Joseph’s evidence and arguments, Newton only  quotes portions of the opening paragraph of his essay, where he  introduces the actual cultural context in which seers opened the way  for Māori to become faithful Latter-day Saints. I will quote  the entire paragraph, with the portions she quotes in italics:

None  of the relentless, bleak unraveling of the traditional Māori way of  life was the work of Latter-day Saint missionaries, or of the quirks  of mission presidents or missionaries, or the result of “the  inadequacy of LDS Church policies for non-Western indigenous  converts” about which Newton complains. The unraveling of the  traditional Māori way of life was well on its way when LDS  missionaries suddenly found Māori who were prepared for them and  their message by their own seers, and in various other stunning ways.  Newton tends to ignore, downplay, or explain this away in her  presumably “more objective and more academic” thesis and in its  published version, but not in Tiki and Temple .

Latter-day  Saint missionaries made contact with Māori many years after the  radical degradation and decline of their world was in full swing. It  was, as Joseph points out, “the bittersweet arrival of the Pakeha”  that provided the context for truly remarkable cultural interchange  that took place between the Māori and Latter-day Saint missionaries  in which both were (and still are) blessed. In the dismal situation  in which the Māori found themselves by 1880, with rapid decline well  on its way, and a desperate scramble to preserve Māori  resources and identity, some were [Page 201] anxious for answers to the evils  they faced. Then Māori matakite opened the way for the  Latter-day Saint message. What those missionaries offered, among  other things, was a genuine revival of Māori moral discipline.  Faithful Saints were thereby shielded from the very attractive but  also soul-destroying beliefs, practices, vices, and addictions made  available by their British colonizers. These base behaviors even now  have much of the Māori world teetering on the rim of an abyss. The  fact is that faithful Māori Saints, in the face of the growing  degradation that many Māori face, have become much better Māori. In  addition, Latter- day Saint missionaries who enter their charmed  world have also become more solid Saints.


## Some  Concluding Comments

In  her thesis, as I have demonstrated, Newton strives to expose the  clash between an alien American church and Māori culture; she also  opines about the “role of myth in Maori Mormonism” (MNZ, vi). She  strives to demythologize the “faithful history” version of the  faith of Māori Saints advanced by “Mormon apologists.” Her  chapter entitled “Mormon Legends in New Zealand” (M&M,  79–110) is a sustained and also strained effort at debunking  what she claims is clumsy, crude embellishment and/ or outright  fabrication of accounts of miracles (M&M, 89–107).

She  describes what she labels “three legends” that “provide classic  case studies of the way religious myths grow, develop, and become  entrenched” (M&M, 79). Then, under the chapter subheading  “Implications for the Church,” she asks: “What, then, can be  made of an apostle, later president of the LDS Church” (she has in  mind Elder David O. McKay) “promoting a story that  was, it appears, at worst fabricated, at best exaggerated?” (M&M,  107). Her conclusion is that the stories she strives to debunk in  Chapter 3 of Mormon and Maori “fit the category of ‘myth’  rather than history” (M&M, 110). This is also, [Page 202] as I have  demonstrated, her “objective” stance on Māori Saints being  providentially prepared for the Church of Jesus Christ by their own  seers.

Newton  ends her assessment of what she considers mythmaking by quoting what  Eric J. Sharpe, the religious studies professor who supervised her  thesis, once said on a radio station about a famous  Australian historian with whom he strongly disagreed on political  issues: “history written for propaganda purposes … is bad  history. There is no easier way to bear false witness than to  misrepresent those who are no longer able to defend themselves,  merely in order to comfort the true believers” (M&M, 112). This  is, of course, the reason that every effort ought to be made to give  serious attention to the Māori Latter-day Saint historical  narrative.


## Addendum


## 1986

  - “Pioneering the Gospel in Australia,” Ensign (October  1986): 32–41. This series of essays consists of Part One, “New  Light on the First Missionaries,” 32–34; Part Two, “Hunted,  Fished and Gathered,” 38–35; Part Three, “The First Half of the  Twentieth Century,” 38–41. [Page 203] Latter-day Saints in Bankstown (Bankstown, New South  Wales, Australia: privately printed, 1986). This was published by  a Committee of Saints in the Bankstown Ward of The Church of  Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints for the Bankstown New South Wales  Diamond Jubilee. “Southern Cross Saints: The Mormon Church in Australia” (MS  honors thesis, History Department, University of Sydney, 1986).


## 1987

  - “The Gathering of the Australian Saints in the 1850s,” BYU  Studies Quarterly 27, no. 2 (Spring 1987): 67–78.


## 1990

  - “Rosa Clara: Bravery on the Pacific,” Ensign (August  1990): 54–55.


## 1991

  - Southern Cross Saints: The Mormons in Australia (Laie, HI:  Institute for Polynesian Studies, 1991). This is the published  version of Newton’s MA thesis (item 3). “‘Almost Like Us’: The American Socialization of Australian  Converts,” Dialogue 24, no. 3 (1991): 9–20. “Mormonism becomes a Mainline Religion: An Austrailian  Viewpoint,” Dialogue 24, no. 4 (Winter 1991): 74–78.


## 1992

  - “Father of Joseph’s Daughter: John Murdoch,” Journal of  Mormon History 18, no. 2 (Fall 1992): 177–93. Hero or Traitor: A Biographical Study of Charles Wandell (Independence, Missouri: Independence Press, 1992).


## 1993

  - Review of an exhibit called “Come, Let Us Rejoice” (the  Relief Society Sesquicentennial Exhibition at the Museum of Church  History and Art, Salt Lake City), March 1992–February 1993, in the Journal of Mormon History 19, no. 1 (Spring 1993): 177–80.


## 1996

  - “‘Seduced Away’: Early Mormon Documents in Australia,” BYU Studies Quarterly 35, no.3 (1995): 149–90. “Towards 2000: Mormons in Australia,” Dialogue 29, no.  1 (Spring 1996): 193–206. “From Tolerance to ‘House Cleaning’: LDS Leadership  Response to Maori Marriage Customs, 1890–1990,” Journal of  Mormon History 22/2 (Fall 1996): 72–91.


## 1997

  - “Australia’s Pioneer Saints,” Ensign (February  1997): 44–51.


## [Page 204] 1998

  - “Mormonism in New Zealand: A Historical Appraisal” (PhD  thesis, School of Studies of Religion, University of Sydney, 1998).


## 1999

  - Review of The Journals of William E. McLellin, 1831–1836, in  the Journal of Mormon History 25, no. 2 (Fall 1999): 245–48.


## 2000

  - Review of New Mormon Studies CD-ROM (by Smith Research  Associates, 1998), Journal of Mormon History 26, no. 1 (Spring  2000): 203–205.


## 2002

  - “My Family, My Friends, My Faith,” BYU Studies Quarterly 41, no. 1 (Spring 2002): 141–46. (This is a personal essay  that won second prize in a BYU Studies contest in 1996.)


## 2008

  - “The Gathering of Australian Saints (Mormons) in Australia,”  in Proclamation to the People: Nineteenth-century Mormonism and  the Pacific Basin Frontier , Laurie F. Maffly-Kipp and Reid L.  Nielsen, eds. (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 2008),  185–97. “Nineteenth Century Pakeha Mormons in New Zealand,” in Proclamation to the People: Nineteenth-century Mormonism and the  Pacific Basin Frontier , Laurie F. Maffly-Kipp and Reid L.  Nielsen, eds. (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 2008)  ,228–54. “The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons) in  Australia,” in Encyclopedia of Religion in Australia , ed.  James Jupp (Cambridge University Press, 2009), 375–79.


## 2012

  - Tiki and Temple: The Mormons in New Zealand , 1854–1958  (Salt Lake City: Greg Kofford Books, 2012).


## 2014

  - Mormon and Maori (Salt Lake City: Greg Kofford Books,  2014). “‘Hope in the Gospel’: Rosa Clara Friedlander Logie  (1837–1913),” in Women in the Latter-days, Volume 2:  1837–1913 , eds. Richard E. Turley and Brittany Chapman (Salt  Lake City: Deseret Book, 2014), 196–209. “Her Very Presence Is a Sermon: Mere Mete Whaanga,” in Women in the Latter-days, Volume 3: 1846–1870 , eds. Richard [Page 205] E. Turley and Brittany Chapman (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 2014),  252–62. “‘Give of Myself to the End’: Polly Tuawatea Deven Duncan,” Women in the Latter-days , Volume 4: 1871–1900 , eds.  Richard E. Turley and Brittany Chapman (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book,  2014), 82–96 (endnotes at 317–20).


## 2017

  - (With Tina Dill), “Matthew Cowley: Beloved Apostle of the  Pacific,” Church History , The Church of Jesus Christ of  Latter-Day Saints, May 30, 2017, https://history.churchofjesuschrist.org/article/matthew-cowley-beloved-apostle-of-the-pacific?lang=eng .

---
Notes

[1] After  Marjorie Newton’s PhD was approved in February 1998, a potential  publisher sent me a Xerox copy of her thesis. 1 I gave it careful attention. It turned out that my Māori  friends had been right. At the Pioneers in the Pacific Conference  held at BYU-Hawaii on 7–11 October 1997, at least two of them  indicated that they doubted that [Page 180] she would do justice to the grounds  and content of their faith. She would, they thought, ignore,  downplay, or explain away matters sacred to them, and she would also  be too critical of the way LDS mission presidents responded to the  difficult issues they faced. They did not, however, make known how  they came to know about her agenda.

[2] I  was also invited to evaluate her first effort to turn the two  introductory chapters of her PhD thesis (MNZ, 1–84) into a history  of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 2 in New Zealand. There were, however, serious flaws in what I call  “Newton’s Unpublished Manuscript,” 3 one of which I will address in this appraisal of Mormon and Maori .

[3] I  was pleased when Tiki and Temple was published in 2012. 4 It is a  fine, faith-affirming narrative history of the Church  of Jesus Christ in New Zealand. She begins her account in 1854, when  the periodic visits by Latter-day Saint missionaries from Australia  first began, and ends with the creation of stakes and the dedication  of the Temple in Hamilton in 1958. Primarily, she tells the story of  the conversion of Māori that began in 1882 and resulted in an  essentially Māori community of Latter day Saints in New  Zealand.

[4] While  I have praised Tiki and Temple , 5 I have also demonstrated that Newton has little grasp of Māori tikanga (culture). However, she warns her readers: “as an  Australian, I am vulnerable to errors of fact and interpretation  in both New Zealand and American history, and especially in Maori culture” (T&T, xiv). She also expresses her “hope that one  day a Maori historian will produce a scholarly history of  Mormonism in New Zealand that will remedy any omissions and defects  in both my works. I also hope to see additional work done with  the hundreds of [Page 181] stories of New Zealand Saints, both Maori and  Pakeha, 6 that are still waiting to be told” (T&T, xiv). Some of this  additional work is beginning to be published. 7 In Tiki and Temple she says that she hoped she had been able  to “convey a sense of the faith, courage, and dedication of  the North American missionaries, and the corresponding faith, courage  and dedication of their converts, whether Maori or Pakeha. It  features the stories of pioneers of the Church in New Zealand, some  of whom are otherwise uncelebrated” (T&T, viii).

[5] In  an effort to discover the source of her agenda, I have consulted  all of Marjorie Newton’s publications. 8 She has mastered library and archival research, and she is adept at  telling a good story. When coupled with her truly remarkable  tenacity, this explains her impressive publishing career. Why has she  sought to challenge the traditional Māori Latter-day Saint  historical narrative in 1998 and then in 2014, while her Tiki and  Temple [Page 182] was faith-affirming? This constitutes a puzzle I have  sought to solve by looking carefully at everything she has published.

[6] Newton  correctly claims that “many Maori today, including stalwart Church  members, want their culture to survive and feel that it exemplifies  true Christian principles — not just the outward symbols displayed  for tourists, but the deepest Maori values” (M&M, 180), some of  which she mentions. However, the “deepest Maori values”  constitute what Māori scholars tend to call tikanga — that  is, the traditional “right” or “correct” ways of living, 9 and not māoritanga , a word that tends to identify the  ordinary or usual way things actually are, since the word māori means “ordinary,” or “usual.” A century back, māoritanga began to mean “culture” in the sense of the usual way Māori  behave. Colonization radically challenged and also eroded Māori tikanga .

[7] Concern  about Mormon cultural imperialism thus seems to be the key to both  her thesis and Mormon and Maori . I therefore sought signs  of this concern — and hence her agenda 10 — in what she published on Latter-day Saints in Australia beginning  in 1984. This led to “A Retrospective Review,” the published  version of her 1986 MA thesis. I sought signs of her concern  about “Mormon cultural imperialism” in what she published about  the Church of Jesus Christ in Australia. There are some signs of this  agenda, though fewer than in her 1998 PhD thesis.

[8] In Mormon and Maori and in her thesis, she grants that faithful  Māori Latter-day Saints are not troubled by what she pictures as the  increasingly nefarious impact of Mormon American cultural  imperialism. Hence, she hopes that what she calls “those  fringe-dwelling New Zealand Latter-day Saints,” 11 Pākeha or Māori, who question what they see as Mormon cultural  imperialism might ponder this conclusion: “It is only possible …  to travel in one direction … Any possibility of return has been  preempted by the journey itself'” (MNZ, 356; M&M, 181).

[9] Newton  uses this quote from a scholar speaking of another time and  place and people. It is taken out of context from a book by  Anthony Pagden. I will provide the context. Pagden is  describing the opinions of Denis Diderot (1713–1784), a French  Huguenot and hence a staunch Calvinist, who was briefly  a Protestant missionary in Brazil. 12 The full passage, with the language quoted by Newton in italics,  follows:

[10] When  Newton’s PhD thesis was approved in February 1998, the Institute  for Polynesian Studies, which published her Southern Cross  Saints , 13 was no longer publishing books. She had to seek a publisher  interested in publishing a book challenging key elements in the  Māori Latter-day Saint historical narrative, suggesting that “Mormon  cultural imperialism” was harming Māori Saints and making claims  about Māori/Mormon mythmaking.

[11] She  sought the assistance of the Pacific Area President at the time,  Elder Bruce Hafen. 14 He suggested that she approach Ron Esplin, then director of the  Joseph Fielding Smith Institute. 15 As a favor to Elder Hafen, Esplin assigned Richard Jensen to  have a look at her thesis, which then underwent peer review.  Newton was urged to turn the first two chapters of her thesis (MNZ,  1–84) into a narrative history of the faith of Latter-day  Saints in New Zealand, which she immediately did. Her [Page 187] 510-page first  draft then underwent peer review and was rejected for publication.  She was then more strongly urged to fashion an accurate account of  the faith of Māori Saints, which was published more than a decade  later as Tiki and Temple .

[12] My  completed dissertation, 16 entitled “Mormonism in New Zealand: A Historical Analysis” 17 was to be published by the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Church  History at Brigham Young University, Provo. When it was suggested  that I should write a chronological history of the New  Zealand Mission first, publication of the dissertation was delayed  until the manuscript of Tiki and Temple was completed. Both  books were still in the early stages of copy-editing when the  institute was closed in 2005. (M&M, xiii)

[13] She  describes Tiki and Temple as the “second of my studies of  the Latter-day Saints in New Zealand” (T&T, xiv), even though  it was published two years prior to Mormon and Maori . That  book represented the ideological core of her more objective doctoral  thesis, “Mormonism in New Zealand: A Historical Appraisal,” which  was written for the Religious Studies Department 18 of the University of Sydney (1998, forthcoming from Greg Kofford  Books) (T&T, xiv).

[14] To  this day, Maori Latter-day Saints cherish the Book of Mormon as their story, the account of their people in distant antiquity before they  sailed their waka (canoes) to Aotearoa. The American  missionaries may have carried it to them and the American Pakeha Joseph Smith may have translated it, but for well over a century  it has been read as the story of their ancestors. (M&M,  180) 19

[15] The  Book of Mormon was read by the older Māori I knew in 1950–1952  as “their story” in the sense that it was a tribal history [Page 190] whose  narrative was very much like their own; they had long been  and still unfortunately were much like the people described in the  Book of Mormon. They knew and understood its contents better than any  LDS missionary, 20 including myself. When I encountered Māori in 1950, they were  not pious stuffed-shirts; even though they knew they were of Nephite  descent, they would say that, much like naughty missionaries, they  sometimes misbehaved like Lamanites. They were often adept at seeing  how stories and prophetic teaching were woven together and then how  those teachings applied to their own tribal identities.

[16] Why  would Māori, for whom the Book of Mormon is “their book,”  incorrectly see themselves as having “Lamanite descent” when  there is exactly nothing in that book to justify such a belief?  Gina Colvin, who was raised as a Latter-day Saint but who has  now become an Anglican, is the only Māori of whom I am aware  who muddles Hagoth with the Lamanites. 21 However, she could merely be following Newton’s lead on this  matter.

[17] Why  make those Nephite mariners who sailed away into the “west sea”  into Lamanites, when the language found in Alma 36 mentions only  Nephites? Newton seems to insist on the Māori being Lamanites  because doing so fits her own misunderstanding of the recent debate  over DNA and the Book of Mormon. Much of this controversy was  advanced by two former Latter-day Saints, neither of whom are  population geneticists. 22 Newton appears to use the opinions of the Australian “molecular  biologist and ex-Mormon Simon Southerton” (M&M, 27) to justify  rejecting her own false idea that Māori believe that they are  Lamanites, which is [Page 191] scattered around two chapters in Mormon and  Maori . In addition, she may not realize that it is a mistake  to take seriously Simon Southerton’s polemic about the Book of  Mormon (M&M, 27, 31, 178–79). Finally, the Book of Mormon  provides the correct answer to her question: “Nephites or  Lamanites?” (M&M, 32–33), 23 which she then ignores.

[18] Newton  claims that “many Mormon apologists” fashioned a Mesoamerican  limited geography for the Book of Mormon as a result of DNA  studies (see M&M, 27–28). The fact is that John Sorenson (and  others) were advocating a Mesoamerican (and hence a limited)  geography for the Book of Mormon long before the debate over DNA  began. She does not seem to know that the argument for both a limited  geography and a Mesoamerican location for the events depicted in  the Book of Mormon flowed from very careful attention to the  geographical clues in the Book of Mormon. This led to what John Clark  called an “internal map,” which turned out to be consonant with  a portion of Mesoamerica. 24

[19] Tied  to acceptance of the historicity of the Book of Mormon is the  uncanonised Mormon belief about Polynesian origins. The recent  scholarly debate over conclusions reached by scientists researching  the DNA of Native Americans and Polynesians — that they are  unrelated — has added another layer to the unquestioning faith  required of those Maori Mormons aware of the arguments and  counter-arguments presented. (M&M, 33) 25

[20] Her  argument in the first chapter of Mormon and Maori seems to be  that, by allowing the publication of an essay by John Sorenson in  1984 in which he sets out a limited geography, 26 the Brethren have thereby set in place the grounds for rejecting the  belief that the Māori are in any way children of Lehi. Hence it is  both foolish and unnecessary for the Brethren to continue to urge  Māori Saints to seek the prophetic promises available to Lehi’s  remote descendants. She also insists that Māori were badly misled  when they were identified as “children of Lehi” in their Temple  dedication prayer.

[21] In Tiki and Temple , Newton relies on textual sources that include  accounts of divine manifestations to Māori. For instance, she relies  heavily on the remarkable contemporary account written by  William Bromley, 27 who arrived in Auckland, New Zealand, in December 1880 to serve as [Page 194] Australasian Mission President. He had been instructed by the  Brethren to take the gospel to the Māori. He struggled to do this.  Some of his very few fellow missionaries made some unwise and even  bizarre efforts to reach and teach the Māori, which Newton describes  in detail, often following Bromley’s diary.

[22] These  efforts all failed, until on 5 April 1881, Bromley set apart  William McDonnel, who had joined the Church of Jesus Christ in  Auckland after he arrived in New Zealand from Ireland, to be  a missionary to the Māori. He also blessed McDonnel to learn  the Māori language, which he immediately began to do. 28 On 18 October 1881, McDonnel baptized Ngataki, who was the first  Māori to join the Church in New Zealand. 29 However, the real breakthrough came later. On 17 December 1882,  Thomas Levis Cox 30 who was born in England in 1845 and who, with his family, had moved  to New Zealand where he became a Latter-day Saint, invited  Bromley to spend Christmas with him in Cambridge, which is 91 miles  from Auckland and 14 miles south of Hamilton.

[23] Bromley  indicates that, as a result of didactic dreams, McDonnel also  made the journey to Cambridge for Christmas. McDonnel arrived  unexpectedly at the Cox residence before breakfast on 24 December.  After breakfast they set out to contact some Māori who were camped  near Cambridge. 31 Later that day they met Hare Teimana, who desired a blessing for  his very ill daughter, which was given. Teimana also told McDonnel  that he had been visited by the Apostle Peter, who was dressed in  white clothing, and who showed him the three Latter-day Saints—that  is, Bromley, Cox and McDonnel—in a vision, so that he  recognized them as agents with Apostolic authority. 32 Hare Teimana, his wife, and one other adult were baptized in the  Waikato river on Christmas Day, 1882.

[24] Newton  presents no evidence that Teimana was a Māori “chief.” Neither  Bromley nor Cox could understand Māori. Without McDonnel, they could  have only passed out some leaflets that McDonnel had previously  managed to have translated into Māori. [Page 196] On  24 December 1882, McDonnel arrived at the Cox home before breakfast,  after which they set out to contact Māori camped near Cambridge. 33 On  24 December 1882, those three fellows did not discuss “Mormon  doctrine” with Teimana. Instead, he told McDonnel how he had come  to recognize them as authorized agents for the Apostle Peter, and  asked them to bless his very ill daughter — she had not eaten in  days — which they did. On  25 December 1882 (Christmas Day), when the three Latter day  Saints visited Teimana again, his daughter was recovering nicely —  she had even eaten some strawberries. Then McDonnel explained to  Teimana, his wife and probably Hare Te Katere (Harry Carter) what  being baptized entailed, prior to that being done that evening in the  Waikato River. Other interested Māori observed the baptism.

[25] After  quoting Bromley’s descriptions of the baptism of Teimana, his wife  and perhaps Hare Te Katere in the Waikato River, Newton indicates  that “McDonnel’s version of the story portrayed his visit to  Cambridge and subsequent teaching of the chief and his family solely  as the result of inspiration and the happenings of one day”  (“Chapter 2 — 1878–1887,” 30). She then argues that “[t]he  Cox family deserves more credit for the first successful introduction  of the Restored Gospel to the Maori people” (“Chapter 2 —  1878–1887,” 31). Her reason for celebrating Thomas and Hannah  Cox’s role in the first “successful introduction of the Restored  Gospel to the Maori people” is that Samuel Cox (1871–1967), who  was the oldest son of Thomas and Hannah Cox, and presumably “a  witness to the events” (when he was barely eleven), wrote a letter  in 1957 in which he claimed that his father “had become very  friendly with the three Maori” who were baptized on Christmas Day  in 1882. They were, he claimed, “already prepared for and waiting  for baptism when Bromley and McDonnel arrived [Page 197] in Cambridge”  (“Chapter 2 —1878–1887,” 30). 34 This letter was written 75 years after the events that took place in  December 1882. 35

[26] In  her thesis, Newton addresses the claim that Mormons cite Māori prophecies as evidence of the divine preparation of the Māori people.  She claims that the prophecies merely foretold a rather vague,  generalized list of items and insists that Mormon apologists have not  confronted the fact that “few of these items are characteristic of  Mormonism” (MNZ, 275). She casually mentions that the true  messengers “would be recognized because they would pray with their  arms raised to the square” (M&M, 3; cf. MNZ, 275). What she  does not indicate is that in Paora Potangaroa’s He Kawenata, 36 which he dictated in 1881, he specifically mentions that the true  messengers would pray with their right arms to the square. When those  Latter-day Saint missionaries who turned up in the Wairarapa in 1883  prayed with their right arms raised to the square, they were  immediately recognized as true messengers from God. (During my life,  as a young boy, this mode of prayer was not uncommon for  blessing the emblems of the sacrament.)

[27] Newton  uses the expression, “variously foretold,” in relation to these  prophecies, which obscures the fact that different Māori seers  provided very specific indications that the true messengers had  arrived for their own people. It was not a “one size fits all”  sort of thing. 37 She has jumbled together several proclamations of Māori Matakite in an effort to dismiss the role they played in the conversion of Māori  Saints. This she did in both her theses with essentially the same  language. However, the [Page 199] specific details of the account are essential  in assessing what Professor Robert Joseph identifies as the  “Māori Latter-day Saint historical narrative.” 38

[28] I have  previously called attention to an essay by Robert Joseph, 39 a Latter- day Saint scholar who set out significant new  details about those whom Latter-day Saints, including Marjorie  Newton, have called “prophets,” but whom the Māori call Matakite (seers). They played a crucial role in preparing some Māori iwi (tribes) for Latter- day Saint missionaries and their  message. 40 Newton is fully aware of Professor Joseph’s essay, the  contents of which challenge her writings in Chapter 8 of her thesis  (MNZ, 271–77) and in the beginning of Mormon and Maori (M&M,  2–3).

[29] Behind  the tattooed face, a stranger stands, He will inherit the  world — he is white. 41

[30] [Page 200] According  to Ngati Whatu sources, the prophecy above was uttered by their  tribal tohunga matakite (seer), Titahi, who foretold the bittersweet  arrival of the Pakeha and the subsequent impacts of European contact,  which thrust the Māori world view into a state of perilous  imbalance as had been prophesied. Land and natural resources loss  through unjust wars, confiscations and their legal machinations  wreaked havoc on the relationship between people and the natural  environment. The forcible individualisation of land, property and  world values in the Native Land Court disturbed the balance between  members of kin groups. Introduced diseases and addictive  substances — alcohol, tobacco, coffee, tea and sugar — decimated  tribal populations, and undermined Māori health and well-being.  Christianity damaged in many ways the connection between the people  and the gods, and the individualistic and economic assumptions of  European capitalism and Western liberalism destroyed traditional  reciprocity economics, the equilibrium between kin, the physical and  metaphysical world, the environment and the fundamental obligations  to past, present and future generations. 42

[31] Finally,  at the risk of being seen as immodest, I must point out that, in  addition to not genuinely engaging the work of those Newton clearly  denigrates as “Mormon apologists” (MNZ, 275)—that is, those who  advance “the Mormon faithful history interpretation” (M&M, 1)  of the grounds and contents of the faith of Māori Saints — she has  ignored two of my own essays. The first of these was published in  1998, 43 shortly after her PhD thesis was approved; the second was published  in 1999, while my wife and I directed the Lorne Street LDS  Institute in Auckland, New Zealand. 44

[32] In  this essay I have not addressed Marjorie Newton’s comments  about the Māori Io cult or its close relationship with the  initiation that elite Māori men once underwent in a whare  wānanga (house of learning). I have  previously shown that Tiki and Temple would have been improved  by a careful study of what was imparted in those wānanga ,  since those so initiated were both able to grasp what Latter-day  Saint missionaries presented and to assist in their efforts to take  their message to other Māori. The reason, of course, is that what  they had been taught meshed so well with what they heard from  Latter-day Saint missionaries. 45

[33] Appendix:  Marjorie Newton’s Writings 46

