[Page 253] Abstract: When Orson Scott Card wrote “The Book of Mormon: Artifact  or Artifice?” in 1993, he applied keen skills as an author of  fiction to help readers understand how to detect the many hidden  assumptions an author brings into a text. Subtle details such as  the choice of what to explain or what not to explain to readers can  quickly reveal the era and environment of the author. The value of  Card’s analysis is reconsidered in light of extensive  Book of Mormon studies since 1993 and has been found, for  the most part, to have withstood the test of time well, like the  Book of Mormon itself.

Upon  reading Card’s article today, one familiar with Book of Mormon  studies may be impressed with how well Card’s analysis and  conclusions have stood the test of time. Many of the points he made  have become more relevant or strengthened by subsequent explorations  into the text of the Book of Mormon, the details of its  translation and publication, [Page 254] the scholarship into the lives of the  witnesses, and many new studies relevant to evidence for the  plausibility of the Book of Mormon and the meaning of the  text.

[Page 256] Much  has changed since Card tugged at the text from the perspective of  a master of science fiction, but for the most part the added  knowledge 25 years later only increases the value of Card’s  approach. Card looked for telltale threads of modern fiction,  revealing instead that the text was of quite a different weave.  Card sees it as the tapestry of multiple authors from an era far  removed from modern fiction, a work impossible for even  a skilled writer of fiction in our day or Joseph’s. Using the  lens of a science fiction writer, Card reveals patterns woven  into the text that defy explanation based on Joseph Smith as author.  Here we review some of the patterns and artifacts of authenticity  that Card spots, and discuss updated information relevant to several  of Card’s points for an added perspective.


## Voices  and Viewpoints of Authors, Ancient and Modern

Card  points out that authors write with a vast network of assumptions  from their environment coloring the way they perceive and describe  events. The environment the author has inherited provides numerous  views on life and society that are easily taken for granted without  realizing that it may not be this way at other times or in other  societies. The environment that influenced the author can often be  revealed by examining that which the author recognizes as unusual and  in need of explanation in the text versus what the author sees as  normal and requiring no explanation.

One  of the first points Card mentions to illustrate such subtleties is  the contrast between the attitude toward valuable documents showed by  Book of Mormon characters and Joseph himself. He mentions  Amaleki’s statement in Omni 1:25 wherein he justifies his decision  to turn over the records he has inherited to King Benjamin:

While  the Bible provides little guidance on provenance, a variety of  ancient scribal practices included giving details on documents and  their origins, and the practices we find in the Book of Mormon  ring true as products of an ancient culture that cared deeply about  records and writing. They ring true today in light of our familiarity  with modern archival practices. But they don’t reflect Joseph  Smith’s environment. Intriguingly, Wells cites Card’s “Artifact  or Artifice” on this point:


## Authorial  Interests

Hardy’s  observation requires understanding the growing body of evidence about  the translation process itself. Royal Skousen’s meticulous  examination of the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon  would provide detailed confirmation that the translation process was  based on oral dictation to scribes, and from the accounts of multiple  witnesses it is clear that it was done without manuscripts as Joseph  dictated. Skousen summarizes:


## [Page 262] Exposition

Card  points out that modern science fiction writers have learned to adjust  their writing to subtly reveal large differences between the setting  of their fiction and the modern world. Thus, instead of stopping to  explain that a door on another world operated in a much  different way than doors on Earth, Robert Heinlein famously simply  wrote, “The door dilated.” That simple statement takes the  unusual technology for granted, as one would in that alien  environment, and leaves it to the reader to figure out what was  happening. Regular fiction, on the other hand, still tends to  interrupt the story to explain what is different in a setting  for the benefit of contemporary readers. While Heinlein’s now  widely adopted approach was a step forward in making science  fiction more natural, introducing novelty without constantly  interrupting the story to explain it, it is still an unnatural  artifact, for someone in a world where doors dilated instead of  swinging on hinges or rolling on rollers would not bother to say the  door dilated as a person left but would simply say “he left.”  If the door needed to be mentioned at all, one might say “the door  opened.” If dilating doors are the norm, there would be no reason  to mention dilation, just as we don’t say “she pivoted the door  shut on its dual hinges until the outer latch engaged a locking  mechanism” instead of “she closed the door.” Card keenly  observes that stop-action explanations for the benefit of a modern  audience are generally absent in the Book of Mormon, except  for the case of explaining the monetary system in Alma 11. In this  case, Card observes that the monetary system around 100 BC surely  would have changed by Mormon’s day, and would be a cultural  difference to him that would need explanation to make sense of the  story of Zeezrom’s tempting Alma with money. Further, the details  of how Mormon handles the explanation, Card argues, are exactly what  one would expect from Mormon as a writer and not what one would  write from the perspective of Joseph’s environment. This is an  interesting example in which a knowledge of modern science  fiction exposition helps us appreciate what happens and doesn’t  happen in the text of the Book of Mormon. The subtleties of  exposition tell us much about who the author was and what they  perceive as normal or unusual, and this alone does much to rule out  Joseph Smith as a modern author of this ancient text.

[Page 263] Since  Card’s speech in 1993, many further insights have strengthened the  evidence that the authors of the Book of Mormon took much  for granted that would be foreign to Joseph Smith. A few of the many  dozens of potential examples include:


## Neighborhoods,  Networks, Economies, Politics, and the Voice of the People

Card  makes several salient points about the culture implicit in the  Book of Mormon and shows that in several significant though  sometimes subtle ways that culture is clearly foreign to what Joseph  Smith knew. Indeed, in considering the hints about Nephite and  Lamanite society, Card accurately describes the culture inherent to  the Book of Mormon as entirely alien to Joseph Smith’s  world and correctly points out that apparent similarities are  superficial and largely due to our imposing modern assumptions and  paradigms without carefully reading the text.

Interesting  issues of this sort raised by Card include the difference in social  and neighborhood relationships, where kinship and lineage were  dominant social factors in Mesoamerica and the Book of Mormon,  in contrast to American society. Card also considers the nature of  employment, where the Book of Mormon suggests that  agriculture and other economic activities were highly communal or  under direction of elites in contrast to the way people pursued  employment in Joseph’s day. Further, Card was impressed with the  “instant cities” that Captain Moroni created. Alma 50 describes  Moroni’s frenetic city-building activities, including the way he  “began a foundation of a city” named [Page 265] Moroni (Alma  50:13) and also “began the foundation for a city” named  Nephihah (Alma 50:14) among other cities that he built in a short  period. This seems bizarre if read from the perspective of Joseph’s  environment but is plausible from a Mesoamerican perspective, as  Card argues and as we discuss further below in light of more recent  research.

Smith  and Novic in the introductory chapter of the volume discuss the  diverse nature of neighborhoods and district organizations in ancient [Page 266] Mesoamerica, where urban centers were much more sparsely populated  than large cities in the Old World:

The  systems described seem to be compatible with Book of Mormon  structures, where nobles and elites still wielded influence at  various levels of society, with kings under kings among the Lamanites  or lesser judges under higher judges in Nephite society. Nobles and  elites wielded influence while also representing somehow and  sometimes “the voice of the people.”

The  low density of urban population resulted in unclear transitions from  hamlet or neighborhood to city, allowing for the kind of “instant  cities” that impressed Orson Scott Card as another way in which the  Book of Mormon revealed a type of society foreign to  Joseph Smith. The ability of military commanders to create entire new  fortified cities in critical areas is a foreign concept to  American society but makes sense in a society accustomed to  forming cities from sparsely populated areas based on the model of  “low-density agrarian-based urbanism.” The low density areas  in a particular region could be unified under control of  a military leader or other elite leader to create an instant  low-density agrarian-based urban center (“instant city”) that  might only need some of Moroni’s earthen banks for fortification to  provide military advantage.

As  for the apparent similarities to Joseph’s culture, Card addresses  one of the most common issues pointed to by critics, the selection of  judges. Some read “voice of the people” and think of ballot boxes  and a highly egalitarian society with separation of powers  according to the US Constitution, but this suspiciously modern  feature turns out to be based [Page 268] on imported assumptions. A more careful  reading of the text indicates that something much different than  American elections and American democracy took place in Nephite  society. Card urges us to look again:

A  recent observation related to the reign of judges and the “voice of  the people” in the Book of Mormon comes from new evidence  that ancient Mesoamerica cultures sometimes had less autocratic and  more collective or “democratic” rule. This recent discovery seems  to greatly amplify the role of collective rule mentioned above by  Feinman and Nicholas.33 Science writer Lizzie Wade  reports:

Blanton’s  paper has this intriguing abstract:

We  look forward to further research into the intriguing possibilities of  collective government in portions of the ancient Americas, including  systems that may be closer to Book of Mormon times.  Meanwhile, what was once thought to be a dead-giveaway of the  Book of Mormon’s modern origins, the reign of judges with  their reliance on “the voice of the people,” upon closer scrutiny  is not only radically different than what Joseph knew but now appears  to be an authentic ancient artifact (albeit an exceptional one) of  Mesoamerica, not a fruit of Joseph’s artifice. For future  scholars to better understand Book of Mormon “democracy,”  they would be wise to use a lens focused on ancient Mesoamerica  and emerging research on ancient political systems there.


## Overlooked  Subtleties: A Key to Appraising the Book of Mormon

Based  on Card’s insights, we can suggest that many subtle details in the  Book of Mormon text are easily overlooked precisely because  they were overlooked and not explained by its authors.

[Page 272] Mormon’s  casual mention of Nephi’s tower can be compared to other uses of  towers in the Book of Mormon. The tower built by King  Benjamin, of course, should be well known to Book of Mormon  readers. King Benjamin’s tower was near the temple (Mosiah 2:7–8).  The people of Zeniff in the city of Nephi also had a tower near  the temple where Gideon almost slew wicked King Noah (Mosiah 19:5–6).  Other references may be easy to miss, such as in Alma 51:20, where  the Kingmen, subdued by Captain Moroni, “were compelled to hoist  the title of liberty upon their towers, and in their cities, and to  take up arms in defence of their country,” just as Mosiah had  earlier ordered that the title of liberty “be hoisted upon every  tower” in the land (Alma 46:36). Here towers implicitly play an  important role or at least a highly visible role in their society.  Lamanite society also employed towers, for Amalickiah “appointed  men to speak unto the Lamanites from their towers, against the  Nephites” (Alma 48:1). Other towers were built by Moroni as part of  his defensive works (Alma 50:4) and likely were of a different  nature than the towers mentioned above. There is also an unexplained  reference to the tower of Sherrizah from which men, women, and  children were captured and taken captive by the Lamanites (Moroni  9:7).

The  Old Testament evidence supporting these conclusions is not readily  extractable from the KJV due to translation difficulties nor clearly  available elsewhere in Joseph Smith’s environment.

By  the way, some critics of Mesoamerica as the New World setting of the  Book of Mormon have ridiculed the concept of King  Benjamin’s building a Mesoamerican-style stone tower in just  a day, but the text in [Page 274] Mosiah 2:7 does not actually say King  Benjamin built the tower in a day, nor does it even say or  require that he began its construction after the crowd showed  up. In stating that “he caused a tower to be erected,” it  could just as well have been built in anticipation of the coming  crowd to prepare a ritual platform for the coronation ceremony  and perhaps other ceremonies. The association of towers and temples  is known in Mesoamerica, and the role of tall towers was prominent  there. The Book of Mormon’s implications about the  various roles of towers, taken for granted by Mormon, fits well  within Mesoamerica and not as well within Joseph’s environment.

The  same question applies to almost every form of the growing evidence  for plausibility that has been found in the Book of Mormon. [Page 275] If Joseph were deliberately mimicking chiasmus, ancient covenant  patterns, psalms of lament, inclusio, and other forms of parallelism,  if he were deliberately adding realistic details from his research to  make the Book of Mormon accounts seem more realistic, why  not call attention to these easily missed elements both with more  emphasis in the text and then in subsequent publicity?


## [Page 276] A  Rarely Attempted Feat, Or, Mormon vs. Ossian

Card’s  experience as a science fiction writer enables him to make  a salient observation about the alleged fraud of the  Book of Mormon. If it is a fraud, what Joseph did is rarely attempted and almost certainly results in obvious  failure. What he did, if the Book of Mormon is a fraud,  was not simply write a work of fiction set in a different  culture and remote time. Many writers stand with Tolkien in being  able to write such fiction well, with a product that is clearly  fiction written by a single modern author for a modern  audience. The Book of Mormon, on the other hand, claims to  be written by multiple ancient authors over a long expanse of  time within a distant and changing culture. Such a fraud,  to have any hope of long-term success, would need to be written from  the cultural perspective of the authors in a different culture,  not one that explains or indicates what is foreign relative to our  modern culture. Such a work must reflect different authorial  interests of the various writers and reflect the changes in culture  or perspective that occur over time. It is a breathtakingly  complex project. Such a work almost never attempts to  pass itself off as a genuine document from a remote culture  and time.

Card  then cites an important example where a fraudulent work  purportedly from antiquity was passed off as genuine by a modern [Page 277] author. The work was a collection of Gaelic poems said to be  written by an ancient poet named Ossian. The poems had been  “translated” into English by a Scottish politician and  writer, James Macpherson. Macpherson’s publication was a hit  and added to his fame and fortune. He died wealthy enough to buy  a spot at Westminster Abby for his tomb. But he did not die  without being denounced as a fraud by Samuel Johnson, who also  was buried at Westminster Abby (but as a token of respect, not  as a result of his wealth).

The  poetry of Ossian inspired many influential people including Napoleon,  Goethe, Thomas Jefferson, and others. Selma, Alabama, was named after  Selma, the home of the Scottish warrior Fingal from the poems of  Ossian. The work has had a significant influence in many  circles, in spite of concerns about fraud.

The  text is available at Sacred-Texts.com , where J.B. Hare, the  website’s founder, summarizes the controversy:

Macpherson  claimed to have original Gaelic manuscripts that he translated.  Samuel Johnson, recognizing the many indications of fraud in the  translation, demanded that Macpherson present the originals for  review. One can easily draw a parallel to Joseph Smith who was  also asked to show his golden plates to the world, if such existed.  But unlike Joseph Smith and the golden plates, Macpherson  provided no extract of copied characters from the manuscripts, sought  out no independent scholarly examination of a portion of his  translation, had no witnesses to support the existence of the  original manuscripts, and had no witnesses of the translation  process. Further, with no angel requiring that the original [Page 279] document  be returned for divine safekeeping, Macpherson lacked any excuse for  the failure to let others see the documents he had translated.

Macpherson’s  fraud is not without evidence of authenticity, for many of the names  he uses were ancient Gaelic names that can be found in documents  going back several hundred years. But as Curley and others have  explained, these are names that could have been picked up from  current lore that Macpherson extracted from his wanderings in the  British Isles. Curley also explains that there are also 16 authentic  Gaelic sources that are used in some way by Macpherson, giving it  several small kernels of apparent authenticity. Some have argued that  Macpherson was simply taking liberties with the existing poems and  still acted largely as a loose translator, but Curley argues  that such defenses are unjustified and that the fans of Ossian poetry  must confront the fact that the vast majority of it is simply  fabricated.

Curley  argues that the evidence of fraud is clear cut and easily exposed,  and most scholars today may agree. On the other hand, some scholars  have sought to revive Macpherson’s Ossian, claiming that it is much  more authentic than Samuel Johnson recognized. For example, Pail  Moulton writes,

Compared  to the Book of Mormon, what Macpherson attempted was not  a complex history spanning vast stretches of time and epic  migrations from the Old World to the New, but mere poems, and not  from a wholly unfamiliar culture but from his own island and  from his own country and ancestors though removed by 1500 years.  Macpherson had the benefit of being well educated, of being raised in  a society familiar with Gaelic tales, with access to abundant  sources of relevant information for his project. What Macpherson  attempted is quite unlike the feat of, say, having a poorly  educated New York farm boy with scant resources write about travel  across the Arabian Peninsula or create ancient poetry rooted in  ancient Hebrew or describe battles, cities, natural disasters, and  other events in an unfamiliar New World setting. What Macpherson  attempted was kid stuff compared to the Book of Mormon, and  yet his Ossian project failed in spite of some hopeful supporters  seeking to overlook its flaws. It was successful enough to add to his  wealth, but he had already been vocally denounced as a fraud by  Samuel Johnson and remains widely recognized as a fraud who got  very much wrong. It has certainly not withstood the test of time.  From the beginning, basic questions about the existence of the  original documents could not be answered nor could witnesses be  provided.

The  Book of Mormon was a surprise bolt from the blue from  a poorly educated, impoverished farm boy not known to be  a bookworm or a writer, unexpectedly announcing he had  received an ancient record, then daring to show the plates to  numerous people, and then translating it by dictation [Page 281] at a prodigious  rate apparently without the use of any manuscripts. Consider the  contrast we find in Macpherson’s preparation for his work, as  described by Yola Schmitz in her 2017 chapter on the Ossian fraud:

Card’s  comparison with Macpherson’s fraud makes valid points that have  only become stronger in light of further research both into the  Ossian fraud and into the origins of the Book of Mormon,  including the translation process, for which there were multiple  credible witnesses.

Failure  to appreciate linguistic change over time was a key weakness in  the Ossian fraud. Macpherson claimed that the Erse language (ancient  Gaelic) of 300 ad had remained pure and unchanged over the centuries,  allowing him to read and understand ancient Erse and translate  Ossian’s poetry into English. In spite of Macpherson’s  outstanding education, this was a monumental blunder, one easily  picked up by critics in his day. Some observed that Gaelic in  Scotland showed obvious variability just from one valley to the next.  With such obvious change across short distances, how could the  language remain unchanged over more than a thousand years?


## [Page 283] Mulek:  Zarahemla’s Deception?

I was  impressed with Card’s ability as an author and critic to look past  the text itself and see the potential for human interpolations in one  of the stories recounted in the Book of Mormon, the origins  of the Mulekites. Card recognizes the potential for tension between  the Nephites and the people of Zarahemla when they met. They have  common origins and surely must become allies, but who shall rule?  Card, open about his speculation, imagines King Zarahemla feeling at  a disadvantage in the “negotiations” with the Nephites, who  come with obvious signs of authority and God’s favor. In addition  to relics such as the sword of Laban, they bear sacred brass plates  and other Nephite plates that help preserve their sacred history and  their language, while the Mulekites have allowed their language to  erode, probably through interaction with other locals over the years.  To buttress his claim to the throne, Card proposes that King  Zarahemla may have fabricated his claim to authority by stating that  he was a descendant of King Zedekiah via a mysterious son,  Mulek, unknown to the writers of the Bible.

Interestingly,  the Mulekites do not immediately introduce themselves as Mulekites  nor does Zarahemla immediately introduce himself as a descendant  of Mulek in the description of first contact in Omni. The Mulekites  describe themselves as “the people of Zarahemla” (Omni 1:14), and  we learn that they came out from Jerusalem at the time that King  Zedekiah was carried captive into Babylon. It is only after King  Mosiah causes the people to be instructed in the Nephite language  (presumably a brief refresher course for a language still  rich in cognates) that King Zarahemla claims to have royal heritage  himself.


## [Page 284] Language:  A Powerful Cluster of Clues

Card  discusses the language of the Book of Mormon, following  what has been a widely accepted scholarly paradigm for Joseph’s  translation that holds that Joseph received mental impressions he  then expressed in his own language. This is a very natural  approach, especially when one considers the abundant bad grammar of  the original manuscript as dictated by Joseph Smith. Members of the  Church looking at the original manuscript may be shocked to see what  looks like “hick grammar” with phrases like “he went  a preaching” and “in them days.” Many of these awkward and  perhaps even embarrassing grammatical gaffes were quickly corrected  during the editorial process.

[Page 286] In  light of his ongoing investigation, Skousen would later state that:

Skousen  had thrown out a challenge to others “to consider the  possibility that the ungrammaticality of the original text may also  date from that earlier period of time, not necessarily from Joseph’s  own time and place.” It was a challenge that would be taken up  by a linguist, Stanford Carmack, in a series of  publications, primarily in Interpreter: A Journal of Mormon  Scripture . These include the following six publications:

Carmack’s  wide array of examples allows him to make this statement:

This  article lays the foundation for Carmack’s extensive work exploring  Early Modern English (EModE) elements in the Book of Mormon.  Carmack shows that some of the syntax in the Book of Mormon  actually shows clearly pre-KJV elements.

Carmack  considers numerous issues and examples. For instance, awkward usages  of the word “much,” such as much + afflictions , fruits , threatenings , horses , contentions ,  or provisions do not appear to be from the KJV Bible nor from  Joseph’s dialect but are found in Early Modern English. Also  considered are the relative use of has versus hath ;  third person plural subjects used with archaic third-person  singular inflection, as in Nephi’s brethren rebelleth, they  dieth , and hearts delighteth ; unusual uses of “there  was” or “there were”; variation in grammatical mood in the same  sentence; the past participle arriven used five times in the  1829 Book of Mormon; dative impersonal constructions like it supposeth me , it sorroweth me , and it  whispereth me ; the phrase faith on the Lord ; and many other apparently non-standard or blatantly  erroneous constructions such as in them days in Helaman 7:8  and 13:37 (“hick grammar” today but known in acceptable EModE) or I had smote in 1 Nephi 4:19, for which we presently require  (and now have in the Book of Mormon) smitten as the  past participle, although smote was frequently used as a past  participle beginning in the 16th century.

Carmack’s  article came as a surprise to many readers, greatly amplifying  the initial suggestions of Skousen yet also creating significant  controversy, as one can gather from the comments posted in response  to Carmack’s article. But this was just the beginning of the  detailed analysis to come.

Carmack  here considers the Book of Mormon’s unusually high rate  of using “did” to convey past tense, as in “Moroni did  arrive with his army to the land of Bountiful” (Alma 52:18) . “The 1829 Book of Mormon contains nearly 2,000  instances of this particular syntax, using it 27% of the time in  past-tense contexts. The 1611 King James Bible … employs this  syntax less than 2% of the time. While the Book of Mormon’s  rate is significantly higher than the Bible’s, it is close to what  is found in other English-language texts written mainly in the mid-  to late-1500s. That usage died out in the 1700s.”73

Carmack  also notes how other modern writers mimicking KJV language fail to  match the KJV or the Book of Mormon in terms of past tense  syntax. Carmack argues that the Book of Mormon’s usage  makes it unique for its time. In light of the detailed statistics of  Book of Mormon past tense syntax, it seems that its syntax  is not readily explainable as a product of Joseph Smith’s  diction nor of Joseph’s mimicry of either the Bible or other texts  available to him.

Carmack’s  next paper argues that the archaic language of the Book of Mormon  cannot be understood by referring to the 1828 dictionary of Noah  Webster but rather requires a much more archaic dictionary.

He  adds to his growing body of linguistic data by exploring several  additional patterns. One example is “it supposeth me,” a rare  inverted syntax pattern that occurs four times in the Book of Mormon,  each consistent with Early Modern English usage much earlier than the  KJV in ways that make it unlikely for Joseph to have picked this up  on his own.

Along  the way, Carmack points out just how complex and interesting the  Book of Mormon text is:

For  those wanting certainty, that’s disturbing language. But this  smells like an adventure that will lead somewhere. Critics and fans  alike should find this challenge worth digging into. Will new  insights about the Book of Mormon cause it to go down in  flames? Critics may hope so. Carmack, on the other hand, argues that  whatever the details are that led to Early Modern English in the  Book of Mormon, the heavy strain of complex Early Modern  English syntax of the Book of Mormon, once thought to be  merely Joseph’s bad grammar or a clumsy attempt at imitating  the KJV, implies that the Lord “revealed a concrete form of  expression (words) to Joseph Smith” and that the text itself is of  divine origin. As surprising as this statement is, at the moment it  seems to be a fair one in light of a great deal of  objective data.

I think  the devil is not in these details, but something is, and further work  is needed.

One  of the particularly interesting details showing apparent Early Modern  English influence in the Book of Mormon is the consistently  unusual syntax used in expressing commands. These abundant archaic  command forms include wordy constructions such as “he commanded  his people that they should maintain those cities” in  Alma 52:4 or “the Father hath commanded me that I should  give unto you this land for your inheritance” in 3 Nephi 20:14.  Carmack makes this argument:

Carmack  explores the use of an obsolete construction using “more” to  indicate the greater part of something. Carmack shows that awkward  usages in the original Book of Mormon text cannot be  plausibly explained as mimicry of the KJV Bible and are unlikely to  be due to Joseph’s own dialect.

In  this interesting paper, Carmack responds to Orson Scott Card and  Brant Gardner regarding the theory that Joseph’s translation of the  Book of Mormon involved expressing revealed ideas in his  own language. They are in good company, Carmack observes, as similar  views have been espoused by B. H. Roberts, John A. Widtsoe, Sidney B.  Sperry, Daniel H. Ludlow, and Robert L. Millett. However, newly  available data about the original text dictated by Joseph show that  had he been doing the translation himself, expressing revealed  concepts in his own words, then the language and syntax of the  Book of Mormon would be much different than it is.

Carmack  emphasizes the Book of Mormon’s accurate archaic uses of  over 30 words not found in the Bible, nearly all of which are not  expected to have been found in Joseph’s dialect. Such words are  unlikely to have come from Joseph’s own vocabulary, making their  usage an indication (one of many) that Joseph’s “translation”  involved receiving specific words, as if he were reading them somehow  to his scribe as he dictated. This is a significant argument for  “tight control” in the translation process. But there are other  strong arguments as well:


## Further  Language Issues

Other  research on language involves the issue of the language of the  Book of Mormon on the golden plates. One of the most  puzzling statements in the Book of Mormon — something  that makes no sense in light of common knowledge in Joseph’s day —  is Nephi’s statement in the opening verses to alert the reader that  he wrote using “the learning of the Jews and the language of the  Egyptians” (1 Nephi 1:2). This was perplexing to readers in  Joseph’s day and ours. Numerous theories have been proposed  regarding what this might mean.65 While there is still  room for debate regarding what Nephi meant, it is clear there is  something that seemed obvious in Nephi’s day that is not obvious to  us and has not been explained adequately for our intellectual  curiosity. It’s the kind of issue that often occurs in legitimate  texts from a foreign culture and not as an artifact of modern  fiction for modern readers. Further, the concept of Hebrew scribes  using Egyptian in any way — often cited as a ridiculous  weakness in the Book of Mormon — has become much more  plausible in light of archaeological evidence long after the  Book of Mormon was published. Neal Rappleye, for example,  is able to make a strong case that Nephi was using Egyptian and  that this is consistent with an ancient scribal tradition that would  not have been known in Joseph’s day. Remarkably consistent with  Card’s approach, Rappleye points out why Nephi may have felt a need  to explain what he was doing — an explanation that is quite logical  when viewed from the perspective of an ancient author yet puzzling to  us today:

If  Rappleye is correct, this view raises questions about some of the  many apparent Hebrew wordplays in the Book of Mormon that  may need to be reconsidered, although there is still the possibility  of such Hebraic elements having been incorporated into the text in  spite of it (or parts of it) being primarily in Egyptian.

In  any case, the issue of Hebrew scribes working with Egyptian language  has long been mocked by Book of Mormon critics but now  seems to be another case where the implausible Book of Mormon  is turning the tide on its critics as we learn more about the ancient  world and break past easy but errant assumptions about what the book  is telling us. It is also another case where detailed examination of  foreign cultural phenomena such as scribal practices in ancient  Palestine and Egypt help us reconstruct the assumptions built into  Nephi’s brief explanation and fill in gaps for a modern  audience.

A  fraudulent work of fiction is not likely to present puzzles that  yield such rewards upon further investigation, nor would a modern  work give an explanation that only make things worse for the modern  reader by raising serious puzzles that would only become clear  through detailed research. Consideration of what Nephi felt a need  to explain again reveals that we are dealing with something far  outside of Joseph’s environment. We are dealing with an ancient  voice from the dust, an authentic and complex record worthy of  respect and thoughtful analysis on every page.


## A Surge  in Semitic Wordplays, Especially Related to Names

Finding  wordplays, like other Hebraic elements including Hebrew poetical  elements, in an English translation faces the obvious problem of  lacking the text in the original language from which one might more  fully evaluate the nature of the literary device. However, with names  in particular, [Page 297] there is a reasonable chance that evidence of  a wordplay can survive translation if the name is transliterated  well and if the associated text has been translated well. An example  is the name Jesus in Matthew 1:21: “thou shalt call his name Jesus,  for he shall save his people from their sins.” In spite of the  Hebrew having been written in Greek and then translated in English,  and in spite of not having the original Aramaic or Hebrew words that  were actually spoken in Matthew 1, we can still see a connection  between the name of Jesus and the Hebrew word yosia meaning  “to save.”

Still,  even when working with the original language, an apparent wordplay  may be unintended and arise from chance. However, when the wordplay  relates well to the text or has explanatory power, and when the  wordplay is applied more than once or in creative, artful ways, the  probability of intent is higher. Bowen makes the case for most of his  finds that multiple factors point to intentional and clever wordplays  rather than mere chance. Wordplays involving Book of Mormon  names in Bowen’s book (which also considers some newly proposed  Biblical wordplays) include the following:

There  are many more wordplays that have been proposed for various passages  in the Book of Mormon, but Bowen’s focus on the  significance of names appears to be especially fruitful and generally  plausible, and frequently brings out added meaning or answers  meaningful questions about the text. In most of these cases, it would  be difficult to ascribe the wordplays identified to just chance and  clever argumentation, though false positives in general cannot be  completely ruled out. As Bowen observes, whether the text was written  in Hebrew or Egyptian, the underlying meanings of names and relevant  wordplays drawing upon Hebrew roots could have been recognized by  readers familiar with the brass plates and the Nephites’ (evolving)  spoken language with its Hebrew origins, reducing the impact of  uncertainty on the written language on the relevance of wordplays  based on names with recognized meaning in Hebrew or Egyptian. In  spite of such uncertainties, Bowen’s work leaves us with a much  richer appreciation of the genuinely ancient literary nature of the  Book of Mormon, filled with gems that are being noticed  only now, nearly two centuries after the Book of Mormon was  dictated by a young man who had not yet studied Hebrew and could  not have studied Egyptian. The literary strength of the  Book of Mormon as an ancient text has become even more  impressive since Orson Scott card discussed its strengths.


## [Page 302] Summary

With  the presentation and publication of “Artifact or Artifice”  a quarter century ago, Card gave us valuable tools for detecting  hidden assumptions that reveal the era in which fiction was created.  His approach can help us look past the text itself and the  assumptions we may have been importing into a text or story to  consider other possibilities. Such tugging at the text of the  Book of Mormon brought fruitful insights in 1993.  Twenty five years later, most of his initial findings still  appear valid or even strengthened. His own assumptions about Joseph  Smith’s language, commonly made by many readers, have been strongly  challenged by emerging work on the nature of the translation and the  dictated text, but even if Card’s views on this one point end up  being overturned, the result only further confirms Card’s overall  thesis, that the Book of Mormon is an artifact of an  environment foreign to Joseph Smith’s setting and mind.

“Artifact  or Artifice?” has withstood the test of time well, like the  Book of Mormon, although some details discussed by Card  require updated understanding in light of intriguing new data. The  question “artifact or artifice?” remains a vital and  increasingly fascinating one that readers should pose as they read  the Book of Mormon deeply, dropping superficial  assumptions, to more fully encounter the numerous surprises and even  wonders in the text.

---
Notes

[1] Twenty-five  years ago — long before the founding of The Interpreter Foundation  and even predating FARMS’s affiliation with BYU by half a decade — a  famous name among fiction writers, Orson Scott Card, gave a speech  at BYU that provided a novel way of evaluating Book of Mormon  claims. In “The Book of Mormon: Artifact or Artifice?”  at the 1993 BYU Symposium on Life, the Universe, and Everything, 1 Card applied his literary skills to examine the artifacts of fiction  we should find if the Book of Mormon had been fabricated  and not merely translated by Joseph Smith.

[2] When  Card spoke in early 1993, he did not have the benefit of the recent  discoveries related to Lehi’s Trail from the work of Warren Aston,  who has highlighted the plausibility of numerous details such as the  existence and location of an ancient place with a name like  Nahom and the existence of a fully plausible site for Bountiful  exactly where it should be. 2 He would not have seen the 1999 notice from S. Kent Brown about the  discovery of ancient altars in Yemen providing hard archaeological  evidence for the rare place name Nahom in the right place and time to  be relevant to Lehi’s Trail. 3 He did not have the benefit of the field work of George Potter  examining the prospects for what was once said to be impossible, the  River Laman in the Valley of Lemuel three days south of the beginning  of the [Page 255] Red Sea, where Lehi preached to his sons. 4 He didn’t have the massive body of evidence from John Sorenson’s Mormon’s Codex 5 or the insights about the Mesoamerican perspectives in the  Book of Mormon uncovered by Brant Gardner. 6 He lacked the revolutionary insights from the study of the earliest  Book of Mormon texts by Royal Skousen or the analysis  of the language of the Book of Mormon by Stanford Carmack.

[3] Card’s  speech was also before Latter-day Saint scholars became familiar with  the work of Scottish researcher Margaret Barker and before she became  familiar with the Book of Mormon. Barker has sought to  reconstruct the early Jewish religion before the reforms of Josiah  and before the major changes of the Second Temple period. 7 Barker was impressed with what she found in the Book of Mormon,  for it seemed to reflect an ancient environment and ancient  worldviews consistent with her research, and, again, quite foreign to  the knowledge available to scholars in Joseph Smith’s day. 8

[4] Which,  by the way, is something that would certainly not be a cultural  idea available to Joseph Smith. You don’t turn ancient records over  to kings in the world of the 1820s in America. Kings would have  nothing to do with ancient records. You would turn ancient records  over to a scholar. We know that that was Joseph Smith’s  personal attitude because when he wanted to find support for his  translation in order to encourage Martin Harris’s continuing  support, he sent Harris, not to a king or a president  or a political leader, but to a scholar. 9

[5] [Page 257] This  is one of many indications of implicit cultural views consistent with  the ancient world of the Book of Mormon and highly  divergent from Joseph Smith’s environment, and a valuable  observation by Card. Indeed, the issue of the handling, preservation,  and transmission of sacred records in the Book of Mormon  has been a fruitful area for additional research since 1993.  Consider, for example, John Tvedtnes’s book published in 2000, The  Book of Mormon and Other Hidden Books: Out of Darkness unto  Light . 10 Tvedtnes examines the authentic ancient aspects of relevant features  in the Book of Mormon such as the use of treasuries to  store records, the practice of hiding or sealing ancient records for  a future time, the use of stone boxes to preserve records,  traditions about records entrusted to the care of angels, mountain  repositories, and ancient traditions about glowing stones used for  revelation, all showing evidence that the world of the Book of Mormon  is highly consistent with ancient Near Eastern practices and  traditions.

[6] More  recently, a professional archivist, Anita Wells, has noted that  the meticulous way in which the Book of Mormon describes  its own provenance and that of the various records used in creating  the text reveals intricate and realistic details about document  handling that cannot be explained as a product of the early 19th  century. 11 Wells explains that our modern concepts of record handling and  establishing provenance was developed by archivists in Europe long  after Joseph Smith’s day, and would not become well established in  the US until early in the 20th century. This perspective has  important implications:

[7] [T]he  archival profession as we understand it now did not exist in  Joseph Smith’s time. The concept of provenance (a record of  ownership to guide claims of authenticity) and chain of custody  (documenting that record of ownership) was not identified. The Bible,  Joseph’s main resource for an example of ancient writing at the  time he translated the Book of Mormon, gave very little  indication of who wrote it and how its records were copied and  transmitted throughout the ages. These ideas were not something  anyone in the mid 19th century [Page 258] could have known, a working  conceptual knowledge of which would allow their incorporation into  the Book of Mormon. Provenance is a modern convention  used today and developed in the past century to validate claims  (notably in art auctions); Mormon made the chain of custody and  provenance of his record abundantly clear from millennia prior. 12

[8] Science  fiction author Orson Scott Card explained that written  hoaxes are a product of their time, easily unmasked by later  scientific understanding. If the Book of Mormon was purely  a Joseph Smith creation, how he did or did not include  lineage and custodial authorship information should conform to  19th-century manners and ring false to modern readers. Yet the more  we learn about archival provenance and chain of custody, the more  remarkable it is to discover the precise documentation of such  practices in the Book of Mormon. 13

[9] Turning  to Mesoamerica, John L. Sorenson also shows that Book of Mormon  practices regarding record keeping are consistent with ancient  Mesoamerican traditions, 14 as is also true for the nature of records and writing systems,  including the keeping of dates, recording of prophecies, genealogies,  keeping of lineage histories, etc. 15 For example, the Quiché Maya had an office of record keeper that was  passed from father to son, similar to the Nephites’ practice. The  records also played an important role as symbols of political and  religious authority. 16

[10] Card’s  keen eye as an author helps us recognize the diverse interests and  voices of various authors. Nephi, for example, glosses over details [Page 259] of battles, whereas Mormon tends to give intricate information “but  only when telling the story of a heroic captain who is  a spiritual as well as a military example.” 17 Nephi and Jacob are writing for a different purpose than Mormon  and Moroni were, and they naturally focus on different issues. This  is natural, that is, for an authentic document with multiple authors.  Properly reflecting the complex array of different rhetorical  purposes for the various voices of the Book of Mormon would  have been a remarkable achievement if Joseph Smith were its  author. Further, Mormon’s interests, which include an intense focus  on military strategy and battle details, are clearly not the  interests of Joseph Smith, whose extensive writings over his life  show no such interest in the details of military campaigns. It is  Card’s experience that authors tend to return to the topics that  fascinate them, as Mormon does to military matters. It is unlikely  that the voice of Mormon is young Joseph drawing upon his  non-military environment in the 1820s. Indeed, the numerous aspects  of warfare in the Book of Mormon represent an area where  the book is on remarkably solid ground as an authentic ancient work,  with intricate, realistic details far beyond Joseph’s environment,  as documented, for example, in Warfare in the Book of Mormon . 18

[11] Card’s  observations on authorial voices and interests anticipate, in part,  a significant later contribution to Book of Mormon  studies in Grant Hardy’s Understanding the Book of Mormon:  A Reader’s Guide . 19 By considering the Book of Mormon as literature from real  humans, regardless of whether it is fiction or history, Hardy  highlights the viewpoints and interests of the multiple men who  worked to prepare and edit Book of Mormon records. Hardy  did not intend to write an apologetic work, but rather to enhance  appreciation of the literary quality of the Book of Mormon  through exploring the voices and agendas of Mormon, Moroni, and  Nephi, three major editors who shaped the final complex document  compiled from numerous sources. However, the result of his work and  his ear for different voices in a literary work show that the  three editors he examines are best understood as different  individuals with [Page 260] unique voices and agendas, making Hardy’s analysis  an unintentionally powerful apologetic work, as Daniel Peterson has  noted. 20 Hardy states,

[12] Under  close scrutiny, [the Book of Mormon] appears to be  a carefully crafted, integrated work, with multiple narrative  levels, an intricate organization, and extensive intratextual phrasal  allusions and borrowings. None of this is foreign to fiction, but the  circumstances of the book’s production are awkward: the more  complicated and interconnected the text, the less likely it is that  Joseph Smith made it up spontaneously as he dictated the words to his  scribes, one time through. 21

[13] All  of this evidence (from the witnesses’ statements, the original  manuscript, the printer’s manuscript, and from the text itself) is  thus consistent with the hypothesis that Joseph Smith could actually  see (whether in the interpreters themselves or in his mind’s eye)  the translated English text — word for word and letter for letter —  and that he read off this revealed text to his scribe. Despite  Joseph’s reading off of the text, one should not assume that this  process was automatic or easily done. Joseph had to prepare himself  spiritually for this work. Yet the evidence suggests that Joseph was  not the author of the Book of Mormon, not even its English  language translation, although it was revealed spiritually through  him and in his own language. 22

[14] We  now know there were numerous witnesses and remarkably consistent  testimony showing that Joseph dictated not only at a rapid [Page 261] pace  but without notes, without manuscripts, and apparently without  a Bible even when quoting Isaiah or other parts of the Bible. 23 (Indeed, it appears that Joseph did not even have a Bible of his  own until after completion of the Book of Mormon  translation, when he sent Oliver Cowdery in late 1829 to purchase  a Bible so he could begin the work of the inspired translation  of the Bible. 24 )  It was a miraculous process on the face of it, but the wonders  are only magnified when we look at the text in intricate detail. The  many witnesses, 25 including at least one non Latter-day Saint witness, 26 who at various times saw the translation as it took place as well as  the witnesses of the plates, also including at least one  non-Latter-day Saint witness, 27 create a consistent record in support of what Joseph said about  his translation work.

[15] Numerous  strange (to us) elements in the story of Ammon and King Lamoni,  including the ability of flock-scattering gangsters to wander freely  into the court of the king, the offering of a daughter in  marriage to the Nephite visitor, the presentation of arms as  a testimony to the king, and so forth. Brant Gardner has  carefully elucidated the Mesoamerican cultural artifacts reflected in  this story in Traditions of the Fathers. 28 The  concept of a hill serving as a place of arms (plausible  when one recognizes the importance of obsidian outcroppings as a key  source of weaponry in Mesoamerica, as discussed by John L.  Sorenson 29 ). Alma  praying after he eats at Amulek’s home in Alma 8:22,  a practice not likely characteristic of Joseph Smith’s  environment. 30 The  ability of blood to stain swords, something not part of Joseph’s  environment but part of a civilization using obsidian embedded  in wooden clubs as a sword and weapon of choice. 31 The  plausible description (from the perspective of immigrants living in  the New World) in Alma 7:10 of Christ’s birthplace being in  Jerusalem (the “land” of Jerusalem) rather than the city of  Bethlehem, a statement [Page 264] given without explanation to overcome the  strident objections it has generated ever since. It is inconceivable  that someone even mildly familiar with the Bible would make this  “blunder” and even more inconceivable that such a blunder  would later be supported by newly found evidence showing ancient Jews  did in fact view Bethlehem as part of the “land of Jerusalem,”  a concept not extractable from the Bible. 32

[16] Since  1993 there has been further investigation in the field of  Mesoamerican neighborhoods and the relationship between rural  households and urban centers. A relevant book from 2012 is Neighborhood as a Social and Spatial Unit in Mesoamerican  Cities , 33 which begins with a detailed review article by Michael E. Smith  and Juliana Novic, “Neighborhoods and Districts in Ancient  Mesoamerica,” 34 discussed below. Also of interest in the same volume is the chapter  of Gary M. Feinman and Linda M. Nicholas, “Compact Versus  Dispersed Settlement in Pre-Hispanic Mesoamerica: The Role of  Neighborhood Organization and Collective Action,” 35 which examines ancient Mesoamerican societies in terms of social  structures, looking at the dispersed, agrarian communities and more  compact communities, and examining the impact of population density  on political structures. Neighborhood ties and structures became  especially important in forms of rule more corporate or collective  with shared power and “broadened voice,” for neighborhoods would  be the focal point for such collaborative action. The work of Feinman  and Nicholas may be helpful in contemplating what the Book of Mormon  may mean when it speaks of the role of “the voice of the people”  in decision making and politics.

[17] Since  the publication of Bullard’s paper, several archaeologists have  discussed Lowland Maya settlement clusters, but without considering  their possible role as urban neighborhoods (e.g., Ashmore 1981;  Pyburn et al. 1998). The first to associate [Lowland Maya settlement]  clusters with neighborhoods was Cynthia Robin (2003: 330–331),  who notes that “neighborhood focused research is perhaps the  least investigated direction of Maya household archaeology” (p.  331). Perhaps Mayanists tended to avoid the topic of neighborhoods  because that concept was associated with the crowded cities of  ancient Mesopotamia or the Islamic world. Yet, the low density  tropical cities of the Maya manifest a very different kind of  urbanism (Arnauld and Michelet 2004), one that Roland Fletcher (2009)  called “low density agrarian based urbanism.” 36

[18] In Mormon’s Codex , Sorenson has pointed out that the term for  “city” in Mesoamerica “was applied on a conceptual, not  just a functional basis” 37 and that they “seem to have been planned and designated as such [Page 267] from their founding.” 38 Sorenson notes the parallel to Alma’s “city” of Helam that was  designated as such with a population of only about 450 people. 39 Small agrarian gatherings in strategic areas likewise could easily  have been turned into “instant cities” by Captain Moroni to  support military goals, consistent with Card’s observation on  a Book of Mormon phenomenon inconsistent with Joseph  Smith’s environment.

[19] Incidentally,  the units of town and village are both mentioned in the  Book of Mormon but only twice in Mormon 4 and 5, while the  unit of city has about 400 mentions. Joseph’s life was spent in  villages and towns. In his own history, he writes that he was born in  the town of Sharon in Vermont (Joseph Smith—History 1:3) and  then later moved to Manchester, which he calls a village (Joseph  Smith—History 1:51). We also read that Martin Harris was “a  resident of Palmyra township” (Joseph Smith—History 1:61).  Palmyra had around 600 people when Joseph’s family moved there, 40 but thanks in part to the opportunities created by the Erie Canal,  its population had grown to about 4,600 by 1825. 41 This township was much larger than Alma’s city of Helam and perhaps  much larger than the “instant cities” Captain Moroni founded or  organized. The Book of Mormon terminology as well as the  curious ability to found cities almost instantly is outside of Joseph  Smith’s environment and culture but consistent with a Mesoamerican  city. Further, the concept of “cities” among Native Americans and  especially large, advanced cities like Zarahemla can be considered  outside of Joseph’s environment and outside of the common knowledge  of his day, though earlier works from European writers such as  Alexander von Humboldt made some aspects of Mesoamerican antiquities  known in better educated circles. 42

[20] But  in the Book of Mormon, the judge not only judges people but  also enforces the law and directs the gathering of taxes and supplies  and sending them in support of the armies. Not your normal,  traditional role. He enforces traditional law, but when new laws are  needed, the judge makes them! Where in American life of his time  would Joseph Smith have seen this? How  are these judges selected? We hear of almost no contested elections.  On the contrary, judges seem to nominate their successors. With few  exceptions, the judge serves until death, and is usually succeeded by  a son or brother, or by a member of a family that has  previously held the judgeship. Now, except for the Adamses, there  were no dynasties in Joseph Smith’s America. The  judges actually function as elected kings. The old pattern of  government still endured, they just had a different method of  choosing the guy in charge. Mormon pointed out the difference ,  which meant he stressed the election of the judges by the voice of  the people, never questioning that authority should stay in only  a few aristocratic families and that judges should have  monarchical powers. Far from being a mistake in the  Book of Mormon, this is one of the places where the  Book of Mormon makes it clear that it does not come  from 1820s American culture. Even the best of hoaxers would have made  the judges far more American. 43

[21] Brant  Gardner’s later treatment of the “voice of the people” and the  role of judges in the Book of Mormon would show much  greater affinity for Mesoamerican concepts than for the democracy of  the young United States. 44

[22] [Page 269] Now,  thanks in part to work led by … Richard Blanton, an anthropologist  at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana, Tlaxcallan is one of  several premodern societies around the world that archaeologists  believe were organized collectively, where rulers shared power and  commoners had a say in the government that presided over their  lives. These  societies were not necessarily full democracies in which citizens  cast votes, but they were radically different from the autocratic,  inherited rule found — or assumed — in most early societies.  Building on Blanton’s originally theoretical ideas, archaeologists  now say these “collective societies” left telltale traces in  their material culture, such as repetitive architecture, an emphasis  on public space over palaces, reliance on local production over  exotic trade goods, and a narrowing of wealth gaps between  elites and commoners. “Blanton  and his colleagues opened up a new way of examining our data,”  says Rita Wright, an archaeologist at New York University in New York  City who studies the 5000-year-old Indus civilization in today’s  India and Pakistan, which also shows signs of collective rule. “A  whole new set of scholarship has emerged about complex societies.” “I  think it’s a breakthrough,” agrees Michael E. Smith, an  archaeologist at Arizona State University (ASU) in Tempe. “I’ve  called it the most important work in the archaeology of political  organization in the last 20 years.” He and others are working to  extend Blanton’s ideas into a testable method, hoping to  identify collective states solely through the objects they left  behind. 45

[23] During  the central Mexican late Postclassic period, the Aztec Triple  Alliance became the largest and most powerful empire in Mesoamerica.  Yet ancient Tlaxcallan (now Tlaxcala, Mexico) resisted incorporation  into the empire despite being entirely surrounded by it and despite  numerous Aztec military campaigns aimed at the defeat of the  Tlaxcaltecas. How did it happen that a relatively small (1,400  km²) polity was able to [Page 270] resist a more powerful foe while its  neighbors succumbed? We propose a resolution to this historical  enigma that, we suggest, has implications for the broader study of  social and cultural change, particularly in relation to theories of  state formation and collective action. We find it particularly  interesting that the Tlaxcaltecas abandoned a key tenet of  traditional Nahua political structure in which kingship was vested in  members of the nobility, substituting for it government by a council  whose members could be recruited from the ranks of commoners. To  achieve such a significant deviation from typical Nahua  authority structure, the Tlaxcaltecas drew selectively from those  aspects of Nahua mythic history and religion that were consistent  with a comparatively egalitarian and collective political  regime. 46

[24] For  example, in Helaman 7 where Nephi prays on a tower in his garden  near the road leading to the chief market, there are some intriguing  details that have merited scholarly exploration but didn’t seem in  need of elaboration by Mormon. Here the analysis from Brant Gardner  in [Page 271] Traditions of the Fathers 47 and earlier analysis from John Sorenson 48 are particularly useful. Mormon doesn’t bother to explain that in  Nephite culture, there were large cities with multiple markets but  that Zarahemla (and perhaps others) had a chief market. He  doesn’t bother to explain that the Nephites built roads. He doesn’t  bother to explain that in his role, Nephi needed to be near the heart  of the city and thus had a home near a major road, and that  this home had a walled enclosure, a garden, and tower  perhaps like the characteristic pyramid-shaped towers that private  residences sometimes had in Mesoamerica, or that towers played an  important role in their society. 49 He doesn’t explain that towers existed that were attached to or  near private residences 50 and were much lower than the large towers used for public rituals,  low enough to make it easy for Nephi to converse with a crowd  along the neighboring road. All the interesting background  explanation that would be helpful to a modern reader and might  naturally be included by a modern writer describing such a scene  is left out because it wasn’t unusual to Mormon. Even if Joseph  somehow had access to precise information about the use of towers in  private residences and the existence of chief markets and major roads  in large Mesoamerican cities, a modern writer taking advantage  of that information would naturally have felt a need to explain  the setting directly or through many more details. A fraudulent  author developing the story based on specialized knowledge might even  emphasize the clever details in his account in preparation for later  claiming it as dramatic evidence of authenticity once such  information become more generally available to the public. We have  none of this in Mormon’s brief matter-of-fact account and in  Joseph’s obliviousness to the relevance of the story to  Mesoamerican finds.

[25] The  men and women of Sherrizah may have fled to a tower as a place  of last defense, just as King Noah fled to the tower by the temple  when being pursued by Gideon. If these towers were part of a pyramid  or a temple on a pyramid, the practice of fleeing there for  safety may fit a Mesoamerican context well, as John E. Clark has  observed, yet fleeing to a tower for safety when being pursued  might not be a common concept in Joseph Smith’s environment. 51

[26] Non-military  towers such as those used for covenant making, religious purposes,  and publicity do not seem to have been part of Joseph Smith’s  frontier environment yet are subtly woven into the Book of Mormon  in a way consistent with Mesoamerican culture as well [Page 273] as with  some aspects of ancient Near Eastern culture. 52 For example, regarding the relationship between the tower of King  Benjamin and related rituals in pre-exilic Judaism, Stephen D. Ricks  observes that as one of many aspects of the covenant-making and  festival-related aspects of King Benjamin’s speech, that:

[27] In  confirming the Old Testament documentation of the use of the dais,  the Mishnah also supports the evidence found in the Book of Mormon.  Together these illustrate that platforms are (1) located in the  temple precinct, (2) associated with the coronation of new kings, (3)  used by the king or another leader to read the law to the people, (4)  used to offer dedicatory prayers for the temple, and (5) associated  with the Festival of Booths. In view of these considerations, one can  conclude that Benjamin’s tower was more than just a way to  communicate to the people — it was part of an Israelite coronation  tradition in which the king stands on a platform or pillar at  the temple before the people and before God. 53

[28] It’s  hard to account for the numerous precise parallels to Mesoamerica as  merely lucky guesses, but it is equally implausible to posit that  a modern writer with an advanced source of knowledge about such  things would have described such a foreign setting without at  least pointing out the cultural differences to aid modern readers.  This problem is related to the problem we have previously pointed out  regarding alleged sources (rare European maps of Arabia, for example)  that Joseph or his advisors with sufficient resources theoretically  might have used to guide the purported fabrication of the story of  Lehi’s Trail. 54 If one had built-in details about the trail and even a rare  place name like Nahom/Nehhem based on detailed maps and other  research in order to add evidence of authenticity, why not use more  widely known details like the place name Mecca to give local color  and plausibility? For the homerun/bulls-eye of Nahom 55 as an ancient name in the right place, why use a potentially  verifiable tidbit and then leave it as an easily missed detail  mentioned only once and never discussed again after publication of  the Book of Mormon ? If evidence of authenticity was  built into the text on purpose, why did it take over a century  for the first member of the Church to notice the potential link  between Nahom and the ancient site in Yemen that is now a remarkable  candidate for Nahom?

[29] Joseph  did celebrate the validation of ancient American civilization that  came with the 1841 publication of Incidents of Travel in Central  America, Chiapas and Yucatan by John Lloyd Stephens, 56 with illustrations by Frederick Catherwood. This work introduced many  readers to the extensive civilization of the ancient Americas.  Clearly Joseph was interested in external evidences for  Book of Mormon issues. 57 Had he been aware of impressive evidence from Arabia, it surely would  have been mentioned. Were he a fraud, he surely would have  arranged for one of his peers to later “discover” the evidence  and make the most of it. Built-in evidence makes no sense if the  evidence is never noticed or pointed to. This would make the  Book of Mormon a most unusual fraud. As a fraud,  it would be of a most unusual nature for still other reasons  that Card helps us recognize.

[30] Critics  frequently try to defuse respect for the Book of Mormon by  suggesting that the purported fraud of Joseph Smith is routinely done  with even more impressive results. J.R.R. Tolkien’s works such as The Lord of the Rings trilogy are commonly cited, showing that  it is possible for a writer to concoct a beautiful,  complex, and generally consistent “history” involving many  places, numerous new names, great battles, political intrigues, and  so forth. (But see the recent work of Brad Wilcox, Wendy  Baker-Smemoe, Bruce L. Brown, and Sharon Black on the “phonoprint”  of names created by Tolkien compared to those found in the  Book of Mormon, yielding evidence that Tolkien’s names  for people from different language groups were created by a single  author while those of the Book of Mormon were not. 58 )  The fact that Tolkien had advanced education and put in a lifetime  of work to produce his polished masterpiece, points often made by  Latter-day Saint apologists in response to critics citing Tolkien, is  a minor point in light of Card’s insight.

[31] James  Macpherson claimed that Ossian was based on an ancient Gaelic  manuscript. There was just one problem. The existence of this  manuscript was never established. In fact, unlike Ireland and Wales,  there are no dark-age manuscripts of epic poems, tales, and  chronicles and so on from Scotland. It isn’t that such ancient  Scottish poetry and lore didn’t exist, it was just purely oral in  nature. Not much of it was committed to writing until it was on the  verge of extinction. There are Scottish manuscripts and books in  existence today which date as far back as the 12th century (some with  scraps of poetry in them), but they are principally on subjects such  as religion, genealogy, and land grants. For  this and several other reasons which are dealt with in the  Preliminary Discourse et seq ., authenticity of the work was  widely contested, particularly by Samuel Johnson. A huge (and  probably excessive) backlash ensued, and conventional wisdom today  brands Ossian as one of the great forgeries of history. In  fairness, themes, characters and passages of Ossian are based on  established Celtic and Scottish folklore. Much of the fourth volume  of J.F. Campbell’s massive Popular Tales of the West Highlands is devoted to tracking down Ossianic fragments in circulation prior  to Macpherson or elicited from illiterate Highland peasants who had  never heard of Ossian . [Page 278] Macpherson  is today considered the author of this work. The language of  composition was probably English: As Campbell determined, Macpherson  wasn’t even particularly fluent in Gaelic. 59

[32] What  some view as a definitive work on the fraud of Ossian came out  after Card’s article with the 2009 publication of Thomas M.  Curley’s Samuel Johnson, the Ossian Fraud, and the Celtic  Revival in Great Britain and Ireland . 60 In summarizing his survey of the Ossian fraud, Curley praises Samuel  Johnson for recognizing the nature of the fraud, a conclusion  that has withstood the test of time and Curley’s own extensive  detective work:

[33] Johnson’s  sense of the falsity of the Ossian works was correct, despite  professions to the contrary by some modern scholars. Twenty-eight out  of Macpherson’s thirty-nine titles — seventy two percent of  all the individual works comprising Ossian — have no  apparent grounding in genuine Gaelic literature and are therefore  entirely his own handiwork. The remaining twenty-eight percent of the  titles have but generally loose ties to approximately sixteen Gaelic  ballads. Contrary to his assertions, Macpherson was no editor or  translator of ancient poetry. He was the author of new, largely  invented literature in violation of true history, legitimate Gaelic  studies, and valid national identity in Scotland. As Johnson had  charged, Macpherson committed literary fabrication. 61

[34] A  recent resurgence of research has done much to exonerate Macpherson  from accusations of fraud. Research by Howard Gaskill, Fiona  Stafford, Derick Thomson, and others have shown that Macpherson’s  poems were largely authentic, as many of the poems have since been  corroborated with other Gaelic sources…. Many of his poems that  have been corroborated show that he was often rather liberal in his  translations, which was typical for the time. Most modern scholars  in the subject now agree that the majority of his poems are based on  genuine, ancient Gaelic poetry, but that Macpherson’s claim he  had found a lost epic was overly ambitious. 62

[35] Moulton’s  statement about the views of “most modern scholars” needs to be  considered cautiously. It might be better said that most scholars  recognize there is a touch of genuine Gaelic poetry that  Macpherson drew upon, but saying that “the poems are based on  genuine, ancient Gaelic poetry” may be misleading. Ultimately, what  Macpherson offered his enthusiastic audiences was his invention.  Defenders suggest that [Page 280] Macpherson was drawing upon authentic material  but applying a great deal of his own creativity to translate in  his own style, but this overlooks what Macpherson insisted upon from  the beginning: that his translation was “extremely literal” and  that the unusual word order in the English was often adjusted to  reflect that of the original. 63 But this was artifice, not an artifact of authentic translation. Yola  Schmitz describes Macpherson’s artifice as translatese — the  deliberate creation of nonstandard syntax to create the sense of  a highly literal translation from a foreign language. 64

[36] Macpherson’s  upbringing put him in the perfect position. He was born in  Ruthven, in the Scottish Highlands where he was brought up in  a Gaelic-speaking community and accustomed to the oral tradition  of the bards of the clans. Yet, he also experienced first-hand the  serious effects of British oppression. In 1745, the nine-year-old  Macpherson witnessed the Jacobite Rising with all its devastating  consequences for the collective identity and the heritage of the  Scottish clans. In its wake, many customs and traditions, such as the  tartan plaid and playing the bag pipes, were prohibited. However,  one of the worst consequences must have been the subsequent ban on  using the Scottish Gaelic language. Therefore, Macpherson’s forgery  can also be considered an attempt to recuperate what was left of the  literary tradition of the Highlands and to rehabilitate a people,  thought to be uncultured and uncivilised. These  circumstances provided Macpherson with all he needed to produce  a successful forgery. He was an insider of Scottish  traditions and, at the same time, he had profited from an academic  education. He had not only learned how classic works of poetry were  studied but also how they were supposed to be presented. When the  scholars in Aberdeen showed interest in this kind of poetry and  offered to sponsor an excursion to the Highlands, Macpherson seized  the moment and delivered. 65 [ emphasis added ]

[37] Macpherson’s  fraud could also be considered in light of a few other attempted  forgeries, including Thomas Chatterton’s Rowley papers, purporting  to be poems from a 15th-century monk named Rowley. The poems  were initially accepted due to a general lack of attention at  the time of publication to the details of the English language and  its changes over the centuries. Chatterton used antique paper for his  poems but was [Page 282] unable to properly reflect the language of the time he  sought to mimic, ensuring that the fraud would be detected. 66

[38] On  the other hand, the challenges of linguistic change over time is an  area where the Book of Mormon shines and far surpasses what  Macpherson and, presumably, Joseph knew. Linguistic change is  implicit as a fact of life in the Book of Mormon  narrative. Nephi’s scribal work may already be blurring the lines  between Egyptian and Hebrew (1 Nephi 1:1–3). 67 We see the Mulekites, immigrants without written records to help  maintain their language, have lost much of their language (it had  become “corrupted”) and need to be taught to understand the  Nephite’s language after just a few hundred years of  separation (Omni 1:17–18), with their rapid linguistic drift  presumably accelerated by contact with local peoples in the New  World. We see Nephites treasuring their written records as a means  of helping them maintain their scriptural language system (Mosiah  1:2–6). We see the Lamanites losing their written language and  later needing to be taught the Nephite writing system (Mosiah  24:1–7). And in spite of their written records, centuries later  Mormon acknowledges that their Hebrew had been altered (Mormon 9:33)  and that their script for recording scriptures, now called “reformed  Egyptian,” had been altered over time and was unknown except to  them (Mormon 9:32, 34). These are realistic views on linguistic  change, in contrast to the much less reasonable claims from the  highly educated Macpherson.

[39] Card’s  proposal is original and worthy of consideration. It may be accurate,  but there is an interesting recent discovery since Card penned his  speculation on Zarahemla that needs to be weighed. Recently  Jeffrey Chadwick presented evidence of a tantalizing new  archaeological find in Jerusalem, a small stamp seal with the  inscription “belonging to Malkiyahu, son of the king.” There is  a plausible case that this belonged to Mulek, son of Zedekiah,  and could be a seal for a Book of Mormon  personality. 68 Further investigation is needed, but Chadwick’s carefully  considered approach raises a fascinating possibility.

[40] Card’s  commentary can be reconsidered in light one of the most extensive  works of scholarship related to the Book of Mormon, the  lifetime of research conducted by Royal Skousen, resulting in the  many recently published volumes of Book of Mormon textual  scholarship for the Critical Text Project. 69 This is arguably the most important body of Book of Mormon  scholarship to date in which “every page, every sentence, every  word, letter, and mark are accounted for” and explored in the  landmark project. 70 His work would also lead to publication of The Book of Mormon:  The Earliest Text , 71 a critical text giving the reader the Book of Mormon  text as close as currently possible to what was dictated by Joseph  Smith, coupled with notes showing numerous significant changes made  in various printings. The details of these works are rich with  surprises and insights about the miracle of the Book of Mormon  translation process, details that make obvious that the text was  dictated orally. 72

[41] One  year after Card’s article was published, Skousen published an  important article pointing to the complex and seemingly non-standard  grammar in the originally dictated text of the Book of Mormon. 73 Skousen noted that the dictated English did not fit Joseph’s  dialect. Some [Page 285] of the awkward grammar as dictated could be viewed as  Hebraisms, and the rest did not seem to fit any single version of  English from any one time and place, raising many questions but also  making it clear that calling upon Joseph’s dialect was an  inadequate explanation for the data.

[42] Several  years later, Skousen’s ongoing explorations would lead him to  a startling new conclusion which he announced in a 2005  issue of the Maxwell Institute’s Insights . After reviewing  three previously reported unexpected conclusions that had been  compelled by his investigation in the Critical Text Project, he  explained that in the past two years his work had led to a fourth  unexpected finding: “The original vocabulary of the Book of Mormon  appears to derive from the 1500s and 1600s, not from the 1800s.” 74 The era of English Skousen referred to is known as Early Modern  English , a phase in the evolution of English corresponding  roughly to 1500 to 1700 ad, though some scholars use a range of  1470 to 1670 ad. This period includes the time in which the King  James Bible was produced (published in 1611), but the KJV Bible is  not representative of the entire era. Skousen’s article discussed  a variety of examples from the text which point to an influence  in the translation from English not found in the KJV and more archaic  than dialects in the United States. It was a controversial  announcement, but one grounded in data and meticulous research.

[43] One  of the first discoveries leading Skousen to begin considering the  issue of Early Modern English involved consideration of the phrase  “pleasing bar of God” in Jacob 6:13 and Moroni 10:34. In context,  this represents an unpleasant encounter for the wicked being judged,  so why would it be called pleasing ? In 2004, Skousen published  his analysis in light of the nature of the mistakes Oliver Cowdery  tended to make upon hearing unfamiliar words during dictation, and  speculated that the term Joseph dictated was actually “pleading bar  of God.” 75 But the “pleading bar” as a legal term in English is archaic  and was not in use in Joseph’s day. Rather, the “pleading bar”  seems to come from English in the early 1600s. Skousen concluded that  “the actual translator of the Book of Mormon — either  the Lord himself or his translation committee — seems to have been  familiar with the term!” 76

[44] Joseph  Smith was literally reading off an already composed English-language  text. Taken as a whole, the evidence in the manuscripts and in  the language of the earliest text supports the hypothesis that the  Book of Mormon was a precise text. I do not  consider this conclusion apologetic but instead as one demanded by  the evidence. The  opposing viewpoint, that Joseph Smith got ideas and translated them  into his own English, cannot be supported by the manuscript and  textual evidence. The only substantive argument for this alternative  view has been the nonstandard nature of the original text, with its  implication that God would never speak ungrammatical English, so the  nonstandard usage must be the result of Joseph Smith’s putting the  ideas he received into his own language. Yet with the recent finding  that the original vocabulary of the text appears to date from the  1500s and 1600s (not the 1800s), we now need to consider the  possibility that the ungrammaticality of the original text may also  date from that earlier period of time, not necessarily from Joseph’s  own time and place. The evidence basically argues that Joseph Smith  was not the author of the Book of Mormon, nor was he  actually the translator. Instead, he was the revelator: through him  the Lord revealed the English language text (by means of the  interpreters, later called the Urim and Thummim, and the seer stone).  Such a view is consistent, I believe, with Joseph’s use  elsewhere of the verb translate to mean ‘transmit’ and the noun  translation to mean ‘transmission’ (as in the eighth Article of  Faith). 77

[45] [Page 287] 1.  “A Look at Some ‘Nonstandard’ Book of Mormon  Grammar” 78

[46] Much  of the earliest Book of Mormon language which has been  regarded as nonstandard through the years is not. Furthermore, when  150 years’ worth of emendations are stripped away, the grammar  presents extensive evidence of its Early Modern English character,  independent in many cases from the King James Bible. 79

[47] [Page 288] 2.  “The Implications of Past-Tense Syntax in the Book of Mormon” 80

[48] .  “Why the Oxford English Dictionary (and not Webster’s 1828)” 81

[49] Could  Joseph Smith have known about this inverted syntax? I suppose he  could have seen it, had he spent time reading Middle English poetry.  Was it accessible to him? No. This grammatical structure is  exceedingly rare, the embodiment of obsolete usage. Had he ever seen  it, he hardly would have recognized it [Page 289] and been able to transform  it…. Yet the text employs inverted syntax with suppose appropriately and consistently four times 82

[50] Let  me also say at this point that it is wrongheaded to propose Moroni as  translator in order to account for “errors” in the text. He may  have been involved in the divine translation effort, but to employ  him as an explanatory device in order to account for putative errors  is misguided. The English language text is too complex, diverse,  and even well-formed to ascribe it to a non-native translation  effort. Again, as I have stated in an earlier paper, the BofM is  not full of grammatical errors. Rather, it is full of EModE — some  of it is typical and pedestrian, some of it is elegant and  sophisticated, and some of it is, to our limited or uninformed way of  thinking, objectionable and ungrammatical. The BofM also contains  touches of modern English and late Middle English. It is not  a monolithic text, and we are just beginning to learn about its  English language…. I have certainly come to realize that it is  not the text of the BofM that is full of errors, but rather our  judgments in relation to its grammar. 83

[51] [Page 290] 4.  “What Command Syntax Tells Us About Book of Mormon  Authorship” 84

[52] The  variety of command syntax found in the Book of Mormon is  very different from what is seen in the King James Bible. Yet it is  sophisticated and principled, evincing Early Modern English  linguistic competence. Interestingly, the syntactic match between the  1829 text and a prominent text from the late 15th century is  surprisingly good. All the evidence indicates that Joseph Smith would  not have produced the structures found in the text using the King  James Bible as a model, nor from his own language. 85

[53] Carmack  concludes that “[a] linguistically unsophisticated author could not  have produced the array of syntactic structures found in the  [Book of Mormon]. Deep, native-speaker knowledge of [Early  Modern English] was required to achieve the regulated patterns of use  found in the [Book of Mormon].” 86

[54] .  “The More Part of the Book of Mormon Is Early Modern  English” 87

[55] [Page 291] 6.  “Joseph Smith Read the Words” 88

[56] Carmack  argues that many words and phrases said to reveal a 19th-century  influence, like “mighty change,” “song of redeeming love,” or  “infinite atonement,” are actually much older and can be found in  the Early Modern period of English. 89

[57] Different  types of systematic usage — for example, 16th-century past-tense  syntax with did ; heavy that -complementation with verbs  like command , cause , suffer , and desire ;  the completely consistent use of the short adverbial form exceeding with adjectives; and morphosyntactic patterns and variation involving  the {-th} plural (and even  the {-s} plural) — only [Page 292] match the systematic usage of the Early  Modern period and are found throughout the text. 90

[58] Several  other papers drive these points home in various ways, including the  unusual usage of was , 91 the surprising but characteristically Early Modern English usage of  {th} for plural forms, 92 evidence from Joseph’s 1832 history regarding his own vocabulary  and syntax, 93 and evidence from other writers who sought to imitate the Bible. 94

[59] Collectively,  Skousen and Carmack present a case for strong Early Modern  English influence in the Book of Mormon that is not driven  by apologetics or any preconceived notions about the Book of Mormon,  but driven by extensive objective data. The data present a complex  story, for while there are Early Modern English elements from shortly  before the KJV era or other parts of the Early Modern English era, 95 there are more modern elements in the Book of Mormon such  as its high usage of the very practical English innovation “its.”  The word is in the KJV, but occurs only once in Leviticus 25:5 and  was not present at all in the original 1611 version. The word is  found in Shakespeare but did not become frequently used until well  after the KJV era. Thus, the strong thread of Early Modern English,  not all from one single time frame, is also blended with some modern  elements as well as some apparent artifacts from Hebrew [Page 293] or Egyptian  in the translation, suggesting a complex translation, but  a translation with a distinctive Early Modern English  influence. In spite of its complexity, the translation is remarkably  consistent and points to origins outside of Joseph Smith’s  environment, however and why ever Early Modern English was selected  for much of the syntax of the book.

[60] It  is reasonable to suggest that Nephi’s language is part of  a centuries-old and widespread scribal tradition in Judah of  writing in hieratic Egyptian. Nephi calls it “the language of my  father” (1 Nephi 1:2), and evidence suggests that rather than being  perpetuated by the state for bureaucratic interests, this tradition  was passed on within the family. By Nephi’s day, the hieratic  script was often intermixed with Hebrew script, incorporating Hebrew  word orders and scribal habits, thus differing from Egyptian as it  was written in Egypt. Calabro calls it a “Judahite variety of  Egyptian script”; Wimmer calls [Page 294] it “ Palästiniches Hieratisch ”  (“Palestinian Hieratic”). Both of these seem functionally  equivalent to Nephi’s “learning of the Jews and the language of  the Egyptians.”… Within  this context, it is not likely that Nephi’s writing was Hebrew  language in an Egyptian script. The awkwardness of such an  arrangement was long ago pointed out by Hugh Nibley. Now,  we know this is not how hieratic was being used in Nephi’s day.  Since Calabro specifically notices what could be called Hebraisms  (Hebrew word orders) in the hieratic writing, the presence of  Hebraisms not typically found in Egyptian — as the Egyptians write — is insufficient evidence to assert that  the underlying language is Hebrew as opposed to Nephi’s statement  that it is Egyptian. Indeed, the most natural interpretation of  Nephi’s statement is that he was writing Egyptian the way the Jews  had learned to write it, that is, according to their own,  independent, scribal tradition, which had some natural syncretism  with Hebrew but was nonetheless Egyptian… That  Nephi specifies his writing is according to “the learning of the  Jews” indicates that he has some awareness that there are  differences in how the Egyptians themselves write and use their  language. He may be referring to the differences in script, in word  order, in the incorporation of some Hebrew linguistic elements, or  most likely all of the above. The awareness of these differences  could come only from having some contact with “pure” Egyptian  scribal practices, as Wimmer’s findings suggest. This awareness of  Egyptian according to the “learning of the Egyptians,” to adapt  Nephi’s phrase, could explain why Nephi makes a statement  about his language at all: familiar with both traditions of Egyptian  writing, Nephi may have felt a need to specify that his was the  Judahite variety. Readers of the Egyptian variety would probably  still be able to read the Palestinian hieratic but may have  struggled. Perhaps Nephi was hoping to help such potential readers  avoid confusion from the Hebraized elements of his Egyptian writing  by telling them up front that this was the Judahite variety of  hieratic. The  context created from late preexilic scribal practice in Judah allows  for a sensible interpretation of 1 Nephi 1:2 that resolves its  ambiguity. The data allow us to see just what the [Page 295] “language of the  Egyptians,” according to “the learning of the Jews,” actually  consisted of and interpret Nephi’s statement accordingly. No such  explanatory context can reasonably be fashioned out of Joseph Smith’s  world, where the reaction of contemporaries indicates that the phrase  was as perplexing to readers then as it is now. 96

[61] While  the debate continues on the nature of the underlying language(s) and  script(s) that were on the golden plates, there are noteworthy hints  of a significant influence of Hebrew due to numerous apparent  instances of artful and intentional Hebraic wordplays, especially in  the names presented in the Book of Mormon. A great body of  analysis on this issue has come to light only in the past decade,  particularly through the extensive work of [Page 296] Matthew Bowen as compiled  in his 2018 book, Name as Key-Word: Collected Essays on Onomastic  Wordplay and the Temple in Mormon Scripture . 97 Bowen’s detailed work shows that when a variety of  Book of Mormon names are considered in light of their  plausible Hebrew form, clever and pervasive wordplays appear in the  way these names are used.

[62] The  name Alma, for example, now known to be an authentic ancient Jewish  man’s name (after so many decades of mockery from critics for  Joseph’s “blunder” of not recognizing Alma as a common  Latin female name), 98 is introduced with an apparent wordplay on the Hebrew name: given  that the name Alma can mean “young man” in Hebrew, the statement  that Alma “was a young man” suggests a knowing wordplay  in Mosiah 17:2. A wordplay with the Hebrew root *’lm , “to  hide,” to be “hidden” or “concealed,” may also occur in the  story of Alma being “hidden” and “concealed” while writing  the words of Abinadi and “privately” teaching those who would  listen. The abundance of wordplays involving his name in Mosiah 17–18  “accentuates his importance as a prophetic figure and founder  of the later Nephite church.” 99

[63] Nephi’s  name. Proposed to be from Egyptian nfr meaning good or goodly,  Nephi appears to have multiple meaningful connections to the word  “good” in the text, beginning with Nephi’s declaration at the  very beginning of our text that “I, Nephi, having been born of  goodly parents….” Bowen suggests this relationship is at play in  both the opening and closing chapters of Nephi’s writings, forming  an “inclusio” that appropriately brackets his two-book work,??  and underscores his mission of helping readers know the goodness of  God and helping them to choose do good and follow Christ. 100 The  name Mary, related to the Egyptian root mr(i) , “love,”  “desire,” or “wish.” It is only after seeing Mary in vision  that Nephi recognizes the significance of the tree he saw in his  vision: “it is the love of God which sheddeth itself abroad  in the hearts of the children of men; wherefore, it is the most desirable above all things” (1 Nephi 11:22). Other possible  wordplays with other occurrences of the name Mary are also  discussed. 101 [Page 298] Mormon’s  name and the related place name, the Waters of Mormon, for which  Mormon appears to show awareness of a relationship to the same  root as Mary for the first syllable, apparently resulting in creative  links with the words “desire” and “love.” 102 The  name Joseph, which involves evidence of particularly extensive and  creative wordplays related to a Hebrew root meaning “gather,”  “assemble,” etc., and a root meaning “to add” or  “increase.” These wordplays are primarily made using an ancient  Hebrew literary technique known as Gezera Shawa, in which two  scriptural passages are brought together based on a shared word  in both passages, thereby adding to or reinterpreting the meaning in  a creative way. After Bowen’s book went into print, he  published another study investigating a further set of wordplays  related to the name Joseph. 103 There Bowen makes the case that Nephi’s heavy application of the  Isaianic use of yāsap (“to add, to proceed”) in 2 Nephi  25–30 is “a direct and thematic allusion” to a latter-day  Joseph who would have a role in in bringing forth additional  scripture. “This additional scripture would enable the meek to  ‘increase,’ just as Isaiah and Nephi had prophesied.”73 The  name Benjamin, which is also used artfully with Gezera Shawa by  Benjamin himself. In the covenant making context of King  Benjamin’s speech, he seeks to make his people become sons and  daughters of God (Mosiah 5:17), with language drawing upon  language in 2 Samuel 7:14 which employs the Hebrew leben (“for  a son”), and also Psalm 2:7 and Deuteronomy 14:1–2,  employing the Hebrew word ben (“son”) or banim (“children”). Those who accept the Lord will be at the “right  hand” (Hebrew yamin ) of God (Mosiah 5:9) 104 ,  possibly invoking Psalm 110:1. The verses that Benjamin brings  together shows further usage of [Page 299] Gezera Shawa resulting in a clever  wordplay on his own name that emphasizes that through making  and keeping the covenant with God, Benjamin’s people can  become sons and daughters of God and be enthroned at his right hand,  each becoming “a Benjamin.” The  name Judah and the Jews, with Judah being related to Hebrew roots  which can mean “to offer praise out of a feeling of gratitude”  or to “praise,” “thank,” or “acknowledge.” In his  chapter, “‘What Thank They the Jews?,'” Bowen shows how Nephi  applies these meanings as he urges the future Gentiles to be grateful  to the Jews for the scriptures they have preserved for the world and  to resist the temptation to despise and persecute the Jews (2  Nephi 29:3–6). “What thank they the Jews?” in 2 Nephi  29:4, the Lord’s condemning question of future anti-Semitic  Gentiles, appears to provide a direct wordplay between the words  for “Jews” and “thank.” To say that the Jews have helped  bring forth “salvation” to the Gentiles (also 2 Nephi 29:4) may  also be a wordplay on the name of Jesus. Bowen also observes  that Nephi’s closing words which call upon us to “respect the  words of the Jews” (2 Nephi 33:14) further underscores the revealed  message shared in 2 Nephi 29. 105 Bowen also notes that the Book of Mormon offers the  strongest condemnation of anti-Semitism found anywhere in the  scriptures. 106 How appropriate that it would be done with Hebraic wordplays. The  names Enos and Jacob, as used by Enos to relate his experiences to  those of his ancestor Jacob in Genesis 32–33. Enos appears to  employ a Hebraic wordplay between the name Jacob and “wrestle”  in addition to a wordplay on his own name. 107 Abish,  a woman servant among the Lamanites whose name is given,  strangely, while most Book of Mormon women go unnamed. In  this case, however, her name fits the story with a straightforward  wordplay, and also fits an important theological agenda. “Abish”  can mean “Father is a man,” an apt name for a woman  who, in the same verse that names her, is said to have been secretly [Page 300] converted due to a “remarkable vision of her father.” But  since names beginning with “Ab-” in the Old Testament often make  a reference to God, “Father is a man” has a very  appropriate reference to the nature of God, particularly Christ.  Ammon was seeking to teach the Lamanites who the Great Spirit was and  how Christ would come to earth as a mortal to redeem all  mankind. The name Abish is meaningful in more than one way in this  account, and we can be grateful that it was included. 108 The  place names Zarahemla and Jershon. Jershon was one of the first  potential wordplays noted in the Book of Mormon, with an  easily discernible relationship to the Hebrew word “inheritance,”  the perfect name for the land that was given as a land of  “inheritance” to the newly converted and exiled  Anti-Nephi-Lehites fleeing their Lamanite homelands and again later  to the newly converted Zoramites. But Bowen reveals more in the  literary devices involving Jershon, including multiple instances in  which the Book of Mormon reveals an awareness of the Hebrew  meaning of Jershon, coupled with the artful intertwining of Jershon  wordplays with wordplays on the name Zarahemla, proposed as taken  from “seed of compassion” or “seed of pity” in Hebrew. Bowen  shows that both names provide us with valuable test cases for the  Book of Mormon, reflecting repeated and apparently  deliberate wordplays that are consistent with ancient Hebrew literary  methods and highly unlikely to have been the result of blind luck in  a farm boy’s random ramblings. 109 The  names Zoram and Rameumpton. Both names share a common syllable  that in Hebrew can describe something that is “high” or “lifted  up.” These names may be involved in wordplays in descriptions of  the Zoramites and their peculiar, prideful religious practices  involving standing on an elevated tower or stand called the  “Rameumptom” from which they boasted of their elite status.  Similar wordplays may have been used in Alma’s counsel to his son  Shiblon and in Mormon’s description of the corrupt chief judges  Cezoram and Seezoram, both with Zoram-derived names, [Page 301] to emphasize  that the proud and wicked Nephites had become lifted up like the  Zoramites. 110 The  name Aminadab, which Bowen sees as a Semitic/Hebrew name meaning  “my kinsman is willing” or “my people are willing.” Aminadab  is the Nephite dissenter among the Lamanites who helps them recognize  what is occurring during a miraculous event in Helaman 5 in  which the Nephite brothers and prophets Lehi and Nephi are spared in  a Lamanite prison. Aminadab, remembering his religious roots,  tells the terrified Lamanites that “You must repent, and cry unto  the voice, even until ye shall have faith in Christ” (Helaman  5:41). They are converted and their witness leads to many more  converts. Mormon, in concluding this story, notes that it was the  “willingness” of the Lamanite people that led to their conversion  (Helaman 6:36).

