[Page 157] Abstract: Living in the Holy Land as a Palestinian Latter-day Saint has created  unique challenges and perspective for Sahar Qumsiyeh. In order to  attend church meetings in Jerusalem from her home near Bethlehem,  Sahar was required to travel under unsafe and stressful circumstances  for hours through military checkpoints to cover the few miles’  distance (as the crow flies). Sahar’s story, Peace  for a Palestinian , varies dramatically from our own and  reminds us that true discipleship requires sacrifice, which in turn  brings blessings.

Personal  response to Sahar Qumsiyeh, Peace for a Palestinian: One Woman’s  Story of Faith amidst War in the Holy Land (Salt Lake City:  Deseret Book, 2018). 176 pp. $15.99.

How  do I relate to an individual whose life seems so different from my  own? Perhaps first I can note some similarities between Sahar  Qumsiyeh and me. We both grew up in loving families with brothers and  sisters and enjoyed associating with extended family members. Both of  us lived in homes with fruit trees and a swing. Both of us rode bikes  and explored our hometowns with friends. We were both raised in  Christian families and were taught to have faith and to pray. Our  families valued education and teaching, and both of us earned  graduate degrees from Brigham Young University.

But there most of the similarities end, and the differences become stark.  While I was raised in a peaceful country and claimed US citizenship  with its associated freedoms and blessings, Sahar experienced danger:  bullets, tear gas, travel restrictions, curfews, and the death of a  fellow university student that began a two-year closure of Bethlehem  University, which she had been attending.

[Page 158] Our little family spent two years in Jerusalem (1978–80) while my husband studied at the Hebrew University. We lived in East Jerusalem  among many Arab neighbors and enjoyed easy access to all parts of the  city and country. In fact, our second son was born the night before  Christmas under the care of an Arab doctor in an Arab maternity  hospital on the road to Ramallah. Eight years later when we spent  another year in Jerusalem, this time in association with the  Jerusalem Center, our son was baptized on his birthday in the Jordan  River. During that year we again lived in a home in East Jerusalem.  We always felt safe, even when the First Intifada, or Arab uprising,  began in December 1987.

In  January 1988, my visiting teaching companion and I made an  unforgettable visit to a member sister living with her Arab in-laws  in Ramallah.

[Page 159] I  mention this experience to show that for a few hours one afternoon I  was inconvenienced by some of the policies and politics in this land  of conflict. But in contrast, Sahar experienced hours of taxi rides  (often through fields or orchards), delays, humiliation, and fear  every time she tried to go to Jerusalem to attend her church  meetings.

Five  years ago I first heard Sahar speak at the home of Jim and Joan  Stevens, our neighbors. I recorded in my journal what I learned that  evening.

Recently  Jim and Joan invited us into their home to hear Sahar speak again.  This time this remarkable woman related her journey from fear and  hate to peace. She felt compelled by the Savior’s admonition to  “love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that  hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute  you” (Matthew 5:44), but it took her a year of prayer and relying  on the Savior’s healing before she could view the Israeli soldiers  as children of God, beloved of Him.

Sahar  came to realize that God loves all his children. “I came to  understand that life was a test and that the trials and difficulties  we face are allowed by a loving Heavenly Father to help us grow and  learn to become like Him. It became clear to me that Heavenly Father  loves us all, and He loves us perfectly. He didn’t hate the  Palestinians, like I used [Page 160] to think! Everything started to make sense  — especially the reason and power of the Atonement of Jesus Christ”  (57).

Years  after praying and expecting to die at the age of 17 because of all  the tragedy and turmoil around her, Sahar joined The Church of  Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Her obedience to the  principles of the gospel enabled her to understand her true identity:  “My contentment and joy in life are not dependent on chains, walls,  fences, or checkpoints. As long as I know that I have a Father in  Heaven that loves me and cares about me, all is well. In His sight, I  am precious. There is no reason to care about what others think of  me. As long as I know that I am walking in His paths and obeying His  commandments, I know that my Heavenly Father will be there to lift me  and help me” (29).

Ultimately,  Sahar teaches us that peace in the Holy Land can come only through  Jesus Christ and his atoning sacrifice. She has gained personal peace  in her own life and, in my mind, joins significant figures, such as  Corrie ten Boom, Viktor Frankl, and Otto Frank, who learned to love  and forgive and depend on God. That long-sought-after peace in the  Holy Land will come only as individuals accept Christ and his  teachings and perhaps will be fully implemented only when He comes  again in his glory.

---
Notes

[1] We  rode an Arab bus into the city, which was rather quiet. We saw some  Israeli army trucks in the middle of town. As we approached the bus  station, the bus had to maneuver around a burning tire and rocks  strewn all over the road. We walked through the mess to get to the  home of our sister, whose family encouraged us to stay longer until  the Israelis were through cleaning up the mess and rounding up  people. They reported a news blackout and that they are not receiving  any newspapers (although they can hear the slanted Israeli view on  the television or radio). They said that frequent beatings are taking  place, even for no apparent reason. They just grab someone and start  beating them. Those who work in Israeli industries are supporting the  strike and not going into work. Everyone feels that things are  different this time, and they are not going to stop striking until  some sort of a solution is reached. Obviously it hurts them  economically, but for them that is not the issue right now. The  Israeli soldiers will force the shops to open, but the shopkeepers do  not feel obligated to sell things. The blacksmiths in town seem to be  donating their time to repairing doors and locks that the soldiers  have broken. Schools are closed. It was interesting to hear an Arab  viewpoint from this family. By the time we had hot chocolate and  stuffed cabbage leaves, we finally excused ourselves and got back to  the bus station with no incident. The road was then free of debris,  which had been tossed onto the sidewalk. 1

[2] I  had never heard such a stark retelling of the Palestinian situation  in Israel — they have no state. Before 1948, the entire Holy Land  was Palestine. With the wars in 1948 and 1967, the Palestinians are  left with no rights, no homeland, no homes, etc. The Oslo Agreement  in 1995 allowed them to handle some affairs internally — vital  statistics, travel permits, etc. But even areas designated as the  Palestinian Authority are not a country — and Israel has been  careful to keep those areas unconnected and difficult to get to.  Sahar came to BYU on one of the ten annual scholarships it grants to  Palestinians, and she joined the Church here in 1996. She is  currently the district Relief Society president. I had not known  about the 25-foot concrete walls the Israelis are building around  Palestinian areas. If the Palestinians have to go outside their area  to work, it may take three to four hours to get through the  checkpoint. My heart is sickened for this great tragedy against some  of God’s children. 2

