[Page 65] Review  of Ann Taves, Revelatory Events: Three Case Studies in the  Emergence of New Spiritual Paths Princeton University Press,  Princeton, 2016, 366 pages with notes and index $29.93 (paperback).

Abstract:  Ann Taves’s book offers a comparative look at the origins of three  groups, among them Mormonism. While she does not address the issue of  competing explanations by each group about their origins or how to  best navigate among them in terms that are not self-referential, that  crucial circumstance is modeled by Thomas Kuhn in The  Structure of Scientific Revolutions. So I, too, have a  pattern that applies to my arguments just as much it does to those  offered by Professor Taves. Where her book attempts to solve the  puzzle of Joseph Smith, my review offers a test of her rules for  puzzle solving. This includes comparisons with the standard approach  to document testing cited by Hugh Nibley, looking at key aspects of  her argument and treatment of sources, and by considering  Richard L. Anderson’s crucially relevant study of  imitation gospels compared to the Book of Mormon. My own response  should be tested not just as secular or religious, but against  standards that are dependent on neither secular nor religious  grounds. That is, to be valid, my response should argue “Why us?”  in comparison to her case, rather than just declare that what she  offers is “Not us.”

Ann  Taves’s new book offers a comparative look at the origins of three  different groups: Joseph Smith and Mormonism, Bill Wilson and  Alcoholics Anonymous, and Helen Schucman and the people involved in  producing A Course in  Miracles . While the  groups have important differences, what they have in common are  claims to revelation, an initial group of believers coming to grips  with those claims, and the production of both a founding narrative  and a large spiritual book. She explains that this “book  reconstructs the historical process whereby small groups coalesced  around the sense of a guiding presence and accounts for this process  in naturalistic rather than supernatural terms” (xi). She says, “My  goal in doing so is not to debunk or explain away the group’s  claims but to learn about the interactive process, the mental  mechanisms underlying the unusual experiences, and the interplay  between individual differences and group processes” (xii).

Although  her personal background is both Catholic and academic, her book is  expressly directed to “[s]cientific explanations [that] presuppose  a naturalistic worldview and adopt the most economical explanations,”  (9) at least relative to the problem field permitted by and the  standards of solution accepted by a secular readership. That is, she  knows her secular audience and plays the game according to the rules, [Page 68] playing field, questions asked, answers desired, and the social  protocols they accept. There is nothing wrong with this any more than  there is anything wrong with a Primary lesson, Gospel Doctrine  lesson, Sunstone presentation, Interpreter essay,  Republican or Democratic convention speech, Fox News commentary, or a  Politifact investigation directed to a particular audience. There is  no need to debunk or explain away LDS claims to a secular audience  that presupposes a naturalistic approach is sufficient and that  Professor Taves can be relied upon to provide one that satisfies  their requirements. But the existence of a specific audience with a  given set of expectations always has implications no one  should ignore because of its effects regarding what questions are  asked and not asked and therefore what is seen and not seen and  therefore not explained under the “circumstances” Professor Taves  organizes.

In  an interview with Spencer Fluhman, Professor Taves commented that:

This  is all good sense. I do not measure a good Primary lesson for  seven-year-olds in the same way I measure a good approach to  Joseph Smith in a class for mature adults or in a scholarly  paper I submit for publication. That is akin to saying that while  Melville’s Moby Dick may be a terrible limerick, haiku,  children’s book, Primary talk, Sunday [Page 69] sermon, film script, or  inauguration speech, it remains a masterpiece of literature by the  standards of literature. I again note that different questions arise,  different standards apply, different observations enter, and  different measurements come into play, even when we consider the same  subjects. And that, I think, is a crucial issue in approaching such  books as Revelatory Events, which build their case and make  their arguments on secular presumptions. It turns out to be just as  crucial for when I read books such as, say , Illuminating the  Sermon at the Temple and the Sermon on the Mount, or The Great  Angel: A Study of Israel’s Second God , which do not build their  cases and make their arguments on secular presumptions but which do  offer new paradigms for viewing familiar texts.

She  assures readers, “Explaining things scientifically neither explains  them away nor destroys their value” (10). Then at the very end of  her book, she assures readers that she has provided a secular  explanation of “[t]he Lord of Mormonism, the Higher Power of AA,  and the Voice of the Course as creations, they were — as I have  been saying — motivated collective subjectivities that envisioned  spiritual paths that can and do transform people towards these  particular ends (salvation, sobriety, reality). These goals must, of  course be evaluated. While people continue to disagree regarding  their validity and value, the power of the paths to transform is —  in my view — quite apparent” (295).

In  this naturalistic context, her reference to a “power to transform”  comes across like saying “placebos can at times help people in  pain” — though not, of course, the people who know what is really  going on, who know the placebo is not real medicine, that is, her  intended secular audience, who have their own pre-existing and  unquestioned group assessment of the true value of religion.

Taves  refers to “Methodological Transparency,” which involves being  “open and clear about the methods and presuppositions we are  bringing to our analysis” (10). To her credit, Taves is open and  clear in stating she adopts a secular approach to her subjects. That  makes it easy for me to account for the differences with my approach.  But what is not addressed in her account is how one should go about  deciding which approach is better and not just “better” for the  needs and expectations of a particular audience (when agreement with  a given ideological position defines “better”) but a better  explanation of the subject regardless of the audience.

What  drew my attention to Taves’s book were comments by an LDS reader on  an Internet board who reported that Revelatory Events gave her  a way to explain away the claims of Joseph Smith and all other  religious claims in purely secular terms and let her walk away from  the [Page 70] community, assured she was leaving behind nothing valid or of  value or with worthwhile power to transform. As Archimedes famously  observed, “Give me a lever and a place to stand, and I can move the  world.” So the welcome attempts at politeness, courtesy, and  fairness that Taves includes do not counter the reality that her  secular book offers a way to explain away religious faith, a lever  and a place to stand, for those who might be seeking such  explanations.

My  own response should not be tested not in terms of secular according  to religious standards, but against standards dependent on neither  secular nor religious grounds. That is, to be valid my response  should argue “Why us?” in comparison to her case, rather than  just declare that what she offers is “Not us.” And the same  should apply in the opposite direction. Those who share her secular  views can easily dismiss my approach as “Not us,” rather than  engage my attempt to explain “Why us.” I long ago learned that  anyone can dismiss what LDS believers such as myself offer as  polemical and apologetic rather than valid scholarship, as if the  existence of faith commitments cancel the possibility of a better  case and as if a secular approach is inherently objective and beyond  criticism.

While  she does not address the issue of competing explanations and how to  best navigate among them, that crucial circumstance is modeled by  Thomas Kuhn in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . So I  too have a pattern to follow, and — this is key — the pattern  applies to my [Page 71] arguments just as much it does to those offered by  Professor Taves. The values Kuhn reports as most useful in judging  theories include puzzle definition and solution, accuracy of key  predictions, comprehensiveness and coherence (breadth and depth as  well as internal and external consistency), fruitfulness, simplicity  and aesthetics, and future promise. And it is important that this  approach is not derived from LDS culture and therefore is not  self-referential in discussing our culture. Part of my task is to  point out available evidence that Taves does not consider and to make  sense of it in terms of criteria not paradigm-dependent.

Regarding  “Methodological Fairness,” Taves comments:

> Research  becomes polemical when we apply methods and theories to others that  we are unwilling to apply to our own beliefs and practices. It is  good to test our methods and theories on ourselves to see what it is  like to be studied in this way. (10)

It  is fair to ask whether and how her secular approach would serve to  identify a real revelatory event within the historical records we  have if she were looking at one. We can also ask whether her approach  could allow her to identify and evaluate potential eyewitness details  in the [Page 72] Book of Mormon. For example, the Book of Mormon is claimed not  only to be the product of the religious experience of Joseph Smith,  but the text itself purports to be set in an actual time and place:

> For  it came to pass in the commencement of the first year of the reign of  Zedekiah, King of Judah, (my father having dwelt at Jerusalem in all  his days); and in that same year there came many prophets prophesying  unto the people that they must repent, or the great city Jerusalem  must be destroyed. (1 Nephi 1:4)

In  setting the Book of Mormon in real places in ancient times,  Joseph Smith’s large and complex book immediately does  something the other two books do not. But Taves largely ignores the  actual content and claims of the Book of Mormon. While it is true  Joseph Smith, Bill Wilson, and Helen Schucman all produced large  inspirational books, there are clear differences that don’t emerge  when the only mode of measurement and comparison amounts to  describing the three very different books as “large” and  “complex” with perhaps some poetry or distinctive language. She  does not confront the scholarship and arguments by LDS scholars that  make the opposing case. For a secular audience, she does not even  have to raise the question because that audience presumes from the  start that the authenticity of the text is not a serious question,  deserving any in-depth inquiry. But again, I am not a part of her  intended audience, and I therefore, come to her text with a different  bibliography in my head and different questions on my lips.  Nevertheless, for her and for her target audience, all of this kind  of thing can be blanketed over, not by exploring the text of the Book  of Mormon, but by an appeal to storytelling talent.

> At  the same time, insider accounts acknowledge factors that they do not  stress, such as Smith’s storytelling abilities and Schucman’s  lifelong attraction to Catholicism and her exposure to the American  metaphysical traditions, including Christian Science. (243)

Her  assertion that Joseph Smith created the Book of Mormon out of his  imagination is not itself a test of her starting premise that he did  so. She focuses on differences between early and late historical  accounts, group dynamics, comparison of the translation accounts by  Smith and Schucman, and research into dissociation and automaticity  as behind other examples of “spirit writing,” studies of highly  hypnotizable people, and examples of artistic creativity, such as  Enid Blyton, a noted and prolific author of children’s books. When  comparing a student in a [Page 73] hypnosis experiment with Joseph Smith, she  cites the famous quotation from Lucy Mack Smith’s history regarding  Joseph’s early “recitals,” and juxtaposes that with selected  comments from neighbors to emphasize his ability as a storyteller.

> Both  the student and Smith recounted narratives of great vividness in two  modes: the student in an ordinary and a hypnotized mode and Smith in  an ordinary and a translating mode. Lucy Smith similarly attests to  the vividness of Joseph’s “recitals” in which he described the  “ancient inhabitants of this continent” to his family after his  initial discovery of the plates in 1823. According to Lucy (EMD 1:  295– 96), he described “their dress[,] their maner [sic] of  traveling[,] the animals which they rode[,] The cities that were  built by them[,] the structure of their later buildings[,] with every  particular of their mode of warfare[,] their religious worship — as  particularly as though he had spent his life with them[.]” Accounts  of neighbors from the early thirties refer to his “marvellous  stories” (EMD 2: 27, 60– 61) and later accounts describe his  “fertile imagination” (EMD 3: 211) and ability to “utter the  most palpable exaggeration or marvellous absurdity with the utmost  apparent gravity” (EMD 3: 93). Writing in 1834, Eber Howe concluded  that “a natural genius, strong inventive powers of mind, a deep  study, and an unusually correct estimate of the human passions and  feelings” more than made up for any deficiencies in Smith’s  formal education ([1834] 2015, 20; EMD 3: 303–4). (252)

> Apart  from the 1825 agreement with Josiah Stowell and the 1826 court  record, both of which are preserved in later versions, we have no  real-time access to events until July 1828, when D&C 3 — the  first real-time recorded revelation — opens a window in the wake of  the loss of the first 116 pages of the manuscript. Chapter 1 thus  opens with an in-depth analysis of D&C 3, read as a window on  that moment rather than as it was interpreted and reinterpreted in  later accounts. (21)

The  Lucy Smith quote, aside from being a late account, rather than early  and contemporary (not “real time access,” not a direct “window  on the moment”), turns out to be notably odd and unique with  respect to Joseph Smith, rather than well supported from a range of  sources. Certainly much in Lucy’s biography is well supported, but  let us recognize the anomaly here. Odd accounts do occur in history,  yes, but the account raises questions that should be faced and  mentioned before building one’s structure there. First of all, the  Book of Mormon we have has no descriptions of people riding animals  in over 500 pages that include several major migrations and 100  distinct wars. It provides no notably detailed descriptions of  clothing (other than armor) and no detailed descriptions of the  structure of later buildings. The most detail we get involves  descriptions of fortifications with palisaded walls and ditches.

It  is true the Book of Mormon does contain abundant details about “their  religious worship” and their “modes of warfare,” but we have no  other accounts of Joseph Smith’s filling anyone’s evening or  afternoon with amusing or serious recitals on those topics either.  Again, why not? This is not a frivolous question but one addressed to  a foundation stone upon which Taves chooses to build.

Taves  emphatically wants readers to picture Joseph Smith as creative and  suitably educated through proximity to the King James Bible to  produce such a work as the Book of Mormon, and she makes explicit  comparisons with Schucman’s preparation, as a PhD with a religious  background, training as a philosopher, and experience as a  Shakespeare scholar:

> Both  Joseph and Lucy Smith’s accounts indicate that the angel had been  telling Smith about the contents of the plates and that he had been  recounting these stories to his family prior to recovering the  plates. As Wapnick indicates, it is clear that Schucman was conveying  ideas that would be central to the Course in the letters she wrote to  Thetford in her own voice the summer before. (253)

This  is to convey a period of preparation and incubation, to get around  the problem of Joseph composing a large and complex document in just  the two months of final dictation without recourse to anything like  Schucman’s decades of formal education and then taking a decade  more to write down the course. But since Joseph Smith was immersed in  the King James Bible, Taves writes as though there is nothing  particularly difficult to explain.

> Both  Smith and Schucman were steeped in the genres of their respective  texts. Smith was immersed in the King James Version of the Bible;  Schucman was a philosophy major in college and loved Plato and  Shakespeare. Schucman also knew the Bible very well, quoting from it  “almost as readily as she could from Shakespeare.” She was a  psychologist trained in Freudian psychology, who did research on ego  development, and an educator. (243)

After  all, Bill Wilson and Helen Schucman also produced large and complex  books, and she can compare some descriptions of Smith’s translation  process with accounts of how Schucman worked.

> [Page 79] In  terms of their subjective experience, this suggests that we need to  compare what it was like for Smith to experience the Lord “tell[ing]  [him] in [his] mind & in [his] heart by the Holy Ghost” and  Schucman hearing the voice of Jesus. (247)

> To  move a step closer to an explanation, I want to introduce a third  person with unusual abilities, a college student described by  psychologist Ernest Hilgard, who, with his wife Josephine established  the Laboratory of Hypnosis Research at Stanford University and  directed it for many years. The student in question showed up at  their lab after having been hypnotized at a social gathering, during  which time he recounted incidents from what he and others believed  was a past life in Victorian England. He came to the laboratory,  Hilgard writes, believing it was “a genuine reincarnation  experience, but … willing to have it subjected to criticism.”  After interviewing the student, the Hilgards learned he had made “an  intensive study of the British Royal family” many years earlier  that he had subsequently forgotten. “Although the evidence is  against the reincarnation interpretation,” Hilgard writes, “it is  interesting in its own right because it shows that memories may be  captured without identification (as in source amnesia) and woven into  a realistic story that is believed under hypnosis by the inventor of  the story.” (250–51)

> H[ighly]H[ypnotizable]s  are people who can most readily alter their perceptions in accord  with the hypnotist’s suggestions (that is, generate  hypnosis-as-product). In the words of psychologist Auke Tellegen,  they are people who have the ability to “represent suggested events  and states imaginatively and enactively in such a manner that they  are experienced as real.” In the terms I have been using, the  “procedure” is a small-scale social interaction and the “product”  is a change in experience or behavior, such that the subjects (and  oftentimes others) experience the suggested events as real. (254)

For  instance, regarding the plates, she says:

> To  get at this, I will assume for the sake of argument that there were  no plates, or at least no ancient golden plates, and at the same time  take seriously believers’ claim that Smith was not a fraud. If we  start with those premises, then we have to explain how the plates  might have become real for Smith as well as his followers. The  challenge, however, is not just to explain how they might have become  real for Smith, but how they might have become real for him in  some non-delusory sense . (51)

Her  solution to the issue of Smith’s dedication and sincerity, reached  after navigating through stories of money-digging, spirits or angels,  legal and personal trials, and encounters with both family and  skeptics is this:

> I  am hypothesizing, involved creating what was in effect a  representation of the plates, perhaps using sand and later tin or  lead, as detractors claimed, in the knowledge that they [Page 82] would become  the sacred reality the Smith family believed them to be only insofar  as the angel made them so. (59)

She  suggests that the experiences of the family and the witnesses can be  explained by making an analogy to the Catholic view of  transubstantiation. That is, fake or non-existent plates become a  sacred record in the same way the wafer and the wine become, the  actual flesh and blood of Christ in the Catholic Mass.

> In  comparing the gold plates and the Eucharistic wafer, I am not making  an argument for the reality of ancient plates (or the real presence  of Christ) but raising the possibility that when materializing the  plates, Smith might have been thinking more like a good Catholic than  a good Calvinist. The comparison, in other words, allows us to  consider the possibility that Smith viewed something that he had made  (metal plates) as a vehicle through which something sacred — the  ancient golden plates — could be made (really) present. In both the  Catholic and Mormon case, the sacred character is visible only to  those who believe. (63)

Taves  demonstrates far more interest in the LDS scholarship on the  translation methods and accounts than on the content of the Book of  Mormon. While she cites Brant Gardner, Stephen Ricks, and others on  the translation, she seems most impressed by Scott Dunn’s essay on  automatic writing and the Book of Mormon, clearly because his  approach closely resembles hers. Certainly, this kind of proposal is  legitimate in the market place of ideas, but it also has implications  for the direction her investigations take and avoid and the kind of  explanations she proposes and ignores.

Kuhn  observes that:

What  Taves produces is a hypothesis, a set of trial descriptions, but the  book does not engage in a rigorous test of the validity of the rules  she applies. She largely ignores both the content of the Book of  Mormon and the scholarship produced by believers. Taves  contextualizes her examples of Smith, Wilson, and Schucman with  research on automaticity and dissociation and formally attempts to  solve the puzzle they represent in strictly secular terms in that  framework.

> Toward  the end of the emergence process, each group coalesced around an  overall understanding of what had happened, which they captured in  more or less official narratives of their group’s emergence. These  quasi-official origin accounts not only defined what it meant to be a  member of the group, but also constituted the group as a social  formation . (14)

> Based  on this reconstruction, a naturalistic account would need to explain  (1) the rapid flow of words that were “known” but seemed like  they were not their own; (2) their ability to control the process,  specifically to stop and start and shift modalities; and (3) their  execution of a complex overall plan without evident planning. (250)

Compare  this description of what, in 1953, Hugh Nibley observed about the  puzzle regarding the best way to investigate the claims of  purportedly historical texts. The traditional non-LDS approach  involves a very different set of rules than what Taves offers:

Taves’s  definition of what a naturalistic account needs to explain is notably  different from what Blass described as the definitive test for  purportedly ancient documents. This potential test of the  Book of Mormon involves details only an eyewitness could  have seen, details difficult to fake, particularly at length in a  long historical document, and emphasizing comparisons with  information unknown to anyone in Joseph Smith’s time. We have in  the Book of Mormon, beginning at a specific time and place, a journey  across a desert, an ocean voyage, and then long accounts of life in  the New World. We can hypothesize that any such details or claims got  there through imagination or careful research by Joseph that none of  his family or neighbors managed to detect, even when living with him  daily or in rummaging through his house and belongings (after which  the frustrated searchers never said, “No gold or plates, just  shelves of books, maps, and reams of notes”). For Taves’s  audience, it is enough to rely on Joseph’s conscious or unconscious  memory, his storytelling abilities and mental states. It is important  to remember that early critics of the Book of Mormon included  Alexander Campbell, a second generation religious leader who was  deeply involved in an attempt to restore primitive Christianity via  Enlightenment methods, Abner Cole, a local newspaper editor, and  John Gilbert, the typesetter, punctuator, and printer, all of  whom had superior education and access to books than had Joseph  Smith. That is, if anyone outside the Smith family was positioned to  authoritatively comment on Joseph Smith’s environmental sources, it  was they. (And it happens that we do have copies of every book listed  in the Manchester lending library, though the Smiths were not  members, did not [Page 87] live in Manchester, and the bulk of the translation  was done in far away Harmony, which had neither library nor  bookstore.) But even Campbell, Cole, and Gilbert could not test  Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon against sources and even sciences  like plate tectonics that no one at the time could have known.

The  most important and reliable scientific approach to testing the  authenticity of purportedly ancient texts is based on the experience  and efforts of Renaissance scholars. That is, the test is not  self-referential in design, requiring us to judge either Mormonism or  secularism by the standards of Mormonism. Nor does the test require  us to end with either a naturalistic explanation or a faithful one.  We have a method that could, in theory, support or undermine the  claims of either audience. In 1953 Nibley offered Blass’s methods  as a model approach to the Book of Mormon. Many believing Book of  Mormon scholars since Nibley have adopted it and have found it to be  impressively fruitful. Only one book in Taves’s bibliography  discusses this sort of thing in significant detail: By the Hand of  Mormon by Terryl Givens. And the only bit of evidence that Taves  mentions from his survey is “chiasmus” (241), listing the word  once without defining it.

As  Barbour observes,

Here  is what Professor Taves does with Joseph Smith, Bill Wilson, and  Helen Schucman. For each of her three subjects, she first walks  through the formal history written by the leaders of each group. Then  she looks again at history, noting differences between the later  formal histories and earlier contemporary accounts. This establishes  the formal history as socially constructed to some degree to serve  later purposes not originally envisioned. And it establishes Taves  herself as one who knows what really happened and, therefore,  somewhat above the historical record that binds believers.

> [Page 91] The  discussion of each group opens with a consideration of how the story  of the path’s emergence is usually told by followers of the path,  briefly introduces the key collaborators, and then indicates, based  on the available sources, how we can reconstruct the process as it  unfolded from the point of view of the interacting subjects. It’s  important to recognize that while the reconstructed process will  break with the more or less “official” story of the path’s  emergence, it still tells the story from the point of view of the  interacting subjects. The difference lies in the timing and the  vantage point of the telling. Insiders tell the “official”  stories in light of what emerged. Their retrospective accounts make  the outcome look much more inevitable than it did as the process was  unfolding. (6)

One  thing she does not do is compare the process of emergence in her  historical accounts with what happens in all histories, including the  history of science. In a fascinating chapter called “The  Invisibility of Revolutions,” Kuhn observes:

It  seems to me that much of the angst in parts of the LDS community over  our changing history can and should be seen not as a reasonable  response to a genuine faith crisis but rather a panic response to  what we ought to see as a normal human process. The standards of  doing history changed, not just within the LDS community, but within  the history profession as a whole, and naturally, the histories  change accordingly. So we have things like the Joseph Smith Papers  project, gathering and making available original, contemporary,  first-hand accounts.

We  define our paradigms via the standard examples we offer; the stories  we take as representative of the general circumstances. Not only is  Nibley’s work paradigmatic for many LDS scholars, but it also  represents, via his non-LDS authority Blass, a generally paradigmatic  approach for the questions in authenticating historical documents.  Taves offers her own secular approach as a general model to approach  claims to revelation as signified by “large and complex” books.  This is important. My approach to [Page 93] Taves here, in noting the  difference between Taves’s secular assumptions and Nibley’s  reference to Blass raises the questions of which paradigm is better  and whether we establish “better” through methods of examination  and judgement not themselves paradigm dependent, not based on  self-referential standards. That is, I ought to be able to  consciously explain “Why us?” in a way not just overtly or  covertly saying “Not us.” My methods ought to put my own paradigm  at risk rather than protect it from such. My methods should in  principle provide the means to make a case against my own starting  beliefs rather than reflexively and uncritically dismissing any  opposition as “fake news!”

What  would make Taves’s approach better than mine or mine better than  hers? Is it just a matter of which audience we want to please or  which community we want to join? Her bibliography cites only a few  texts relevant to the question of defining and comprehensively  solving the puzzle that the Book of Mormon presents.

Her  bibliography of contemporary LDS scholarship on the Book of Mormon is  not extensive, not up-to-date, and is clearly weighted to skeptical  interpretations generally consistent with her secular views. This is  not necessarily decisive for her suggestions, but it does raise  questions and has implications for the issue of how well her  hypothesis accounts for what she has not considered. Even if she had  read and listed many other important studies of the Book of Mormon,  that doesn’t mean she would take them seriously in relation to her  study. Having listed Bushman’s Joseph Smith and the Beginnings  of Mormonism , she would have seen this passage:

Taves’s  approach may seem sensible and promising from a secular perspective,  but a reader like myself, coming to the problem and proposed solution  with a great deal of reading that does not appear in her  bibliography, may see the implications of her limited choices on  context and comparison that would be illuminated by a broader  perspective. For example, it is important to see the full  implications of the way Taves contextualizes [Page 98] Joseph Smith by placing  him in company with Wilson, Schucman, and research on dissociative  mental states. In surveying a range of different Joseph Smith  histories, Richard Bushman observed that

John  McDade had observed the same decisive influence of contextualization  in his important survey of Jesus research:

Contextualization  has a determining effect, causing Joseph Smith to assume the  character of the history selected for him. Taves places Joseph Smith  alongside Helen Schucman and Bill Wilson and notions of automaticity  and the creativity of highly hypnotizable individuals. That is a  soil, context, and nurture designed to grow a particular crop  targeting the appetite of her secular audience. One of her sources,  Terryl Givens in By the Hand of Mormon , included a survey of  scholars who contextualize the Book of Mormon in the ancient world.  But which context is best? And how do we measure best? Jesus says  that the soil and nurture in which a word is placed can lead to  different yields, ranging from nothing to a hundred-fold. He also  says of the Parable of the Sower, “Know ye not this parable? And  how then will ye know all parables?” [Page 99] (Mark 4:13). And as Samuel  Clemens says, “The difference between the right word, and almost  the right word, is that between a lightning bug and lightning.” The  same is true of context.

As  Kuhn observes,

The  presence of the alternative approach defined by Blass for testing  documents also turns out to be a means to try the rules of the game  as Taves defines them. And what we know about the rules of paradigm  debate from Kuhn means that we compare paradigms in a way that does  not completely depend on self-referential arguments. That is, we can  frame the comparison that provide reasons that justify “Why us,”  rather than just tribal dismissals as “Not us.”

So  the existence of a substantial body of work exploring the historicity  of the Book of Mormon text may not demonstrate proofs, but it does  demonstrate “reasons for judgements which are not simply matters of  personal taste.”

There  is another relevant comparative test to make by reading Richard L.  Anderson’s essay “Imitation Gospels and Christ’s Book of Mormon  Ministry.” Because his article compares the 3 Nephi account with a  range of other modern gospels, many of which were also composed in a  manner that invites comparison with “spirit writing” and  “automaticity,” this is an important essay to consult in order  evaluate Taves’s arguments. The texts and books that Anderson  examines include:

Dunn  here is so inaccurate and misleading in dismissing Anderson that it  seems to me a response to what Dunn imagined Anderson wrote, rather  than what he actually produced. Anderson discusses a range of modern  Gospels, including but not limited to spiritualist work. And  Anderson’s chief criteria involve consistency with known [Page 103] historical  records, including but not limited to the New Testament, the Dead Sea  Scrolls, and early Christian writings. He observes that in comparison  to modern Apocrypha the Book of Mormon is unique in (1) not  contradicting the New Testament; (2) demonstrating affinity with  ancient styles and practices, including the Pesher form exemplified  in the Dead Sea Scrolls but not known or demonstrated by any other  modern Gospel; and (3) demonstrating unique consistency with the  criteria non-LDS scholars have created for identifying authentic  logia, that is, words of Jesus not found in the New Testament.  Anderson also discusses the witnesses to the Book of Mormon as  without parallel in any of the other modern gospels. So contrary to  Dunn’s non-exhaustive footnote response, Anderson does not simply  reply on “consistency with Mormon interpretations” nor “his  personal opinions” but he cites a range of non-LDS authorities,  including scholars who have examined other modern Gospels, such as  Enslin, Stendhal, Goodspeed, and Per Beskow. In doing so, he  highlights what is different and distinctive about the Book of  Mormon, and all of his findings are directly relevant in evaluating  the model that Taves offers. These include the following:

Dunn’s  essay showed a particular interest in Pearl Curran’s production of  a life of Jesus called The Sorry Tale. And Dunn and Taves are  both legitimately impressed by comparisons of surface features of her  composition to Joseph Smith’s translation. But surface composition  does not tell the whole story of the different substances. For  example, in making a case that The Sorry Tale had not only a  translation resembling the Book of Mormon, but an equally impressive  content, Dunn writes:

With  respect to Curran and verisimilitude, Anderson writes:

Rather  than confront any of these specifics in Anderson’s article, Dunn’s  updates to his 1982 essay for the 2002 American Apocrypha settled for an unsupported and inaccurate claim regarding what  Anderson wrote. Yet Anderson’s work offers a wealth of fresh and  important observations in noting how distinct the Book of Mormon is  in comparison to a wide range of modern gospels produced by means of  automatic writing and dissociative states:

> There  are many terse and wholesome utterances, utterly unobjectionable and  free from the bias of dubious theology or the tinsel of fantasy,  which have appeared to many critics as not inappropriate to the Jesus  of the canonical Gospels.

> [Page 107] Old  things are done away, and all things have become new (3 Nephi 12:47). Therefore,  whoso remembereth these sayings of mine and doeth them, him will I  raise up at the last day (3 Nephi 15:1). Behold,  I am the law, and the light (3 Nephi 15:9). Behold,  I am the light which ye shall hold up — that which ye have seen me  do (3 Nephi 18:24). And  if it so be that the church is built upon my gospel, then will the  Father show forth his own works in it (3 Nephi 27:10).

Taves  mentions the important issue of delusion:

> According  to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual , a delusion is “a  false belief based on [an] incorrect inference about external reality  that is firmly sustained despite what almost everyone else believes  and despite what constitutes incontrovertible and obvious proof or  evidence to the contrary” (DSM-5 2013, 819). (269)

This  sounds straightforward, except that until we all possess omniscience,  we all inevitably possess incorrect inferences about external reality  and are therefore all operating under as yet unidentified delusions.  The history of science demonstrates over and over again that change  can often come through a new insight that goes against what almost  everyone else believes. Taves also brings in the concept of “reality  monitoring” (260), which raises the question of how best to do it.  In considering whether Taves or I and other believing scholars offer  a map that more accurately describes the territory of LDS faith,  consider the following criteria of worth because they are not  paradigm-dependent. Kuhn reports on what matters most in pragmatic  practice:

[Page 110] Notice  that none of the key values Kuhn observes as valuable in pragmatic  practice is based on whether or not it is pleasing to a particular  audience. So playing to an audience always involves a kind of  deference to opinion, to not saying and thinking beyond a given set  of assumptions, to accepting the authority of group orthodoxy. But  what should matter most is not who has a given set of opinions but  why? Are those opinions well grounded? Do I accept audience  expectation as a constraint or determiner on my thought and  questions, or am I engaged in an open-ended quest for further light  and knowledge, considering audience only as an afterthought or  side-effect that comes after new insight or discovery?

When  Apostle Neal Maxwell addressed the Foundation for Ancient Research  and Mormon Studies in 1991, he quoted Austin Farrar’s famous remark  about the work of C.S. Lewis:

Then  after the 2012 “change in direction,” new editor Spencer Fluhman  explained his choice of audience:

This  change in audience has implications. Ours is not the only community  that has experienced the results when the universities serve academic  interests rather than faith community interests. It is not just a  Mormon issue. Compare what happened in recent LDS social history with  a survey of trends in biblical studies in the twentieth century:

Barker  has also more recently addressed the question of audience for  scholars, and the relationship between a scholar’s allegiances, and  the work they produce.

I  take Barker as a more appealing paradigmatic example than Taves. But  of course, as I said at the beginning, I am not part of her secular  audience, so my opinions may not have any weight in that community.

So  what about my audience? Who are they? In my case, it is not just an  academic community but includes a community of believers as well as  those who wrestle with belief. I’m a believer who seeks “further  light and knowledge,” who seeks answers for my own questions, and  who seeks to share what I find useful. I don’t just write to  believers. I also write for those who don’t know what to believe or  whether to believe. I write for people who share my love for “seeking  out of the best books words of wisdom” and for “proving  contraries” and for checking footnotes and sources. I write knowing  that what I do is not just an abstract exercise designed to please  people who sign my checks or approve my promotions. Because I’m an  unpaid amateur, doing what I do out of gratitude, love, and passion,  none of that professional aspect applies. I know what I write may  have both positive and negative consequences, affecting not only the  lives of individuals who read what I offer but also the lives of  their loves ones in the present, their children, and generations  unborn. So doing what I do involves an inescapable responsibility,  yet I cannot take myself too seriously because I know that for all my  effort, anyone can dismiss all I have done with a mere “So what?”  But most of all, I cannot forget that as a believer, my audience also  includes God.

---
Notes

[1] We  can decide situationally whether to define key concepts such as  religion, spirituality, theology, and ministry or sit back and track  how others are defining them. Either stance has its strengths and  liabilities. Each allows us to see some [Page 66] things while obscuring  others. The key is to figure out what we want to see under any given  circumstances. 1 The  current paradigm is going toward a non-faith-based study, which has  no future. By this I do not mean simply that the study is not  faith-based; it is based on non-faith, so criticism does not mean  close study; it so often means destructive study. New paradigms  emerge from those aware of the crisis, who recognize the situation is  not likely to be remedied by the methods that caused it. 2

[2] She  also says, “I hope that this book models a way of playing fair with  deeply held beliefs, whether religious or not, without having to  bracket one’s own” (9). That is, she wants her approach to these  three subjects to provide a paradigmatic model, a “standard example  of scientific work” that models a set of assumptions, method,  problem-field, and standard of solution that works everywhere. 3 She provides a lengthy appendix for this specific purpose, as a model  approach to religious studies.

[3] [Page 67] As  discussed in the introduction, the book presupposes that scholars can  both analyze and reconstruct phenomena as they seemed from the point  of view of historical or ethnographic subjects, and also attempt to  explain the processes that produced the phenomena in naturalistic  terms. 4

[4] As  Kuhn says, “[P]aradigms guide research through direct modeling as  well as through abstracted rules. Normal science can proceed without  rules only so long as the relevant scientific community accepts  without question the particular problem-solutions already achieved.” 5

[5] I  come to her book from a different audience than intended, a member of  a different community. I’m not a secular reader but an LDS believer  with a long-held fondness for what Joseph Smith called “proving  contraries,” since that process, he affirms, is one way that “truth  is made manifest,” where truth is defined as “knowledge of things  as they are, as they were, and as they are to come.” 6 I am deeply concerned about models and rules and their implications  for perception and understanding. And I have become more and more  interested in the effects of ideological frames, paradigmatic  examples, underlying metaphors, controlling narratives, socially  defining myths, parables, dubious tweets, and sound bites that become  the source of the rules accepted and applied by different  communities.

[6] Rules  should therefore become important, and the characteristic unconcern  about them should vanish whenever paradigms or models are felt to be  insecure. That is, moreover, exactly what does occur. The  pre-paradigm period, in particular, is regularly marked by frequent  and deep debates over legitimate methods, problems, and standards of  solution, though these serve rather to define schools [that is,  different communities] than to produce agreement.” 7

[7] In  general and as holder of a chair in Catholic studies at a public  university, I stress our ability to shift our voice to one that is  appropriate relative to a given audience or constituency. I often ﬁnd  myself explaining the difference between teaching Catholic studies  courses at a public university and at a Catholic university. In the  former, the aim of the institution is not religious formation but  formation in the liberal arts as well as the formation of educated  citizens (or something like that). In private universities with a  religious mission, the institution often aims to combine formation in  the liberal arts with religious formation. Within any of these  institutional contexts, we may want to teach students to distinguish  different voices, for example, the voice of the historian who speaks  in light of approaches and methods shared by historians and the voice  of a religious (or nonreligious) person when speaking in light of  beliefs shared with cobelievers. 8

[8] Like  the choice between competing political institutions, the choice  between competing paradigms proves to be a choice between  incompatible modes of community life. Because it has that character,  the choice is not and cannot be determined by the evaluative  procedures of normal science, for these depend on a particular  paradigm, and that paradigm is at issue. 9

[9] Ian  Barbour explains that “the possibility of assessing a religious  paradigm must in practice be compared with the possibility of  assessing alternative religious or naturalistic paradigms —  regardless of what the possibility of assessment in science  may be. The most one can expect of any set of beliefs is that it will  make more sense of all of the available evidence than alternative  beliefs . … [S]elf-criticism of one’s own basic beliefs is  only possible if there are criteria which are not totally paradigm  dependent.” 10

[10] It  strikes me that the issue here is not that research becomes polemical  in this case of an unwillingness to be tested by the methods and  theories we point at others, but hypocritical. A polemical method and  theory — for example, “political correctness,” which originally  applied to Marxist thought — is just as polemical whether applied  to oneself, the subject of one’s inquiries, or one’s critics. In  recent politics, we have seen the spectacle of Republican senators  defending a closed-door approach to legislation on healthcare that  matches in several ways and in others far exceeds the behavior they  bitterly complained about seven years previously during the year in  which the Affordable Care Act was debated and enacted in Congress and  the Senate. The hypocrisy in that case is palpable, as is the  predominant role of ideology in controlling the arguments raised or  dismissed. In the case of Taves’s book, the method and theory is  secular. I do not imagine that self-examination in light of secular  theory would cause her any personal discomfort, inspire charges of  hypocrisy, or lead to any startling revelations with respect to the  Book of Mormon. As Kuhn observes, “[T]he decision to employ a  particular piece of apparatus and to use it in a particular way  carries an assumption that only certain sorts of circumstances will  arise.” 11

[11] There  are some unexamined oddities about the Lucy Smith quote. Before I  would take it as an interpretive foundation, I must consider that,  even though a first-hand account, it is not an autograph account, and  it is late, 12 dating to an 1844 dictation in Nauvoo to the non-LDS, 24-year old [Page 74] Martha Jane Coray regarding events in Palmyra 1823 and then not  published until 1853. That is, the quote is six years older than  Joseph Smith’s official history from 1838, which Taves takes  notable interest in dissecting and comparing with earlier sources. In  her discussion of method and sources for Mormonism, she observes:

[12] Then  there is the unasked question as to why — if Joseph Smith as a  youth was capable of this kind of detailed, immersive,  evening-filling recital on the everyday particulars of Book of Mormon  peoples and culture — do we have no further record anywhere of his  performing the same service as an adult? Perhaps the closest  circumstance on this topic involves the Zelph story on Zion’s Camp,  but in that case the notable differences in the details recorded by  the different people who reported it, even those writing close to the  event, should give pause to a person [Page 75] trying to build an interpretive  foundation on an isolated, late, anomalous account related to far  longer and complex narrative than the Zelph gossip. 13 It bears mentioning that if Joseph Smith had been telling stories  about the Book of Mormon peoples, animals, clothing, and culture,  such stories should have had an obvious influence on Abner Cole’s  1830 parody version, the Book of Pukei , which “tells in  mocking fashion about the sorts of things that Joseph’s neighbors  expected to find in the Book of Mormon.” 14 Yet the most notable thing about the Book of Pukei is how utterly  different it is from the actual Book of Mormon. 15 The book Joseph Smith produced was emphatically not what his  neighbors expected.

[13] The  one notable discussion of ancient buildings from Joseph Smith comes  as his surprised and delighted review of John Lloyd Stephen’s Incidents of Travels Central America as expressed in two  articles in the Times and Seasons in Nauvoo. 16 I find Michael Coe’s report of Joseph Smith’s encounter with the  Stephen’s book particularly telling:

[14] In  1841 — after the Book of Mormon, actually — there was a  publication in New York and London of a wonderful two volume  work called Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas and  Yucatan by John Lloyd Stephens, an American diplomat, and his  artist-companion, the British topographical artist Frederick  Catherwood, with wonderful illustrations by Catherwood of the Maya  ruins. This was the beginning of Maya archaeology, … and we who  worked with [Page 76] the Maya civilization consider Stephens and Catherwood  the kind of patron saints of the whole thing. Well,  Joseph Smith read these two volumes, and he was flabbergasted,  because what he had dictated about the ancient his mind, these were  the ancient cities that he was talking about. They weren’t in South  America, as he originally thought; they were in Central America and  neighboring Mexico. 17

[15] It  happens that there are over 500 passages with geographic details for  the New World portions of the Book of Mormon, and they have a  remarkable internal consistency. 18 But they are not at all consistent with any location in South  America, and more particularly, there is no way to fit the internal  travel accounts required to a New York Cumorah and a Land South that  includes South America. Coe doesn’t bother to explain how Joseph  managed to describe in detail and at length something so very  different than he originally imagined, or more accurately, what Coe  imagines Joseph imagined. Taves avoids these issues the same way Coe  does: by not exploring the Book of Mormon text or Joseph Smith’s  history or believing Mormon scholarship in enough detail to encounter  or generate such problems. In her account, the Book of Mormon is  Biblical sounding, has a bit of distinctive language in chiasmus, and  has a story of “shining stones” and divine rebuke she reads as  analogous to Joseph Smith and the plates. But for purposes of her  discussion, it can be defined simply as “large” and “complex,”  just as The Big Book of AA is, and as Schucman’s A Course  in Miracles is, and as a range of other automatic writings are.  Personally, I find the superficiality of her approach to the Book of  Mormon to be astonishing in a book that purports to authoritatively  account for its existence. And this is true even considering the  comment of another sympathetic Catholic scholar, Thomas O’Dea, who  famously observed, “The Book of Mormon is not one of those books  that one must read in order to have an opinion of it.” 19

[16] It  is not just the story of the Book of Mormon’s publication but the  experience of people in actually reading it that to this day defines  and binds the community of Mormons. Grant Underwood’s important [Page 77] surveys of early Mormon use of the Book of Mormon demonstrate that  “[p]rophesies relating to the fate of the gentiles and the  restoration of Israel were by far the principle interests of the  early Saints.” 20 I notice that Lucy Smith did not mention those themes as part of her  late dictated memory. Comparison of the set of common themes that  emerge in Underwood’s survey, which includes Joseph Smith’s  surprisingly rare comments on the Book of Mormon text and those  published by Lucy Smith on Joseph Smith’s evening recitals,  shows little overlap, if any. This circumstance ought to be mentioned  as a puzzle, even if we have no way of definitively resolving it in  light of current records.

[17] Taves  also avoids dealing with the contrast between the skeptical neighbors  who wanted an appropriately dismissive explanation for the unwieldy  book, the associated angel stories, and the growing religious  community Joseph had somehow attracted and the family, who, according  to William Smith’s account, viewed Joseph quite differently from  the picture she paints from selected comments of neighbors (from many  contradictory possibilities 21 )  of Joseph as a storyteller. William reports that:

[18] Knowing  that he was very young, that he had not enjoyed the advantages of a  common education; and knowing too, his whole character and  disposition, they were convinced that he was totally incapable of  arising before his aged parents, his brothers and sisters, and so  solemnly giving utterance of anything but the truth. 22

[19] William  also noted that after Joseph’s vision became known, “We never  knew we were bad folks, until Joseph told his vision. We were  considered respectable till then, but at once people began to  circulate falsehoods and stories in a wonderful way.” 23 Notice that the reports [Page 78] from neighbors that Taves selects to  characterize Joseph Smith as a wildly imaginative storyteller all  happen to be ideologically saturated, reflexively skeptical  judgements, rather than cool, objective reporting, providing specific  accounts and details of what Joseph Smith said and did on specific  occasions.

[20] Taves  also cites Scott Dunn’s interesting essay on “Automaticity and  the Dictation of the Book of Mormon.” 24 She adds further discussions of the experiences of highly  hypnotizable individuals and examples of creativity, including those  that bear comparison with examples of what has been called “spirit  writing.”

[21] Many  years ago I acquired and read a very good book by Ian Wilson called All in the Mind: Reincarnation, Hypnotic Regression, Stigmata,  Multiple Personality, and Other Little-Understood Powers of  the Mind . 25 Wilson’s book mentions the work by Hilgard and others, so I had a  preview of the ideas and research that Taves and would bring to her  investigation [Page 80] of Joseph Smith. But one notable difference is that  Wilson is far more interested in tracking down the sources of  information that emerge in cases of purported hypnotic regression.  Taves introduces the notion of highly hypnotizable individuals and  makes comparisons with Scott Dunn’s Sunstone/American Apocrypha essay on spirit writing. She makes a case that the Book of Mormon  translation can be explained as one more case of spirit writing,  based on the notion that self-hypnosis/ dissociation provides a way  to attain the altered state of consciousness required. She also  suggests that the experiences of the witnesses can be explained via  hypnosis theory, including spontaneous self-hypnosis.

[22] So  this line of argument produces an explanation of Joseph Smith and the  witnesses, a secular explanation by design, but is it the best  explanation? “Best” requires comparison, and not just against  something designed to make one’s case look good in the absence of  cross examination, but rather, something designed to stress the  capacity of that explanation to the utmost. And how do we measure  “best” in a way not ideologically determined? That is, that the  argument is either secular or faithful should not carry the judgment  of “best.” Fortunately, Thomas Kuhn explains that “there are  also, however, values to be used in judging whole theories: they  must, first and foremost, permit puzzle-formulation and solution;  where possible they should be simple, self-consistent, and plausible,  compatible, that is, with other theories currently deployed.” 26

[23] To  shift the metaphor somewhat, consider the problem that Edgar Allen  Poe lays out in his famous detective story, The Purloined Letter .  In such a situation, Taves could attempt to locate and identify the  purloined letter by herself, as the detective does in the story,  famously reasoning that the letter had not been hidden but placed in  plain sight [Page 81] in such a manner that it would not be recognized for what  it was. 27 But rather than locate the letter, her secular solution for the Book  of Mormon is to assert that we can safely presume there is nothing to  see, nothing to find, certainly not hidden because some official  investigators are said to have looked carefully everywhere (except in  plain sight in the right place), and therefore, the alleged letter is  an imaginative fiction and that the proper subject of inquiry is how  such a fiction came to be and what purposes it serves for the  interested community.

[24] In  making the suggestion that such a mode of thinking was fundamental to  the founding stories of the restoration, she does not consider why  the LDS do not view the sacrament itself in these terms. Our bread  and water are not literally the flesh and blood and Christ, but bread  and wine (and now water) used as symbols. 28 We use water rather than wine because it can just as easily serve as  a symbol as wine. The metaphors of identity are not a metaphysics of  identity.

[25] Lacking  that much more direct analogy to support her thesis, she also cites  the story of the shining stones from Ether as a possible precedent  for the kind of thinking that could transform a fabricated set of  plates into a sacred record (62–63). Such a reading of the Ether  story (her only attempt at reading a story from the Book of Mormon)  makes Joseph equivalent to the Brother of Jared and makes the shining  stones equivalent to both a set of fabricated plates and  transubstantiation in the Catholic view of the Eucharist. This  strikes me as more an unlikely leap than plausible stretch,  particularly since the LDS view of the Eucharist is plainly  different. The illuminated stones were still stones, not divinity.  The stories of the Brass Plates and Nephi’s plates and the 24  plates of the Jaredite record do nothing to support her  transformation by faith [Page 83] hypothesis. 29 Nor does the 1 Nephi 13:39–41 prophecy of other records to come  after the publication of the Book of Mormon that will support the  Bible and restore plain and precious things that had been lost. 30 Ancient literary precedents for the Jaredite stones provide believing  LDS with other approaches to the Ether account not mentioned by  Taves. 31

[26] Science  does not deal in all possible laboratory manipulations. Instead, it  selects those relevant to the juxtaposition of a paradigm with the  immediate experience that that paradigm has partially determined. As  a result, scientists with different paradigms engage indifferent  concrete laboratory manipulations. 32

[27] In  formulating the puzzle of Joseph Smith this way, around notions of  automaticity and hypnosis and deliberately designing her  investigation to satisfy a secular audience as consistent and  plausible from that perspective, it’s easy to see that Taves has  grounds for believing she has succeeded in explaining him. Arthur  Conan Doyle has Sherlock Holmes famously say, “When you have  eliminated the impossible [in this case, real angels and plates],  whatever remains, no matter how improbable, must be the truth.” 33 As an archetype of the brilliant [Page 84] investigator, assembling the clues  with perfect logic, Holmes’s attitude in fiction reflected the  logical positivism of the 20th century. However, Dorothy Sayers  observed the effects of this dominant image of “the infallible  sleuth with his cut-and-dried clues — and cast iron deductions …  and always right” and notes the shock and awe generated among both  readers and writers when E. C. Bentley produced Trent’s Last  Case , in which, she reports, “The marvelous deductions might,  he thought, quite easily go wrong — and in the book they go  completely wrong from start to finish.” 34 Investigators should always consider that making mistakes “in  eliminating the impossible” is always possible.

[28] Insofar  as he is engaged in normal science, the research worker is a solver  of puzzles, not a tester of paradigms. … [H]e is like the chess  player who, with a problem stated and the board physically or  mentally before him, tries out various alternate moves in search for  a solution. These trial attempts, whether by the chess player or the  scientist, are trials only of themselves, not of the rules of the  game. 35

[29] It  should not go without saying that her secular audience functions as a  group that also “coalesced around an overall understanding of what  happened” with respect to religious belief in general. For a target  audience that shares her assumptions regarding the “rules of the  game” as necessarily secular and naturalistic, this will do. This  is what they paid [Page 85] good money for when they purchased the book. A  different audience may have different assumptions, different  background information on Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon, and  different questions. For instance, one of the things I think is  important regarding the possibility of real plates are the two  Mesoamerican cylinder seals, dating to Book of Mormon times, that  have symbols on them that correspond to the characters Joseph Smith  copied from the plates. 36 So for me, a question not addressed by the explanation Taves offers  is, “How do I explain that circumstance without authentic plates?”  Is coincidence good enough? I also think about the First Temple  Judaism and the Book of Mormon, a notable field of exploration that  post-dates the 2002 By the Hand of Mormon by Terryl Givens,  Taves’s only serious bibliographic source on Mormon scholarship,  and about Nibley on qasida and the Astons on Lehi’s journey, and  Sorenson, and Gardner and Larry Poulson and John Clark on the New  World setting, and much more. But the kinds of questions and  information that occur to those familiar with a range of the best  Mormon scholarship simply do not come up with her method, problem  field, and standard of solution. Here is how Taves defines the  problem of the Book of Mormon:

[30] One  of the best-established disciplines in the world is the critical  examination of written texts to detect what in them is spurious and  what is genuine. … [T]he rules given by Blass are all obvious  enough on experience and reflection, but every one of them is a  stumbling block to the superficial critic, and [Page 86] they have all been  scrupulously avoided by those attacking the Book of Mormon. To  begin with, says Blass, “We have the document, and the name of its  author; we must begin our examination by assuming the author  indicated really wrote it.” You always begin by assuming the text  is genuine. What critic of the Book of Mormon has ever done  that? …Thus  while we can never prove absolutely that the Book is what it claims  to be, we are justified at the outset in assuming that is it what it  claims to be. If one assumes that it is true, its features at least  become testable. 37

[31] So  environmental theories are themselves things with the potential to be  tested rather than accepted uncritically. In testing rival theories,  the issue remains, “Which paradigm is better?” and “Which  problems are more significant to have solved?” 38 The question of the potential presence of eyewitness details in the  text represents an obvious puzzle for Book of Mormon readers to  consider even if Taves and her target audience disregard it. Remember  that Kuhn explained that some of the most important questions for  paradigm testing are these:

[32] [T]hey  must, first and foremost, permit puzzle formulation and solution;  where possible, they should be simple, self consistent, and  plausible, compatible, that is, with other theories currently  deployed. 39

[33] Neither  the Big Book of AA nor A Course in Miracles claims to  be an ancient text. By comparing the Book of Mormon only with surface  features of the translation and the most general features that the  three books have in common (“large” and “complex”), she  avoids the need to even mention the possibilities for testing the  content. (She does not even mention as a point of comparison with  Bill Wilson that the [Page 88] Book of Mormon contains the Twelve Steps of  addiction recovery. 40 )  She offers a paradigm as one to compete in the open marketplace of  ideas. But as Kuhn explains, one of the most important criteria for  valuing a paradigm is “puzzle definition and solution” and those  offering “different paradigms engage in different concrete  laboratory manipulations.”

[34] For  an example of how scholars with overlapping backgrounds can engage in  different approaches to the same material, consider an essay that  Taves does not cite from American Apocrypha , a 2002 book she  does cite for essays by Vogel, Dunn, and Stoker. In his essay in the  volume, Robert Price refers to the reforms of Josiah and the  Deuteronomists in “discovering” the Book of Law in the sixth  century BCE as an example of pious fraud, a paradigm for viewing  Joseph Smith as doing something similar with the Book of Mormon. 41 Just a few years later, in 2005, Margaret Barker spoke on the Book of  Mormon at a conference in Washington, DC, introducing her approach  like this:

[35] I  am not a scholar of Mormon texts and traditions. I am a biblical  scholar specializing in the Old Testament, and until some Mormon  scholars made contact with me a few years ago, I would never have  considered using Mormon texts and traditions as part of my work.  Since that initial contact I have had many good and fruitful  exchanges and have begun to look at these texts very closely. I am  still, however, very much an amateur in this area. What I offer can  only be the reactions of an Old Testament scholar: are the  revelations to Joseph Smith consistent with the situation in  Jerusalem in about 600 BCE? Do the revelations to Joseph Smith fit in  that context, the reign of King Zedekiah, who is mentioned at the  beginning of the First Book of Nephi, which begins in the “first  year of the reign of Zedekiah” (1 Nephi 1:4)? Zedekiah was  installed as king in Jerusalem in 597 BCE. 42

[36] [Page 89] Even  though Price and Barker are both non-LDS Bible scholars approaching  the Book of Mormon, and even though both cite the reforms of Josiah  and the appearance of the Book of Law, they engage in very different  “concrete laboratory manipulations” and consequently perceive  very different things. 43 For Price, the “discovery” Book of the Law serves as paradigmatic  model of pious fraud; for Barker, it is part of a relevant historical  context that constitutes a valid test. Remember that I quoted Nibley  on Blass’s rules for authenticating historical documents:

[37] To  begin with, says Blass, “We have the document, and the same of its  author; we must begin our examination by assuming that the author  indicated really wrote it” You always begin by assuming the text is  genuine. What critic of the Book of Mormon has ever done that? 44

[38] What  was remarkable about Barker’s approach is that it actually allows  that assumption to inform her test. And that is the point Nibley  made: “If one assumes that it is true, its features at least become  testable.” Price began, as Professor Midgley observes of some LDS  scholars, “to approach the text of the Book of Mormon already  knowing, from sources exterior to the text, both the questions and  the answers.” 45 Barker brought what she knew, from sources exterior to the text, a  rather different set of questions for the Book of Mormon. Under the  circumstance Barker defines, “its features became testable” to  the degree the answers she gave were not ideologically predetermined.  She does not begin by declaring the Book of Mormon is either  fraudulent or correct but rather frames her approach in a manner in  which both positive and negative answers to that question are at  least possible, depending on how the testing goes. All of the themes  of authority, transfiguration, and ascent that Price mentions in his  discussion of 3 Nephi as evidence of a “cut and paste” approach  by Joseph Smith also come forward quite naturally in comparing the  Book of Mormon to Barker’s work on the Jerusalem 600 bce context  and the First Temple tradition. That is, the very issues that Price  sees as evidence of Joseph Smith’s pious fraud turn out to belong  together in the 3 Nephi temple setting in which they appear. It also  happens that Price reviewed Barker’s The Great Angel as  marking a “paradigm” shift in [Page 90] Biblical studies and published her  essay on “The Secret Tradition,” 46 which contained much relevant to the themes he considered in 3 Nephi.  In his case, he has the relevant information at hand, but guided by  his paradigm of pious fraud, he fails to imagine the possible  connection.

[39] I  mentioned that Thomas O’Dea famously observed that the Book of  Mormon is not “one of those books that one must read in order to  have an opinion of it.” The same thing often applies to serious  Book of Mormon scholarship. Sometimes, from some critics who read it  comprehensively, we get telling admissions like that from John  Charles Duffy, the author of an ambitious Sunstone essay on  Book of Mormon scholarship. He reports of himself, “As someone who  does not believe in the historicity of the Book of Mormon, I dismiss a priori much of the work FARMS scholars have done around the  book.” 47

[40] [I]f  a deduction is not confirmed experimentally, one cannot be sure which  one, from among the many assumptions on which the deduction was  based, was in error. A network of theories and observations is always  tested together. Any particular hypothesis can be maintained by  rejecting or adjusting other auxiliary hypotheses. … In  practice the scientist works in the framework of accepted assumptions  and throws all the doubt on one hypothesis at a time; but it might be  the accepted assumptions that should be questioned. 48

[41] As  the source of authority, I have in mind principally text books of  science together with both popularizations and the philosophical  works modeled on them. … They address themselves to an already  articulated body of problems, data, and theory, most often to the  particular set of paradigms to which the scientific community is  committed at the time they are written. … To fulfill their function  they need not provide authentic information about the way in which  those based were first recognized and then embraced by the  profession. In the case of textbooks, at least, there are even good  reasons why, in these matters, they should be systematically  misleading… For  the moment, let us simply take it for granted that, to an extent  unprecedented in other fields, both the layman’s and the  practitioner’s knowledge of science is based on textbooks and a few  other types of literature derived from them. Textbooks, however,  being pedagogic vehicles for the perpetuation of normal science, have  to be rewritten in whole or in part whenever the language,  problem-structure, or standards of normal science change. In short,  they have to be rewritten in the aftermath of each scientific  revolution, and, once rewritten, they inevitably disguise not only  the role [Page 92] but the very existence of the revolutions that preceded  them. Unless he has personally experienced a revolution in his own  lifetime, the historical sense either of the working scientist or the  lay reader of textbook literature extends only to the outcome of the  most recent revolutions in the field. …For  reasons that are both obvious and highly functional, science  textbooks (and too many of the older histories of science) refer only  to that part of the work of past scientists that can easily be viewed  as contributions to the statement and solution of the texts’  paradigm problems. Partly by selection and partly by distortion, the  scientists of earlier ages are implicitly represented as having  worked upon the same set of fixed problems and in accordance with the  same set of fixed canons that the most recent revolution in  scientific theory and method has made seem scientific. No wonder that  textbooks and the historical tradition they imply have to be  rewritten after each scientific revolution. And no wonder that, as  they are rewritten, science once again comes to seem as largely  cumulative. 49

[42] I’ve  learned it is crucial to be aware of the implications of one’s one  paradigm in approaching debates with others: “When paradigms enter,  as they must, into a debate about paradigm choice, their role is  necessarily circular. Each group uses its own paradigm to argue in  that paradigm’s defense.” 50

[43] Whose  picture is truly representative? Which is better? “Like the choice  between competing political institutions, that between competing  paradigms proves to be a choice between incompatible modes of  community life.” 51

[44] Fawn  Brodie, No Man Knows My History: The Life of Joseph Smith , 2nd  ed. (New York: Knopf, 1971), a famously secular approach that has a  section making an environmental explanation of the Book of Mormon. Richard  Bushman, Joseph Smith and the Beginnings of Mormonism (Urbana:  University of Illinois Press, 1984) which provides a brief summary of  the Book of Mormon, a good survey of early critical arguments, and  does respond well to the mid-80s fashion for invoking Ethan Smith’s View of the Hebrews as potential source. ( View, he  observes, is about the Lost 10 Tribes, and in the Book of Mormon, the  Lost 10 Tribes are expressly lost, and not the subject.) She also  cites Bushman’s Rough Stone Rolling. Scott  Dunn, “Automaticity and the Dictation of the Book of Mormon” in  Dan Vogel and Brent Metcalfe, eds., American Apocrypha: Essays on  the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 2002). This  is a slightly edited version of a 1985 Sunstone essay,  basically changing the title and adding a wholly inaccurate and  inadequate [Page 94] response buried in a single footnote to Richard L.  Anderson’s important essay on “Imitation Gospels and Christ’s  Book of Mormon Ministry.” 52 Dunn’s note 85 lists such things as Dan Vogel’s Indian Origins  and the Book of Mormon , George D. Smith’s and Madison Sowell’s  1981 essays on the Roberts study and View of the Hebrews , and  a few other essays arguing against the Book of Mormon, but he doesn’t  bother to mention or address any important LDS scholarship since  then. His footnote 86 refers to Madison Sowell’s 1981 Sunstone paper as providing a “good overview of the debates” regarding  “View of the Hebrews,” but this inevitably and irresponsibly  neglects the important work published in the two decades subsequent  to Sowell’s short essay and available before the publication of American Apocrypha . This includes John Welch’s 1985  paper, “Answering B. H. Roberts Questions and ‘An Unparallel,’”  as well as Sorenson’s An Ancient American Setting for the Book  of Mormon . Apparently, neither Dunn nor his editors considered  these studies relevant enough to mention. We can take Taves’s book  as an elaboration of Dunn’s hypothesis. Terryl  Givens, By the Hand of Mormon: The American Scripture that  Launched a New World Religion (New York: Oxford University Press,  2002). In two chapters on “The Book of Mormon as Ancient History,”  Givens provides a serious historical survey of believing and  skeptical arguments regarding the Book of Mormon as history from 1829  to 2002. Of the material Givens surveys, only chiasmus rates a  mention in her book. Givens discusses critics such as Howe, Brodie,  and even Dan Vogel, Mark Thomas, and John Brooke. He also  mentions defenders of the Book of Mormon including  important work by Nibley, Sorenson, Hamblin, Welch, Ostler, and  Peterson. [Page 95] Grant  Hardy, Understanding the Book of Mormon: A Reader’s Guide (New York: Oxford, 2010). This is a valuable and important close  reading of the Book of Mormon focused on “character studies …  particularly the three major narrators” 53 while “bracketing … questions of historicity” 54 in order to “demonstrate a mode of literary analysis by which all  readers, regardless of their prior religious commitments or the lack  thereof, can discuss the book in useful and accurate ways.” 55 While I appreciate Hardy’s work, I have learned that  contextualization can often make surprising differences in what a  person might suppose is the “plain meaning of the text,” and that  we cannot know the difference an ancient context makes unless we try  it out. 56 Eber  D. Howe, Mormonism Unveiled (Salt Lake City: Signature Books,  2015), which contains the oft-quoted affidavits regarding the  supposedly lazy and primarily money-digging and superstitious Smiths  and the first iteration of the Spaulding theory. Because Taves sees Smith as the author, she does not discuss the Spaulding theory. Grant  Palmer, An Insider’s View of Mormon Origins (Salt Lake City:  Signature Books, 2002), which views Joseph Smith as fraud,  deriving the Book of Mormon from [Page 96] the environment, using sources like View of the Hebrews . Despite his claims to be an insider, not  just LDS but an insider historian speaking for the community, actual  LDS historians found his work to be shallow and notably one sided,  ignoring important primary sources and important scholarship  throughout. David  Persuitte, Joseph Smith and the Origins of the Book of Mormon 2nd Ed. (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2000), which elaborates  on the notion of Joseph Smith as a fraudulent money digger and argues  for deliberate borrowing from Ethan Smith’s View of the Hebrews . D.  Michael Quinn, Early Mormonism and the Magic World View , 2nd  ed. (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1998). Quinn postulates that  Joseph Smith drew on all sorts of esoteric traditions despite no  evidence that Joseph Smith could afford or had even seen any of the  esoteric books involved. B.  H. Roberts, Studies of the Book of Mormon, 2nd ed.  (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1992). This is another discussion  of parallels to View of the Hebrews , making a devil’s  advocate case of Book of Mormon dependence from the perspective of  1923. It is worth noting that while Roberts was an LDS authority,  much has happened in LDS scholarship since 1923 that he could not  consider, and indeed, much has happened since the formal publication  of the studies in 1985. Robert  A. Rees, “The Book of Mormon and Automatic Writing” in Journal  of Book of Mormon Studies 15/1 (2006), 5–17. Taves observes  that Rees here responds to Scott Dunn’s automaticity essay. She  does not cite Richard L. Anderson’s earlier and, I think, much more  important and telling response. Susan  Straker, “Secret Things, Hidden Things: The Seer Story in the  Imaginative Economy of Joseph Smith” in Dan Vogel and Brent  Metcalfe, eds., American Apocrypha: Essays on the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 2002). Straker’s essay is the  only one in American Apocrypha that explores the Book of  Mormon narrative in [Page 97] a sustained way. She argues for parallels between  the seer narratives in the text and in Joseph Smith’s career as  seer. Dan  Vogel, Joseph Smith: The Making of a Prophet (Salt Lake  City: Signature Books, 2004). She cites Vogel for his notion of fake  plates and hypnotized witnesses. Vogel’s book is notable for  assuming any parallels he can find or create between Joseph Smith’s  life and the text demonstrates that Joseph created the text from his  own imagination. Vogel’s work is also notable for preferring to  give preference to his own speculations over the reports of  eye-witnesses that he so painstakingly gathered and published.

[45] Perhaps  the most serious failing of the critiques of the Book of Mormon was  an inability to deal with the text in any detail. … The outsiders’  yearning to find some rational explanation for the Book of Mormon  caused them to hurry their work. Their aim was always to explain away  the Book of Mormon rather than understand it. Failing to ground their  views in the actual contents of the books, the critiques did not do  justice to the work’s actual complexity, and their conclusions were  unstable, even ephemeral. 57

[46] the  context in which [Joseph Smith] is placed profoundly affects how  people see the Prophet, since the history selected for a subject  colors everything about it. Is he a money digger like hundreds of  other superstitious Yankees in his day, a religious fanatic like  Muhammad was thought to be in Joseph’s time, a prophet like Moses,  a religious revolutionary like Jesus? To a large extent, Joseph Smith  assumes the character of the history selected for him. 58

[47] There  is then a radical dependence between the reconstructed Jesus and the  reconstructed context/model: how the context and social model are  understood determines how Jesus is understood. “Determines” is  not too strong a word, for one of the problems with this approach is  that the grid of social and economic context is such a strong factor  it can inhibit responsible handling of the actual textual evidence we  have for Jesus. 59

[48] Alexander  Campbell contextualized Joseph Smith by titling his response  “Delusions” and by leading off his essay by saying, “Every age  of the world has produced imposters and delusions. Jannes and Jambres  withstood Moses,” 60 and he continues with a discussion of a range of “false prophets”  and imposters. For his part, Joseph Smith, in his 1838 account,  compares himself to “Paul, when he made his defense before King  Agrippa” (Joseph Smith History – 1:24). For my part, I spent  several years compiling a list of 28 biblical keys for discerning  true and false prophets. 61 That seems to me at least a natural and reasonable approach to  contextualizing the claims of Joseph Smith, a relevant context in  which to examine the puzzle he represents. And it is clear this  approach to solving the puzzle of Joseph Smith leads to some very  different conclusions regarding how we might compare him to Bill  Wilson and Helen Schucman and what we consequently might see as most  significant about them.

[49] Insofar  as he is engaged in normal science, the research worker is a solver  of puzzles, not a tester of paradigms. Though he may, during the  search for a particular puzzle’s solution, try out a number of  alternative approaches, rejecting those that fail to yield the  desired result, he is not testing the paradigm when he does  so. Instead he is like the chess player who, with a problem stated  and the board physically or mentally before him, tries [Page 100] out various  alternative moves in the search for a solution. These trial attempts,  whether by the chess player or by the scientist, are trials only of  themselves, not of the rules of the game. 62

[50] Ian  Barbour comments, “As when literary critics evaluate a play, there  are both data and criteria held in common, which makes possible a  rational discussion even among those whose conclusions differ. There  are no proofs, but there are good reasons for judgements which  are not simply matters of personal taste or individual preference.” 63

[51] Some  of the reasons for judgements can arise because, as Kuhn observes,  “[P]articularly persuasive arguments can be developed if the new  paradigm permits the prediction of phenomena that had been entirely  unsuspected while the old one prevailed.” 64

[52] The  Aquarian Gospel by Levi S. Dowling, published in 1908. A convert  in my ward gave me this to read a few years ago. It is long and draws  extensively on the New Testament, but it goes its own way and does  not, in my [Page 101] view, rival the Book of Mormon. Anderson cites many  historical inaccuracies and contradictions of scripture. 65 The  Archko Volume. “The supposed editor of a large find of writings  was William D. Mahan, a Missouri Presbyterian preacher who was  disciplined in 1885 by his local presbytery for plagiarizing Lew  Wallace’s Ben Hur and publishing ‘Eli’s Story of the  Magi’ as a fraudulent ancient document.” 66 The  Gospel of the Holy Twelve. “ The medium of receiving this long  gospel was the Reverend G. J. R. Ouseley, who left the Church of  England and associated with several para-Christian movements before  his death in 1906. Some of his writings promoted vegetarianism, also  a prominent theme in his revealed additions to the New Testament.” 67 Oahspe.  “ A tiny fraction of this ‘Kosmon Bible’ claims to report  the historical Jesus. Its author was John Newbrough, a dentist who  made a hobby of spiritualism for years. Finally claiming purification  to reach the higher spirits, he began his scribal work in 1881  without any record: ‘One morning the light struck both my hands on  the back and they went for the typewriter, for some fifteen minutes,  very vigorously. I was told not to read what was printed. … For  fifty weeks this continued … and then it ceased, and I was told to  read and publish Oahspe.’ The time of day was before dawn, and the  coming of daylight terminated the inspiration each day. The result  was published in 1882 and reads like a science-fiction view of  history, with strange mortal and extraterrestrial beings that control  and conflict. Jesus appears incidentally as an astounding  contradiction to gospel and Jewish realities: ‘In the thirty-sixth  year of Joshu’s age he was stoned to death in Jerusalem by the Jews  that worshipped the heathen Gods.’” 68 The  Sorry Tale. “ This justly forgotten novel impressed American  reviewers of the World War I generation but can only be reviewed as  sterile bombast today. Its notoriety came from author Pearl Curran’s  story of receiving [Page 102] dictation of poetry and historical tales from the  spirit of a ‘Puritan spinster’ called Patience Worth.” 69 The  Urantia Book. “ Published in 1955, this massive volume devotes a  third of its space to the story of Christ. But of all the imitation  gospels surveyed here, this one offers the fewest clues on its  origin.” 70 Subsequent to Anderson’s 1986 essay, Martin Gardner wrote Urantia:  The Great Cult Mystery (Amherst: Prometheus Books, 1995) which  describes how physician William Sadler, as early as 1911, conducted  interviews with a neighbor who had begun falling into nightly  trances. Sadler shared his interest in the trance subject with a  group of friends and colleagues who were already meeting for  philosophical discussions. The group began conducting interviews with  the trance subject, and the results eventually became The Urantia  Book. I reviewed this for the AML-List in 1995. Gardner makes  some superficial comparisons to Joseph Smith and The Book of Mormon .  The Urantia Book origins via a trance subject and committee  involvement over several years strikes me as far more amenable to  direct comparison with A Course in Miracles than the Book of  Mormon.

[53] Anderson’s  essay overall seems strikingly relevant to Taves’s subject, and I  find it surprising that she did not reference it, at least as a  compliment to the essay by Robert Rees responding to Scott Dunn that  she does cite. Perhaps she did not know about Anderson, or perhaps  Dunn’s response to Anderson in a single footnote defused her  interest. According to Dunn, Anderson “discusses spiritualist works  about Jesus Christ and makes judgements about their authenticity. His  chief criteria are (1) consistency with Mormon interpretations of the  Bible and (2) his personal opinion of each work’s literary merit.” 71

[54] “No  apocryphal gospel furnishes any witness who saw its original record,  who could be cross-examined concerning it. Like Christ’s  resurrection itself, the Book of Mormon presents a supernatural claim  surrounded by impressive circumstantial evidence.” 72 “Depth  and dimension permeate Third Nephi but are notably absent from the  spurious later gospels. Most are thinly disguised special pleading —  making Christ a precursor for Mohammed, promoter of a natural health  program, an Eastern mystic, or a cosmic spiritualist. These books mix  strange code words and jargon with the known teachings of the Lord.  But they are also disconcerting even in the portions that do not  conflict with the Gospels, for here they trivialize Jesus into a  wordy moralizer. So fictitious gospels must hazard two dangers:  contradictions or flattening of dynamic events and vital personality.  The gospel forger stands at the crossroads of too much novelty or too  little substance.” 73 [Page 104] “No  modern apocryphal gospel pictures Christ as an expounder of the  prophets, but when he appears in this role in Third Nephi, he speaks  in a known idiom of ancient Judaism, alternating prophetic verses  with interpretive explanations. The Qumran ‘commentaries’  generally quote a part of a verse, one verse, or up to three verses,  with interspersed explanations. Early Christian literature has some  examples of a chain of quotations with comments, but does not display  the above explication of one prophet that makes the Qumran pesharim highly unusual. It is improbable that Joseph Smith stumbled onto  this teaching form, since the Qumran pesher style is  distinctive enough to rate a special article in the 1971 Encyclopaedia Judaica .” 74

[55] Regarding The Sorry Tale , one author notes that “scholars and literary  critics agreed that even a lifetime of reading all of the available  knowledge of the Holy Land (reading that apparently never took place,  but even if it had) still would not have given [Curran] the  information to produce a book with such verisimilitude.” 75

[56] Mrs.  Curran’s editor stated the plot as follows: Christ  himself is the outstanding and speaking character, though the central  figure is a son of the Emperor Tiberius by Theia, a dancing slave,  who names him Hatte. He is born outside the walls of Bethlehem on the  same night in which Christ was born, and the two lives move on  parallel paths to the tragedy on Calvary, where Hatte also is  crucified, being the person known as the “unrepentant thief.” [Page 105] This  contrived story grinds through 500 pages of simplistic narrative and  tedious dialogue before featuring Jesus. The whole is subvictorian  prose at its predictable worst, where tears are dropping jewels and  bosoms regularly heave. Despite Mrs. Curran’s claim of “panoramic”  moving pictures in her mind, The Sorry Tale notably lacks  social and physical details. If they are mentioned, the score for  accuracy is low. For instance, Mrs. Curran claimed to envision “the  ark as it was at that time restored,” but this relic had long since  disappeared from Jewish scripture and history. The Roman governor sat  in an oriental court, with “vested virgins” dancing before him,  and Jesus shocked the masses by dining with the Pharisees, though  they are known in the Gospels and Josephus as popularly respected.  The unhistorical “eye of the needle” gate is described, with the  physically implausible act of the camel inching through it on his  knees. If  this Tale cannot recreate settings, what is its picture of  Christ? The free and rapid dictation shows a patchwork of events from  the Gospels — their historical integrity is flaunted in random  chronology and modified message. The canonical five loaves and two  fishes diminishes to “two fishes and a loaf,” and the miraculous  is next subtracted. Although all Gospels detail how five thousand  were physically fed, The Sorry Tale gives a sentimental  version of how hunger vanished as the crowd was overwhelmed with  truth. The close is an unrealistic platitude on Jesus’ lips: “for  the body crieth out only when the spirit is barren.” Since the Tale reports no resurrection, the natural crescendo of Christ’s  teachings is the Last Supper and the Garden, but here the reader  meets no suffering Savior. Emotive prose changes the grim night  arrest to a pregnant dawn; the bloody sweat is reduced to a footnote  while Christ’s insuperable burden becomes a pleasant prayer about  “supping sweet the cup.” This storybook Jesus gently wanders back  to his Apostles, “pausing to pluck a branch and kiss it, plucking  up a stone, to smile and leave it fall.” T he  Sorry Tale spins overdone human tragedy but fades out the divine  tragedy of Christ’s atonement for sin. Its Jesus teaches an  unstructured “kingdom of love” but drops out the realities of [Page 106] sin  and salvation, church and ordinances. Such oversimplified humanism  does not match the Christ of the Gospels. 76

[57] The  beginning of this paper noted the continuation of Jesus’ sayings in  quotations by Paul and by the Christian fathers. Here scholars seek  some basis for judging whether these free-floating sayings have  historical credibility, since they are not in canonical Gospels. To  be considered authentic, the quotation should come from an early  source with probable access to authentic information about Christ.  But given this condition, how can one separate folklore from  responsible tradition? That forces a judgment after first determining  these “genealogical” credentials. Then comes the question: is the  saying “conceivable in the mouth of Jesus, in view of what the  canonical Gospels make known to us of his thought and spirit”? There  are many terse and wholesome utterances, utterly unobjectionable and  free from the bias of dubious theology or the tinsel of fantasy,  which have appeared to many critics as not inappropriate to the Jesus  of the canonical Gospels. The  first half of this paper gave sample quotations from modern  apocrypha, showing that their language typically displays platitudes,  wordiness, or unfocused mysticism. But Third Nephi joins the four  Gospels in the spiritual light reflecting from vivid sayings of the  Lord. These are not in obvious positions in the American Gospel, but  are spread evenly throughout Christ’s teachings as the spontaneous  utterances of one who typically sums up his message in concise  urgency: [Page 107] Old  things are done away, and all things have become new (3 Nephi 12:47). Therefore,  whoso remembereth these sayings of mine and doeth them, him will I  raise up at the last day (3 Nephi 15:1). Behold,  I am the law, and the light (3 Nephi 15:9). Behold,  I am the light which ye shall hold up — that which ye have seen me  do (3 Nephi 18:24). And  if it so be that the church is built upon my gospel, then will the  Father show forth his own works in it (3 Nephi 27:10). Because  a main goal of scholarship is discovery, studies continue to gather  and weigh the noncanonical sayings of Jesus. Out of several hundred  possibilities, from one to two dozen are usually selected on the  double basis of location in a responsible historical source plus tone  reminiscent of Jesus. Third Nephi contains many more vivid sayings  than the examples given above. But if these are mingled with other  uncanonical words from early sources, they measure up with those most  favored in possessing the “terseness and aptness very  characteristic of Jesus’s mode of speech.” The objective element  is style, the close resemblance to Jesus’ patterns of expression. 77 Readers  of Dunn’s essay are not informed of the existence of the kinds of  observations and evidence that Anderson makes regarding the unique  and distinctive nature of the Book of Mormon, even in relation to a  range of books that rival its claim to be a modern gospel. That Taves  did not consult or confront Anderson’s important work makes her  book particularly vulnerable in comparison. Kuhn observes that  “particularly persuasive arguments can be developed if the new  paradigm permits the prediction of phenomena that had been entirely  unsuspected while the old one prevailed. 78

[58] One  of the reasons I enjoy the work of the best LDS scholars in  comparison to the work of disaffected LDS and secular critics is that  while I am rarely surprised or disturbed by what the critics offer, 79 I am [Page 108] continually astonished by what I learn from scholars like  Nibley, Anderson, Welch, Peterson, Tvedtnes, Ricks, Goff, Gardner,  and many others. Yet, she did list By the Hand of Mormon in  her bibliography, a remarkable book published by Oxford University  Press for an academic readership.

[59] Taves  can take a kind of comfort in knowing that her secular audience, for  the most part, will not know or value this body of scholarship. But  as Ian Barbour says, a belief in God “makes a difference not only  in one’s attitudes and behaviour but in the way one sees the world.  One may notice and value features of individual and corporate life  which one otherwise might have overlooked.” 80

[60] “[S]ince  no paradigm ever solves all the problems it defines, and since no two  paradigms leave all the same problems unsolved, paradigm debates  always involve the question: Which problems are more significant to  have solved?” 81 “Probably  the single most prevalent claim advanced by the proponents of a new  paradigm is that they can solve the problems that have led the old  one to a crisis.” 82 [Page 109] “Claims  of this sort are particularly likely to succeed if the new paradigm  displays a quantitative precision strikingly better than its older  competitor.” 83 “[P]articularly  persuasive arguments can be developed if the new paradigm permits the  prediction of phenomena that had been entirely unsuspected while the  old one prevailed.” 84 aesthetic — the new  theory is said to be ‘neater’, ‘more suitable,’ or ‘simpler’  than the old.” 85 “[T]he  issue is which paradigm should in the future guide research on  problems, many of which neither competitor can yet claim to resolve  completely. A decision between alternate ways of practicing science  is called for, and in the circumstances that decision must be based  less on past achievement than on future promise. … A decision of  that kind can only be made on faith.” 86 “First,  the new candidate must seem to resolve some generally recognized  problem that can be met in no other way. Second, the new paradigm  must promise to preserve a relatively large part of the concrete  problem-solving ability that has accrued to science through its  predecessors.” 87 “There  are also, however, values to be used in judging whole theories: they  must, first and foremost, permit puzzle-formulation and solution;  where possible they should be simple, self-consistent, and plausible,  compatible, that is, with other theories currently deployed.” 88 “In  matters like these the resort to shared values rather than to shared  rules governing individual choice may be the community’s way of  distributing risk and assuring the long-term success of its  enterprise.” 89

[61] Though  argument does not create conviction, the lack of it destroys belief.  What seems to be proved may not be embraced, but what no one shows  the ability to defend is quickly abandoned. Rational argument does  not create belief, but it maintains a climate in which belief is  possible. 90

[62] A  couple of years ago, Maxwell Institute leaders asked me to advise  them on the future of the Mormon Studies Review. They were  interested in engaging more fully with the rising academic field of  the same name, but wondered if the journal should even continue given  the already crowded periodical field. My response was brief — well,  brief for me — and would not have impressed any capitalists in the  room. Don’t worry about the LDS audience , I said. Other  journals have that covered. Speak instead to scholars, period.… The  Review’s advisory board cured any lingering conflicted feelings.  Drop any hybridity goals, they urged, and tilt unreservedly toward  the academy. So as it stands, it’s the Institute’s humble Mormon  studies endeavor that seems least [Page 111] interested in a broad audience —  which isn’t to say educated Latter-day Saints should feel  uninvited!… All  this helps explain why the Mormon Studies Review’s tilt  toward the broader scholarly community is not the sign of an  insidious secularism spreading at BYU. For us, it’s primarily a  question of audience, voice, and scholarly niche.” 91

[63] There  is a major crisis in biblical studies of which the churches seem  unaware, and there is need for urgent action to ensure that at least  in theological colleges something is taught that does not simply rely  on university departments and replicate their syllabus and interests.  Theological colleges and university departments now have very  different agendas.… Biblical  studies should serve the needs of the Churches; there are other  goals, too, but if the needs of the churches are not even considered,  something has to be amiss. Perhaps the time has come to break free  from the Faustian pact between Church and Academy. We are unlikely  to solve the problems currently facing biblical studies using the  methods which created them. What we need is an approach, soundly  based in scholarship, which enables us to stand where they stood,  look where they looked, read what they wrote and glimpse what they  saw. 92

[64] There  is no such thing as objective biblical scholarship, that is, biblical  scholarship produced by those with no faith commitment. I have often  said that a professor of French who [Page 112] had never been to France did not  speak the language and doubted that France even existed would not be  taken seriously. The same should apply with biblical studies, but  it does not. The  result is that the much biblical study produced in the UK, outside  the faith-based institutions, is of no use to the consumers of  biblical scholarship, that is, the faith-based communities. Any  medical school that produced no graduates fit to practice medicine  and no research relevant to the human body would be closed down. The  same should apply with biblical studies, but it does not. All  the independent biblical scholars that I know work from a faith-based  perspective, and it is with us that the future lies. 93

