[Page 299] Abstract: The Book of Abraham continues to attract scholarly attention. New  findings in the fields of Egyptology, Near Eastern archaeology, and  Mormon history have highlighted the complexity surrounding the  origins of the Book of Abraham and its relationship to the Egyptian  papyri that came into the possession of Joseph Smith in 1835. A new  introductory volume on the Book of Abraham by John Gee, An  Introduction to the Book of Abraham , is an excellent  resource that may help laypersons and scholars alike navigate this  rapidly developing area of study.

Review  of John Gee. An Introduction to the Book of Abraham . Salt Lake  City and Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young  University, and Deseret Book. 2017. 184 pp. + index. $19.99 (print)  and $11.99 (e-book).

Anyone  — layperson and scholar alike — wishing to better understand the  Book of Abraham and the associated Joseph Smith Papyri faces a  daunting problem. As Nibley astutely observed:

“The  goal with the Introduction to the Book of Abraham ,” Gee  explains, “is to make reliable information about the Book of  Abraham accessible to the general reader” (ix). The book  accomplishes this goal. This is something to celebrate, since many  past treatments on the Book of Abraham and the Joseph Smith Papyri  are often too technical (and thus riddled with academic jargon only  comprehensible to scholars), too general or amateurish (and thus  riddled with inaccuracies), too hyper focused on a single aspect  or issue of the controversy, or too scattered across various  publications, some more accessible (and [Page 302] affordable) to a popular  audience than others. An Introduction to the Book of Abraham largely remedies this problem. Gee upholds  his scholarship but does not drown his prose in academese and focuses  on the important issues without becoming pedantic. This is  complemented by the book’s affordability and accompanying charts,  images, and sidebars that helpfully enhance readability.

The  organization of An Introduction to the Book of Abraham flows logically and keeps the reader’s attention. Gee begins  with an overview of the background of the Joseph Smith Papyri (1–12),  their acquisition by Joseph Smith and their chain of custody from his  death to their return to the Church in 1967 (13–42), the content of  the Abrahamic narrative Joseph translated (43–48), the relationship  between the Book of Abraham and the Joseph Smith Papyri (83–86),  and evidence for the historicity of the text (87–142). Gee provides  overviews of what we know about the ancient owners of the papyri  (57–72) and the contents therein (73–82). He additionally  discusses the facsimiles of the Book of Abraham (143–156) and the  role of the Book of Abraham as scripture in the Church today  (163–74). The book concludes with an FAQ that summarizes the main  points and findings of his research (175–184). I do not think  it’s an exaggeration to say that John Gee is perhaps one of the few  people alive who could do all of this basically by himself. That he  can cover each of the issues identified by Nibley as necessary to  know to discuss the Book of Abraham intelligently is a monument to  his scholarly acumen.

---
Notes

[1] Hugh  Nibley once quipped that the controversy surrounding the Book of  Abraham was “a great fuss … being made about a scrap of  papyrus.” 1 Were it not for the fact that it is tied up in religious polemics  involving Joseph Smith, founder and first prophet of The Church of  Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, outside of a handful of  Egyptologists who specialize in Greco-Roman funerary texts, there  would probably be little concern for the text identified among the  surviving Joseph Smith Papyri as the Book of Breathings — what the  ancient Egyptians called the š ˁ t n snsn  ỉr. n ˁ I st  n snỉ.s Wsỉr , or  the “document of breathings [Page 300] made by Isis for her brother Osiris.” 2 But because the text is tied to a book of scripture purporting  to be “a translation of … the writings of Abraham, while he was  in Egypt,” 3 there has been an unusual amount of interest (to say nothing of a  bois terous fracas)  among laypersons for this unassuming “scrap of papyrus.”

[2] Consider  for a moment the scope and complexity of the materials with which the  student must cope if he would undertake a serious study of the Book  of Abraham’s authenticity. At the very least he must be thoroughly  familiar with (1) the texts of the “Joseph Smith Papyri”  identified as belonging to the Book of the Dead, (2) the content and  nature of mysterious “Sen-sen” fragment, (3) the so-called  “Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar” attributed to Joseph Smith, (4)  statements by and about Joseph Smith concerning the nature of the  Book of Abraham and its origin, (5) the original document of  Facsimile 1 with its accompanying hieroglyphic inscriptions, (6) the  text of the Book of Abraham itself in its various editions, (7) the  three facsimiles as reproduced in various editions of the Pearl of  Great Price, (8) Joseph Smith’s explanation of the facsimiles, (9)  the large and growing literature of ancient traditions and legends  about Abraham in Hebrew, Aramaic, Arabic, Greek, Slavonic, etc., and  (10) the [Page 301] studies and opinions of modern scholars on all aspects of  the Book of Abraham. 4

[3] Spending  the effort and time needed to get a handle on each of these complex,  interlocking issues may very reasonably seem like a bridge too far.  Thankfully, Latter-day Saints can benefit from dedicated scholars  like John Gee, an Egyptologist who has studied the Book of Abraham  and the Joseph Smith Papyri extensively, leaving voluminous writings  on the subject in his academic wake. 5 Gee’s latest offering, An Introduction to the Book of  Abraham , is the culmination of decades of previous scholarship. 6 It is a book that fills a gaping void, as there have  heretofore been no introductory works on the Book of Abraham that are  accessible to a general audience while still grounded in rigorous  scholarship.

[4] Some  aspects of Gee’s work on the Book of Abraham may appear  iconoclastic from a conservative Latter-day Saint perspective. For  instance, Gee argues that “the Book of Abraham … presents a  geocentric astronomy, like almost all ancient astronomies, including  ancient Egyptian astronomy,” as opposed to a modern scientific  cosmology (116). If we follow Gee’s proposition that the Book of  Abraham reflects a cosmology that would have been comprehensible to  the ancient Egyptians (cf. Abraham 3:15), then we should not concern  ourselves with proving that the Book of Abraham is reconcilable with  modern science, since such attempts miss the point of the text. 7 This may seem jarring at first for Latter-day Saints who have  inherited fundamentalist assumptions about scriptural concordism —  belief that Scripture, when [Page 303] properly interpreted, will always agree  or concord with modern science 8 — but when properly understood, Gee’s argument actually  strengthens belief that the Book of Abraham is ancient. 9 After all, if the Book of Abraham was written sometime during the  second millennium BC, would it not make more sense for it to reflect  a pre-scientific worldview and understanding of the cosmos? 10

[5] On  the other hand, some of Gee’s arguments are sure to rankle those  who want to read the Book of Abraham as pseudepigrapha. Besides  arguing for the Book of Abraham’s historicity (87–105), Gee  challenges recent attempts by source critics to reduce the book down  to a mere pastiche of Joseph Smith’s imaginative speculations and  reworking of the Genesis creation account (136–138). 11 Gee does not dispute that the author of Genesis “had some access to  written or oral sources,” but he rather questions “whether or not  source criticism can correctly identify those sources” (137). He  insists that “[i]f one accepts the historicity of the Book of  Abraham, then one cannot accept the validity of source criticism.  Likewise, if one accepts the validity of source criticism, then one  cannot accept the historicity of the Book of Abraham. The two are  incompatible” (138). While I am personally not sure the two are  entirely incompatible (I am open to various theories for a possible  transmission or redaction of the Book of Abraham that may allow for  an intertextual relationship with Genesis), Gee’s bigger point is  one worth considering: [Page 304] when it comes to the Book of Abraham, do we  grant the text any evidentiary precedence against other theories? And  if so, how much?

[6] While  much of what Gee offers might not be especially new or  ground-breaking for most who have followed the discussion and  scholarship on the Book of Abraham, he nevertheless brings fresh  insights to the text that will be appreciated by both seasoned and  novice readers. He identifies, for example, the presence of an  Egyptian pun at Abraham 3:17–18 that nicely develops the Lord’s  revelation to Abraham (117). 12 Concerning the Abrahamic covenant in Abraham 2:6–11, Gee points out  that the form of the covenant “has several features that appear in  other covenants and treaties of the ancient world” (108).  Accordingly, “the covenant in the Book of Abraham follows the  pattern of treaties and covenants in his day and not the pattern of  later times. The covenant pattern is thus an indication that the text  dates to Abraham’s day” (111). 13

[7] Gee  also explores how Abraham calling Sarah his “sister” rather than  his “wife” (Abraham 2:22–25; cf. Genesis 12:10–13) would have  been ambiguous to the ancient Egyptians rather than intrinsically  dishonest (102). 14 On the contested issue of Abraham’s homeland, Gee mentions [Page 305] an  article published by a non-Mormon Turkish archaeologist excavating  Oylum Höyük, which posits a possible  conn ection between the site and the Book of Abraham (104). 15 Finally, Gee’s mainstream Egyptological work on the family history  and occupation of Hor — the ancient owner of the Book of Breathings  recovered in the Joseph Smith Papyri — is summarized in the book  and is sure to raise laypersons’ appreciation for how the Book of  Abraham could plausibly fit an Egyptian Sitz im Leben in  Ptolemaic Thebes (57–72). 16

[8] While  most of Gee’s arguments are persuasive, some of his positions  appear debatable. His discussion of the timeline of the translation  of the Book of Abraham is one such debatable point. Gee believes the  extant text of the Book of Abraham was translated by the end of 1835.  “Joseph revised the translation preparatory to its publication in  1842, but other than that, no evidence has survived that he worked on  the translation of the existing Book of Abraham after 1835” (15).  In this Gee appears to be following a translation timeline for the  Book of Abraham laid out [Page 306] by Kerry Muhlestein and Megan Hansen. 17 I am not confident that this timeline for the translation of the Book  of Abraham is as certain as these authors, including Gee, would have  us suppose. The key piece of evidence that contradicts this timeline  is the appearance of transliterated Hebrew words in Abraham 3 that  are clearly drawn from Joshua Seixas’ Hebrew classes offered in  Kirtland, Ohio, beginning in 1836. 18 Their appearance in the Book of Abraham as well as the text’s  recognition that ʾ elōhîm (God) is technically a plural noun in Hebrew (cf. Abraham 4:1–12,  14, 16–18, 20–22, 24–29, 31; 5:2–5, 7–9, 11–16, 20), it  could be argued, would seem to indicate that Abraham 3 onward was  translated after Joseph Smith studied Hebrew in 1836.

[9] Muhlestein  and Hansen believe this can be reconciled by understanding the  transliterated Hebrew words in Abraham 3 as interpretative glosses  added by Joseph Smith in his preparations for the publication of the  Book of Abraham in 1842 after he initially translated the text in  1835. 19 While this is possible, it remains speculative. It seems we simply do  not know enough at the moment to stake out any definitive answers.  Further work, such as that being undertaken by Brian Hauglid and  Robin Jensen with the Joseph Smith Papers Project may bring  additional light to this issue down the road. 20 While Gee’s position is arguable, I believe readers should at least  be aware that this remains a contested point.

[10] Whatever  I found questionable in An Introduction to the Book of Abraham ,  however, did not dramatically detract from the overall quality of the  book. With something as perplexing and often vexatious as the Book of  Abraham, there is inevitably going to be disagreement on many points.  But whether you agree or disagree with all his conclusions, there is  no denying that Gee possesses a qualified scholarly voice in this  discussion that is worth listening to. An Introduction to the Book [Page 307] of Abraham , alongside the Church’s Gospel Topics essay, 21 is therefore my new default recommendation as an excellent primer  resource on the Book of Abraham.

