[Page 53] Abstract: The story in John 8 of the woman taken in adultery is sometimes used  to argue that Jesus was lenient toward sin and that we should be too.  However, when placed in its broader context, we can see the story is  not one in which Christ shows indifference or contempt for the law,  but rather utmost respect for it.

> [Page 55] And  early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the  people came unto him; and he sat down and taught them. (John 8:2)

> And  the scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in  adultery; and when they had set her in the midst, They say unto him,  Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act. (John  8:3–4)

> Now  Moses in the law commanded us, that such should be stoned: but what  sayest thou? (John 8:5)

However,  the fact the woman is said to have been caught “in the very act” seems suspicious. How did this happen? If the husband of the  adulteress planned to capture the illicit lovers in the act, he must  have suspected them of adultery in the first place. If he suspected  adultery but decided to wait until he caught his wife in the act, it  would further indict the husband and the witnesses, since the law  made specific provisions for a husband who suspected his wife of  adultery: the Sotah, or ordeal of the bitter waters.

This  provision is found in Numbers 5:11–31. It allows a husband to  accuse a woman of adultery without fear of punishment for false  accusation. If the husband suspected adultery but had no witnesses,  he could bring his wife and a jealousy offering of barley meal  to the priest in order that she may undergo a sort of trial by  ordeal. The priest began the ordeal by taking dust from the floor of  the temple and mixing it in a vessel of holy water. Next, the  priest uncovered the woman’s head and put the offering of meal in  her hands. He then spoke an oath to the woman, saying:

Afterward,  the priest would write the words of the oath on parchment in water  soluble ink. He would wash the parchment with the dirty water and let  the water run back into the vessel for the woman to drink. The text  says that if the woman is guilty, her belly will swell and her thigh [Page 58] shall rot, and the woman shall be a curse among her people. If  she is innocent, she will conceive a child.

The  text concludes by saying that this is the law. When a husband  suspects his wife of adultery, he must perform the requirements of  this law in order to be guiltless from iniquity rather than set her  up to be caught in flagrante delicto. Numbers 5:29–31  states:

> This  is the law of jealousies … when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon  him, and he … shall set the woman before the Lord, and the priest  shall execute upon her all this law. Then shall the man be guiltless  from iniquity, and this woman shall bear her iniquity.

So  if a man does not submit his wife to the ordeal of the bitter  waters when “the spirit of jealousy cometh upon him,” he will not  be “guiltless from iniquity.” It seems, then, that the husband in  our story may have brought iniquity upon himself by disregarding the  law. Instead of following the law of jealousies as soon as he  suspected his wife of adultery, he may have decided it would be  preferable to find a way for his wife to be put to death.

> This  they said, tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. (John 8:6a)

> But  Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as  though he heard them not. (John 8:6b)

> So  when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself, and said unto  them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone  at her. (John 8:7)

It  is unlikely that a lynch mob could be halted in their tracks by  a simple plea to be non-judgmental. However, the words of Jesus  may actually have been a legal reference that implied that the  accusers may be [Page 61] subject to the very penalty they wished to impose  upon the woman. The suggestion that the men themselves may be guilty  of a capital offense would be enough to inspire the effect we  read about in the narrative. This fact demands a legal  interpretation of Christ’s words.

As  already noted, based on the law in Exodus 23:1, a witness could  be disqualified on the basis of unrighteousness. According to Baylis,  Deuteronomy is another place where strict requirements are placed on  witnesses:

> If  a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him  that which is wrong; Then both the men, between whom the controversy  is, shall stand before the Lord … if the witness be a false  witness, and hath testified falsely against his brother; Then shall  ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother. …  [L]ife shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for  hand, foot for foot. (Deuteronomy 19:16–19)

> And  again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground. (John 8:8)

> And  they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went  out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last: and  Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst. (John  8:9)

The  fact that the accusers did not argue the point Jesus made confirms  that Jesus was not making a statement regarding the  appropriateness of capital punishment. Clearly, capital punishment  was not the issue but rather the competence of the accusers to carry  out the punishment. The fact that Jesus did not press for the death  penalty in this case has more to do with a respect for due  process than with the attitude of Jesus toward forgiveness or even  capital punishment. If He meant to teach that stoning should no  longer be practiced He could have said so and explained why. Instead,  He focused on the procedure by which an adulteress would justifiably  be put to death and reminded the accusers that the proper procedure  was not being followed according to the law. They could not argue  with this point and so dropped their stones and left, one by one, as  the significance of what He said and wrote in the dust began to sink  in. [Page 64] The group of men who came to accuse an adulteress and to accuse  Jesus left, finding themselves accused by their own consciences.

> When  Jesus had lifted up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said unto  her, Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned  thee? (John 8:10)

It  is frustrating to all of us how our system of justice sometimes  allows the guilty to go free. It appears the Jewish system of justice  had the same problem. If the woman was guilty of adultery, why would  Jesus let the woman go on a technicality? The example Jesus  shows us is one not of ambivalence toward or defiance of the written  law but one of utmost respect. The law required that those who served  as witnesses and executioners should be competent in their duties.  This point of law was so clear and so important that it was agreed  upon by all those present — one who was guilty of a capital  offense should be set free where no two people could competently  stand against him or her.

> She  said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn  thee: go and sin no more. (John 8:11)

> Then  spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the  world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall  have the light of life. (John 8:12)

Jesus  stands as the light of the world in many ways. Often, His example is  one of love and forgiveness. However, in the story of the woman taken  in adultery, He shines in a different way. While we cannot be  certain of exactly why the accusers left, the words and actions of  Christ clearly provided the impetus to their departure. We do not  know what He wrote on the ground, and we do not know what the men  were thinking when [Page 65] He said, “He that is without sin among you, let  him first cast a stone at her.” However, we do know that,  while He did not condemn the woman, He did not tell her that her sins  were forgiven. As we try to make sense of these events, when viewed  in the context of Jewish law, it is clearly not a story of  repentance and forgiveness. It seems rather to be a story of  commitment to order and procedure.

[ The  author wishes to thank John W. Welch and Matthew L. Bowen for their  valuable feedback. ]

In  contrast, Heil argued that there is strong linguistic and literary  evidence that supports the conclusion that the story was original [Page 67] to  Gospel of John. John Paul Heil, “The Story of Jesus and the  Adulteress (John 7:53–8:11) Reconsidered,” Biblica 72  (1991): 182–91. Wallace responds to Heil by arguing that Heil’s  literary arguments usually work against themselves** and that the  external evidence that the pericope was a latter interpolation  into the Gospel of John is overwhelming. Daniel B. Wallace,  “Reconsidering ‘The Story of Jesus and the Adulteress  Reconsidered’” New Testament Studies , 39 (1993): 290–96.

Some  evidence exists that may lead us to conclude that while the story may  not have originally been in the Gospel of John, it may nevertheless  be authentic. For example, Knust noted that “the pericope  adulterae , or some version of it, was perceived to be ‘gospel’  — in the sense of ‘a good story about Jesus — by the late  second century, whether or not it was known from a written  Gospel. By the fourth century, the pericope adulterae appears  as a regular proof-text among Latin-speaking Christians.”  Jennifer Wright Knust, “Early Christian Re-Writing and the History  of the Pericope Adulterae ,” Journal of Early Christian  Studies 14:4 (2006): 489. Knust added, “The story remained less  known in Greek Christian traditions, though it appears in  a commentary of Didymus the Blind, is depicted on a few  fifth- and sixth-century Egyptian pyxides, and is discussed in the  writings of one anonymous sixth-century Greek chronicler.” Knust,  “Early Christian Re-Writing,” 490. While perhaps not original to  the Gospel of John, there is some evidence that it may have been  included in the Gospel of the Hebrews. “According to Eusebius,  Papias, a second-century bishop of Hierapolis, knew a story  involving a woman of sins before the [Page 68] Lord, a story that  Eusebius (and maybe Papias?) also found in the Gospel according to  the Hebrews . Eusebius writes that ‘[Papias] has put forth also  another story concerning a woman falsely accused of many sins  before the Lord, which is contained in the Gospel according to the  Hebrews.’” Knust, “Early Christian Re-Writing,” 495. Of  course, the pericope adulterae in John involves a single  sin, and there is no indication in the text that she had been falsely  accused. So this may be referring to a different story, or  perhaps Eusebius or Papias remembered it incorrectly.

Interestingly,  Didymus the Blind described a story “in certain gospels” of  a woman “condemned by the Jews for a sin” who was taken  before the Savior to be stoned. Christ is quoted as saying, “He who  has not sinned, let that one take a stone and cast it.” Knust,  “Early Christian Re-Writing,” 499–500. This sounds very much  like the story in John. Scholars are unsure of what is meant by the  phrase “in certain gospels” and debate whether Didymus meant  various copies of John, or that he found it in various gospels  perhaps including John and the Gospel according to the Hebrews .  Knust, “Early Christian Re-Writing,” fn. 47. In any event, there  is reason to believe that the story was circulating among the  believers fairly early and certainly before it appeared in the Codex  Bezae.

J.  Duncan M. Derrett suggests that one reason the story may not have  been included in some of the early texts was that it may have been  offensive to some who would rather not give the impression that  Christ was lenient toward sin. See J. Duncan M. Derrett, “Law in  the New Testament: The Story of the Woman Taken in Adultery,” New  Testament Studies 10 (1963), 1–2.

The  medical condition being described in these verses has been identified  as a prolapsed uterus. “In this condition, which may occur  after multiple pregnancies, the pelvic floor (weakened by the  pregnancies) collapses, and the uterus literally falls down. It may  lodge in the vagina, or it may actually fall out of the body through  the vagina. If it does so, it becomes edematous and swells up like  a balloon. Conception becomes impossible, and the woman’s  procreative life has effectively ended.” Tikva Frymer-Kensky, “The  Strange Case of the Suspected Sotah (Numbers V 11–31),” Vetus  Testamentum 34 (1984): 20–21.

---
Notes

[1] The  story of the woman taken in adultery is sometimes referenced as an  example of the love and forgiveness of Jesus. As Raymond Brown has  observed, “Some have used this to paint their portrait of the  liberal Christ and have turned it in to a maudlin justification  for indifference toward sins of the flesh.” 1 Of course, as  Christ exemplifies perfect love and is the embodiment of mercy, it is  tempting to use this story as an illustration of Christ’s love and  mercy. However, those who use the story as an example of how we  should not judge others, that we should be forgiving of one another,  or that Christ is against capital punishment, 2 fail to take into  account the context in which the story takes place.

[2] For  example, it is important to remember that Jesus Christ gave Moses the  law. He, as Jehovah, commanded that adulterers should be put to  death. 3 Capital punishment for adultery was part of the  Hebrew canon of laws at the time of Christ. 4 It would be  curious indeed if He who gave the law was now advocating that the law  not be enforced. Some may be inclined to resolve this incongruity on  the basis that Christ was God, He who would pay for all sins on the  cross and later stand in judgment of mankind (John 5:22;  1 John 2:2). Christ, the only person who has ever been  totally without sin (Hebrews 4:15), paid the price for our sins. He  therefore had the divine right to condemn a sinner or to forgive  a repentant offender. However, He did not actually forgive the  woman (John 8:11). Furthermore, the Pharisees did not believe that  Jesus could forgive sins (Luke 5:21), and [Page 54] yet somehow they were  “convicted by their own conscience” (John 8:9). So what message  did the Pharisees actually understand?

[3] It  has been suggested that Christ was teaching that while “the letter  of the law seemed to compel Jesus to condemn the woman, … his  response shows that sometimes the righteousness of God is better  served by redemptive and restorative grace.” 5 Was this  Christ’s message? That the law should no longer be enforced since  we have all sinned and fallen short of God’s glory (Romans  3:23)? There is nothing in the text to indicate that the reason the  Pharisees left is that they suddenly became converted to the  principle of redemptive and restorative grace. So what could have  caused them to leave?

[4] It  should be noted at the outset that much of the scholarly writing  addressing this incident has examined the question of whether the  story was authentic and an original part of the Gospel or was  fabricated and inserted at some later time. 6 Of course,  even if the episode was not an original part of the Gospel of John,  we need not necessarily conclude that the story was apocryphal. 7 Furthermore, regardless of whether or not the story actually  happened, the question of why it was written and how we should  interpret it is an interesting and important one. What was the writer  of the story trying to teach by showing Jesus Christ apparently  defending the adulteress and allowing her to escape punishment —  a punishment He Himself had pronounced? In light of all the  evidence that follows, it seems most reasonable to conclude that this  is not a story of tolerance for sin but one of respect for the  law.

[5] In  his article “Law in the New Testament: The Story of the Woman Taken  in Adultery,” J. Duncan M. Derrett attempts to answer some of the  more difficult questions raised by the story. 8 For  example, what did Jesus write in the dust? And what prompted the  accusers to retreat so quickly? Derrett believes the accusers must  have had impure motives in bringing the woman to Jesus. In collusion  with the husband, Derrett believes, the men set the woman up to be  caught in the act of adultery, which was contrary to the requirements  of the law. He speculates that Jesus wrote words of the law on the  floor of the temple, reminding the accusers that they must not serve  as witnesses in a trial brought under questionable circumstances  and that one should not even lend his support to such an affair.  These legal injunctions pointed out by Jesus caused the accusers to  drop their stones and leave. My analysis attempts to go beyond the  work of Derrett by drawing the focus more acutely on the potential  motives and intentions of the accusers and the procedural  requirements by which they would have had to abide in order to justly  put a guilty woman to death.

[6] The  writer of this pericope begins by making it clear that Jesus began  teaching as the light of the sun began to fill the sky. At least one  commentator 9 has noted how the symbolism evident in this  passage is consistent with light imagery elsewhere in the Gospel of  John (John 1:4– 9; 3:2; 7:50; 8:12; 9:4; 11:10; 13:30;  21:3–4). 10 The gospel writer began his book by stating  that Christ was “the true Light, which lighteth every man that  cometh into the world” (John 1:9). Now, as the light of dawn filled  the temple, so did Christ’s great example illuminate the minds and  hearts of those present. “I am the light of the world,” He  declared that morning. “[H]e that followeth me shall not walk in  darkness, but shall have the light of life” (John 8:12).

[7] The  writer of the gospel then makes note of the fact that, consistent  with Rabbinic practice for teachers, Christ was seated in the  temple. 11 That this encounter took place in the temple is  notable, since this was the proper place for performance of the  ritual ordeal known as the Sotah, or the ordeal of the bitter waters  (Numbers 5:11–31). The significance of this will be discussed  below.

[8] Adultery  in the law referred specifically to sexual intercourse between a man  and a married woman (Leviticus 20:10; Deuteronomy 22:22–24).  The Greek word used here, from which “woman” was translated,  usually refers to a married woman. 12 According to  Derrett, “[t]here is no reason to doubt but that she was a married  woman, though the word μoιχεία will admit of other  possibilities.” 13 Furthermore, Derrett continues, Jewish  law and Semitic customs make it clear that the witnesses would have  to have seen the woman actually engaging in sexual intercourse. 14 It seems clear that the woman was guilty. 15 The  penalty for false accusation was severe — those who falsely accused  a person of a capital offense could themselves be put to  death (Deuteronomy 19:15–19). It seems unlikely then that the  accusers in the story would so openly declare the guilt of the  accused unless there was a firm basis for the accusation. 16 Additionally, the words of Jesus himself acknowledged the guilt  of the woman when he later told her to “sin no more” (John 8:11).

[9] [Page 56] Yet,  while it does not seem likely that the witnesses falsely accused the  woman, it does seem likely the woman was entrapped or set up to be  caught in the act. The reason this seems likely is that it would be  difficult to catch someone in the act of adultery. Since adultery was  a capital crime, illicit lovers would have every incentive to  avoid detection, and the law required two eyewitnesses to the event  (Deuteronomy 17:6). Because the husband could not serve as a witness  against his wife, 17 two or three others would have to  actually see the man and woman engaging in intercourse. 18 This  suggests that the suspicious husband may have planned an elaborate  situation whereby his wife might be caught in the act of adultery. He  may then have hired witnesses 19 to lie in wait until the  couple engaged in sexual intercourse, at which point it could be said  that the crime of adultery had been committed. This would mean the  witnesses were not paragons of integrity simply trying to enforce the  law. Such witnesses may have had material incentive to condemn the  woman, casting doubt on their characters. In fact, their actions  would have brought them under suspicion of breaking the law  themselves, an idea discussed below.

[10] A further  indication that the accusers were corrupt is the conspicuous absence  of the male offender. The law required that both culprits be executed  (Leviticus 20:10; Deuteronomy 22:22). It may be that the husband or  the witnesses were willing to accept a bribe 20 from  the male. But the female, unable to offer a bribe, since her  money would become her husband’s upon her death anyway, had little  power to buy her freedom. Finally, the husband had incentives to  execute his guilty wife, while the same incentives to kill the male  lover did not exist. This point will be discussed further since the  questionable motives of the husband and the witnesses raises a key  issue in interpreting this story. 21

[11] The  law of Moses stated in Leviticus 20:10, “And the man that  committeth adultery with another man’s wife, even he that  committeth adultery with his neighbor’s wife, the adulterer and the  adulteress shall surely be put to death.” Deuteronomy 22:22 said,  “If a man be found lying with a woman married to an  husband, then they shall both of them die, both the man that lay with  the woman, and the woman: so shalt thou put away evil from Israel”  (see also Ezekiel 16:40). During the time of Jesus, as Derrett and  Brown have written, stoning was the way in which a woman guilty  of adultery was punished. 22

[12] Some  commentators have noted that alternatives to execution existed in the  case of punishing a woman caught in the act of adultery. The [Page 57] alternatives included divorce (Jeremiah 3:8; Deuteronomy 24:1–4) 23 and the husband stripping the woman naked and driving her from the  home (Hosea 2:2–5; Jeremiah 13:22–26; Ezekiel 16:37–39 &  23:29; Nahum 3:5). 24 While some of the alternatives  to capital punishment appear in the scriptures to be metaphorical,  Gordis points out that “were … [alternatives to stoning] out of  the question, the use of [such] metaphor[s] by the prophets in their  pleas for Israel’s return to God would have been totally  self-defeating.” 25 However, while it is possible these  alternatives existed, no one disputes that execution was also an  alternative that still existed in Jewish law during the time of  Jesus. 26 Therefore, the accusers would have been acting in  line with traditional Jewish law of the time by suggesting that it  would be appropriate to put an adulteress to death by stoning. 27

[13] If  no man have lain with thee, and if thou hast not gone aside to  uncleanness with another instead of thy husband, be thou free from  this bitter water that causeth the curse: But if thou hast gone aside  to another instead of thy husband, and if thou be defiled, and some  man have lain with thee beside thine husband: The Lord make thee  a curse and an oath among thy people, when the Lord doth make  thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to swell; And this water that causeth  the curse shall go into thy bowels, to make thy belly to swell, and  thy thigh to rot. 28

[14] There  are numerous reasons why a husband would have a motive to  defy the law of jealousies and seek his wife’s death instead of  submitting her to the ordeal of the bitter waters. Presumably, once  the ordeal was completed, the couple would return home and continue  their lives, waiting for the results of the oath. 29 One  would assume the results would take weeks if not months for signs to  appear of the woman’s guilt or innocence. Once he found his wife  could have no children, he could divorce his wife. Of course,  a husband could divorce his wife anyway, without even putting  her through the ordeal. 30 But if he were to divorce her  without a clear cause, 31 he would lose the benefit of  succeeding to her property as her heir, 32 and he would be  required to repay the bride- price to his wife’s family. 33 So it would be wise to wait for the results of the ordeal before  executing a divorce. Of course, if one had doubts about the  ability of the ordeal to definitively determine the guilt of a wife,  one would be tempted to find (or create) more clear evidence. Or if  a husband did have confidence in the efficacy of the ordeal, he  might have been reluctant to engage the trial of the bitter waters  because he was guilty of adultery himself. According to rabbinical  commentary, if a man had committed the crime himself, the ritual  would not be effective in exposing the adultery of his wife. 34 Therefore, a jealous husband with the taint of sin upon himself  would have reason to believe the ordeal of the bitter waters could  not establish the guilt of his wife. Finally, a husband might be  so overcome with jealousy that he would rather see his wife [Page 59] killed  immediately than wait several months for his suspicions to be  confirmed, only then to divorce her. Therefore, a plausible  motive existed for a suspicious husband to construct a way  in which witnesses could catch his wife in sin.

[15] Under  Roman law, adultery was not a capital offense until the third  century ad. 35 Furthermore, Derrett claims the Sanhedrin  was not allowed to try cases involving capital crimes. 36 So, if we assume, as many have, that the Jews were not allowed by the  Romans to employ stoning for adultery, this surely would be a way  to tempt Jesus into making a statement they could use to accuse  him. If Jesus were to say that the woman should be stoned, as Mosaic  law provided, the accusers could go to the Roman authorities accusing  Jesus of speaking out against Roman authority and Roman law. In the  alternative, if Jesus said the woman should not be executed, they  could have accused Jesus of preaching doctrine contrary to the law of  Moses. In spite of the fact that there may have been no due process  available to enforce the death penalty, the Jews of the time were not  above using capital punishment, though perhaps without Roman  sanction. The Bible recounts examples of Jesus and Paul narrowly  escaping the deadly wrath of lynch mobs (Luke 4:29; John 8:59 &  10:31; Acts 5:28), while Stephen was executed by stoning (Acts  7:58– 59). In this context, therefore, the question of whether  she should be stoned seems disingenuous. Indeed, it seems clear that  the question was asked in order to “tempt” Jesus. 37

[16] Although  no one really knows what Jesus scribbled in the dust, many have  speculated about what Jesus might have written there. 38 Therefore, a short discussion of some of the possibilities is  instructive.

[17] Some  have suggested that Jesus wrote the names of the wicked accusers on  the floor of the temple, acting out the prophecy of Jeremiah 17:13:  “all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they that depart from  me shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken the  Lord, the fountain of living waters.” 39 Ambrose  speculated that Jesus wrote “earth, earth, write that these men  have been disowned,” a saying also said to be inspired by  Jeremiah, who wrote “O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the  Lord” (Jeremiah 22:29), and “they that depart from [Page 60] me shall be  written in the earth, because they have forsaken the Lord, the  fountain of living waters” (Jeremiah 17:13). 40

[18] Derrett  speculates that since Jesus was probably sitting on a low stool  and writing with his finger in the dirt, it is unlikely that He could  have written more than 16 Hebrew characters. 41 Derrett  further speculates that the writing was a text of law having to  do with accusation and execution of offenders. 42 And since  Christ’s oral comments relate to the function of witnesses, Derrett  narrows the possibilities to one: “put not thine hand with the  wicked to be an unrighteous witness.” 43 Derrett points  out that all the rabbis’ rules on disqualification of witnesses  hinge upon this verse. 44 Jesus clearly recognized the  impure motives of the accusers. Rather than fall into the trap of  simply answering their question and giving them something with which  to accuse him, Jesus removed himself from the situation by drawing in  the dust. And by thus removing himself, the accusers became the  accused. “[H]is refusal to be a party to what may be an  unrighteous decision merges imperceptibly with a warning to the  questioners that their own activities must be justifiable, and that  it is not sufficient that they or some of them saw her in the act of  adultery.” 45

[19] The  act of Jesus’s writing in the dust brings a couple of images  to mind. First, writing words of the law in the dust of the temple  could serve to remind careful observers of the ritual of the bitter  waters, in which the words of the law of jealousy were combined with  dust of the temple floor in a mixture that could serve to set an  accused adulteress free. However, this connection may have been lost  on the minds of those present, since the process of taking dust from  the temple floor was a particular one. The dust was taken from  underneath a slab that lay to the right of the entrance to the  sanctuary and not from any random location on the floor of the  temple. 46

[20] Second,  this act of Jesus’s reaching forth his finger, perhaps to write  words of the law, brings to mind the finger of Jehovah writing the  words of the ten commandments (Exodus 31:18; Deuteronomy 9:10). 47 This connection was also not likely made in the minds of the  accusers, though it is a poignant reminder to the modern reader  that it was Christ Himself who wrote the law.

[21] The  Law of Moses required that in the case of capital punishment, at  least two witnesses to the offense were required, and that the  witnesses should be those to initiate the execution by casting the  first stones (Deuteronomy 17:6–7). As Derrett pointed out, the  fact that stoning was even an issue means there must have been at  least two witnesses to the act. 48

[22] Where  the verse reads, “If a malicious witness rises up against  a man,” the word “malicious” is defined as “a witness  that promotes violence and wrong.” 49 Another commentator  has stated that the word “false” is used here to describe  a perversion of justice; those who act falsely “are those who  do violence to the Law, who use it for their own benefit.” 50 A statement found in the Talmud dating from the Second Temple  period attributed to Shimon ben Shetah warned, “Examine the  witnesses thoroughly, but be careful with your words, lest from them  they learn to lie.” 51 The integrity of the witnesses was  an essential element to the administration of justice. So just as the  trial of a suspected adulteress (i.e., the ordeal of the bitter  waters) demanded an untainted husband in order to be effective, so  did the trial of an accused adulteress demand untainted witnesses in  order to be legally effective. 52

[23] The  Greek word anamarthto x, used here  in John 8:7 to describe being “without sin” (used nowhere else in  the New Testament), occurs in 2 Maccabees 12:42 where, in  context, it refers to being without the sin of idolatry. 53 This suggests that although the word could be used to communicate  being without sin in general, it could also be used to mean being  without sin in a specific sense as well. A variety of  possibilities have been proposed for what the sins of the accusers  might have been: failure to apply the ordeal of the bitter waters,  conspiracy between the [Page 62] woman’s husband and the witnesses to plot  for her execution, and failure to deliver both guilty parties for the  trial. Furthermore, there may have been a transgression of the  obligation to act to help prevent a brother’s sin (See  Leviticus 19:17; Deuteronomy 19:15; Matthew 18:15–16; Luke 17:3;  Galatians 6:1; James 5:19). 54 (Or in this case the sin of  a sister or a wife.) If the witnesses had lain in wait in  order to catch the adulteress in the act, they would have hesitated  to emerge from their hiding place until coitus had occurred. At this  point, they would have been unable to help prevent the sin of the  woman. So the accusers may have been guilty of a number of  transgressions. But at the very least, it seems they would have been  guilty of the sin of serving as “false” witnesses by promoting  violence and wrong to the woman and doing violence to the law by  using it for their own benefit.

[24] Some  early manuscripts, after the phrase “wrote on the ground,”  included the words “the sins of every one of them.” 55 Metzger and Ehrman speculate that this phrase was added by an unknown  copyist seeking to satisfy a natural curiosity concerning what  it was that Jesus wrote upon the ground. 56 It is  interesting to hypothesize that the accusers themselves might have  been guilty of the crime of which they have accused the woman. While  there is no textual support for this idea, adultery seems to have  been a common occurrence. Jesus implies that the Jews of the  time were an “adulterous generation” (Matthew 12:39; see also  James 4:4). Also, not long after this time, the trial of the  bitter waters was discontinued. The explanation given by Rabban  Jochanan Ben Zacchai, who lived at the time of Jesus, was that the  Sotah was abandoned because adultery was so openly prevalent. 57

[25] Derrett  says that if he is correct in his theory about what Jesus wrote the  first time, “there can be no doubt what it was Jesus wrote to round  off his [judicial] ‘opinion.’” 58 He then cites  Exodus 23:7a: “From a false matter keep far.” This is the  verse upon which the rabbinical rule rests that one must not  associate with a sinner as co-judge or co-witness. 59 It is unclear to what degree a witness had to have been free  from sin. Of course, to an extent, this requirement would exclude  everyone from being a competent witness. If Jesus was saying  that only witnesses wholly without sin were eligible to testify and  to perform the execution, it is curious that those present in the  temple would feel inspired to drop the stones they held for use  against the adulteress and then pick them up again to use against  Jesus only a few minutes later (John 8:59). While the  temple-goers do not seem to have felt an obligation to be completely [Page 63] sinless, it seems they were at least convinced they had to be free  from taint as regarding that which they were to testify.

[26] Finally,  the image of Christ writing words of the law again reminds us of the  respect Christ had for the law since it was He who, as Jehovah, gave  the law. And just as Jehovah wrote the words of the law twice, Christ  wrote on the floor of the temple twice (Exodus 34:1–4, 28). 60

[27] Perhaps  the accusers were reminded of the then popular story in the History  of Susanna as they dropped their stones and left. 61 In  this story, found in the Apocrypha, Susanna is a recently  married woman who finds herself pursued sexually by two respected  elders. The elders threatened that if she did not accept their  advances, they would accuse her of adultery. Susanna refused to  submit and was thus brought before the people to be accused and put  to death on the false testimony of the two elders. A young man,  called Daniel, 62 came to her defense and proved the elders  had borne false witness. The two elders then suffered the same death  they would have carried out on Susanna. Since this story was well  known at the time, 63 it is quite possible the accusers  were reminded of the story either by what Jesus had said to them or  by what he wrote. This would be especially true if, as Derrett has  suggested, Jesus wrote words from Exodus 23:7 on the ground, since  this is the very verse Daniel cites in obtaining Susanna’s  acquittal. 64 The story of Susanna might also come to mind  if, as some have suggested, the accusers themselves were guilty of  adultery. 65

[28] It  is significant to note that unlike other episodes with sinners (see  e.g., Luke 7:36–50; Luke 23:34), Jesus did not offer the woman  forgiveness. It would therefore be incorrect, as some have been, to  cite this incident as an example of the divine forgiveness of God. 66 Although Christ will stand in final judgment, He chose not to pass  judgment on the woman at this time. Instead, He admonished her to sin  no more, mercifully allowing her time to prepare for that final  judgment, which opportunity was not afforded her by the accusers. Of  course, we may not know all the reasons He did not “condemn” the  woman under the law. However, one reason seems clear at least: He did  not condemn her because procedural requirements would not allow it.  He was not a witness to the crime and so could not stand in  condemnation, unlike a competent eyewitness.

[29] It  is sometimes easy in the modern world to forget the importance of the  procedural rules and safeguards of our own criminal justice system.  As we in society pass judgment on the accused, we may find ourselves  pointing an accusatory finger not only at those who are guilty, but  also at those who defend the guilty. In this story, Christ can be  seen as a light to those who have a commitment to due  process of law, order, and those safeguards that make us more  civilized. When viewed in this vein, this story serves not only as  a statement that the wicked are unfit to serve in God’s system  of justice, but also as a statement that the process of justice  matters. To follow the example set in this story, we should be  willing to follow the law both when it means the guilty will be  punished and when it requires that the guilty are set free. 67

