[Page 81] Abstract :  Walking for 500 miles in a foreign country through heat, arduous  terrain, and many inconveniences is difficult enough. Add to the  equation a man in a wheelchair, and the task appears impossible. The  solution? Determination, humility, humor, faith, love, and someone,  or many, who give you a push. I’ll  Push You is a true story and parable for life that will  give readers hope and encouragement.

Review  of Patrick Gray & Justin Skeesuck, I’ll Push You: A Journey  of 500 Miles, Two Best Friends, and One Wheelchair (Carol Stream,  IL: Tyndale House Publishers, 2017). 296 pp. $24.99 (hardback);  $15.99 (paperback).

Reading  or watching the news can be a depressing experience. Most stories  feed us excessive amounts of conflict, violence, abuse, and tragedy  that can be difficult to digest. If we come to believe that what we  see is the full picture of “reality,” falling into cynicism  becomes a real possibility. To counterbalance this negativity we  need true stories of kindness, sacrifice, faith, and hope to remind  us that goodness and God are still very much among us. I’ll  Push You is one such  story. It’s a story that touches, inspires, entertains, engages,  and moves readers to life reflections and examinations. Indeed, the  book can be a transforming experience because it is a story written  in the language of truth from beginning to end. The experience,  characters, relationships, hope, and life lessons presented feel true  to the very core. This is, I believe, the greatest gift the book  offers: it shows us a reality we may be too distracted to see or too  hardened to recognize.

Hundreds  of thousands of people from all over the world walk or bike these  routes every year, some for spiritual reasons, others as adventurous  tourists. Most if not all are transformed by the experience. That  Justin Skeesuck from Idaho should make the decision to go on the Camino is not newsworthy … except for the fact that Justin  is confined to a wheelchair due to a progressive neuromuscular  disease. The only way his dream can come true is through the help of  his best friend Patrick, whose response to the invitation provides  the very title to the book: “I’ll push you.”

As  readers travel with Justin and Patrick to Spain, they really come to  know the two friends in their joys, sorrows, and struggles. The  authors display a remarkable amount of transparency and vulnerability  by describing not only their remarkable journey, but also their  backgrounds and life challenges. The story is thus an account of the  spiritual and emotional development of the two authors as they travel  to a destination both physical and spiritual. It is also the  potential story of every human being because the pilgrimage functions  as a broad metaphor for life with its challenges, surprises, hopes,  and disappointments — but most of all with its love. Indeed, if the  book has a primary theme or a thread that unites the various  experiences, relationships, and adventures described, it is that love  makes the “mission possible.” The depth and sincerity of  friendship between the two protagonists is central to this message,  but the love they share with their spouses and children, the love  they feel from God, and the love and support they receive from fellow  travelers, friends at home, and even complete strangers, highlights  it as the necessary ingredient of a meaningful life.

Humility  is another prominent theme, especially in Patrick’s journey. He  learns from Justin the importance of letting go of control, of  trusting loved ones in the midst of tragedy, and of truly having  faith in the God he believes [Page 83] in when obstacles appear insurmountable.  Reciprocity surfaces repeatedly. Patrick may be pushing Justin’s  wheelchair physically, but Justin pushes Patrick in other profound  ways. Indeed, most of the encounters with occasional helpers, travel  companions, and new friends highlight this dimension of reciprocity.  Patrick learns that receiving is as important as giving when he  concludes, “I have to let go of the safety I find in my own  abilities; I have to let go of the reins so I can embrace the  provision of others” (231). In this way the Camino becomes  transformative. Patrick’s subtle invitation is for readers to join  him and be transformed in the same way.

While  the book is filled with what we may call “life lessons,”  including memorable insights on rest and the Sabbath, the strength of  community, and the power of faith and grit, the story is neither  heavy nor moralistic. These lessons flow naturally from the real  experiences of the authors, who describe their adventures with great  humor and enthusiasm. For example, the impromptu songs that Justin  sings to Patrick when he dresses him in the morning highlight the fun  dimension of even the most ordinary moments of life. Readers’ eyes  are also opened to the aesthetics of northern Spain as the writers  focus their attention on its beauties, both in its nature and people.  Overall, optimism and hope overflow from the book’s pages, not as a  result of denial of darkness but in recognition of it. The difference  is in looking through the darkness in the strength of faith and love.

[Page 84] In  reflecting upon the decision that led to the Camino adventure,  Patrick says his friend Justin “always starts with the why. If  the why is strong enough, the how will come together”  (29). What many thought was impossible actually came to be. How could  that be? Patrick again responds: “Though my why has changed,  the how never has. It has always been together ” (81).  Justin echoes him and adds: “The only people we feel loved by are  those who pursue us. They pursue conversation with us, spend time  with us, hold us when we are broken, and help us get up when we fall”  (178). The right motivation and support will do it: even in the midst  of great trials, life may turn out to be a wonderful adventure. I’ll  Push You opens a window into the friendship between these two  Christian Nazarene men from Idaho, and by so doing shows us a  real-life example of Christlike love. In a world that often  highlights discouragement and isolation, these are the stories we  need to read more of!

---
Notes

[1] A pilgrimage is a journey to a holy, special, or unusual place.  In many faith traditions people have travelled often long and  dangerous distances [Page 82] to sacred sites in order to rediscover their  faith, connect with God, explore the deepest corners of their souls,  or a host of other reasons. One of the most important Christian  pilgrimages is the Camino de Santiago. 1 The pilgrimage begins in the corner of France at St. Jean Pied de  Port, then crosses the Pyrenees into Spain with a first stop at  Pamplona, where the famous running of the bulls takes place, and  culminates 500 miles to the west in Santiago de Compostela in the  Spanish autonomous community of Galicia. According to tradition,  Santiago’s cathedral contains the human remains of the Apostle  James; hence, this “sacred site” functions as the destination of  the pilgrimage.

[2] As  Latter-day Saints we know much about sacred journeys; indeed, we are  a journey-conscious people. We view the biblical exodus as  a foundational event of God’s interaction with His people, but  we also place great focus on other transforming journeys. The exodus  of Lehi’s family in the Book of Mormon and the pioneers’ crossing  of the plains in the history of this dispensation are only two of the  more significant examples. These and other travels (like the journey  to reach a distant temple) clearly involve sacred destinations —  promised lands that assure peace, prosperity, posterity, or spiritual  illumination. Yet it is the journey itself that sanctifies the  travelers and prepares them to enjoy the destination. Trials, joys,  and numberless opportunities to develop faith, love, and mutual  support on the journey are not secondary to the destination — they  become part of it. Ultimately, life itself is our greatest pilgrimage  to be endured but also enjoyed in family and community fellowship  until we reach that glorious destination, which is God’s eternal  presence. 2

