[Page 191] Abstract: The concept that race has evolved rather than remaining static is not  well understood, both outside and within The Church of Jesus Christ  of Latter-day Saints. In Religion  of a Different Color , W. Paul Reeve shows how the concept  of race evolved from painting Mormons as nonwhite in the 19th  century to “too white” by the beginning of the 21st  century.

Review  of W. Paul Reeve, Religion of a Different Color: Race and the  Mormon Struggle for Whiteness (New York: Oxford University Press,  2015). 352 pp. $36.95 (hardcover), $24.95 (paperback).

Reeve,  preempting these responses, says the following in the introduction to  his book:

> This  book argues that one of those transitions was racial: from not  securely white in the nineteenth century to too white by the  twenty-first century. Being white equaled access to political,  social, and economic power: all aspects of citizenship in which  outsiders sought to limit or prevent Mormon participation. … The  process was never linear and most often involved both [Page 193] sides talking  past each other. Yet, Mormons in the nineteenth century recognized  their suspect racial position. (3)

This  remark is fascinating in and of itself. Most of us (including me)  assumed that Mormons were disliked primarily because of their  religion, and that is true to a point. However, if Reeve is correct —  and it seems he is — the main reason for the marginalization was  that Mormons were not seen as being white at all; they were thought  of as having formed a new, inferior race.

Reeve,  using this picture as a framework for his book, dedicates one chapter  to the four white children, two chapters to the Indian child, four to  the black child, and one chapter to the Asian child. He notes that  just as in real life, not all children receive equal attention in his  book (11).

The  chapters on the white children (14‒51) shows that while the  children are from parts of the world notably white, early critics of  the Church saw them as nonwhite because the children were mixed among  the other races and because Utah — distant as it was from the  eastern cities — was cut off from white-culture society. This was  not seen as a joke; medical doctors submitted this thesis to  peer-reviewed journals, and their papers were published (16‒20).  While there was pushback as to whether a race of people could be  created in a short amount of time, the general consensus was that  Mormons were something close to white but not fully white. As Reeve  had noted earlier (6), only white people were fit to rule and lead in  that time, so this was taken as evidence that the Mormons were not  fit to be in the United States or to be leaders of American  territories.

The  two chapters on Indians (52‒105) show that while the relations  between Mormons and their Indian neighbors were largely cordial, the  problem of racial regression remained because Mormons were encouraged  to marry and did marry Indians. Given that this was the era just  after the age of Andrew Jackson, the public had an unfavorable view  of Indians, and by association the view of Mormons declined as they  intermarried with [Page 194] them. Furthermore, since the Book of Mormon claims  (according to the critics of that time) that the American continent  belonged rightfully to the Indians, this led to understandable  tension (55‒74).

The  chapters on blacks cover three main topics: the Church’s attitude  toward slavery, its attitude toward miscegenation, and the origins of  the priesthood ban. Reeve notes that for the most part of his life  (after a statement in 1836) Joseph Smith was consistently  against slavery and was open to the idea of blacks living among  whites, a radical view during that time (126‒27). He also proposed  that profits from the sale of public lands could be used to pay slave  owners for their freed slaves (127). However, Smith was consistently  against miscegenation, though the Church had no official policy about  the matter during his lifetime (127). It is also well documented that  Smith was aware of several black people being ordained to the  priesthood and had no qualms about it (106, 126).

During  the administration of Brigham Young, things began to change. At the  outset, Young generally had the same outlook as Smith: he was against  slavery and had no problems with blacks being ordained to the  priesthood. In a remark he made to William McCary during an  unofficial Church trial, he remarked that Walker Lewis, a black  barber, was “one of the best elders” (131). In 1852 he formally  announced the priesthood ban before the Utah legislature (rather than  in a Church gathering), justifying it by saying that blacks were  descendants of Cain and were cursed in regard to the priesthood  (144‒46), a theme that would recur until the ban was lifted in  1978.

Reeve  concludes the book by saying that Mormons have gone from being  described as not white at all to too white by the time Mitt Romney  ran for president in 2012 (269‒72). This does seem to be the case,  but if Reeve is correct, it did not have to be that way. Mormons  could have been seen as the most progressive Church when it came to  matters of race. Instead, it chose to retrench and thereby became  seen as one of the most regressive and is paying the consequences in  the modern day and age. To be sure, many members of the Church are  not white, and the Church is growing most rapidly in nonwhite areas  (Africa and Asia, for example). But the afterglow of a checkered  racial past remains visible. Only time will correct it.

---
Notes

[1] In  December 2013 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints  published an online essay titled “Race and the Priesthood.” 1 Who wrote the essay is unknown, but a note at the bottom states that  the essay was written with the contributions of multiple scholars. It  is not hard to understand why the essay was written; in the 40 years  since the revelation on priesthood was received, the issue has not  been addressed directly in a general conference talk. Many people  have questions about who originally initiated the ban on blacks  holding the priesthood:  whether it was inspired and whether some of  the myths that had permeated LDS culture were accurate. The essay  dismissed many of the myths, but it left open the question of whether  or not the ban was inspired. So while parts of the puzzle have been  resolved, many questions remain.

[2] Enter  W. Paul Reeve, author of Religion of a Different Color: Race and  the Mormon Struggle for Whiteness. Reeve is a historian and  professor at the University of Utah, where he specializes in Utah  history, [Page 192] Mormon history and the history of the American West; in  other words, he is qualified to write about the issues of race as it  relates to the LDS Church. Recently, Reeve was also appointed the  first Mormon Studies professor at the University of Utah, 2 so we can expect more books on the history of blacks and the LDS  Church in the coming years as Reeve continues his research.  Additional reviews of Reeve’s book have come from eminent LDS and  non-LDS historians, such as Patrick Q. Mason, Richard Lyman Bushman,  and Alexandra Griffin.

[3] The  subtitle of the book almost seems like an oxymoron: Race and the  Mormon Struggle for Whiteness . Isn’t the problem with Mormons  that they are too white? After all, at the recent press  conference introducing Russell M. Nelson as the 17th  president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, a  newspaper reporter raised the point that “the Church leadership is  still white, male, American.” 3 In addition, in the recent Broadway musical The Book of Mormon, all the original missionaries are Americans. There has not yet been  an African-American General Authority of the LDS Church. How in the  world could the LDS Church “struggle for whiteness”? It seems to  be an area in which whites already flourish and even dominate.

[4] The  cover photo of Reeve’s book comes from an April 1904 picture in Life magazine. A person named Elder Berry (who looks  suspiciously like Joseph F. Smith, the Church’s president when the  magazine cover first appeared) is shown holding hands with eight of  his children. The caption underneath the picture reads: “Mormon  Elder-berry — Out with His Six Year-Olds, Who Take After Their  Mothers.” 4 Of the eight children, five are white, one is black, one is Asian,  and the other is Indian. This picture was an attempt to show that  Mormons embraced interracial marriage and hence were also thereby in  a state of “racial decline.”

[5] One  of the most important books in Mormon history in the last 50 years is  undoubtedly Richard Bushman’s biography of Joseph Smith. Why? It  helps readers understand Mormonism and Joseph Smith as well as they  can be understood and therefore better grasp the community of the  Saints that flowed from the divine, special revelations to Joseph as [Page 195] prophet, seer, and revelator. Rough Stone Rolling, 5 coupled with the publication of the Joseph Smith Papers, assists the  Saints in doing this. However, given that race is such a fascinating  issue in and of itself and the fact that the issue of race in  relationship to many things is not well understood by the Latter-day  Saints, Professor Reeve’s Religion of a Different Color adds significantly to understanding the cultural milieu in which  the Church was founded as well as understanding one of the more  controversial aspects of the Church’s subsequent history. Reeve has  written a truly commendable book that should be in the library of  every member of the LDS Church.

