[Page 139] Abstract : The Maxwell Institute Study  Edition of the Book of Mormon is an important  tool for personal and class study of the Book of Mormon.  Not only does it provide a better reading experience, it has  important features that enhance study.

Review  of Grant Hardy, ed. The Book of Mormon: Another  Testament of Jesus Christ, Maxwell Institute Study Edition (Provo,  UT: Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship,  Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University / Salt Lake  City: Deseret Book, 2018). 648 pp. $35.00 (paperback).

During  the October 2018 Women’s session of general conference, President  Russell M. Nelson challenged the sisters (and presumably all readers)  to read the Book of Mormon by the end of 2018. This  particular edition of the Book of Mormon arrives too late  to help with that challenge, but the very next time Latter-day Saints  are admonished to read the English version of the Book of Mormon,  this is the edition they should read.

Because  the Maxwell Institute Study Edition is not the official  edition of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I am  aware of the audacity of my suggestion to read this edition rather  than the official one. One reason I am comfortable with that  statement is that the Study Edition is based on the official  version (1981, with 2013 updates). That means the words read will be  the very words one would read in the official text. It is what the Study Edition adds that improves both the reading and the  study experience.

Grant  Hardy himself is the editor of the new Study Edition , and it  is clearly built upon his earlier work. Although he kept much, if not  most, of the paragraphing from the Reader’s Edition, he went  through the text anew and at times changed his mind on where  paragraphs would begin. The reason the same person could see the text  in two different ways is that there is no precise way to capture  paragraphs.

Also,  neither the original nor the printer’s manuscript contained much  punctuation. Not only were there few periods, the capitalization was  random, based more on words than on conceptual paragraphs. Having  personally attempted similar paragraphing, I believe the text  does not conform to the choices that drive modern paragraphing. Thus,  creating paragraphs imposes on the text a logic not necessarily  inherent in the text. All that means is that any two people creating  paragraphs, and even the same person at different times, will create  different paragraphs. The purpose of the paragraphs does not matter  much. They are there to make reading easier, not to provide meaning  in and of themselves.

Where  the Reader’s Edition marked the original chapters in  footnotes, the original chapters are much more explicit in the Study  Guide. At the center of each page’s header, Hardy notes in  brackets the original chapter number. To keep references clear, Hardy  uses Arabic numerals for the current chapters and verses and Roman  numerals for the 1830 chapters. Additionally, the original chapter  numbers are shown in brackets when [Page 141] they appear within the text. Most  of these appear before current chapters, but at times Orson Pratt  divided the original chapter to provide ending information of one  chapter at the beginning of the next.

Understanding  the original chapters allows for a type of understanding  unavailable in editions that follow only the modern chapters.  No  matter which edition we read, we can know which stories Nephi1  included. Knowing which set of stories Nephi1 thought  belonged together in a chapter (for example chapter I comprises  our chapters 1–5) helps us understand Nephi1 himself  rather than only the stories.

An  important visual change comes in the sections quoting Isaiah. Rather  than simply providing the text, Hardy highlights in bold the  additions to the KJV text and provides footnotes for significant  removals of text. This allows the reader not only to read the text  but also to identify the differences easily. This is one of the  places where the concept of study and easy reading combine. The  reader learns important information simply through the process of  reading the text, while the visual markers supply information quickly  and easily.

Those  who will read this text for study will find a wealth of  information in the footnotes. Some footnotes indicate references to  the Bible, others to intratextual links. Good study notes help the  reader understand the text better. One of the ways Hardy supplies  important information is by providing a footnote for references  to important variant readings.

The  authoritative work in the multiple changes in the text, from the  manuscripts through all published versions, is Royal Skousen’s Analysis of the Textual Variants of the Book of Mormon ,  an exhaustive look at all changes. Hardy combed that source to  provide the important or interesting variants. Most readers of the Study Edition will be unaware that the Analysis of the  Textual Variants is a work in six volumes and 4,060 pages.  They will therefore be unaware of the significant labor Hardy  undertook to digest the possible variants to identify those he deemed  worth entering in the footnotes.

The Reader’s Edition contained many helpful maps and charts, and  many of those are included in the Study Edition, updated as  needed. One difference is that the Reader’s Edition was  written for both Latter-day Saint and  secular readers, and some of  the notes were directed at the secular  reader. The Study Edition is clearly for Latter-day Saints, and the secular-facing notes are  not required. They are replaced by excellent introductions to  information important to the faithful reader. A nice touch is placing  the testimonies of the three and eight witnesses before [Page 142] Emma Smith’s and Joseph’s testimonies. The statements are  not new, but their placement in such prominence is.

I am  sure one feature of the text will be mostly ignored, if not assumed  to be an error. At the end of Words of Mormon and before the page  indicating that Mormon’s abridgment of the large plates is to  begin, there is a single completely blank page. I hope that  isn’t an error, rather an effort to subtly remind the reader of an  important distinction between what he or she has just read and the  text that follows. Although we call the whole The Book of Mormon, technically, Mormon’s book doesn’t begin until Mosiah (and begins  after the lost beginning to the book of Mosiah). That single blank  page may be a striking reminder of a significant difference  between the two parts of the text.

Of  course, read the Book of Mormon in any format, but if you  have the option, read this version. It is currently the best edition  of the Book of Mormon available.

---
Notes

[1] The Study Edition is not totally new, but it is clearly totally  revised and reexamined. In 2003 Grant Hardy published The  Book of Mormon: [Page 140] A Reader’s Edition through the  University of Illinois Press. At that time, he used the 1920 edition  (in public domain) rather than the official version. What he  innovated in that edition was a formatting designed, as the  title indicated, for the reader. The text retained all the chapter  and verse apparatus that allowed a reader to engage with any and  all references to the Book of Mormon’s verses, but they  were formatted into paragraphs. Along with the paragraphs were  section headers that provided in-context information about the  subject of the following set of verses. Hardy also included  a footnote to indicate where the original chapters ended, prior  to the changes in the 1879 version of the Book of Mormon.  It was a much nicer reading experience than the official text,  which is broken into chunks by no logic other than whatever drove the  decision to create a set of text as a verse. 1

[2] The Study Edition has the same text as the officially published  Book of Mormon . Thus there is nothing to lose by  reading this version. However, there is so much to gain that this is  the version to prefer. Were I to teach a class on the  Book of Mormon at any level, I would want the class to  be reading this version. 2 There is simply much more to be understood as one reads.

