[Page vii] Abstract: Young members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints  have grown up with a plethora of information available to answer  the questions they may have about the Gospel. This, in turn, has  allowed discordant information to cause concern in many members,  ultimately drawing some away from the Gospel. In a recent  address to young, married members of the Church in Chicago, President  Dallin H. Oaks advised that more research is often not the way to  approach these concerns, but rather that members should rely on their  faith in Jesus Christ. While many may not agree with this advice,  when it comes to questions that will never have a provable  answer, particularly of a religious nature, President Oaks’s  words are correct. Research can never completely replace true faith,  only supplement it.

In  our current day when the use of handheld, GPS-enabled devices has  virtually supplanted the use of paper maps, it is possible that the  following excerpt by Lewis Carroll may be lost on some. The message,  though, is important.

Young,  married Latter-day Saints in Chicago had a notable opportunity  on 2 February 2019, when President Dallin H. Oaks, first  counselor in the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of  Latter- day Saints, passed through the city as a visitor.  There was some special meaning in his visit because he had lived in  Chicago for a number of years, originally as a student at  the highly-ranked law school of the University of Chicago and then,  among other things, as a member of that law school’s faculty.

Subsequently,  an article appeared in the Church News about his remarks, and  I found a couple of passages from his speech, as reported  in the article, of particular interest:

“Research  is not the answer”? Really?

[Page ix] Some  might expect me to disagree with President Oaks’s statement. After  all, I was deeply involved for many years with the old  Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies (FARMS) and its  successor, the pre-2012 Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious  Scholarship. And now I’m deeply involved with The Interpreter  Foundation. These organizations have focused on fostering faithful  research into the scriptures and claims of the Restoration and on  publishing the results of that research as widely as possible.

If  I didn’t believe Gospel-related research and scholarship to be  important, I certainly wouldn’t have devoted so much of my  time and effort to FARMS and Interpreter. And if others didn’t  believe such scholarship and research to be of great value, those  organizations wouldn’t have been launched in the first place.

Moreover,  I believe that scholarship supplies many reasons to accept and  sustain Latter-day Saint faith.

Nevertheless,  in the last analysis, I agree with President Oaks. Apart from  the most simple and noncontroversial topics, research and scholarly  argument will almost always be tentative, inconclusive, reaching  probable conclusions and arguing for positions that invite  qualifications and counterarguments. What caused the fall of Rome?  Who wrote the Odyssey and the Iliad ? What are the roles  of nature and nurture in human personality? What is the ultimate  origin of morality? These and thousands of other such questions have  been and continue to be disputed — to say nothing of such far  deeper and more essential questions as whether there is a God,  whether Jesus really rose from the dead, or whether Joseph Smith  was divinely inspired.

And  yet, in matters of ultimate concern — religious questions, really,  whether one answers them “religiously” or not — decisions must  be made. Such decisions are inescapable. Not to decide is, itself, to  decide. Moreover, they must be made in the absence of definitive,  objective, publicly demonstrable “proof.”

We  can research forever. And I think that we should do so.  In the meanwhile, though, we must live — and life is ticking  inescapably away. Moreover, the life of a disciple requires  commitment. It’s not a never- ending PhD program supported  by an inexhaustible scholarship fund. Covenants need to be made or  not made, kept or abandoned. Children need to be reared, in faith or  without it. Infinite postponement is impossible.

Consider  the case of the calling of the ancient apostles Peter, James, John,  and Andrew, as it is described in the gospel of Matthew:

Please  note the terms straightway (4:20) and immediately (4:22). Both of them render the same underlying Greek word (εὐθέως).  The New International Version of the Bible translates them,  respectively, as at once and immediately . J. B.  Phillips gives them both as at once .

The  sense is pretty clear. Neither Simon Peter nor Andrew nor James nor  John pursued graduate studies in a theological school before  responding to Jesus’s call. None of them did any library research.  They didn’t even take the missionary discussions. They heard the  call and felt impelled to accept it. εὐθέως. Immediately.

Shouldn’t  they have engaged in extensive and rigorous research before making so  momentous a choice?

Dobelli’s  brief chapter begins with an allusion to an even briefer 1946 short  story by the great Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges, which appears  in the form of an invented fragmentary literary forgery. (It may have  been inspired by the above passage from Lewis Carroll.) Titled “Del  Rigor en la Ciencia” (“On Rigor in Science”), the Borges story,  in its entirety, reads as follows:

Here  is an English translation:

He  illustrates his point, also, with a personal story about  searching for a hotel in Berlin. Having looked through  a selection of possibilities, he chose one of them on an  impression. But then, not trusting his “gut reaction”  ( Bauchgefühl ), he did more research. He read dozens of  comments, evaluations, and blog entries for a wide range of  hotels and clicked through uncounted photos and videos. After two  hours of intensive study, he decided on … the same hotel he had  chosen at the very start.

But  how about some science? Some real data? Dobelli mentions a study  by a researcher named Jonathan Baron. In it, Baron posed the  following question to a group of physicians:

> A  patient is suffering from symptoms that point, with a likelihood  of 80%, to Illness A. However, if the patient’s disease isn’t Illness A, it is either Illness X or Y. Unfortunately, each of these  diseases must be treated in a different way. Each of the three  is roughly equally serious, and each potential treatment has similar  side effects. As a physician, which of the treatments would you  prescribe? Logically, you would bet on Illness A and,  accordingly, order up Therapy A. But  now suppose that there is a diagnostic test that will give  a positive result in the case of Illness X and a negative  result in the case of Illness Y. If, however, the disease in question  really is Illness A, half of the test results will come out positive  and half will come out negative. Would you, as a physician,  recommend that the patient undergo this diagnostic test?

[Page xiii] In  fact, most of the physicians surveyed by Jonathan Baron, the  researcher running the study, recommended the diagnostic test be  administered to the patient. And they did so, remarks Dobelli,

Gigerenzer  asked a simple question of students at both the University of  Chicago and the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München (i.e., the  University of Munich, in Germany): “Which city has more residents,  San Diego or San Antonio?”

Of  the American students, 62% gave the right answer, “San Diego.”  But fully 100% of the German students were able to answer the  question correctly. Why? Because German students are so much better  than American students, even at the elite University of Chicago? No.  Because the German students knew less than the American students did:

Dobelli  closes his chapter with a brief allusion to the Great Recession  of 2008. Scores of thousands of government, academic, and private  economists — armed with mathematical models and research reports,  commentaries and terabytes of data — failed to foresee the  financial crisis. When certain knowledge is beyond the reach of human  reason, more data and more research isn’t going to give it to us.

[Page xiv] Another  of Dobelli’s chapters is worthy of note in this context. It’s  entitled “Wann Sie Ihren Kopf ausschalten sollen” (“When you  should turn your head off”).

> And  thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o’er with the pale  cast of thought, And enterprises of great pith and moment With  this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action.  (Hamlet, 3.1.92–96)

Dobelli  tells an interesting story about preferences in strawberry jam. In  the 1980s, it seems, Consumer Reports had 45 different types  of strawberry jam rated by expert “tasters.” Some years later,  a psychologist by the name of Timothy Wilson did exactly the  same thing with his students, and the results were very nearly  identical: The students preferred the same varieties of strawberry  jam as the experts had.

“If  one thinks too much,” concludes Dobelli,

None  of what I’m saying here, I hasten to add, is intended to argue  against the value of knowledge or the importance and interest of  research. It is, however, intended to suggest that, in matters where  ultimate answers are unavailable to human reason — e.g., whether  there is a God, whether life has meaning, whether there is  a real distinction between good and evil, whether there is  a purpose behind the cosmos — additional research really  cannot deliver the answers we seek. Where did I come from? Why  am I here? Where am I going? No quantity of scientific data  and no amount of immersion in the library stacks will settle those  questions beyond doubt.

President  Oaks is right.

---
Notes

[1] “What  a useful thing a pocket-map is!” I remarked. “That’s  another thing we’ve learned from your Nation,” said Mein  Herr, “map-making. But we’ve carried it much further than you .  What do you consider the largest map that would be really  useful?” “About  six inches to the mile.” “Only six inches !” exclaimed Mein Herr. “We very soon got to six yards to the mile. Then we tried a hundred yards  to the mile. And then came the grandest idea of all! We actually made  a map of the country, on the scale of a mile to the  mile !” “Have  you used it much?” I enquired. [Page viii] “It  has never been spread out, yet,” said Mein Herr: “the farmers  objected: they said it would cover the whole country, and shut out  the sunlight! So we now use the country itself, as its own map, and  I assure you it does nearly as well.” 1

[2] “Your  generation has grown up with an avalanche of information about the  history of the Church that is new to many and concerning to some,”  he said. “The time-honored principles of relying on and trusting  the Lord and His servants are questioned by some.” … He  acknowledged that some Latter-Saint couples face conflicts over  important values and priorities. Matters of Church history and  doctrinal issues have led some spouses to inactivity. Some spouses  wonder how to best go about researching and responding to such  issues. “I suggest that research is not the answer,” he  said. The Church does offer answers to many familiar questions  through its Gospel Topics Essays found at lds.org. “But the  best answer to any question that threatens faith is to work to  increase faith in the Lord Jesus Christ,” he said. “Conversion to  the Lord precedes conversion to the Church. And conversion to the  Lord comes through prayer and study and service, furthered by loving  patience on the part of spouse and other concerned family members.” 2

[3] [Page x] And  Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called  Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for  they were fishers. And he saith unto them, Follow me, and I will  make you fishers of men. And they straightway (εὐθέως) left  their nets, and followed him. And going on from thence, he saw other  two brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in  a ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and he  called them. And they immediately (εὐθέως) left the ship and  their father, and followed him. 3

[4] And  at what a cost! Their acceptance of the divine call ripped these  provincial Galilean fishermen out of the small rural lives they would  otherwise have lived and made them figures of international  historical importance — but not, necessarily, of international  affection. The New Testament itself records that James (or Jacob),  the brother of John and a son of Zebedee, was martyred by the  sword in Jerusalem around AD 44, at the order of Herod Agrippa. 4 According to ancient tradition, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter,  died by crucifixion in Achaea, a region of today’s Greece.  Somewhere around AD 64, Simon Peter was crucified upside down in  Rome. John, the brother of James, disappears from history not long  after his exile on the island of Patmos, off the coast of modern  Turkey.

[5] I recently  read a book by the always-stimulating Swiss journalist,  philosopher, and novelist Dr. Rolf Dobelli that might shed some  interesting light on such questions. It’s entitled Die Kunst des  klugen Handelns: 52 Irrwege, die Sie besser andere n  überlass en — roughly, in English, The Art of  Smart Action: 52 Wrong Paths that Would Be Better [Page xi] Left to Others . 5 Among the brief chapters of his book is one called “Hast du einen  Feind, gib ihm Information” (“If you have an enemy, give him  information”).

[6] En  aquel Imperio, el Arte de la Cartografía logró tal Perfección que  el mapa de una sola Provincia ocupaba toda una Ciudad, y el mapa del  Imperio, toda una Provincia. Con el tiempo, estos Mapas Desmesurados  no satisficieron y los Colegios de Cartógrafos levantaron un Mapa  del Imperio, que tenía el tamaño del Imperio y coincidía  puntualmente con él. Menos  Adictas al Estudio de la Cartografía, las Generaciones Siguientes  entendieron que ese dilatado Mapa era Inútil y no sin Impiedad lo  entregaron a las Inclemencias del Sol y los Inviernos. En los  desiertos del Oeste perduran despedazadas Ruinas del Mapa, habitadas  por Animales y por Mendigos; en todo el País no hay otra reliquia de  las Disciplinas Geográficas. Suárez  Miranda, Viajes de Varones Prudentes , Libro Cuarto, Cap. XLV,  Lérida, 1658. 6

[7] In  that Empire, the Art of Cartography attained such Perfection that the  map of one Province alone took up the whole of a City, and the  map of the empire, the whole of a Province. In time, those  Unconscionable Maps did not satisfy and the College of Cartographers  set up a Map of the Empire which had the size of the Empire  itself and coincided with it point by point. Less Addicted to the  Study of Cartography, Succeeding Generations understood that this  Widespread Map was Useless and not without Impiety they abandoned it  to the Inclemencies of the Sun [Page xii] and the Winters. In the deserts of the  West some mangled Ruins of the Map lasted on, inhabited by Animals  and Beggars; in the whole Country there are other relics of the  Disciplines of Geography. Suárez  Miranda, Viajes de Varones Prudentes , Book Four, Chapter XLV,  Lérida, 1658. 7

[8] Dobelli  cites the Borges story to illustrate his point: “Borges’s map  represents an extreme case of a mistake in reasoning called  ‘Information Bias’: The false belief that more information leads  automatically to better decisions.” 8

[9] even  though the information derived thereby is irrelevant. Suppose that  the test result is positive. In that case, the probability of Illness  A is still much greater than for Illness X. The supplemental  information delivered by the test is completely useless for the  decision. 9

[10] In  cases where the decisive facts are already on the table, Dobelli  argues, “More information is not merely superfluous, it can also be  detrimental.” 10 To illustrate this contention, he cites a little experiment  conducted by the psychologist Gerd Gigerenzer, of the  Max-Planck-Institut für Bildungsforschung in Berlin.

[11] All  of the German students had at least heard of San Diego, whereas only  a few had heard of San Antonio. So they chose the more familiar  name. Both cities, however, were known to the Americans. They had  more information, and for precisely that reason often chose  incorrectly. 11

[12] There  was once, he says, a highly intelligent millipede. It looked  from the edge of one table over to another table, where a grain  of sugar lay. It began to ponder whether it should descend the right  or the left leg of the table on which it sat, and, whether it should  ascend the other table by the right leg or the left leg. And should  it begin the journey with its own left leg? Or with its right leg?  And then, in which order should it move its other legs? The millipede  was a skilled mathematician, so it worked its way through all  the possible variants. Finally, it decided on the best course — and  died of hunger in the very same spot where it had done all its  calculations. 12

[13] But  that was just the first part of Wilson’s experiment. He repeated it  with a second group of students. However, this time he had the  students fill out a form on which they were to justify their  evaluations of the jams in some detail. And, this time, the rankings  were completely turned around: Some of the very best types of jam  were given the very worst rankings. 13

[14] one  cuts the head off from the wisdom of the feelings, … [which] are  simply a different way of processing information than is  rational thinking — a more primitive way, but not necessarily  a worse one. In fact, often a better one. … Thinking  might needlessly sabotage intuitive solutions. The same thing is true  for decisions that already confronted our Stone Age [Page xv] ancestors: the  evaluation of foods, the choice of friends, or the question of who  can be trusted. 14

