Review  of Donald W. Parry, Preserved in  Translation: Hebrew and Other Ancient Literary Forms in the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book; Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 2020). 171 pages. Hardback,  $19.99.

Abstract: Donald W. Parry  combines a lifetime of insights about the Old Testament and  Book of Mormon into one volume. Written for a non- academic  audience, this book will provide a glimpse into some of the  Book of Mormon’s literary complexities that originate  from Hebrew grammar and style.

Mark  Twain “once quipped that if Joseph Smith had left ‘and it  came to pass’ out of the Book of Mormon, the book would  have been only a pamphlet” (103). Twain’s disparaging  comment, while witty, did not account for the fact that the English  translation he mocked was exceptional Hebrew. The Book of Mormon  employs “and it came to pass” within its proper narrative  context, and the poetic sections of the Book of Mormon  employ the phrase less frequently, aligning with Semitic narrative  structure rules (104). This insight is one of hundreds Dr.  Donald W. Parry provides in his book on Hebraisms in the  Book of Mormon, written for a non-specialized audience  (xv).

Bringing  a career’s worth of insights to both the Old Testament and the  Book of Mormon, Parry claims that “The Hebrew elements  discussed in this volume can enhance the readability of the  Book of Mormon and heighten our understanding and  appreciation of ancient scripture” (xxii). For conservative readers  of the Book of Mormon who are interested in how the study  of the language can enhance their scripture study, Parry’s  perspective will capture interest.

In  this volume, Parry explains literary features of Semitic language  such as chiasmus, theme words, symbolic action and prophetic curse,  and [Page 38] idea-amplifying plurals, and spotlights the contributions of  prophets, Latter-day Saint scholars, and Hebrew Bible scholars alike.  He also explains the structure and limitations of Hebrew narrative  and poetry through examples from popular passages that resonate with  readers. He synthesizes linguistic principles, language development,  and secondary literature on the topic while consistently creating  relevance that will resonate with a non-expert reader. He most  effectively achieves this through demonstrating how the theological  meaning of beloved passages changes when its contextual grammatical  structure is accounted for.

Where  appropriate, Parry highlights the differences between English and  Biblical Hebrew grammar to show the purposeful creation of phrasing  in the Book of Mormon. At the end of each chapter, he  discusses a particular principle’s structure, how scholars use  it to reconstruct the past, and what it can add to an individual’s  reading. More than grammar, Parry’s analysis illuminates the text  by forcing a slower reading — a reading focused on  parallels, similarities between the Old Testament and the  Book of Mormon, repeated themes in a passage, etc.

Openly  admitting that without the autograph (original record), a certain  amount of conjecture will always exist when deconstructing the  Book of Mormon’s translation, Parry overcomes this  monumental obstacle by analyzing the genre, grammatical structure,  and individual words employed by the book’s writers, redactors, and  translators, and compares these features to Hebrew grammar and style.  For instance, in discussing numerical parallelism, Parry comments  that  the  Old Testament employs this construction more than the  Book of Mormon authors. He suggests this is because there  are several entirely poetic books in the Old Testament (e.g. Psalms,  Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes) while narrative dominates the  Book of Mormon, making this feature inconsistent with the  book’s genre (36, 37).

Had  the book addressed the effect of King James English (and its literal  translation of the Hebrew and Greek texts) on English’s  development, I would have felt more at ease with all of Parry’s  conclusions. While there are countless instances in which the King  James Version failed to adequately convey the original Hebrew  construction the Book of Mormon preserved in translation,  a clearer delineation between the two, especially in the  beginning chapters, would have situated and clarified more of the  book’s conclusions.

The  book concludes with accounts of several early Church converts’  experiences with the Book of Mormon, reminding the reader  that the believer’s interaction with the text far outweighs an  academic knowledge of the text. While I believe that scripture  should be read devotionally [Page 39] by academic and believer alike, this  book’s merit undeniably lies in the fact that many of the forms  discussed are undetectable in the KJV and require extensive academic  training in Semitic grammar to notice. Without a translator,  a non-academic person’s access to these insights is virtually  impossible. It is wise to read this book with scriptures in hand, so  as to have the full references in context.