[Page 9] Abstract: In 1 Nephi 1:16–17, Nephi tells us he is abridging “the  record of my father.” The specific words Nephi uses in his writings  form several basic but important patterns and features used  repeatedly by Nephi and also by other Book of Mormon  writers. These patterns and features provide context that appears to  indicate that Nephi’s abridgment of Lehi’s record is the  third-person account found in 1 Nephi 1:4 through 2:15 and  that Nephi’s first-person account of his own ministry begins in  1 Nephi 2:16.

This  paper begins with a synopsis of the history of Nephi’s two  sets of plates. It then reviews the literature that discusses Nephi’s  abridgment of Lehi’s record. Textual analysis is then presented to  suggest that Nephi’s abridgment of Lehi’s record begins in  1 Nephi 1:4 and continues (interspersed with Nephi’s  editorial comments) through 1 Nephi 2:15, and is followed,  beginning in 1 Nephi 2:16, by Nephi’s account of his own  ministry. The paper then briefly suggests that these accounts  highlight the ministries of Lehi and Nephi. It also suggests that the  period covered by Lehi’s original record probably matches the time   covered by the abridgment.


## Nephi’s  Two Sets of Plates

It  should be clear to any reader of the Book of Mormon that  Nephi kept his record on two sets of plates. The first set, often  called the large plates of Nephi, begins with Lehi’s record,  followed by other records added by Nephi (see 1 Nephi 19:1–2).  The second set, often called the small plates of Nephi, begins with  Nephi’s abridgment of Lehi’s record and Nephi’s account of his  own ministry (see 1 Nephi 1:16–17).


## [Page 10] Nephi’s  Large-Plate Record

By  the time the Lord commanded Nephi to create the small plates (see  2 Nephi 5:30), a total of 30 years had passed since  the family left Jerusalem (see 2 Nephi 5:28). During the  intervening years in the promised land, Lehi had died, Laman and  Lemuel had tried to kill Nephi (see 2 Nephi 5:2), and Nephi  and his followers had fled to the land of Nephi (see  2 Nephi 5:4– 28). By then, the large-plate record was  already a comprehensive record, beginning with Lehi’s record  and continuing with Nephi’s account of many subsequent events (see  1 Nephi 9:2, 1 Nephi 19:1–2, and 2 Nephi 5:29).  Nephi explains that, “the things which transpired before that  I made these plates [the small plates] are of a truth more  particularly made mention upon the first plates [the large plates]”  (1 Nephi 19:2).

The  large-plate record contains visions and prophecies (see, for example,  1 Nephi 9:2; 10:15; and 19:1), but it also contains more  secular writings than the small-plate record. Nephi tells us that the  large plates contain “a full account of the history of my people”  (1 Nephi 9:2) including “the more part of the reign of  the kings and the wars and contentions of my people” (1 Nephi 9:4)  or “a greater account of the wars and contentions and destructions  of my people” (1 Nephi 19:4). It may be reasonable to  speculate that Lehi’s record, the initial record on the large  plates, is similarly broad-based and served as a template for  Nephi’s continuing large-plate record.

While  the Nephite civilization remained, the Lord never rescinded the  commandment to add to the large plates. Nephi continued to add to [Page 11] this record during his life and others continued the effort for  centuries. Mormon added the final large-plate entry (see Mormon  2:17–18).

Joseph Smith  never received the original large-plate record that included Lehi’s  record. Mormon abridged that voluminous record, and Joseph Smith  translated Mormon’s abridgment. However, the translation of the  first part of that abridgment, which included Mormon’s abridgment  of Nephi’s large- plate record, was lost by Martin Harris and is  not available in our day. The books of Words of Mormon, Mosiah, Alma,  Helaman, 3 Nephi, 4 Nephi, and the first part of Mormon contain the  portion of Mormon’s abridgment of the large-plate record found in  the Book of Mormon.


## Nephi’s  Small-Plate Record

As  mentioned above, the Lord didn’t command Nephi to create the small  plates until at least 30 years after Lehi’s family left Jerusalem  (see 2 Nephi 5:28). The small plates were made for a wise  purpose known only to the Lord (see 1 Nephi 9:5). Nephi describes in  three separate passages the information these plates should contain.  In the first, he says they should contain an account “of the  ministry of my people” (1 Nephi 9:3). Later, Nephi says  that the small plates were to contain “the ministry and the  prophecies — the more plain and precious parts of them —”  (1 Nephi 19:3), and that he made them “that the more  sacred things may be kept” (1 Nephi 19:5). Finally, Nephi  tells us that the Lord said, “Make other plates [the small plates];  and thou shalt engraven many things upon them which are good in my  sight for the profit of thy people” (2 Nephi 5:30).

Nephi  engraved his abridgment of Lehi’s record onto his small plates. He  added an account of his own proceedings, reign, and ministry (see  1 Nephi 1:16–17). Later, Nephi’s brother Jacob and  Jacob’s descendants added their records to the small plates (see  Words of Mormon 1:3). Joseph Smith’s translation of this  special small-plate record is found, in its entirety, in the  Book of Mormon. Nephi’s small-plate record comprises the  books of 1 Nephi and 2 Nephi. Jacob and his descendants added the  books of Jacob, Enos, Jarom, and Omni.


## Reviewing  the Applicable Literature

Only  16 verses into his small-plate record, Nephi mentions (twice) that it  includes both an abridgment of his father’s record and an account  of his own life:

> And  now I Nephi do not make a full account of the things which  my father hath written, for he hath written many things which he saw  in visions and in dreams. And he also hath [Page 12] written many things which  he prophesied and spake unto his children, of which I shall not  make a full account. But I shall make an account of my  proceedings in my days . Behold, I make an abridgment of  the record of my father upon plates which I have made with  mine own hands. Wherefore, after I have abridged the record  of my father, then will I make an account of mine own  life . (1 Nephi 1:16–17, emphasis added)


## Textual  Analysis of the Meaning of 1 Nephi 10:1

A careful  analysis of the text of the Book of Mormon suggests  a different way to read 1 Nephi 10:1 — one that may  resolve the incongruities pointed out by Reynolds and Brown. Maybe  Nephi didn’t write this passage as a transition point between  his abridgment of Lehi’s record and his own account. Perhaps Nephi  had begun his account of [Page 15] his proceedings, reign, and ministry much  earlier in his record. Then, prior to this passage, Nephi paused this  ongoing account to discuss an important side topic. Nephi’s words  in 1 Nephi 10:1 may simply indicate that he has ended his  discussion of the side topic and is now proceeding (continuing) with  the ongoing account of his life.


## An  Aside About Nephi’s Two Sets of Plates


## A Literary  Structure for Resuming a Narrative After an Aside

The  second part of this structure is a brief (and somewhat  repetitive) recap that restates the event described in the narrative  just before the aside began. This recap reminds readers of what had  happened in the narrative just before it was paused. Here, Nephi  writes, “For behold, it came to pass that after my father had made  an end of speaking the words of his dream and also of exhorting them  to all diligence” (1 Nephi 10:2). This passage initially  appears redundant. It briefly restates information Nephi had written  just prior to the aside:

> And  it came to pass that after my father had spoken all the words of his  dream or vision, which were many, he said unto us, because of these  things which he saw in a vision, he exceedingly feared for Laman  and Lemuel. Yea, he feared lest they should be cast off from the  presence of the Lord. And he did exhort them then with all the  feeling of a tender parent that they would hearken to his words,  in that perhaps the Lord would be merciful to them and not cast them  off. Yea, my father did preach unto them. And after that he had  preached unto them and also prophesied unto them of many things, he  bade them to keep the commandments of the Lord. And he did cease  speaking unto them. (1 Nephi 8:36–38)

This  reiteration serves a purpose. At the conclusion of the aside, it  reorients the reader back to the event from which the narrative will  now proceed — preparing the reader for the third part of this  structure, which is simply the continuation of the narrative from  that point as if it had not been interrupted for the aside. Here,  Nephi continues his narrative describing further revelations that  Lehi received and taught his children — prophecies about those who  remained in Jerusalem (see 1 Nephi 10:2).

This  resumptive structure provides context for Nephi’s words in  1 Nephi 10:1, clarifying that they are intended to continue  an account interrupted for an aside. The context provided by this  literary structure becomes even more clear with a review of its  repeated use across the text of the Book of Mormon. We will  now review three other places in the Book of Mormon where  this same resumptive structure helps to reorient readers after other  asides.


## [Page 17] Mormon  Resumes His Narrative After an Aside about the Lands of the Lamanites

This  same literary structure follows an aside written by Mormon in Alma  chapter 22, where Mormon’s narrative is about the mission of the  sons of Mosiah to the Lamanites. In this narrative, Mormon mentions  that “the king sent a proclamation throughout all the land”  (Alma 22:27). Because he has mentioned “all the land,”  Mormon then pauses his narrative to provide his readers with a more  complete description of the land (see Alma 22:27–34). After  doing so, he transitions back to his narrative about these  missionaries using the same three-part structure used earlier by  Nephi.

First,  Mormon reidentifies the narrative being resumed with something akin  to a title, “And now I after having said this return  again to the account of Ammon, and Aaron, Omner, and Himni, and  their brethren ” (Alma 22:35, emphasis added). He then gives  a brief (and repetitive) recap of the event described in the  narrative just before the aside, saying, “Behold, now it came to  pass that the king of the Lamanites sent a proclamation among  all his people” (Alma 23:1). And then he resumes the narrative by  describing, for the first time, the content of the proclamation (see  Alma 23:1–3).


## Moroni  Resumes His Narrative After Discussing Nephite History and Modern  Witnesses

Moroni  uses this structure to resume his Jaredite narrative after a pause  for a lengthy two-part aside found in Ether chapters 4 and 5.  This aside comes after Moroni’s narrative describes the Brother of  Jared’s visit with the Lord when the Lord touches the 16 stones to  light the barges. Moroni tells us that after this visit, the Lord  commands the Brother of Jared to “go down out of the mount from the  presence of the Lord and write the things which he had seen” (Ether  4:1). Then, Moroni begins the first part of his aside, in which he  explains the history of the Brother of Jared’s words among the  Nephites, including the fact that Moroni has engraved them onto  plates but sealed them up to come forth in our future. This initial  part of the aside includes a long direct quotation of the Lord’s  words to Moroni and ends with the word amen (see Ether  4:1–19). Then, Moroni immediately begins the second part of his  aside, giving Joseph Smith specific instructions concerning the  plates and three latter- day witnesses. This second part also ends  with the word amen (see Ether 5:1–6). Then, Moroni’s  transition back to the Jaredite narrative uses the same three-part  structure used previously by Nephi and Mormon.

[Page 18] First,  Moroni explains that he is resuming the narrative he had interrupted  with the two-part aside, reidentifying the narrative as follows, “And  now I Moroni proceed [continue] to give the record of Jared  and his brother ” (Ether 6:1, emphasis added). He then gives  a brief (and somewhat repetitive) recap of events described in  the narrative just before the two- part aside, saying, “For it  came to pass after that the Lord had prepared the stones which the  brother of Jared had carried up into the mount” (Ether 6:2).  And then, he actually continues the narrative with the words “the  brother of Jared came down out of the mount; and he did put forth the  stones into the vessels which were prepared, one in each end thereof.  And behold, they did give light unto the vessels thereof”  (Ether 6:2).


## Moroni  Resumes His Narrative After an Aside About Faith

Moroni  uses the same structure again to resume the same Jaredite narrative  after his oft-quoted aside on faith in Ether chapter 12. This aside  follows the description in his narrative of the great and marvelous  prophecies of Ether, which the people didn’t believe, “Ether did  prophesy great and marvelous things unto the people, which they did  not believe because they saw them not” (Ether 12:5). Moroni then  transitions to his aside, saying, “And now I Moroni would  speak somewhat concerning these things” (Ether 12:6). His aside is  a beautiful explanation of faith, of weakness, and of hope and  charity. He ends his aside with the word amen (see Ether  12:6–41). Then he transitions back to the Jaredite narrative using  the structure we’ve seen elsewhere.

First,  he explains that he is resuming the narrative, which he reidentifies  with the words, “And now I Moroni proceed [continue] to finish my record concerning the destruction of the people of which I have  been writing ” (Ether 13:1, emphasis added). Then, he gives  a brief, repetitive recap of the event he had described in the  narrative just before the aside, “For behold, they rejected all the  words of Ether” (Ether 13:2). Then, he resumes the narrative,  sharing the content of Ether’s prophecies (see Ether 13:2–12).


## The  Significance of This Literary Structure

This  resumptive structure doesn’t follow all Book of Mormon  asides (see, for example, 3 Nephi 5:8–26 and 10:14–19).  This structure does, however, appear often enough to tell us that  when we see it, we have clearly found a place where the  narrative was interrupted by an aside and is being continued.

This  structure is particularly helpful in passages that use the verb to  proceed , which, as explained earlier, has different meanings in  different [Page 19] contexts. This resumptive structure provides context that  strongly suggests that, in these instances, the verb to proceed describes a continuation of a narrative that was paused  for an aside (see 1 Nephi 10:1; Ether 6:1; and 13:1). Even  without this unique structure, similar context can suggest  a continuing or resuming narrative (see 3 Nephi 5:19;  26:12; and Ether 2:13). Note, however, that in a different  context, the verb to proceed can describe the beginning of  a new narrative (see, for example, Ether 1:1).

After  Nephi pauses his ongoing account of his life to discuss his two sets  of plates, he uses this resumptive structure to reorient his readers  back to the point where he had paused his narrative, so he can  continue again from that point. The words he uses within this  resumptive structure include the phrases proceed with and proceed to give . In this clear context, the verb to proceed means to continue . Nephi is saying, in essence, “and now  I Nephi [continue] to give an account upon these plates of my  proceedings and my reign and ministry. Wherefore to [continue] with  mine account, I must speak somewhat of the things of my father  and also of my brethren” (1 Nephi 10:1). These words help us  understand that Nephi is continuing an account that he began much  earlier.

The  textual evidence reviewed so far suggests that Nephi didn’t write  1 Nephi 10:1 as a transition point between his  abridgment of Lehi’s record and his own account. Rather, it  describes the resumption of an account of his life and ministry begun  earlier.


## Textual  Analysis Identifying the Abridgment and Nephi’s Account

We  will now review Nephi’s words from the beginning of 1 Nephi in an  effort to identify both Nephi’s abridgment of his father’s record  and the transition point at which Nephi begins his account of his own  life and ministry. An important key to this identification is the  fact that Nephi writes some parts of the text in the first person and  other parts in the third person. As we isolate the third-person text  from the first-person text, it appears that the third-person text  constitutes Nephi’s abridgment of Lehi’s record.


## Nephi’s  Initial Editorial Comment

> I  Nephi having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was taught  somewhat in all the learning of my father. And having seen many  afflictions in the course of my days, nevertheless having been highly  favored of the Lord in all my days, yea, having had a great  knowledge of the goodness and the mysteries of God, therefore I make  a record of my proceedings in my days. Yea, I make a record  in the language of my father, which consists of the learning of the  Jews and the language of the Egyptians. And I know that the  record which I make to be true. And I make it with mine own  hand, and I make it according to my knowledge. (1 Nephi 1:1–3)

Although  these words mention that Nephi was born, was taught, saw afflictions,  and was favored of the Lord, their primary purpose isn’t really to  tell his story. This isn’t the beginning of Nephi’s narrative.  These words introduce us to Nephi as an author, to his qualifications  to make this record, and to his reasons for making it. This colophon  appears to identify Nephi as the seasoned veteran who authored the  small-plate account, rather than as the young man in Lehi’s  household at the time the narrative begins. This introductory  editorial comment is comparable to information we might find on the  inside of the dust jacket of a modern hardback book.

Separating  Nephi’s editorial comments from his narrative helps us better  understand the nature of his narrative. Like all editorial comments  and asides Nephi adds later, this introductory colophon is written in  the first person. In Nephi’s editorial comments, he always speaks  in the first person, often identifying himself by name and always  using the pronouns I and my . Immediately after this  introductory editorial comment, however, these first-person pronouns  all but disappear from his writing until his next editorial comment.  This is because the initial portion of the narrative, unlike his  editorial comments, is written consistently in the third person.


## [Page 21] Narrative  Written From Lehi’s Perspective

Isolating  Nephi’s narrative from his comments also highlights that the  initial narrative is written from a different perspective  altogether from those comments. In the narrative, Nephi speaks in the  third person and relates events of his father’s life from his  father’s viewpoint. The narrative isn’t about Nephi at all. The  pronoun my is used only to repeatedly identify “my father  Lehi.” The narrative is filled with the pronouns he , his ,  and him , all of which describe his father.

This  third-person narrative tells a story that doesn’t belong to  Nephi. It is written from Lehi’s perspective and relates events he  experienced when Nephi was not present. Each event is described as it  happens to Lehi. For example, the account of Lehi’s vision of the  pillar of fire (see 1 Nephi 1:6) is described as it occurs.  This isn’t the account of how Nephi learned about this vision. We  can assume that Lehi described this vision to Nephi and others, but  this abbreviated account never tells us whether he did. It just  describes the vision as it took place.


## Another  Editorial Comment

So  far, it would be hard to say whether Nephi is simply choosing to tell  his father’s story in the third person or whether he may be  abridging his father’s story from his father’s own record. This  third-person summary of events in Lehi’s life continues until Nephi  interjects another first-person editorial comment. Some of the  language in this comment suggests that Nephi is in the process of  abridging his father’s record and that he will make an account of  his own life afterwards.

> And  now I Nephi do not make a full account of the things which  my father hath written, for he hath written many things which he saw  in visions and in dreams. And he also hath written many things which  he prophesied and spake unto his children, of which I shall not  make a full account. But I shall make an account of my  proceedings in my days. Behold, I make an abridgment of the  record of my father upon plates which I have made with mine own  hands. Wherefore after I have abridged the record of my father,  then will I make an account of mine own life. (1 Nephi 1:16–17)

The  fact that Nephi is already in the process of writing his abridgment  is suggested by the present tense of a verb. Nephi says, “I make an abridgment.” The word make subtly reflects an ongoing  effort. This subtle suggestion is corroborated by the third-person  narrative that surrounds this comment. The future tense of two other  verbs in this comment similarly indicates that Nephi hasn’t yet  begun his account of his own life, but that account will follow this  abridgment of his father’s record. With respect to the account of  his own life, he says, “I shall make” and “then will I make.”  Based on these words, we should expect to find Nephi’s  first- person account of his own life, from his own perspective,  after he ends this third person account, which is less than a full  account of his father’s record and which he describes as “an  abridgment of the record of my father.”

After  writing this second editorial comment, Nephi transitions back into  his abridgment of his father’s record with the words, “Therefore  I would that ye should know that” (1 Nephi 1:18).  After these transitional words, he resumes his third-person  narrative, telling how Lehi prophesied of the coming Messiah and was  rejected by the people in Jerusalem.


## A Third  Editorial Comment

Nephi  then interjects his third first-person editorial comment: “But  behold, I Nephi will shew unto you that the tender mercies of  the Lord is over all them whom he hath chosen because of their faith  to make them mighty, even unto the power of deliverance”  (1 Nephi 1:20). After this short comment, Nephi resumes his  abridgment once more with the transitional words, “For behold, it  came to pass that” (1 Nephi 2:1). We then learn more of  Lehi’s story from Lehi’s point of view.


## A Direct  Quote

Note  that when Nephi’s abridged account contains a quote, the  quoted words appear in their original form. For instance, the Lord  tells Lehi, “Blessed art thou Lehi because of the things which thou  hast done. And because thou hast been faithful and declared unto this  people the things which I commanded thee, behold, they seek to  take away thy life” [Page 23] (1 Nephi 2:1). So, in this instance,  the Lord, in the first person, speaks to Lehi in the second person.


## Consistent  Perspective

Except  for direct quotations, however, the narrative continues in the third  person. It also continues to relate events from Lehi’s perspective,  and not Nephi’s. For example, after the Lord commands him to “take  his family and depart into the wilderness” (1 Nephi 2:2),  the account tells us, from Lehi’s perspective, that “he did  travel in the wilderness with his family” (1 Nephi 2:5).  Of course, Nephi was there, but because the source of this account is  Lehi’s record, Nephi doesn’t use the word we . Nephi’s  abridgment of Lehi’s record continues from Lehi’s point of view  as Lehi takes his family into the wilderness, endures the murmurings  of Laman and Lemuel, speaks to them with power, and then dwells in  a tent in the valley of Lemuel (see 1 Nephi 2:2–15).  As before, the account is filled with the pronouns he , him ,  and his , all of which describe Lehi.


## The  Transition Point

> I  Nephi being exceeding young, nevertheless being large in stature, and  also having great desires to know of the mysteries of God, wherefore  I cried unto the Lord. And behold, he did visit me and  did soften my heart that I did believe all the words which had  been spoken by my father. (1 Nephi 2:16, emphasis added)


## Consistent  Patterns and Features

The  word usage patterns employed by Nephi — writing his abridgment of  another person’s record in the third person and writing his own  record in the first person — are followed quite consistently  throughout the Book of Mormon. Like Nephi, Mormon and  Moroni consistently write their own editorial comments, asides about  their own thoughts and actions, and personal accounts in the first  person. Like Nephi, both Mormon and Moroni use the third person when  they abridge the records of others. However, when any of them quotes  something directly from another source (an existing record or  a living person), the quote appears in its original form. These  word usage patterns help us distinguish among abridged accounts,  editorial comments, personal asides, personal accounts, and quoted  materials throughout the Book of Mormon.


## Lehi’s  Continued Role in Nephi’s Narrative

Lehi  continues to play an important role in Nephi’s account long after  Nephi ends his abridgment of his father’s record. However, after  Nephi begins his own personal account, the story follows Nephi and  not Lehi. It is told from Nephi’s perspective, not Lehi’s. There  is a clear difference between the two accounts. In Nephi’s own  account, Lehi’s revelations are described, not necessarily as they  occur, but as Nephi becomes aware of them. For instance, the account  of Lehi’s dream in which the Lord commands him to send Nephi and  his brothers back to Jerusalem for the [Page 25] plates of brass comes to us  through Nephi’s own account. This account doesn’t relate Lehi’s  actual receipt of this dream. Rather, it tells how Lehi describes the  dream previously received to Nephi: “And it came to pass that  I Nephi returned from speaking with the Lord to the tent of my  father. And it came to pass that he spake unto me, saying: Behold,  I have dreamed a dream in the which the Lord hath commanded  me that thou and thy brethren shall return to Jerusalem”  (1 Nephi 3:1–2).

Similarly,  the account of Lehi’s vision of the tree of life and Lehi’s  further prophecies made in the valley of Lemuel (see 1 Nephi chapters  8–10) come to us through Nephi. He doesn’t describe how Lehi  receives the vision or subsequent prophetic information, but rather  how Nephi (and his brothers) learn about them. His account of this  vision begins, “And it came to pass that while my father tarried in  the wilderness, he spake unto us, saying: Behold, I have dreamed  a dream, or in other words, I have seen a vision”  (1 Nephi 8:2). By the time Lehi speaks to his sons, the  dream has already taken place. Nephi wasn’t present when Lehi  received the dream. Nephi tells us about the dream from his own  experience — he learns about it as his father shares it.

Nephi’s  account does describe some of Lehi’s actions right as they occur,  but it appears that in each case, Nephi is present with Lehi as the  event takes place. These events still come to us from Nephi’s  perspective, but his perspective is very similar to that of Lehi. For  example, Nephi describes Lehi’s review of the records on the brass  plates as it occurs (see 1 Nephi 5:10– 16). It appears  that Nephi is with Lehi during this review. Nephi summarizes the  experience as follows: “[T]hus far I and my father had …  obtained the record which the Lord had commanded us and searched them  and found that they were desirable” (1 Nephi 5:20–21,  emphasis added).

Nephi  later mentions other prophecies that Lehi shared with his sons in the  valley of Lemuel (see 1 Nephi 9:1–2, 10:15, and 19:1),  and additional prophecies given by Lehi shortly before Lehi’s death  (see 2 Nephi chapters 1–4).

[Page 26] Nephi’s  account describes his own revelatory experiences from his own  perspective. This includes, of course, the Lord’s visit to Nephi,  described earlier. It also includes the next recorded revelation that  Nephi receives while grieved about Laman and Lemuel (see  1 Nephi 2:18–24). It then goes on to include many other  revelations received by Nephi.

The  cumulative textual evidence from all these provisions lends support  to the proposition that Nephi’s abridgment of Lehi’s record  begins in 1 Nephi 1:4 and ends in 1 Nephi 2:15  and that the balance of Nephi’s small-plate record contains his  account of his own ministry, supplemented by asides and by quotations  from Lehi, Jacob, Isaiah, and other prophets.


## Plausible  Inferences Based on This Identification of the Abridgment

This  proposed identification of the text of Nephi’s abridgment of Lehi’s  record and the point at which Nephi transitions to his own account  provides an opportunity to consider Nephi’s editorial intent for  beginning his small-plate record with a relatively brief  abridgment of his father’s record before sharing his own account.  It also allows us to explore the text for any further indications  that Lehi may have ended his original contemporary account while the  family lived in the valley of Lemuel and that Nephi may have begun  his contemporary account at about the same time.


## The  Abridgment and Nephi’s Account Focus on the Ministry

As  mentioned previously, Nephi eventually tells us that he made the  small plates of Nephi, upon which he engraved this record, because he  “received a commandment of the Lord” that this smaller  record should be made “for the special purpose that there should be  an account engraven of the ministry of my people” (1 Nephi 9:3).  He later adds that this special record should contain, “the  ministry and the prophecies — the more plain and precious parts of  them” (1 Nephi 19:3).

It  seems that to fulfill this commandment, Nephi chose to set the stage  for the account of his own ministry by preceding it with an  abridgment of his father’s record, which describes the inception of  Lehi’s ministry, including “the more plain and precious parts of”  several of Lehi’s early prophecies. The abridgment appears to serve  as the literary vehicle that introduces us to the unique, desolate  world in which Nephi’s own ministry begins. In addition, it  highlights an important parallel between two ministries. Just as  Lehi’s ministry in Jerusalem begins after a vision in which he  sees the Lord, Nephi’s ministry begins with a visit [Page 27] from the  Lord. After this visit, Nephi immediately begins a ministry of  service by teaching and praying for his brethren (see  1 Nephi 2:17–18) and humbly obeying the Lord’s  commandments given through his father (see 1 Nephi 3:7). As  Nephi continues the account of his own ministry, he is mindful of the  Lord’s commandment and incorporates into his account other  important teachings and prophecies of Lehi (and of Jacob) that are  part of “the ministry of my people” (1 Nephi 9:3).


## The  Small Plate-Record May Suggest the Time Frame of Lehi’s Record

It  seems likely that Lehi’s record, which Nephi engraved onto the  large plates, was initially written by Lehi on a perishable  medium, such as parchment. It was likely transferred by Nephi onto  the large plates for long-term preservation (see 1 Nephi 19:1–2  and Jacob 4:1–3). The Book of Mormon never specifically  mentions Lehi’s initial, perishable record, but it seems reasonable  to imply that Lehi made a contemporary account that Nephi  eventually engraved onto the large plates. It also seems likely that  Nephi made a similar contemporary account, which provided  a basis for his writings on the large plates. Assuming then that  these accounts existed, Nephi’s small-plate record appears to  suggest a plausible timeline for the closing of Lehi’s  contemporary account and for the inception of Nephi’s contemporary  account.


## Lehi’s  Account Appears to End in the Valley of Lemuel

While  some students of the Book of Mormon may have assumed that  Nephi’s term the record of my father describes a record  covering virtually all of Lehi’s life, the text of Nephi’s  abridgment (1 Nephi 1:4 to 2:15) doesn’t cover Lehi’s  later years. It ends while he is living in the valley of Lemuel. Even  so, Nephi doesn’t call his abridgment “an abridgment of the  first part of the record of my father.” He calls it “an  abridgment of the record of my father” (1 Nephi 1:17).  Other Book of Mormon passages refer to “parts” of  records (see 1 Nephi 6:1 and Ether 1:3), so when Nephi  doesn’t do so here, it would appear that he is referring to his  father’s entire record.

The  abridgment narrative appears to cover a period beginning in “the  commencement of the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of  Judah” (1 Nephi 1:4). However, the narrative also  mentions that Lehi had “dwelt at Jerusalem in all his days”  (1 Nephi 1:4). This latter phrase may suggest that Lehi’s  record covered some events from his earlier days, but Lehi’s record  clearly begins no later than the first year of Zedekiah’s reign.

The  abridgment narrative ends with a reference to Lehi dwelling in  a tent in the valley of Lemuel (see 1 Nephi 2:15).  This passage allows for the possibility that Lehi continued adding to  his ongoing account for a while in that valley. Although Nephi’s  own small-plate account, which follows the abridgment, begins before  Nephi and his brothers travel to Jerusalem for the brass plates,  other passages suggest that Lehi kept his contemporary account until  sometime after his sons returned with the brass plates.

Nephi  tells us that when he and his brothers returned with the brass  plates, Lehi searched these plates (see 1 Nephi 5:10),  where he discovered “a genealogy of his fathers” (see  1 Nephi 5:14, 16). Nephi tells us that this genealogy  became part of Lehi’s record (see 1 Nephi 6:1), so it  appears that Lehi didn’t close his contemporary account until after  he found this genealogy.

Nephi’s  other brief mention of this genealogy appears to suggest that Lehi  did, in fact, end his account at about this time with the genealogy  as his final entry. As mentioned earlier, each of Nephi’s two short  summaries of the early large-plate records begins with Lehi’s  record (see 1 Nephi 19:1–2). Only the second summary  mentions the genealogy. In it, Nephi lists the genealogy right after  Lehi’s record (see 1 Nephi 19:2). This separate listing  of the genealogy appears to support the idea that Lehi ended his  contemporary account after his sons returned with the brass plates  and that he added the genealogy — perhaps as an addendum — at the  end of that account.


## [Page 29] Nephi  Recorded the Events That Follow Lehi’s Record

Of  course, Lehi wouldn’t have closed his contemporary account before  a new recordkeeper was in place. Nephi tells us, “I was taught  somewhat in all the learning of my father” (1 Nephi 1:1).  This teaching prepared him to “make a record in the language  of my father” (1 Nephi 1:2). Nephi’s first- person  small-plate account indicates that he assumed a recordkeeping  role (perhaps under Lehi’s guidance) near the beginning of his  ministry. His detailed account of the journey to obtain the brass  plates (see 1 Nephi chapters 3 and 4) suggests that he may have first  recorded its particulars shortly after they took place. Thus, it can  be inferred that Nephi was keeping a contemporary account during  or soon after this journey.

Other  aspects of Nephi’s two short summaries of the early large- plate  records (see 1 Nephi 19:1–2) may further corroborate the  time covered by Lehi’s record by identifying events recorded onto  the large plates by Nephi after he had added Lehi’s record to those  plates. Nothing in these summaries requires us to conclude that the  abridged account omits any period included in Lehi’s original  record. While some of the language in these brief summaries is  ambiguous, it can be read to suggest that Lehi’s record, like the  abridgment, ends while Lehi is in the valley of Lemuel.

In  the first summary, Nephi tells us that the large plates contain “the  record of my father and also our journeyings in the wilderness and  the prophecies of my father. And also many of mine own prophecies”  (1 Nephi 19:1). Then, after mentioning that he didn’t  know at the time that he would be making the small plates, he adds  a second summary, stating that “the record of my father and  the genealogy of his fathers and the more part of all our proceedings  in the wilderness” (1 Nephi 19:2) are engraved upon the  large plates.

Each  summary begins with the term the record of my father . Nephi  wrote these summaries having already completed his abridgment of this  record, so by mentioning it, he alludes to the events already  described in the abridgment. Therefore, it is plausible that each  summary then mentions later events that Nephi added to the large  plates after his father’s record.

The  second summary lists “the more part of all our proceedings in the  wilderness” (1 Nephi 19:2). This term may recognize that  Lehi’s record had already covered a lesser part of their  wilderness proceedings, so that those covered by this term were only  “the more part” of their proceedings. The first summary mentions  “our journeyings in the wilderness” (1 Nephi 19:1),  a term that could include the journey to the valley of Lemuel,  but it is possible the intended meaning of this term is similar to  “the more part of all our proceedings in the wilderness.” If so, [Page 30] this term may refer only to journeyings subsequent to the journey to  the valley of Lemuel already described in Lehi’s record. These  subsequent journeyings in the wilderness would include the two trips  back to Jerusalem, the journey to the promised land, and, perhaps,  the journey to the land of Nephi.

In  addition to journeyings, the first summary mentions both Lehi’s and  Nephi’s prophecies. Of course, Lehi’s record had already covered  not only their initial journey to the valley of Lemuel but also many  of Lehi’s prophecies. The fact that this summary then mentions  further prophecies of Lehi suggests that Nephi later added more of  Lehi’s prophecies to the large-plate record. These likely included  the prophecies Lehi made just before his death (see 2 Nephi chapters  1–4), long after Nephi’s initial engravings on the large plates.  More significantly, Nephi also added to the large plates many  prophesies Lehi had made in the valley of Lemuel. Nephi specifically  tells us, “I have written as many of them [Lehi’s prophecies  shared with his sons in the valley of Lemuel] as were expedient for  me in mine other book [the large plates]” (1 Nephi 10:15).

Thus,  it seems reasonable to infer that after Nephi engraved Lehi’s  record onto the large plates, he added his own account of continuing  events, including the further journeyings in the wilderness, Lehi’s  further prophesies, and many of Nephi’s own prophecies. All these  continuing events are recounted by Nephi in his small-plate account  after his abridgment of Lehi’s record.

In  review, it appears that Lehi kept the original, perishable record  that Nephi transferred to the large plates as “the record of my  father” until his sons brought the brass plates to the valley of  Lemuel. It appears that Lehi closed this record at about that time,  including with it the genealogy of his fathers. He then apparently  relied on Nephi to chronicle (perhaps under Lehi’s direction) “the  more part of” their wilderness proceedings, apparently including  journeys made by Lehi’s sons and prophesies made by Lehi while Lehi  lived in the valley of Lemuel. It may be reasonable to speculate that  Lehi could have kept further records at some later time, but Nephi’s  small-plate account mentions Lehi’s subsequent prophecies and  teachings that were recorded by Nephi and never mentions any further  records made by Lehi.

Lehi’s  record was the first record Nephi engraved onto his large plates.  Nephi’s abridgment and his summaries of the records that follow  Lehi’s record on the large plates appear to suggest that the  abridgment covers the same time as the record Nephi calls “the  record of my father.”


## [Page 31] Conclusion

Nephi’s  term the record of my father appears to refer consistently to  Lehi’s record of events from no later than the first year of the  reign of Zedekiah until Lehi was dwelling in a tent in the  valley of Lemuel. The textual evidence reviewed herein demonstrates  the possibility that Nephi’s third-person abridgment of this record  begins with 1 Nephi 1:4 and ends with 1 Nephi 2:15.  This textual evidence suggests both Lehi’s authorship (text written  from his unique perspective) and Nephi’s abridgment of this record  (text written by Nephi in the third person and identified by Nephi as  an abridgment). The abridgment sets the stage for Nephi’s  first- person narrative about his own ministry, which begins in  1 Nephi 2:16 with a description of a visit from  the Lord. Nephi’s account of his own ministry continues to the end  of his record, but he interrupts it several times, including a pause  in 1 Nephi chapter 9 for an aside about his two sets of plates.

---
Notes

[1] The  Lord commanded Nephi to make his large plates shortly after the  family arrived in the promised land (see 1 Nephi 18:23–19:2).  The Book of Mormon contains two short summaries of the  early large- plate records. In each summary, Nephi lists “the  record of my father” (1 Nephi 19:1–2) 1 as the initial record on these plates. 2 After engraving Lehi’s record onto the large plates, Nephi added  other information about the history of his people. Lehi continued to  live and to prophesy after Nephi had engraved “the record of my  father” onto the large plates (see, for example, 2 Nephi 1–4).  Nephi’s record on the large plates includes many of Lehi’s  prophecies (see 1 Nephi 10:15) and many of Nephi’s own  prophecies (see 1 Nephi 19:1).

[2] To  date, the discussion about the location and extent of Nephi’s  abridgment of Lehi’s record has focused on 1 Nephi 10:1,  which says, “And now I Nephi proceed to give an account upon  these plates of my proceedings and my reign 3 and ministry. Wherefore to proceed with mine account, I must  speak somewhat of the things of my father and also of my brethren.”  Over the years, a number of students of the Book of Mormon  have asserted that these words mark the transition point between  Nephi’s abridgment of Lehi’s record and Nephi’s own account. 4

[3] This  oft-repeated assertion appears to be based on an unstated assumption  that, in 1 Nephi 10:1, the verb to proceed means to  begin . While this is a reasonable assumption, this paper  explores another reasonable possibility. The verb to proceed can mean either to begin or to continue, depending on  the context. 5 The context of this passage may suggest that the verb to proceed is intended to mean to continue .

[4] Noel  B. Reynolds appears to recognize some incongruity between the common  assertion that 1 Nephi 10:1 divides these two accounts and  the context in which Nephi writes this passage. 6 To Reynolds, the words [Page 13] at the end of the previous chapter, “and  thus it is. Amen” (1 Nephi 9:6), followed by these words  about Nephi’s reign and ministry, initially appeared to mark the  end of one account and the beginning of another. He thought they  suggested “an abridgment of Lehi’s record followed by an account  of Nephi’s proceedings.” 7 But then Reynolds realized that this view clashes with surrounding  context, which suggests a continuing story, not the beginning of  a new record. He notes that, absent this reading of these words  “we would never suspect two records. The story is continuous. …  And the very next verse continues the speech of Lehi that was  interrupted to end chapter 9.” 8

[5] This  realization led Reynolds to question the existence of any abridgment  of Lehi’s record. He states, “Nephi is the narrator of the entire  book [1 Nephi] from beginning to end. … We know  of Lehi’s teachings through Nephi’s report, not through  a condensation of Lehi’s own record.” 9 Thus (incorrectly) concluding that 1 Nephi contains no abridgment of  Lehi’s record, Reynolds then employs the words in 1 Nephi 9:6  and 10:1 as support for a very different thesis, “not that  there are two distinct records in 1 Nephi, but rather that the book  is divided [between chapters 9 and 10] into two parallel structures.  [1 Nephi 9:6 and 10:1] serve primarily to call our  attention to that structural division.” 10 So, to Reynolds, these passages support a “structural  division” in 1 Nephi, but no true abridgment by Nephi of  Lehi’s record.

[6] S.  Kent Brown also disagrees with the assertion that Nephi’s words in  1 Nephi 10:1 divide the abridgment of Lehi’s record from  Nephi’s own account. In a 1991 article, Brown suggests this  abridgment is not found in 1 Nephi, but his reasoning is very  different from that of Reynolds. 11 Brown may conflate “the record of my father” (1 Nephi 19:1),  which Nephi engraved on the large plates, with the “abridgment of  the record of my father” (1 Nephi 1:17), which Nephi  engraved on the small plates. [Page 14] Brown states that Nephi’s abridgment  of Lehi’s record was engraved onto Nephi’s large plates, not his  small plates. 12

[7] In  1998, Brown updated this research in a second article. 13 His second article omits any suggestion that the abridgment is found  on the large plates but offers no new theory about its location.  Brown clearly doesn’t, however, agree with the suggestions noted  earlier 14 that the abridgment comprises all of 1 Nephi chapters 1–9 or 1–10.  Brown doesn’t see how the text of the Book of Mormon  supports these suggestions. He says, “A close inspection of these  and later chapters, however, indicates that these suggestions must be  modified considerably since (a) Nephi includes important material in  his opening chapters about himself and (b) both he and Jacob quote  and paraphrase their father’s words in later chapters.” 15 In other words, Brown doesn’t believe that 1 Nephi 10:1  divides Nephi’s abridgment of Lehi’s record from Nephi’s own  account, because (a) the text of 1 Nephi chapters 1–9 or 1–10  isn’t limited to Lehi’s story; it includes a substantial  amount of Nephi’s own story and (b) after these opening chapters,  Lehi’s words continue to play a significant role in Nephi’s  writings (and Jacob’s writings).

[8] Separately,  Brown tries to correlate Nephi’s small-plate content with his  large-plate content. Appropriately, he sees 1 Nephi 19:1 as  a summary of the initial large-plate content. To Brown, Nephi’s  term “the record of my father” (1 Nephi 19:1)  “corresponds roughly to 1 Nephi [chapters] 1–10.” 16 Brown doesn’t further break down this perceived rough  correspondence, and we should avoid mistaking it for a suggestion  that he sees 1 Nephi chapters 1–10 as Nephi’s abridgment of  Lehi’s record. Brown has already explained that he believes the  context belies that suggestion.

[9] In  1 Nephi chapter 8, Nephi’s narrative describes how Lehi shared with  his sons his vision of the tree of life and some further teachings.  Then, at the beginning of 1 Nephi chapter 9, Nephi alludes to many  more revelations that Lehi received and taught “which cannot be  written upon these plates” (1 Nephi 9:1). 17 Having mentioned “these plates,” Nephi then pauses his narrative  for an aside (a lengthy editorial comment, perhaps similar to  a sidebar in a modern publication) about “these plates.”  He begins his aside with these words: “And now as I have  spoken concerning these plates, behold, they are not the plates upon  which I make a full account of the history of my people”  (1 Nephi 9:2). Then, through the rest of 1 Nephi chapter 9,  Nephi helps his readers understand more about the purpose and content  of his two sets of plates (see 1 Nephi 9:2–6). Nephi ends  this aside with the word amen (1 Nephi 9:6).

[10] Nephi’s  words after this aside (in 1 Nephi 10:1–2) appear to form  an interesting literary structure designed to resume the narrative  paused for the aside. Book of Mormon writers repeatedly use  this structure to resume narratives after they have paused them for  asides. This structure has three distinct parts. The first part  provides a title, of sorts, to reidentify the narrative being  resumed. In this case, Nephi is resuming an account of his life and  ministry 18 that was paused for the aside, “And now I Nephi proceed  [continue] to give an account upon these plates of my  proceedings and my reign and ministry . Wherefore to proceed [Page 16] [continue] with mine account, I must speak somewhat of the  things of my father and also of my brethren” (1 Nephi 10:1,  emphasis added).

[11] Nephi’s  words in the first three verses of 1 Nephi are a colophon — an  editorial comment identifying the author and his qualifications for [Page 20] writing this record. 19 This colophon, like all Nephi’s editorial comments, is written in  the first person.

[12] The  first line of this comment suggests that Nephi may be taking this  account from “the things which my father hath written.” An  abridgment is “a digest or shortened version of a longer text,  treatise, etc., esp. produced by omitting the less important passages  of the original; an [Page 22] abstract, an epitome.” 20 Nephi tells us in this comment that he is not making a full  account of his father’s writings, suggesting that there are some  aspects of his father’s writings that need not be recounted here.

[13] This  initial third-person narrative, which continues through 1 Nephi 2:15,  never mentions Nephi by name. It names Lehi four times, refers to him  14 times as “my father,” and refers to him at least 75 times with  the pronouns he , him, and his . Nephi’s  references to himself are limited to his editorial comments and  transitional language. The narrative itself clearly tells Lehi’s  unique story from Lehi’s personal point of view. 21

[14] Nephi’s  words in 1 Nephi 2:16 constitute the transition point  between Nephi’s abridgment of his father’s record and Nephi’s  own account. At this point, Nephi begins to tell his own story. Now  that his abridgment of Lehi’s record has brought Lehi and his  family out of Jerusalem and through the wilderness to dwell in the  valley of Lemuel, Nephi is ready to fulfill his earlier promise to  make an account “of my proceedings in my days” (1 Nephi 1:1  and 1:17). From this point forward, Nephi is the main character in  his account and the narrative comes to us in the first person from  Nephi’s own perspective. 22 This account also begins [Page 24] with a brief colophon that identifies  Nephi, not as the seasoned author of the small- plate record but as  the young man whose account is now beginning. Then the first event  Nephi records at the inception of his own personal account is the  visit from the Lord that appears to mark the start of his ministry:

[15] Similarly,  Nephi describes a prophecy received by Lehi as they search the  brass plates. Nephi simply says that as Lehi studied the plates of  brass, “he was filled with the Spirit and began to prophesy”  (1 Nephi 5:17). Again, it appears likely that Nephi was  there as Lehi spoke the words of the prophecy. Nephi uses the phrase  “he said that” (1 Nephi 5:19) in his description. 23

[16] The  word abridgment refers to a condensation of a written  work. 24 Elsewhere in the Book of Mormon, the word abridgment indicates a summary of an entire record or set of records (see,  for example, Words of Mormon 1:3, Moroni 1:1). Likewise,  Nephi tells us (twice) that he [Page 28] abridged an entire record — “the  record of my father” (1 Nephi 1:17). The plain meaning of  Nephi’s words suggests that he ended the abridgment where Lehi’s  large-plate record ends — in the valley of Lemuel. The few other  Book of Mormon passages that mention Lehi’s large-plate  record lend support to the proposition that the time covered by the  abridgment matches that of the large-plate record. 25

