[Page vii] There  has been much comment recently on the growth in numbers of the  religious “nones.” Not all of them are actually non-theists, but  secularism or naturalism is undoubtedly on the rise — and  Latter-day Saints have not escaped damage from the trend. Several  recent books and articles have sought to help their readers live with  doubt, cope with uncertainty, or find value or joy in the Mormon  community even when some, most, or perhaps even all of its founding  narrative has come to seem untenable. I believe, however, that  naturalism should be directly challenged and that the Book of Mormon  is among our best tools for doing so. And the Witnesses to the Book  of Mormon are, in turn, some of our best evidences for its truth —  and the only “secular” evidence that the Lord himself has  provided.

Of  late, several books and articles published for a Latter-day Saint  audience have sought to help their readers live with doubt, cope with  uncertainty, or [Page viii] find value or joy in the Mormon community, even when  some or most or perhaps even all of its founding narrative has come  to seem untenable.

Such  approaches can obviously be helpful to different people in different  circumstances. But I see no reason to surrender or to despair or to  be resigned — I don’t regard palliative care as our only option;  I think full and robust spiritual health remains an option for  everybody — and so my approach today will be quite different. I  intend to challenge secularism directly. Moreover, I propose to do  that by means of a resource given to us, in my judgment, very  deliberately by God himself.

“Be  ready,” says 1 Peter 3:15, “always to give an answer to every man  that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you.”

Like  the empty tomb on the first Easter morning — for which, by the way,  I think the secular evidence is surprisingly solid — the Book of  Mormon represents a concrete, tangible challenge to secular or  naturalistic understandings of reality. It exists, and its existence  requires explanation.

There  are many arguments available in support of the historical  authenticity (and hence the divine authority) of the Book of Mormon —  ancient Middle Eastern parallels, corroborating linguistic features,  elements of Mesoamerican archaeology, and so forth — and I myself  have written extensively on such topics. I think they’re very much  worth pursuing, and they can often be quite powerful.

(Lately,  to name just a few recent items, I’m especially intrigued by the  research of Royal Skousen and Stan Carmack demonstrating the humanly  inexplicable presence of Early Modern English in the Book of Mormon;  by the work of Brian Stubbs on apparent Egyptian and Semitic  influence on the Uto-Aztecan language family; and by Matthew Bowen’s  examination of Semitic wordplays in Book of Mormon names — all of  which appear or are discussed in Interpreter: A Journal of Mormon  Scripture .)

But,  if I may so term it, only one “secular” or “objective”  argument for the Book of Mormon directly involves divine aid. Only  one that, from the beginning, was directly ordered by God. I’m  referring, of course, to two solemn declarations — “The Testimony  of Three Witnesses” and “The Testimony of Eight Witnesses” —  that have been published with the Book of Mormon since 1830.

Significantly,  both of the declarations — of the Three and of the Eight Witnesses  — and both taken together eliminate the possibility that all of  this rests merely on Joseph Smith’s imagination, whether that  imagination is deemed deranged or deceptive. He isn’t the only  person who claimed to perceive these things. Others claimed to have  seen, and in some cases to have handled, the related physical  artifacts as well.

[Page ix]

Joseph  grasped the import of this point very clearly. In her History ,  Joseph’s mother, Lucy Mack Smith, records his relief after the  Three Witnesses had their experience:

Very  importantly, however, the two statements — of the Three and the  Eight — are distinctly different both in their tone and in what  they describe.

In  the first, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris affirm  that they’ve seen the plates from which Joseph translated the Book  of Mormon. But they also claim to have seen the angel who brought  those plates and to have heard the voice of God himself testifying to  the truth of the volume and commanding the witnesses to testify of  its truth. Their statement is overtly and strongly religious in tone.

By  contrast, the statement of the Eight Witnesses is strikingly sober,  legalistic (note, for example, its three rather dry references to  “the said Smith”), quite reserved (e.g. “the plates … have  the appearance of gold” as well as “the appearance of ancient  work”), and almost distinctly nonreligious in tone. No divine voice  is mentioned nor is any angelic appearance. God is invoked, but  solely as guarantor of the truth of their affirmation, rather in the  manner of courtroom testimony or the pronouncing of a solemn oath.  They too claim to have seen the plates; unlike the three, however,  they also claim to have “hefted” those plates, and to have  “handled” them one by one.

What  is the point of having these two distinct declarations?

One  thing, at least, is clear: They make the task of coming up with a  single naturalistic explanation of the witnesses considerably more  difficult.

Someone  determined to reject the testimony of the Three Witnesses, for  example, might argue that their experience was merely “visionary,”  and, thus — if visions are decreed to be impossible — the product  of hallucination or overactive imaginations. And the same would have  to be said of Mary Whitmer, the mother of the witnesses David, Jacob, [Page x] John, Christian, and Peter Whitmer Jr., who also saw the plates and,  evidently, an angel.

In  late 1839, Hyrum Smith wrote an account for the Times and Seasons newspaper covering, among other things, his four months of hungry and  cold imprisonment in Missouri’s ironically named Liberty Jail,  under recurring threats of execution, while his family and fellow  members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints were being  driven from their homes during the wintertime:

“I  thank God,” he told the Saints,

One  might dismiss this declaration of willingness to die for his  testimony as an empty boast, mere retrospective bravado, were it not  for the fact that, fewer than five years later in Illinois, fully  understanding the risk, he did in fact go voluntarily to Carthage  Jail. There, with his prophet-brother, he died a martyr — which, in  ancient Greek, means “witness” — in a hail of bullets.

The  accounts left behind by the Eight Witnesses are replete not only with  claims to have “seen and hefted” the plates, to have turned their  individual leaves and examined their engravings, but also with  estimates of their weight, descriptions of their physical form and  the rings that bound them, and reports of their approximate  dimensions as well.

Wilhelm  Poulson’s 1878 interview with John Whitmer provides an excellent  summary:

Those  who seek to dismiss the testimony of the Eight Witnesses must, on the  whole, flatly brush aside what those Witnesses actually and very  forcefully said.

If  their worldview demands it, though, many skeptics are admittedly up  to the task of dismissing the experience of all of the witnesses as  merely hallucinatory: “Once you eliminate the impossible,”  Sherlock Holmes explains in Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s 1890 story  “The Sign of the Four,” “whatever remains, no matter how  improbable, must be the truth.” And for certain anti-theists,  visions and the supernatural — and ancient Nephite gold plates —  are flatly impossible.

In  other words, if we respect the primary historical sources, the  explanation that skeptics favor for the Three Witnesses —  hallucination [Page xii] or imagination — simply can’t work for the Eight  Witnesses, nor for several ancillary witnesses.

Describing  the Nephite breastplate, she recalled that

William  Smith, not one of the Eight Witnesses, repeatedly told of his own  experience with the plates:

Joseph’s  wife Emma and his sister Katharine both had to move the plates about  on more than one occasion. Later, too, Emma testified that

[Page xiii]

A  conscientious unbeliever is required, accordingly, to assume fake  artifacts, for the creation of which absolutely no evidence exists —  and no sign, among Joseph Smith’s associates, of the required  fabrication skills. Moreover, as later statements from the Three  Witnesses indicate, they saw not only the plates but various other  objects (e.g., the Liahona, the sword of Laban, the Urim and Thummim  and breastplate) that only an expert metalworker could have forged.

But  let’s return to the suggestion that the Three Witnesses were merely  hallucinating. Dismissing even the testimony of the three is more  difficult than some seem to imagine, for their experience didn’t  occur all at one time. To the contrary, it occurred on two separate  occasions. And something experienced by three distinct persons  besides Joseph Smith and — since Martin Harris received his witness  separately from Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer — at two distinct  times and in two distinct locations is substantially harder to brush  off than an experience claimed by only a single individual.

After  all, as the evangelical philosopher Gary Habermas has observed  regarding Christ’s post-resurrection appearance to the eleven  apostles, “Hallucinations are private events observed by one person  alone. Two people cannot see the same hallucination, let alone  eleven.”

Please  note, by the way, that Professor Habermas’s comment applies  remarkably well to the official Book of Mormon Witnesses, of whom  there were — perhaps not coincidentally — exactly eleven.

In  support of his position, Habermas cites personal correspondence “from  a well-published psychologist,” who writes:

[Page xiv]

Perhaps  I can illustrate my point with a quotation from Shakespeare’s A  Midsummer Night’s Dream. Theseus, the Duke of Athens, and his  bride-to-be, Hippolyta, Queen of the Amazons, have just heard the  tale told by the lovers Hermia, Lysander, Helena, and Demetrius, of  strange transformations and fairies in the woods. Hippolyta is  impressed and puzzled by the story:

Now A Midsummer Night’s Dream is obviously fiction, and fiction  of the most fantastic kind. Still, within the framework of the play,  we know that the lovers’ story is actually true and that Oberon,  Titania, Puck, and the others were in fact active realities.  Hippolyta’s point is an entirely sound one. The consistency of the  tale told by various witnesses indicates that it rests upon more than  mere imagination.

William  E. McLellin was chosen as one of the Twelve Apostles in 1835 but was  excommunicated from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints  in 1838. However, he never abandoned his faith in the Book of Mormon,  and one of the pillars of his faith rested upon his early, searching  interviews with the witnesses to that book. He was a highly  intelligent man (and, it seems, a rather irascible one), and he was  very careful and intent upon getting at the truth.

McLellin  left a number of statements on his investigations. This one comes  from a previously unpublished manuscript he wrote between January  1871 and January 1872. I find it fascinating and, since I don’t  think it’s very well known, I’ll quote it at length:

[Page xv]

> In  1833, when mobbing reigned triumphant in Jackson Co. Mo. I and O.  Cowdery fled from our homes, for fear of personal violence on  Saturday the 20th day of July. The mob dispersed, agreeing to meet  again on the next Tuesday. They offered eighty dollars reward for any  one who would deliver Cowdery or McLellan in Independence on Tuesday.  On Mond[a]y I slipped down into the Whitmer’s settlement, and there  in the lonely woods I met with David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery. I  said to them, “brethren I have never seen an open vision in my  life, but you men say you have, and therefore you positively know.  Now you know that our lives are in danger every hour, if the mob can  only only catch us. Tell me in the fear of God, is  that book of Mormon true? Cowdery looked at me with solemnity  depicted in his face, and said, “Brother William, God sent his holy  angel to declare the truth of the translation of it to us, and  therefore we know . And though the mob kill us, yet we must die  declaring its truth.” David said, “Oliver has told you the  solemn truth, for we could not be deceived. I most truly declare  declare to you its truth!!” Said I, boys I believe  you. I can see no object for you to tell me false <hood> now,  when our lives are endangered. Eight men testify also to handling  that sacred pile of plates, from which Joseph Smith <read off the>  translation that heavenly Book.

And  he continues:

The  Book of Mormon has sometimes been explained as the product not of  simple fraud perpetrated by one fiendishly, peerlessly clever  individual (Joseph Smith), but of a more complex, collective fraud.  We might call this notion “Collective Deceit” (deception, that  is, by Joseph Smith, the witnesses of the Book of Mormon, and  presumably others).

This  hypothesis would explain the “supernatural” events associated  with the recovery of the Book of Mormon by declaring, simply, that  they never happened. Everybody testifying to them must have been  lying to further a grand conspiracy.

[Page xvii]

There  is simply no sign of dishonesty and no evidence for a conspiracy  among Joseph Smith’s associates — and, in the case of a group so  large (eleven official witnesses, plus Mary Whitmer, Emma Smith,  Lucy Mack Smith and William Smith), it would have been  inconceivably difficult to keep such a conspiracy secret.  Particularly so since the alleged conspirators suffered a great deal  (including death, in a few cases) for their supposed plot, gained  nothing, were (in many cases) alienated from Joseph Smith and,  collectively, lived several decades after the death of the Prophet,  and were entirely isolated from any supportive or ego gratifying  community.

[Page xviii]

What  are the principal objections to the witness’ testimonies? I  routinely encounter the confident declaration that the witnesses to  the Book of Mormon didn’t really see or touch anything at all and  didn’t actually claim to have seen or touched anything. They only  “saw” the plates with their “spiritual eyes,” I’m assured,  and “spiritual eyes,” to them, means “in their imaginations.”

I’ll  leave aside the question of whether it’s even remotely plausible  that the witnesses sacrificed so very much for something they  recognized as merely imaginary. Let’s look at their explicit verbal  testimonies. Several of the eleven official witnesses were obviously  confronted during their lifetimes with accusations that they had  merely hallucinated, and they repeatedly rejected such proposed  explanations.

It’s  difficult to imagine how he could have been any clearer.

[Page xix]

Some  years ago while driving through the countryside just north of Kansas  City, Missouri, my wife and I saw a number of banners hanging at  various Protestant churches, inviting people to join tours to the  Holy Land. I lead tours to biblical sites myself; I recognize that  visiting such places has enormous spiritual and educational value.  However, western Missouri itself is the burial place of several much  more recent eyewitnesses who are, in important ways, comparable to  the early disciples of Jesus. They too saw. They too knew for  themselves.

And  with the plates, as with the incarnation of Christ himself, we have a  fully material, entirely tangible incursion of the divine into our  mundane world, a very palpable refutation of the secular worldview.

But  aren’t such testimonies a dime a dozen? Isn’t there an obvious  parallel in the case of James J. Strang, the leader of a short-lived  splinter group after the murder of Joseph Smith?

Though  little remembered today, James Jesse Strang campaigned seriously to  lead the LDS Church after Joseph Smith’s 1844 assassination.

When  the general membership rejected the obscure new convert’s claim  that a secret letter had appointed him as Joseph Smith’s successor,  Strang started his own sect, ultimately headquartered on Beaver  Island, Michigan. Like Joseph, he eventually claimed to have  translated ancient metal plates and provided eleven corroborating  eyewitnesses.

By  1856, when he himself was murdered, he had several thousand  followers, including members of Joseph Smith’s family, former  apostles, and Book of Mormon witnesses.

Incidentally,  the fact that some Book of Mormon witnesses credited Strang argues  for their sincerity: Had they been knowing perpetrators of a fraud  with Joseph Smith, they would likely have been far more skeptical of  Strang.

[Page xx] But  does the fact that Strang had witnesses like Joseph’s mean that,  for consistency’s sake, modern believers in Mormonism must either  accept Strang’s claims or reject both Joseph and Strang?

No.  Because the two sets of witnesses and their experiences were very  different.

The  two sets of inscribed plates that Strang claimed to have found in  Wisconsin and Michigan beginning in 1845 almost certainly existed.  Milo Quaife’s early, standard biography of Strang reflects that,  while Strang’s angelic visitations “may have had only a  subjective existence in the brain of the man who reported them, the  metallic plates possessed a very material objective reality.”

And  they were almost certainly forgeries.

The  first set, the three “Voree” or “Rajah Manchou” plates, were  dug up by four “witnesses” whom Strang had taken to the plates’  burial place. Illustrated and inscribed on both sides, the Rajah  Manchou plates were roughly 1.5 by 2.75 inches in size — small  enough to fit in the palm of a hand or to carry in a pocket.

Among  the many who saw them was Stephen Post, who reported that they were  brass and, indeed, that they resembled the French brass used in  familiar kitchen kettles. “With all the faith & confidence that  I could exercise,” he wrote, “all that I could realize was that  Strang made the plates himself, or at least that it was possible that  he made them.” One source reports that most of the four witnesses  to the Rajah Manchou plates ultimately repudiated their testimonies.

The  18 “Plates of Laban,” likewise of brass and each about 7.5 by 9  inches, were first mentioned in 1849 and were seen by seven witnesses  in 1851. These witnesses’ testimony was published as a preface to  “The Book of the Law of the Lord,” which Strang said he derived  from the “Plates of Laban.” (He appears to have begun the  “translation” at least as early as April 1849. An 84-page version  appeared in 1851; by 1856, it had reached 350 pages.) Strang’s  witnesses report seeing the plates but mention nothing miraculous.  Nor did Strang supply any additional supporting testimony comparable  to that of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon.

One  of the witnesses to the “Plates of Laban,” Samuel P. Bacon,  eventually denied the inspiration of Strang’s movement and  denounced it as mere “human invention.” Another, Samuel Graham,  later claimed that he had actually assisted Strang in the creation of  the plates.

“We  can hardly escape the conclusion,” writes Quaife, “that Strang  knowingly fabricated and planted them for the purpose of duping his  credulous followers”; and, accordingly, that “Strang’s  prophetic career was [Page xxi] a false and impudent imposture.” A more recent  biographer, Roger Van Noord, concludes that “based on the evidence,  it is probable that Strang — or someone under his direction —  manufactured the letter of appointment and the brass plates to  support his claim to be a prophet and to sell land at Voree. If this  scenario is correct, Strang’s advocacy of himself as a prophet was  more than suspect, but no psychological delusion.”

Thus,  Strang’s plates were much less numerous than those of the Book of  Mormon, his witnesses saw nothing supernatural, and his translation  required the better part of a decade rather than a little more than  two months. (Quite unlike the semiliterate Joseph Smith, Strang was  well read. He had been an editor and lawyer before his  involvement with Mormonism.) Perhaps most strikingly, unlike the  witnesses to the Book of Mormon, at least some of Strang’s  witnesses later denied their testimonies.

The  contrasts work very much in Joseph Smith’s favor.

I’ve  only begun to scratch the surface of the case that can be made for  the reliability of the Book of Mormon witnesses. Our time is far too  short to do the matter justice.

But  I want to indicate very clearly what their testimony entails, if it’s  accepted. For one thing, acceptance of their accounts entails that  there were tangible, real, material plates — which effectively  eliminates the stance that the Book of Mormon represents only Joseph  Smith’s imagination. And, since collective hallucination is  vanishingly unlikely, it means either that they were dupes of a fraud  or themselves partners in one. But what we know about their  characters and of their biographies, to say nothing of Joseph’s,  makes the idea that they were engaged in a conspiracy to commit fraud  extremely difficult to maintain. Nor is there anything to suggest  that Joseph or anybody in his circle had the ability to manufacture  bogus plates.

Let’s  return for a moment to the dictum of Sherlock Holmes: “Once you  eliminate the impossible,” he said, “whatever remains, no matter  how improbable, must be the truth.”

If  theism and revelation aren’t deemed altogether impossible, the  testimonies of the witnesses must be taken very seriously.

I  realize that rejection of Joseph Smith doesn’t require the  abandonment of theism. There are many other options on the market.  But let’s close by considering what is involved in opting for a  completely secular worldview. What is that alternative?

“Apatheism”  is the witty term coined for the complete indifference to great  issues of faith and religion that’s fashionable in some circles.

[Page xxii]

“If  there were a God,” a supremely complacent atheist once told me  online, “I think (s)he’d enjoy hanging out with me — perhaps  sipping on a fine Merlot under the night sky while devising a grand  unified theory.”

“If  you live in this very moment,” another atheist wrote to me a year  later, “you’ll find happiness. You realize that life isn’t  about getting to the shore. It’s about enjoying the feel of the  water glide against your skin, feeling the power in your arms as you  systematically push water behind you, deeply breathing the fresh  salty air, feeling a moment of awe as you turn your head and see the  sunset, and feeling the love that you share with your fellow  swimmers. This life is a precious thing in and of itself. There may  be something beyond it, there may not. But this life is wonderful  enough.”

I  understand his attitude; things can be very good indeed for those who  win life’s lottery. But it hasn’t been so good for many, and  there’s nobody for whom it’s always grand.

Speaking  very broadly and taking the religious or theistic and the  naturalistic or materialistic positions in their most generic sense,  it must be said that, if it’s true, the naturalistic position is  very bad news for the generality of humankind, whereas the religious  position, if true, is deeply good news.

This  isn’t to say that atheists can’t point to and enjoy human  goodness and love, the satisfactions of family life and community,  various physical pleasures, aesthetic appreciation, creative  expression, the glories of nature, the quest for scientific  understanding, food, sports, and entertainment. They surely can, and  all these unquestionably are, or can be, good.

But  the simple fact is that a substantial proportion of humanity has been  largely denied access to such things. Perhaps even, speaking  historically, an overwhelming majority. Those who profit from  material prosperity in stable societies, who benefit from adequate  nutrition and decent medical care, who enjoy reasonably good health  and have received fairly solid educations, who have been born into  rich and relatively healthy cultures — those who, in the late  British philosopher John Hick’s phrase, “have been lucky in the  lottery of life” — have a shot at more or less happy lives.

Even  in such cases, though, happiness is scarcely guaranteed.

Even  the most fortunate of humans will have their illnesses, their sorrows  and bereavements, their frustrations and missed opportunities, and  their ruptured relationships, although these will befall them in a  generally positive context. They will inevitably encounter pain,  sorrow, grief, disappointment, despair, frustration, sickness, aging,  and, finally, death. But there will be some compensating  satisfactions.

For  those, by contrast, who suffer from congenitally poor health, whose  lives are blighted by plague or war or political oppression, who are  mired in hopeless poverty, there is no favorable context to which  they can return. There will be relatively few compensations — and  perhaps essentially none at all.

Any  atheist or humanist, to be realistic, must acknowledge this fact. But  it isn’t often that such atheists or humanists, at least in the  West — belonging, as they do, to the well-educated, comfortable,  lucky elite — seem to realize the depths of the pointlessness and  the hopelessly inescapable misery to which their sunny nihilism  condemns the majority of their fellow human beings.

“If  I were to die now,” commented a nineteenth-century atheist cited by  the great Harvard philosopher and psychologist William James,

But  most people don’t die suddenly. Most of us don’t pass painlessly  from robust health into oblivion while accompanied by a first-rate  string quartet. Rather — whether for a brief period or over the  course of a lengthy decline — they suffer physical deterioration  and the loss of mental faculties. And, for all too many even today,  this concludes lifetimes of frustration, hunger, humiliation, pain,  and injustice.

Perhaps  40 percent of the population of classical Athens were slaves. In  ancient wars, husbands and fathers were often put to the sword; their  women and children were enslaved without rights. But urban slaves  were [Page xxiv] the lucky ones. Others went to the Athenian silver mines, where,  rarely seeing the sun, they were harshly beaten, starved, and worked  to death.

Nearby  Sparta depended upon a population of “helots,” fellow Greeks —  seven for every citizen — who farmed the city’s lands under  continual military occupation. Sparta’s teenagers honed their  military skills by roaming in gangs through the helots’  settlements, terrorizing them and destroying their hovels. And every  year, somewhat in the spirit of The Hunger Games , Sparta’s  rulers declared ritual war on the helots, murdering anybody who  showed signs of leadership.

Such  was life for many in classical Greece, at the fountainhead of Western  civilization. And conditions surely weren’t better under the  ancient Assyrians or Babylonians, or the medieval Huns and Mongols.

While  comfortable people often observe that money doesn’t bring  happiness, poverty and hunger make happiness very elusive. According  to the United Nations World Food Programme, one in nine people is  chronically undernourished, therefore lacking the energy and mental  acuity needed for a full life. One quarter of those in sub-Saharan  Africa suffer from malnutrition. More than three million children  under the age of five die from malnourishment each year. And I’ve  said nothing about the cruelty of oppressive armies and murderous  tyrants.

In  his 1870 Grammar of Assent , John Henry Newman quotes the words  of a dying factory girl from a then-popular story:

Even  for fate’s most favored children, there will inevitably be regrets  and areas of disappointment.

None  of this, of course, demonstrates that there is a God, nor that we are  immortal, nor that a world of compensating rewards awaits us on the  other side of the grave. But certainly it illustrates why the  question of whether such a world exists is and ought to be of  profound concern to normal people. “Apatheism” is an expression,  it seems to me, of thoughtless complacency.

Moreover,  increased secularization is likely to have negative consequences for  the poor and disadvantaged even in this life.

For  as long as I can remember, those who disagree with my fairly  libertarian economic views have told me how much more they care about  the poor than I do. And nonreligious people have assured me that,  while I’m supposedly focused on some sort of illusory “pie in the  sky when I die” and on “saving” others from mythical sufferings  in a fairy tale afterlife, they’re devoted to making life in  this world, on this planet, tangibly better for everybody.

In  my particular case, the critics may be right. They’re very likely  far better people than I am — more charitable, kinder, more  concerned for their fellow humans. However, unless they actually  supply evidence to demonstrate it, recent research has made it much,  much harder for secularists to preen themselves, as a class, on their  superior compassion.

Religious  people, it turns out, give more to charity than do nonreligious  people. They donate more money — and not merely to their churches,  synagogues, temples, and mosques. “Religious people are more  charitable in every measurable nonreligious way — including secular  donations, informal giving, and even acts of kindness and honesty —  than secularists.” They’re more likely to give money to family  and friends, and, when they do, to give larger amounts. They’re  more likely to volunteer and to give blood. Even non-churchgoers, if  they were [Page xxvi] raised in religious households, are more likely to donate  to charity than those who were not.

Not  surprisingly, private charity in ever-more-secular Europe has  plummeted — to the point, in some areas, almost of extinction.  Brooks, who also argues that charitable giving is essential to a  strong economy, points to polling data suggesting that Europeans are,  according to their own reports, less happy with their lives than  Americans are, and suggests that their unhappiness may be connected  with their low rates of charity and volunteerism. Humans feel better  when they give.

As  befits a premier social scientist, Brooks concentrates heavily on  multiple streams of contemporary statistical data to form his  judgments. However, the historical record also seems to support the  general conclusions of his very important book:

Rodney  Stark, in an insightful 1996 study of The Rise of Christianity ,  has shown that the superior charity of the ancient Christians was a  vital factor in the rapid growth of the early Christian movement.  And, as an examination of the surviving sources demonstrates, even  the pagans recognized that. “The impious Galileans support not only  their poor, but ours as well,” lamented the fourth-century Roman  Emperor Julian (known to subsequent history as “the Apostate” for  his efforts to turn back the religious tide even after his uncle  Constantine had declared Christianity the official religion of the  empire). “Everyone can see that our people lack aid from us.”

“Religion  is the opiate of the people,” Karl Marx famously complained.  Elsewhere, he remarked that, while “philosophers have said that the  purpose of philosophy is to understand the world, the purpose is to  change it.” Religion, in his view, was a distraction from the real  business of making this world a better place. Unfortunately for  Marx’s thesis, though (and even more so for those who had to live  through the 20th century), the millennium recently closed was heavily  influenced at its end by Marxism and by a related ideology that went  under the names of fascism and “National Socialism” or Nazism. We  now have quite graphic evidence of exactly how such theories tend to  “change the world”: Scores of millions of people were murdered,  and many national economies were destroyed.

A  religious approach to the world and life doesn’t look too bad by  contrast. But even when contrasted with the soft secularism — the  “apatheism” — that has come to dominate Europe and perhaps  Canada and certain portions of the American elite, and even though  religious [Page xxvii] people can undoubtedly do much more and much better than  they are doing now, believers fare pretty well.

None  of these sad realities proves the existence of God, life after death,  or ultimate justice. In fact, quite understandably, many see in them  a powerful argument against God. Surely, though, they illustrate why  the hope for eternal joy and compensation is so deeply important.

“In  light of heaven,” said Mother Teresa, who was well aware of poverty  and human agony, “the worst suffering on Earth, a life full of the  most atrocious tortures on Earth, will be seen to be no more serious  than one night in an inconvenient hotel.”

If  she’s right, that’s fabulous news for everybody who has ever  lived.

It  seems arguable, to me, that acceptance of a thoroughgoing naturalism,  a complete secularism, might well require the abandonment of reason  altogether — and thus, ironically, the abandonment of any ability  to argue that secularism is, in fact, true.

I  think I’ll stick with theism. Mormon theism, in fact. And I  recommend that you do, too.

---
Notes

[1] The  title of this lecture series, Reason  for Hope: Responding to a Secular World ,  presupposes that the world — or at least our world, the affluent West — is largely and perhaps increasingly  secular. 1 This seems to me a reasonable assumption. It also invites  participating lecturers to respond to the challenge posed by  secularism.

[2] Joseph  threw himself down beside me, and exclaimed, … “you do not know  how happy I am: the Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to  three more besides myself. They have seen an angel … and they will  have to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they  know for themselves, that I do not go about to deceive the people,  and I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too  heavy for me to bear. 2

[3] However,  although some have also sought to dismiss the experience of the Eight  Witnesses as merely visionary (which, they insist, naturally means  merely imaginary), it occurred in broad daylight and remains  stubbornly matter-of-fact. 3 It seems to have included no explicitly supernatural elements.

[4] that  I felt a determination to die, rather than deny the things which my  eyes had seen, which my hands had handled, and which I had borne  testimony to. … I can assure my beloved brethren that I was enabled  to bear as strong a testimony, when nothing but death presented  itself, as ever I did in my life. 4

[5] I  — Did you handle the plates with your hands? He — I did so! I  — Then they were a material substance? He — Yes, as [Page xi] material as  anything can be. I — They were heavy to lift? He — Yes, and  you know gold is a heavy metal, they were very heavy. I — How  big were the leaves? He — So far as I can recollect, 8 by 6 or 7  inches. I — Were the leaves thick? He — Yes, just so thick,  that characters could be engraven on both sides. I — How were  the leaves joined together? He — In three rings, each one in the  shape of a D with the straight line towards the centre. … I —  Did you see them covered with a cloth? He — No. He handed them  uncovered into our hands, and we turned the leaves sufficient to  satisfy us. 5

[6] William  Smith, who knew the Eight Witnesses well — his father and two of  his brothers were among them — explained “they not only saw with  their eyes but handled with their hands the said record.” 6 Daniel Tyler heard Samuel Smith testify that “He knew his brother  Joseph had the plates, for the prophet had shown them to him, and he  had handled them and seen the engravings thereon.” 7

[7] Lucy  Mack Smith “examined” the Urim and Thummim and “found that it  consisted of two smooth three-cornered diamonds set in glass, and the  glasses were set in silver bows, which were connected with each other  in much the same way as old fashioned spectacles.” 8

[8] It  was wrapped in a thin muslin handkerchief, so thin that I could see  the glistening metal, and ascertain its proportions without any  difficulty. It  was concave on one side and convex on the other, and extended from  the neck downwards, as far as the centre of the stomach of a man of  extraordinary size. It had four straps of the same material, for the  purpose of fastening it to the breast, two of which ran back to go  over the shoulders, and the other two were designed to fasten to the  hips. They were just the width of two of my fingers, (for I measured  them,) and they had holes in the ends of them, to be convenient in  fastening. 9

[9] I  handled them and hefted them while wrapped in a tow frock and judged  them to have weighed about sixty pounds. I could tell they were  plates of some kind and that they were fastened together by rings  running through the back. 10

[10] The  plates often lay on the table without any attempt at concealment,  wrapped in a small linen table cloth, which I had given him to fold  them in. I once felt of the plates as they thus lay on the table,  tracing their outline and shape. They seemed to be pliable like thick  paper, and would rustle with a metallic sound when the edges were  moved by the thumb, as one sometimes thumb the edges of a book. 11

[11] Hallucinations  are individual occurrences. By their very nature only one person can  see a given hallucination at a time. They certainly are not something  which can be seen by a group of people. Neither is it possible that  one person could somehow induce an hallucination in somebody else.  Since an hallucination exists only in this subjective, personal  sense, it is obvious that others cannot witness it. 12

[12] “Hallucination  is a solitary phenomenon,” agrees the Catholic writer Karl Keating.  “In medical literature, there are no records of even two people  having the same hallucination at the same time.” 13

[13] Hippolyta: “’Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.” Theseus: “More strange than true: I never may believe These  antique fables, nor these fairy toys. . .” Hippolyta: “But  all the story of the night told over, And  all their minds transfigured so together, More  witnesseth than fancy’s images And  grows to something of great constancy.” 14

[14] One  circumstance I’ll relate of one of these eight witnesses. While the  mob was raging in Jackson Co. Mo. in 1833 some young men ran down  Hiram Page <in the woods> one of the eight <witnesses,>  and commenced beating and pounding him with whips and clubs. He  begged, but there was no mercy. They said he was <a> damned  Mormon, and they meant to beat him to death! But finally one then  said to him, if you will deny that damned book, we will let you go.  Said he, how can I deny what I know to be true? Then they  pounded him again. When they thought he was about to breathe his  last, they said to him, Now what do you think of your God, when he  dont save you? Well said he, I believe in God–Well, said one of the  most intelligent among them, I believe the damned fool will stick to  it though we kill him. Let us let him go. But his life was nearly run  out. He was confined to his bed for a length of [Page xvi] time. So much for a  man who knows for himself. Knowledge is beyond faith or doubt. It is  positive certainty. I  in company with <a> friend, <I> visited one of the eight  witnesses <in 1869>–the only one who is now alive, and he  bore a very lucid and rational testimony, and gave us many  interesting particulars. He was a young man when he had those  testimonies. He is now <was then> sixty eight  years old, and still he is firm in his faith. Now I would ask what  will I do with such a cloud of faithful witnesses, bearing such a  rational and yet solemn testimony? These men while in the prime of  life, saw the vision of the angel, and bore their testimony to all  people. And eight men saw the plates, and handled them. Hence  these men all knew the things they declared to be positively true.  And that too while they were young, and now when old they declare the  same things. 15

[15] William  McLellin was closely acquainted with the Smith and Whitmer families  from the time of his 1831 conversion. He carefully questioned them  about the Book of Mormon. In 1880, long alienated from Mormonism, he  still asserted their credibility: “I believed them then and I  believe them yet.” 16

[16] However,  such an explanation collides with abundant evidence regarding the  character of Joseph Smith. 17 Moreover, it clashes directly with what we know about the character  of the witnesses and their subsequent behavior. 18

[17] Many  of those who interviewed David Whitmer, one of the Three Witnesses,  over his last decades noted the reverential awe with which he  regarded the manuscript of the Book of Mormon that he had in his  possession. He refused to part with it for any price, although he was  by no means wealthy, and both he and his family felt not only that it  was divinely protected but that they would share in that divine  protection so long as they owned it. 19 Whether their sense of the manuscript’s near-supernatural potency  was misplaced or not is irrelevant to the issue at hand: Such  attitudes are impossible to square with cynicism and conscious  deception.

[18] David  Whitmer was once confronted by a mob of 400‒500 Missourians who  demanded, on pain of death, that he deny his published testimony of  the Book of Mormon. Instead, he forcefully reasserted it. Neither he  nor the other witnesses come across as cynical conspirators. 20

[19] As  the lawyer James H. Moyle, who had interviewed David Whitmer, justly  observed, “If there had been fraud in this matter Joseph Smith  would have cultivated those men and kept them with him at any cost.  The truth is that when they became unworthy they were excommunicated,  even though they were witnesses to the Book of Mormon.” 21

[20] In  a letter dated 22 September 1899, David Whitmer’s grandson, private  secretary, and business partner George Schweich recalled of his  grandfather, “I have begged him to unfold the fraud in the case and  he had all to gain and nothing to lose but to speak the word if he  thought so — but he has described the scene to me many times, of  his vision about noon in an open pasture — there is only one  explanation barring an actual miracle and that is this — If that  vision was not real it was HYPNOTISM, it was real to grandfather IN  FACT.” 22

[21] I’ve  argued that hallucination, whether individual or collective, cannot  explain the facts surrounding the coming forth of the Book of Mormon.  But the facts are heavily against conscious conspiracy, too. As the  early 19th-century Mormon convert John Corrill remarked, “As to its  being a revelation from God, eleven persons besides Smith bore  positive testimony of its truth. After getting acquainted with them,  I was unable to impeach their testimony, and consequently thought  that it was as consistent to give credit to them as credit the  writings of the New Testament, when I had never seen the authors nor  the original copy.” 23

[22] In  fact, David Whitmer, one of the initial Three Witnesses, could easily  have been addressing today’s skeptics when he declared “I was not  under any hallucination, nor was I deceived! I saw with these eyes  and I heard with these ears! I know whereof I speak!” 24

[23] And  listen, once more, to Hyrum Smith’s declaration about the months he  spent in Liberty Jail, condemned to death: “I thank God that I felt  a determination to die, rather than deny the things which my eyes had  seen, which my hands had handled.” 25

[24] Let’s  have a look. 26

[25] “I  will say nothing against the course of my existence,” the great  German poet and philosopher Johann Wolfgang von Goethe wrote in 1824.  “But at bottom it has been nothing but pain and burden, and I can  affirm that during the whole of my 75 years, I have not had four  weeks of [Page xxiii] genuine well-being. It is but the perpetual rolling of a  rock that must be raised up again forever.” 27

[26] being  in a healthy condition for my age, both mentally and physically, I  would just as lief, yes, rather, die with a hearty enjoyment of  music, sport, or any other rational pastime. As a timepiece stops, we  die — there being no immortality in either case. 28

[27] I  think if this should be the end of all, and if all I have been born  for is just to work my heart and life away, and to sicken in this  (dreary) place, with those millstones in my ears for ever, until I  could scream out for them to stop and let me have a little piece of  quiet, and with the fluff filling my lungs, until I thirst to death  for one long deep breath of the clear air, and my mother gone, and I  never able to tell her again how I loved her, and of all my troubles,  — I think, if this life is the end, and there is no God to wipe  away all tears from all eyes, I could go mad! 29

[28] “Take  the happiest man,” suggests William James, “the one most envied  by the world, and in nine cases out of ten his inmost consciousness  is one of failure. Either his ideals in the line of his achievements  are pitched far higher than the achievements themselves, or else he  has [Page xxv] secret ideals of which the world knows nothing, and in regard to  which he inwardly knows himself to be found wanting.” 30

[29] Arthur  Brooks, formerly a professor of public administration in the Maxwell  School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at Syracuse University in  New York and now president of the American Enterprise Institute in  Washington, DC, has studied patterns in charitable giving and service  for many years and is widely recognized as perhaps the pre-eminent  authority on the subject. Still, he reports that even he has been  surprised by what he has found. 31

[30] Finally,  if a purely naturalistic secularism is true, might that not entail  the death of reason and, strikingly, an inability even to judge  whether it’s true or false? If our “thinking” is merely the  accidental byproduct of neurochemical processes in our brains, which  are in turn the accidental byproducts of a random, meaningless, and  undirected process of biological evolution, what real significance  should we grant to that “thinking”? Is a brain adapted to  survival and reproduction on the African Savannah likely to be  well-suited to judging issues of cosmic meaning? And, if, as one  reductionist puts it, brains secrete “thinking” the way livers  secrete bile, how does it make sense to judge such thinking as either  “right” or “wrong”? After all, bile is neither “right”  nor “wrong.” Nor is bile “about” anything, any more  than oxidation or rust is “about” anything. How would it make any  more sense to say that the neurochemical processes in Newton’s  brain were “about” calculus than to say that his digestive  processes were? 32

