[Page 273] Abstract: This is the first of two articles discussing Missouri’s  requisitions to extradite Joseph Smith to face criminal charges and  the Prophet’s recourse to English habeas corpus practice to defend  himself. In this article, the author presents research rejecting the  suggestion that the habeas corpus powers of the Nauvoo City Council  were irregular and explains why the idea that the Nauvoo Municipal  Court lacked jurisdiction to consider interstate habeas corpus  matters is anachronistic. In the second article, the author analyzes  the conduct of Missouri Governor Thomas Reynolds in relation to the  requisitions for Joseph Smith’s extradition. Even by the standards  of the day, given what he knew, his conduct was unethical.

I  have approached this task in four parts. First, I summarize the  nature of the habeas corpus powers provided to Nauvoo by its charter,  and I concur with the assessment of James L. Kimball and  Jeffrey N. Walker that despite what Governor Ford wrote in  1854, there was nothing particularly unusual about those powers when  they were granted in 1840.

Second,  to correct misunderstanding as to how habeas corpus worked in  Illinois in the 1840s, I trace the history of the habeas corpus writ  from England into the Western United States during the period before  the Civil War, and I reject the notion that this writ predated Magna  Carta and was always an instrument designed to protect the rights of  prisoners. I provide this review so that readers will understand what  happened in Joseph Smith’s habeas corpus cases in light of the law  and practices that [Page 276] then applied, rather than in terms of practices  after the Civil War, which have received more attention in American  historical and legal literature. I believe this excursion is  necessary to correct the misunderstanding that happens when  historical practices are interpreted through the lens of modern  understanding. During Joseph Smith’s time, habeas corpus processes  were almost completely English, and United States courts at all  levels had not yet resolved the question of whether municipal or  state courts, granted habeas corpus powers by their charters and  constitutions, could exercise those powers in federal cases.

In  Part III, I further reject the idea — prominent in 19th-century  American legal scholarship and which has found its way into the  historiography of the Missouri extradition episodes — that it was  American judges who pioneered review of the facts behind habeas  corpus returns (written explanations of why jailers were holding  their prisoners). I will explain that the Mormons did not abuse the  habeas corpus process that had been developed by English judges and  which was applied in a very English fashion in the United States  before the Civil War.

I  argue that the first Mormon War requisition was a sham from start to  finish since the indictments in the underlying cause of action had  been dismissed before the extradition request was made, even though  Joseph Smith and his team did not know that until late 1843. I also  observe that if the first Mormon War requisition was invalid because  the underlying cause of action had been dismissed, then as a  necessary consequence, any warrant based upon those same charges was  also invalid, even if a new indictment had been issued by a  different court.

Even  though Mormon critics argue that the Nauvoo Municipal Court exceeded  its authority when dismissing the second Mormon War requisition, I  argue that the process involved in the issue of that requisition was  illegal and unethical in accordance with the principle of double  jeopardy.

I  conclude that criticism of the use of the writ of habeas corpus in  Nauvoo between 1840 and 1843 on the basis that it was preferential,  capricious, or overreaching is not substantiated by the law, the  facts, or the practice of the period. Not all may agree that the  actions taken by Nauvoo’s leaders during the Nauvoo Expositor episode were wise, but this analysis suggests that we in the 21st  century should pause before passing judgment on 19th-century  English legal practices in the US without proper understanding. (This  analysis is also relevant to the use of the writ of habeas corpus  during the Nauvoo Expositor episode, although that is not the  focus of this article.)


## Part I  — City Habeas Corpus Powers in Illinois between 1837 and 1840

The  right of Chicago’s municipal court to issue writs of habeas corpus  is not so obvious. It was there from the beginning in 1837 in  consequence of the language of section 69 which read:

The  habeas corpus power in Nauvoo’s charter documents, written 18  months later, was expressed slightly differently but without tangible  difference in legal consequence:

Missouri’s  embarrassment and desire to arrest and incarcerate the citizen of  another state did not invalidate the habeas corpus right. Citizen  protection in the face of official displeasure was the very essence  of that right — protection from what Joseph Smith had described as  unrighteous dominion after his earlier and more famous incarceration  without trial for nearly six months in jails at Richmond and Liberty,  Missouri. Habeas corpus had been developed by English judges and  parliamentarians to protect its citizens from the capricious and  arbitrary conduct of an angry monarch, and its adoption into United  States state charters was intended to do the same.


## Part II  — The History of the Writ of Habeas Corpus


## Part  III — How US Habeas Corpus Practice Was Innovative

However,  to give a fair overview of this practice in United States history and  so readers interested in LDS history may properly understand  Joseph Smith’s legitimate and “English” use of the writ of  habeas corpus, I will briefly explain what was and remains innovative  in US habeas corpus practice.


## Slavery  Cases before the Civil War


## Slavery  Cases after the Civil War


## Habeas  Corpus in Joseph Smith’s Federal Case before the Civil War

For  the purposes of this article, the important point is that US habeas  corpus practice largely followed English practice until the Habeas  Corpus Act of 1867 was passed following the Civil War.  That legislation was a part of the Reconstruction package, which  included the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments to the  Constitution. It authorized federal courts to review state judicial  practices that enabled slavery under another name. Though habeas  corpus writs were used in slavery cases before the Civil War,  practices varied from North to South depending on whether the  relevant court was part of a state inclined to free slaves or to  preserve them as a form of property.


## Part IV  — The Missouri Warrants for Joseph Smith’s Arrest between 1840  and 1843


## The  Mormon War Charges

Walker  is gentle when he discusses the Mormon War charges, especially in  light of the information he has uncovered in connection with them. He  has written:

I  discuss the legal and ethical issues in the State of Missouri’s  conduct that Walker has raised in his research in my second, shorter  article about the Missouri requisitions for Joseph Smith’s arrest.  The purpose of this article is to show that there was nothing  improper or even unwise in Joseph Smith’s response to these  requisitions. Given the malevolent attitudes that existed toward him  in Missouri, the only other course Joseph Smith could have taken was  to run away and hide, and that would have been interpreted by the  world as well as Church members as an admission of guilt.


## The  Accessory Before the Fact Charges

Judge  Pope considered himself called upon to decide a matter of wide  significance. He explained the US Constitution’s requirement that  important interstate matters, including extraditions, should be  decided in the federal courts. He then explained that the protection  afforded by the writ of habeas corpus against arbitrary imprisonment  at the behest of the executive, in the spirit of Magna Carta, was of  foundational [Page 299] importance to the framers of the US Constitution. This  was something English that must be retained:

> All  who are familiar with English history, must know that it was extorted  from an arbitrary monarch, and that it was hailed as a second magna  charta (sic), and that it was to protect the subject from arbitrary  imprisonment by the king and his minions, which brought into  existence that great palladium of liberty in the latter part of the  reign of Charles II. It was indeed a magnificent achievement over  arbitrary power. Magna Charta (sic) established the principles of  liberty; the habeas corpus protected them.

He  then confirmed why his federal court had jurisdiction to finally  settle the matter as Justin Butterfield had advised:

> The  matter under consideration presents a case arising under the 2d  section, 4th article of the constitution of the United States, and  the act of congress of February 12th, 1793 [1 Stat. 302], to carry it  into effect … This court has jurisdiction. Whether the state courts  have jurisdiction or not, this court is not called upon to decide.

Judge  Pope then moved to the substance of the arguments behind the  extradition warrant. He examined the warrant for Joseph’s arrest  and the Boggs’ affidavit in support, and he concluded that neither  provided any evidence of Joseph’s complicity in a crime. The  highest argument against Joseph Smith was suspicion in the minds of  others. He accepted Justin Butterfield’s argument refuting the  “fugitive from justice” claim, and then he pontificated upon the  State’s paramount duty to defend citizen liberty, for as citizens  surrender their liberty to the state in the interests of law and  order, they do so with an expectation that the state would protect a  citizen’s liberty in return:

> Man  in a state of nature is a sovereign, with all the prerogatives of  king, lords and commons … But when he unites himself with a  community, he lays down all the prerogatives of sovereign, (except  self-defence,) and becomes a subject. He owes obedience to its laws  and the judgments of its tribunals, which he is supposed to have  participated in establishing, either directly or indirectly. He  surrenders, also, the right of self-redress. In consideration of all  which, he is entitled to the aegis of that community to defend him  from wrongs … It would be a gross violation of the social compact,  if the [Page 300] state were to deliver up one of its citizens to be tried and  punished by a foreign state, to which he owes no allegiance, and  whose laws were never binding on him. No state can or will do it. In  the absence of the constitutional provision, the state of Missouri  would stand on this subject in the same relation to the state of  Illinois, that Spain does to England. In this particular, the states  are independent of each other. A criminal, fugitive from the one  state to the other, could not be claimed as of right to be given up.

Judge  Pope then observed that Missouri could have asserted that Smith was  an accessory before the fact in the commission of a crime in Missouri  but had not done so nor provided any evidence that would have enabled  that conclusion. After examining Boggs’ affidavit, Judge Pope  concluded that Missouri really sought Smith’s extradition on  unfounded suspicion, and suspicion of a crime was not grounds on  which to deprive a man of his liberty. He therefore had no option but  to dismiss the warrant and set Joseph Smith at liberty:

> It  is not averred that Smith was accessory before the fact, in the state  of Missouri, nor that he committed a crime in MO: therefore, he did  not commit the crime in Missouri — did not flee from Missouri to  avoid punishment … Mr. Boggs’ opinion, then, is not authority. He  should have given the facts … Is the constitution satisfied with a  charge upon suspicion?… “to say that he was complained of, or was  examined, is no proof of his guilt; and then to say that he had cause  to suspect him, is too cautious; for who can tell what they count a  cause of suspicion, and how can that ever be tried? At this rate they  would have arbitrary power, upon their own allegation, to commit whom  they pleased.” From this case, it appears that suspicion does not  warrant a commitment, and that all legal intendments are to avail the  prisoner. That the return is to be most strictly construed in favor  of liberty … No case can arise demanding a more searching scrutiny  into the evidence, than in cases arising under this part of the  constitution of the United States. It is proposed to deprive a  freeman of his liberty — to deliver him into the custody of  strangers, to be transported to a foreign state, to be arraigned for  trial before a foreign tribunal, governed by laws unknown to him —  separated from his friends, his family and his witnesses, unknown and  unknowing … The mis-recitals and overstatements in [Page 301] the requisition  and warrant, are not supported by oath, and cannot be received as  evidence to deprive a citizen of his liberty, and transport him to a  foreign state for trial. For these reasons, Smith must be discharged.


## The  Revived Mormon War Charges


## Mormon  Reliance on Habeas Corpus Review in the Nauvoo Municipal Court Did  Not Overreach the Court’s Chartered Jurisdictional Powers

Governor  Ford and Thomas Sharp of the Warsaw  Signal had stated that the Mormons abused their city’s  habeas corpus powers to protect Joseph Smith from legitimate  warrants for his arrest. The argument that the habeas corpus powers  of the city of Nauvoo were an overreach appeals to modern readers who  do not expect a city to have the power to invalidate arrest warrants  issued by a state or federal authority. But that is an anachronistic  assumption. If Nauvoo and the other cities of Illinois that were  given habeas corpus powers in the late 1830s and early 1840s were  able to exercise those powers only in respect to arrests made under  city authority, then those powers would have been redundant from the  date of their issue. Habeas corpus powers were always controversial  because judges with modest authority were authorized by those powers  to hold the exercise of high executive power to independent account.  Joseph Smith and his colleagues merely applied English precedents of  this law to similarly evade the abuse of executive power.

James  L. Kimball has made a similar decentralization point in relation to  the habeas powers that were conferred upon the city of Alton by  amendment of that city’s Charter in 1839. He wrote:


## Conclusion

The  nature of the habeas corpus power exercised in pre-Civil War America  had a very English character. As yet, there was only limited recourse  to the writ of habeas corpus in slavery matters, and its development  as a post-conviction remedy lay in the future. In Nauvoo, as  elsewhere in America in the 1840s, the courts followed established  English practice and used the writ of habeas corpus to review the  form and the substance of arrests and incarcerations by executive  authority, including high executive authority where no trial had yet  taken place. Suggestions in late 19th-century American  scholarship that US courts were the first to look behind the official  reasons given for incarceration when prisoners were presented at  court following the issue of writs of habeas corpus misunderstands or  misrepresents the nature of the English habeas corpus practice that  America inherited. Certainly, the availability of this great writ was  denied in the colonies for 100 years after the remedial Habeas  Corpus Act (UK) of 1679 was passed, but as soon as  independence was declared, the right to seek habeas corpus writs was  proclaimed by a series of state enactments in completely English  terms. The right for state courts to seek the writ in federal cases  was also confirmed when the Constitution was drafted.

Suggestions  that the Nauvoo Municipal Court’s habeas corpus practice unfairly  protected Joseph Smith from Missouri’s extradition warrants are  also unfounded. I have not discussed the Nauvoo Municipal Court’s  use of the writ to test the Hancock County arrest warrants issued in  the wake of the destruction of the Expositor Press. However, the  suggestion that standard habeas corpus practice was abused or  departed from in Nauvoo in the earlier 1841–1843 period has no  substance. The Nauvoo Municipal Court dealt with habeas corpus writs  in connection with Governor Carlin’s 1842 warrant for Joseph  Smith’s arrest on the [Page 306] charge that he was an accessory before the  fact in the attempted murder of former Governor Boggs of Missouri,  and in connection with Governor Ford’s June 1843 warrant issued in  respect of treason Joseph Smith was alleged to have committed during  the Mormon War in 1838. In the Boggs’ attempted murder case, the  Nauvoo Municipal Court’s decision to grant the writ was effectively  affirmed by the United States Circuit Court in early January 1843  when the court freed Joseph Smith after looking behind the warrant  and finding the charge was unfounded.

Both  Missouri requisitions for Joseph Smith’s arrest on grounds that he  was a fugitive from Missouri justice in matters connected with the  Mormon War and extermination order were an unethical business from  start to finish. While Missouri Governor Boggs may not have known  that the indictments against Joseph Smith had been dismissed before  he issued Missouri’s first requisition for Joseph Smith’s arrest,  the new Missouri Governor Reynolds was well aware, as he himself  dismissed those indictments at the insistence of the Boone County  Prosecutor. Reynolds did not withdraw Missouri’s request for Joseph  Smith’s extradition from Illinois, and he issued a further  requisition founded on the same facts, even though the 1820 Missouri  State Constitution included a double-jeopardy clause intended to make  such an act an unconstitutional abuse of process. While legal ethics  on the frontier were still developing, it is indisputable that  Reynolds acted dishonorably. Both Missouri governors who sought  Joseph Smith’s extradition from Missouri had dirty hands.

> I  	am a lawyer; I am a big lawyer and comprehend heaven, earth and  	hell, to bring forth knowledge that shall cover up all lawyers,  	doctors and other big bodies. This is the doctrine of the  	Constitution, so help me God. The Constitution is not law to us, but  	it makes provision for us whereby we can make laws. Where it  	provides that no one shall be hindered from worshiping God according  	to his own conscience, is a law. No legislature can enact a law to  	prohibit it. The Constitution provides to regulate bodies of men and  	not individuals. ( History of the Church , 5:289–290).

> i.)  	the absence of a residency requirement for city leaders, ii.)  	the city council’s right to remove city offices “at will,” iii.)  	the large number of alderman and councilors who, with the Mayor,  	formed the Council, iv.)  	the fact that the principal judge of Nauvoo was also ex officio the  	Mayor, who thus conducted city business as Chief Judge with the  	aldermen functioning as Associate Justices.

However,  	the requirement that appeals from the Nauvoo Court would be heard in  	the Hancock County Circuit Court was more restrictive than  	equivalent provisions in the Chicago and Alton charters that granted  	their local courts “concurrent jurisdiction with the circuit  	courts of their respective counties” and thus allowed them to  	bypass the local circuit courts which could hear Nauvoo in jury  	trial cases.

> The  	Mayor shall have exclusive jurisdiction in all cases arising under  	the ordinances of the corporation, and shall issue such process as  	may be necessary to carry such ordinances into execution and effect;  	appeals may be had from any decision or judgment of said Mayor or  	Aldermen, arising under the city ordinances, to the Municipal Court  	under such regulations as may be presented by ordinance; which court  	shall be composed of the Mayor as Chief Justice, and the Aldermen as  	Associate Justices, and from the final judgment of the Municipal  	Court to the Circuit Court of Hancock county, in the same manner of  	appeals are taken from judgments of the Justices of the Peace;  	provided that the parties litigant shall have a right to a trial by  	a jury of twelve men in all cases before the Municipal Court. The  	Municipal Court shall have power to grant writs of habeas corpus in  	all cases arising under the ordinances of the City Council.

See  	https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Nauvoo_Charter.

> All  	who are familiar with English history, must know that it was  	extorted from an arbitrary monarch, that it was hailed as a second  	magna carta, and that it was to protect the subject from arbitrary  	imprisonment by the king and his minions, which brought into  	existence that great palladium of liberty in the latter part of the  	reign of Charles II. It was indeed a magnificent achievement over  	arbitrary power. Magna Carta established the principles of liberty;  	the habeas corpus protected them. (377)

> In  	1841, Joe Smith predicted or prophesied in a public congregation in  	Nauvoo, that Lilburn W Boggs, ex-Governor of Missouri, should die by  	violent hands within one year. From one or two months prior to the  	attempted assassination of Gov. Boggs, Mr. O. P. Rockwell left  	Nauvoo for parts unknown to the citizens at large. I was then on  	terms of close intimacy with Joe Smith, and asked him where Rockwell  	had gone? ‘Gone,’ said he, ‘GONE TO FULFILL PROPHECY!

> That  	no person, after having been once acquitted by one jury, can, for  	the same offence, be again put in jeopardy of life or limb, but if,  	in any criminal prosecution, the jury be divided in opinion at the  	end of the term, the court before which the trial shall be had, may,  	in its discretion, discharge the jury, and commit or bail the  	accused for trial at the next term of such court.

---
Notes

[1] Former  Illinois Governor Thomas Ford and the Warsaw  Signal editor Thomas  Sharp, together with Sharp’s correspondents, popularized the view  that the use Joseph Smith and the Latter-day Saints made of the  English writ of habeas corpus during the Nauvoo period was suspect. 1 In fact, it was Missouri’s willingness to pursue Joseph Smith’s  extradition, even though it had dismissed the underlying indictments,  that forced [Page 274] Smith’s recourse to the now-misunderstood English  habeas corpus process and seeded the resentment of later enemies. 2

[2] In  his History of Illinois in 1854, Ford wrote that the Nauvoo  Charter’s provisions were “unheard of, and anti-republican in  many particulars; and capable of infinite abuse by a people disposed  to abuse them.” 3 Though he had formerly held office as an Illinois Supreme Court  Justice, 4 objectivity was not to be expected from Governor Ford. He had  promised Joseph Smith safe conduct if he went to Carthage 5 and was thus considered responsible for the martyrdom by the  Latter-day Saints.

[3] Thomas  Sharp quoted Charles Foster in his newspaper, suggesting that  “Joseph’s escape from arrest through habeas corpus writs in the  Nauvoo municipal court,” 6 was just one example of “galling oppression” 7 by the Mormon majority in Nauvoo. Sharp began his relationship with  the Mormons as a “neutral observer” 8 who “reported the issuance of the Nauvoo Charter without editorial  comment” in January 1841, 9 but he became a Mormon-hater within a few months, largely because of  the Mormon reaction to his criticism of John C. Bennett’s  appointment [Page 275] as Mayor of Nauvoo and his concern about “the political  power of the growing number of Mormons in Hancock County.” 10 That political power was demonstrated in Sharp’s loss in the 1842  Hancock County election for the Illinois legislature to William  Smith, the Mormon Apostle and brother of the Prophet. 11

[4] Joseph  Smith became something of an expert in the law 12 as a result of the many legal cases in which he was involved. 13 The purpose of this article is to show that neither he nor the other  Latter-day Saints misused the English writ of habeas corpus in  connection with Missouri’s efforts to extradite him to face  criminal charges in that state. Indeed, the habeas corpus power in  the Nauvoo Charter and the use that was made of it was reasonable,  predictable, and legal according to the standards of the times.

[5] In  Part IV, I discuss the two causes of action cited for the Missouri  requisitions for Joseph Smith’s arrest and extradition from  Illinois to Missouri between 1840 and 1843. The first requisition,  issued in 1840, was based upon Joseph Smith’s escape from Missouri  while in transit to Boone County, where he was to be tried for arson,  riot, burglary, treason, and receiving stolen goods during the Mormon  War and extermination order period (what I will call the “first  Mormon War requisition”). 14 The affidavit supporting the second requisition for Joseph’s arrest  by Missouri in August 1842 alleged that he was an accessory before  the fact in the attempted murder of Governor Lilburn W. Boggs on May  6, 1842, (the “accessory before the fact” requisition). The third  requisition was a revival of the first cause of action and was  peremptorily dismissed by the Nauvoo Municipal Court on  double-jeopardy grounds (the “second Mormon War requisition”).

[6] [Page 277] Since  Judge Nathaniel Pope of the United States Circuit Court for the  District of Illinois had found the accessory before the fact  requisition invalid on January 5, 1843, 15 I argue that the Nauvoo Municipal Court’s previous conduct in that  matter was not unreasonable or oppressive. I also suggest  reasons why Judge Pope’s ruling in Ex parte Smith 16 was cited with approval as a precedent in the United States for more  than 100 years afterwards. 17

[7] In  1971, James L. Kimball, Jr. was the first to publish a research  article confirming that Nauvoo was not the only chartered Illinois  city with a municipal court that had been granted habeas corpus  powers by 1840. 18 Chicago was chartered first in March of 1837, Alton four months later  in July 1837, Galena in 1839, and Springfield, the state capital  along with Quincy, in 1840. Nauvoo was the sixth Illinois city to  receive a charter and received it from the 12th Illinois legislature  on December 16, 1840, 19 [Page 278] effective February 1, 1841. Though each city charter was different,  Nauvoo’s 28-section charter closely followed the others. 20 Kimball has noted differences, 21 the largest in his view being Nauvoo’s omission of a residence  or American citizenship requirement for public office. Kimball  speculated that was because of Nauvoo’s wish to press recent  Canadian and English converts into municipal service as soon as  possible. 22

[8] While  the original charters of Chicago and Alton did not specifically endow  their municipal courts with habeas corpus powers, 23 habeas corpus writs were popular, and Alton’s charter was amended  in 1839 to include a habeas corpus power 24 before Nauvoo’s charter was even drafted. Effective June 3, 1839,  the habeas corpus power amendment to Alton’s charter read as  follows:

[9] Be  it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois, represented in the  General Assembly , That the judge of the municipal court of the  city of Alton shall have power, and is hereby authorized, to issue  writs of habeas corpus, writs ne exeat , writs of injunction,  and writs certiorari , within the jurisdiction of said court;  and the same proceedings shall be had thereon before said judge and  court [Page 279] as may be had in like cases before the circuit judges and  circuit courts of this State, respectively. 25

[10] That  there shall be established in the said city of Chicago, a municipal  court which shall have jurisdiction concurrent with the circuit  courts of this State in all matters civil and criminal, arising  within the limits of said city, and in all cases where either  plaintiff and defendant or defendants, shall reside at the time of  commencing suit, within said city, which court shall be held within  the limits of said city in a building provided by the corporation. 26

[11] Jeffrey  Walker calls this an express grant of habeas corpus power since  Illinois’ circuit courts had the power to issue writs of habeas  corpus. 27

[12] The  Municipal Court shall have power to grant writs of habeas corpus in  all cases arising under the ordinances of the City Council. 28

[13] [Page 280] Kimball  observed that the charters of Chicago, Alton, Quincy, Galena,  Springfield, and Nauvoo all “illustrate early nineteenth century  tendencies towards democratization in government.” 29 In other commentaries, that localization trend is attributed to  Jefferson’s government 30 and has much in common with the 21st century European  concept of subsidiarity. 31 While Kimball does not elaborate on the trend to encourage local  government and judiciary, he concludes his discussion of the habeas  corpus power possessed by the Nauvoo Municipal Court with the view  that those provisions followed state precedent and “the powers of  the court were well hedged and easily within the era’s allowable  range of acceptance.” 32 Walker’s summary is similar:

[14] The  drafting of the Nauvoo Charter was undoubtedly influenced by the  Mormons’ experiences in Missouri and the perceived threat of  additional efforts by the Missourians to apprehend Mormon leaders,  especially Joseph Smith. Yet its grant of rights to issue writs of  habeas corpus cannot be seen as entirely unique. 33

[15] The  original habeas corpus powers in the Nauvoo charter documents were  not tailored to respond to Missouri efforts to extradite Joseph  Smith, since those efforts did not begin until September 1841.  However, the Nauvoo City Council did later amend its ordinances to  respond to the [Page 281] Missouri requisitions. 34 Richard Bushman has suggested that the original Missouri requisition  for Joseph Smith’s arrest on Mormon War charges was a response to  Mormon redress petitions in the nation’s capital. Those petitions  had embarrassed Missouri because they argued that the absence of any  extradition proceedings to that point was a tacit admission of  Missouri’s culpability in the Mormon War and extermination order. 35

[16] The  Latin phrase habeas corpus literally means that a court  required the body of the person charged in court so that it could  make a decision in light of the facts. From as early as the end of  the 13th century, English courts would issue orders using  this phrase to make sure parties were in court so civil cases could  proceed. But the “modern” use of the writ by courts to review  arrests by members of the executive English government can only be  traced to the 16th and 17th centuries. 36

[17] Walker  observes that a complete history of the idea of habeas corpus would  review “a series of writs from the Middle Ages” before Magna  Carta in 1215, which provided protection from imprisonment. 37 While Magna Carta does foreshadow the writ of habeas corpus, since  clauses 38 to 40 of [Page 282] the original version denied arbitrary  imprisonment without prompt trial, 38 the writ of habeas corpus extolled as the engine of practical liberty  was a much later judicial innovation. 39 The English legal historian Edward Jenks observed that when it first  appeared, the king’s high writ of habeas corpus was about getting  people into prison rather than getting them out. 40 The counter-intuitive origin of the writ of habeas corpus in English  history will not surprise readers familiar with English legal  history; they know the impartial English jury was actually a tool of  the king, who summoned people who were likely well informed  about their neighborhoods. There was originally no trace of an  impartiality requirement in their selection. The first jurors were  chosen because they likely knew, or would be able to discover, the  detail and value of property in their towns and the identity of  people likely to have committed notorious crimes.

[18] The  Canadian scholar Robert Sharp has confirmed that by the 16th  century the writ of habeas corpus was being used to combat  executive committals. The writ was not originally connected with  liberty but involved an element of due process because the courts  were unwilling to decide anything in connection with a case without  the physical presence of the defendant in court. 41 However, the medieval rule held that the king’s writs were not  available when imprisonment was by the king’s order. 42 The original writs were part of the marketing of the king’s justice [Page 283] as a desirable alternative to local and franchise courts. 43 The adaptation of the writs to achieve other purposes, including  prompt peer trials, was a trial and error effort that took centuries  to unfold. It was not really secure until the 17th century  when Parliament had acquired the power to force the king to accept  the Petition of Right in 1628 and the first Habeas Corpus  Act following the Restoration of the monarchy in 1679.

[19] Jenks  has explained that the innovation which developed the habeas corpus  writ as an instrument of liberty came when the writ was paired with  the idea of privilege. 44 That is, if a writ of habeas corpus could remove a trial from a local  court into the king’s court, then a person of high breeding could  similarly insist that his case should always be heard in a higher  court. This idea also resonated with the Magna Carta’s idea that  barons were entitled to a trial by their peers. 45 Its potential was amplified in the early 17th century when  Sir Edward Coke asserted that his common-law courts had authority to  hear cases traditionally heard in other courts, including the king’s  ecclesiastical courts. 46 These ideas appealed in colonial America, and they appealed to Joseph  Smith from the pages of William Blackstone’s famous 18th-century  English law commentaries because a corrupt court could be called to  account by another court with completely different jurisdiction. 47

[20] The  judicial innovation that saw the writ of habeas corpus used to test  arrests by lesser members of the King’s Executive took much longer  to settle. The efforts of the king’s common-law judges to use the  writ of habeas corpus to protect high-born folk against orders made  by the king’s equity (Chancery and Exchequer Chamber) and  prerogative (Star Chamber and High Commission) courts, resulted in  furious [Page 284] jurisdictional battles. 48 But in an age when judges were still appointed and dismissed at the  pleasure of the king, a return that cited the king’s personal  authority behind an imprisonment engaged a wholly different level of  political consideration. Would a judge risk his career and possibly  his life by ordering the release of a man if he were convinced the  king had indeed ordered the imprisonment challenged by a particular  writ of habeas corpus? 49 If a lesser departmental official of the king was behind the arrest,  the personal safety of the judge was not so large an issue.

[21] Darnell’s  case in England in 1627 50 focused on the practical question of whether a judge would  countermand the king’s personal order of imprisonment; the  resulting judicial back-down was redressed by the House of Commons  the following year when Sir Edward Coke authored the Petition of  Right . Because King Charles I needed funding for his military  campaign in France, 51 the House of Commons required him to concede that his judges could  issue the writ of habeas corpus in cases where the imprisonment had  been the result of Executive direction, including his own personal  direction.

[22] The  story of habeas corpus in England after Darnell’s case in  1627 and the Petition of Right, which immediately followed,  tells of English judges looking behind the returns provided by  jailers when responding to habeas [Page 285] corpus writs. 52 When jailers sought to deny judicial review by claiming the prisoner  was held by personal order of the king, judges refused to accept  those simple assertions, and if proper reasons were not given on the  face of the record or by testimony, the prisoners were released.

[23] Robert  Sharp says that although the king flouted his promise to give reasons  for all imprisonments after the Petition of Right (1628) as  soon as his urgent need for finance had passed, the practice of  providing reasons gradually took hold. 53 And in a short time, that practice was reinforced by the first  English Habeas Corpus Act in 1640, and others soon followed.  The 1679 Habeas Corpus Act (UK) was passed to curtail  a variety of Executive abuses that developed to get around the  writ. These included the arrest of prisoners when the courts were not  in session and the removal of prisoners to places like Scotland and  the Channel Islands, where the writ did not reach. 54 Certainly, errors on the face of the record enabled court  interference in cases of Executive arrest, 55 but section 3 of the 1816 Habeas Corpus Act (UK) confirmed  again that the courts were authorized to examine the truth of the  reasons given in cases where liberty was infringed by an act of the  Executive. 56 If not so, state officials and inferior tribunals would have been  free to determine the [Page 286] limits of their own powers when it came to  imprisonment, 57 and the laws requiring all matters affecting the liberty of the  subject to be construed strictly would be without effect. 58

[24] For  English judges, the core of the writ of habeas corpus was to review  the sufficiency of the evidence, especially if that was not clear  from the face of the return. 59 English habeas corpus principle and practice was well known,  respected, and followed by US judges at the time of Joseph Smith’s  habeas corpus experiences. Subsequent American commentators have  stated that American innovation first saw the courts examine the  sufficiency of evidence rather than take arrest warrants at face  value 60 but that American reinterpretation completely ignores how the English  developed the writ as a check on Executive power. It also ignores how  the English Parliament bargained with the king — before American  independence — to make sure English judges were authorized by  habeas corpus Acts to look beyond simple summaries of the reasons for  imprisonment that jailers gave in response to habeas corpus writs.

[25] During  Joseph Smith’s lifetime, habeas corpus practice in America remained  decidedly English. The supremacy of federal courts lay in the future,  but some of the seeds of that future were planted by  Justin Butterfield, who served as the United States District  Attorney for Illinois and represented Joseph Smith before federal  circuit judge Nathaniel Pope. Joseph Smith’s first Illinois habeas  corpus hearing before Judge Stephen A. Douglas in the Illinois  Supreme Court (state) in response to the first Missouri Mormon War  requisition 61 did not result in any jurisdictional argument. Butterfield advised  that the charge that Joseph Smith had been an accessory  before-the-fact in the attempted murder of the former governor of a  state should be brought in the Illinois [Page 287] Circuit Court (federal).  Bringing that second Illinois habeas corpus case in federal court was  innovative and was strenuously opposed by Josiah Lamborn,  arguing for the State of Illinois. 62 But Lamborn’s challenge did not sway the presiding federal judge,  Nathaniel Pope, and his decision in favor of Joseph Smith was cited  as a precedent for more than 100 years afterwards. 63

[26] The  English Courts never developed a post-conviction habeas corpus  practice because they did not have to deal with imaginative efforts  to confirm the liberty of former slaves. 64 That was partly because of the success of the anti-slavery politics  of William Wilberforce, partly because England did not have a federal  constitution entrenching a federal version of habeas corpus, and  partly because English jurisprudence has always had an aversion to  any interference with the finality of the trial process. 65 Robert Sharp says the essential reason the United States developed  the writ of habeas corpus as a post-trial remedy was because of the  belief that any claim that a criminal trial breached constitutional  law was best [Page 288] heard by a forum divorced from the guilt-finding  process. 66 But that is also a simplification of a process developed over an  extended period.

[27] In  a 1965 article in The University of Chicago Law Review ,  Dallin H. Oaks wrote that most of the states followed the  English Habeas Corpus Act of 1679 when they sought to provide  the habeas corpus guarantee in their state constitutions. However,  that state legislation was passed only after the signing of the  Declaration of Independence, in consequence of the English Crown’s  previous position that the writ of habeas corpus was not available in  the colonies. 67 While most of the state statutes that implemented habeas corpus were  “patterned after the English act,” 68 there were variations. Generally, the benefits of the writ did not  “extend to persons properly charged with felony or treason or to  ‘persons convict’ or in execution under civil or criminal  process.” 69 But there was variation as to whether the writ was available only in  criminal matters or whether it extended to the restraint of liberty  for any cause, including civil matters. 70 There was also variation as to whether writs of habeas corpus could  be issued when the courts were not in session, and some jurisdictions  extended the English template to authorize judges not just to allow  bail when they perceived a defect in process or evidence but to  release such prisoners completely. 71

[28] In  effect, when passing their state constitutions, the American states  added to the remedial work done by the English Habeas Corpus Act of 1679 and codified the English common-law practice that  developed during the century after that Act was passed. Before 1865,  there is no evidence that the US courts were using the writ of habeas  corpus to review convictions unless it could be shown that the  impugned proceedings were somehow void ab  initio . 72

[29] Habeas  corpus petitions brought after conviction fell under the shadow of  state legislation patterned after [the English Act [Page 289] of 1679 and still]  … withheld the benefits … from ‘persons convict or in execution  by legal process’. 73

[30] Thus,  Oaks confirmed that once states had claimed the writ of habeas corpus  for themselves, the only pre-Civil War innovations to the law related  to adjusting the categories where the English writ was applicable.  The emergence of the writ of habeas corpus as a post conviction  remedy lay in the future. But slavery cases before the Civil War  hinted at the development of the writ of habeas corpus that was to  come, and Justin Butterfield made reference to the use of habeas  corpus writs in northern slave cases before the Civil War when he  defended Joseph Smith against the accessory before the fact  requisition in federal court. Josiah Lamborn for Illinois, on behalf  of Missouri, had argued that the case should have been brought in the  Illinois Supreme Court because the matter was between two states and  did not involve the federal government. Butterfield replied that the  federal court had exclusive jurisdiction to hear Smith’s case. It  had been held, in a case seeking the return of a Louisiana slave  in the New York Court of Errors, that “the state process could not  circumvent federal process” or the US Constitution. After that, he  asked rhetorically, “Has not my client, Joseph Smith, the rights of  a [slave]?” 74

[31] Before  the Civil War, Oaks reports, the way habeas corpus issues were  decided in slavery cases had more to do with geography than  doctrine. 75 In the North, when a writ of habeas corpus for a slave was returned  to the court, a hearing was held to determine whether or not he was  a slave, and if proven to be so, the court would remand him to  his master’s custody. If he was proven to be a free man, he was  released. In the South, however, the writ of habeas corpus was not  available for a colored person because the master was entitled to a  jury trial before being deprived of his property. Some southern  courts held that there was no point to the use of the writ in slavery  cases since a master could claim the slave again. But Oaks claims  that reasoning is suspect since English law ruled against [Page 290] those  recapturing a person who had been discharged following a hearing on a  writ of habeas corpus. 76

[32] Before  the Civil War, two writs were available to determine slave cases.  Bail-like arrangements were normally made until trial when the issues  would be heard by a jury rather than by a judge, as was the  invariable practice in habeas corpus cases. Juries allowed community  sentiment a place in the process, but the process also allowed slaves  to escape on terms of bond forfeiture — a price that some  abolitionist plaintiffs were prepared to pay. 77 But the choice as to which writ was most likely to secure a party’s  objectives in slavery cases before the Civil War differed from state  to state and from North to South.

[33] After  the Civil War, US Habeas Corpus  Act 1867 tipped the federal state balance in favor of  the federal government. 78 Congress passed the Habeas  Corpus Act of 1867 at the same time that it implemented  the Emancipation Proclamation and the Thirteenth Amendment. Before  the Civil War, state courts in abolitionist states had resisted  slavery by requiring detailed evidence of title to slaves before they  would release runaway slaves to slaveholders and federal marshals in  accordance with the federal Fugitive  Slave Act of 1850. After the Civil War, it was the federal  courts that were skeptical about black arrests because they appeared  to be enforcing slavery. 79

[34] Though  congressional understanding of the legal history and development  behind the Habeas Corpus Bill in 1866 was limited, the new Bill was  drafted to enlarge and strengthen federal court power. 80 The final language of the Habeas  Corpus Act confirmed that federal courts could hear writs  of habeas corpus filed by prisoners held under state law. It also  permitted the federal courts to do their own fact-finding about those  cases and allowed appeals to the Supreme Court. 81

[35] The  spirit of federal court cooperation with federal government policy is  manifest in the decision in In  re Turner (1867), given shortly after [Page 291] the Bill was passed  into law. 82 The case was decided by Salmon P. Chase, the sixth Chief  Justice of the US Supreme Court acting in his capacity as a Circuit  Court Judge. He had previously served as Abraham Lincoln’s Treasury  Secretary. Justice Chase ordered the release of an ex-slave who was  bound to her former master under the Maryland Apprenticeship  Act . 83 He struck down the Maryland law because it attempted to impose  involuntary servitude contrary to the Thirteenth Amendment. 84 Other federal courts took similar action to disallow southern  judicial enforcement of the Black Codes. 85

[36] The 1867 Habeas Corpus Act empowered  US federal courts to issue writs of habeas corpus “in all cases  where any person may be restrained of his or her liberty in violation  of the constitution, or any treaty or law of the United States.” 86 But its innovation was the authorization of federal court review of  cases already decided in state courts. The political justification  for this intrusion into state rights and sovereignty was the  supremacy of federal law as confirmed by the outcome of the Civil  War, but the underlying argument about the bounds of state rights has  never been authoritatively resolved. 87 However this history is interpreted, the federal judiciary’s  insistence that state courts could not decide federal constitutional  issues was well entrenched by 1880. 88

[37] On  the first day of Joseph Smith’s habeas corpus hearing in federal  court before Judge Nathaniel Pope, Josiah Lamborn (for Illinois and  Missouri) and Justin Butterfield (for Joseph Smith) argued about  jurisdiction. [Page 292] Their jurisdictional argument would not have been  necessary after the  Civil War since the federal jurisdiction would have prevailed. But an  assumption by many modern lawyers and historians of federal  jurisdictional prevalence is not appropriate in Joseph Smith’s  habeas corpus cases before the  Civil War; it did not yet exist. Lamborn (for Illinois and Missouri)  was justified in arguing at this time that the federal court had no  jurisdiction in Smith’s case because it was a matter between two  states. But Butterfield asserted that the federal courts had a  legitimate claim to jurisdiction. Butterfield’s argument was easily  upheld since the judge in this case was a federal judge. While the  legal argument was unsettled in 1843, the recommendations of  Butterfield, Judge Douglas, and Governor Ford that this case should  be brought in the federal court show the new federal jurisdiction  beginning to unfold. 89

[38] This  brief summary of that history shows how the writ of habeas corpus was  changed in the United States after the Civil War. Those changes did  not affect the habeas corpus doctrine or practice in Nauvoo,  Illinois, during the early 1840s. But the early use of the writ of  habeas corpus in some pre-Civil War slavery cases enabled Justin  Butterfield, Joseph Smith’s lead advocate before the US Circuit  Court in 1843, to rhetorically ask whether his client, Joseph Smith  had at least the rights of a slave. 90

[39] In  the unabridged version of his article entitled “Habeas Corpus in  Early Nineteenth Century Mormonism,” 91 Jeffrey Walker has confirmed that [Page 293] the State of Missouri sought the  extradition of Joseph Smith to stand trial in Missouri on multiple  occasions but on only two grounds.

[40] The  first of those grounds was that Joseph Smith was a fugitive from  Missouri justice and had never been tried on charges “ranging from  arson, burglary and robbery to treason and even murder.” 92 These were the charges that famously resulted in Joseph Smith’s  imprisonment, first at Richmond, Missouri, and then, following  transfer, at Liberty, near modern-day Kansas City.

[41] The  second Missouri warrant for Joseph Smith’s arrest asserted that he  was an accessory before the fact in the attempted murder of former  Governor Lilburn W. Boggs on May 6, 1842. This idea seems to have  been spawned by anti-Mormons including John C. Bennett in Illinois. 93

[42] In  early April 1839, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight,  Alexander McRae, and Caleb Baldwin were taken from Liberty Jail …  to Gallatin, Daviess County, where a grand jury was empanelled … to  consider the charges … against them, including the … treason.  There, after a two-day hearing … Judge Thomas Burch granted a  request to change venue to Boone County due to the fact that he had  been the prosecuting attorney in the preliminary hearing before  Judge Austin King. En route to Boone County, all of the  prisoners either escaped or were released and made their way to  Illinois to join the body of the Church. Sixteen  months later, on September 1, 1840, Governor Boggs sent a requisition  to Illinois Governor Thomas Carlin seeking the extradition of Joseph  Smith and five others to Missouri based on these outstanding  indictments. The extradition request was supported by the  indictments, of which Governor Boggs had secured certified copies in  July 1839. What is not clear is  whether Governor Boggs knew that in August 1839 all of these  indictments had been dismissed based on a motion by the Boone County  prosecuting attorney . The judge in Boone [Page 294] County was  Governor Boggs’s successor, Thomas Reynolds … The hearing started  on a procedural matter, since the underlying indictments from the  Missouri courts had not been attached to the arrest warrant as  required by law. As this procedural irregularity could result in  further postponement, both sides stipulated that such indictments  existed. Ironically, had Joseph  Smith’s counsel further investigated this issue, they would have  discovered that in fact no indictments existed, all of them having  been dismissed in August 1840 by the now sitting Missouri Governor  Reynolds (emphasis added). 94

[43] The  first Mormon War requisition for Joseph Smith’s arrest was never  dealt with by the Nauvoo Municipal Court. Rather, that warrant was  handled by Illinois Supreme Court Justice Stephen A. Douglas in  June 1841 in Monmouth, Illinois. Judge Douglas considered the  merits of the requisition following the issue of an arrest warrant by  Illinois Governor Thomas Carlin, after Joseph Smith was arrested at  the Heberlin Hotel in Bear Creek 28 miles south of Nauvoo. The writ  of habeas corpus that had permitted Joseph to return home until Judge  Douglas could hear the merits of the case a few days later at  Monmouth 95 was issued by Charles Warren, an equity court official in Quincy.  Bushman says Judge Douglas decided the case on a technicality that  gave the Latter-day Saints the result they wanted but without  vindicating them. 96 Bushman has also suggested that the favorable judgment was part of  Douglas’s “mission to recover [the LDS vote and the balance of  power] for the Democrats” in future elections. 97

[44] Walker’s  analysis of the legal issues is more nuanced. Judge Douglas heard  witnesses from both sides and could have looked behind the writ, [Page 295] but  he did not need to. The original warrant for Joseph’s arrest on the  Mormon War charges had been issued in September 1840 by Illinois  Governor Carlin following Missouri requisition, but the warrant was  spent because it had been returned to Governor Carlin. 98 Walker has explained that, despite the suggestion that Douglas made  the decision in favor of the Prophet to garner Mormon political  support, 99 the ruling was legally correct, and it is misleading to suggest that  the case was decided on a technicality. A returned warrant was functus officio ,  meaning it could not be reused or resurrected in any way. It was  dead. There was a variety of sound judicial precedent for that  decision, 100 but Walker has observed that even if Judge Douglas had not been able  to deal with the case on the basis that the warrant was spent, there  was ample evidence before him that the warrant had been issued “by  fraud, bribery and duress.” 101 That evidence meant he would have been able to decide the case in  favor of the liberty of Joseph Smith in accordance with established  precedent, even if the warrant was not spent. It is also clear that  if Judge Douglas had known the underlying indictments had been  dismissed by then-Justice Reynolds in August 1840, he would have had  a third reason to order Joseph set free.

[45] While  he was reading the newspaper in his Missouri home at about 9pm on May  6, 1842, someone tried to kill Lilburn W. Boggs, the former governor  of Missouri. 102 Bushman says that early suspicion fell on Boggs’ political  opponents “in a heated campaign for a state senate seat.” 103 However, two weeks later, anti-Mormons in Illinois started reporting  rumors of Joseph Smith’s involvement — ranging from an  alleged prophecy that Boggs would suffer a violent death within a  year to John C. Bennett’s more direct allegations in letters to the Sangamo Journal .  Bennett alleged therein that Joseph “had offered a five-hundred  dollar reward for Boggs’ death” and that “Orrin Porter Rockwell  [w]as the likely assassin.” 104

[46] [Page 296] Bushman  records that Rockwell was living in Independence, Missouri, near his  in-laws at the time because he was awaiting the birth of his fourth  child, but he says that Rockwell left Independence immediately after  the shooting. Bennett then “traveled to Missouri to publicize his  suspicions,” which were plausible because of Boggs’ history in  mistreating the Mormons. 105 Missouri Sheriff, J. H. Reynolds eventually arrested  Rockwell for attempted murder and held him for a year, but Rockwell  was defended by Alexander Doniphan and acquitted of all charges. 106

[47] In  the meantime, and so as to protect Joseph Smith should an arrest  warrant be issued premised on these allegations, the Nauvoo City  Council utilized their habeas corpus power and passed an ordinance  empowering them to examine all outside arrest warrants and issue  writs of habeas corpus. 107 The Council also asked Illinois State Governor Carlin to disregard  the false reports of John Cook Bennett, but “[b] y August 8, the  extradition papers had passed from Governor Thomas Reynolds of  Missouri through Carlin to the deputy sheriff of Adams County,” who  then arrested both Orrin Porter Rockwell and Joseph Smith in [Page 297] Nauvoo. 108 The City Council then issued writs of habeas corpus for both men, and  “[u]nsure of his legal grounds, [the sheriff] went back to Carlin  for instructions.” In the meantime, both men disappeared. 109

[48] Various  officials continued to search for Joseph for the next few months, and  Governor Carlin “offered a $200 reward for Joseph’s capture.”  But the searching ended in December 1842 when Joseph Smith agreed to  submit to a further habeas corpus hearing in Springfield Illinois.  The United States District Attorney for Illinois, Justin Butterfield,  had been approached to act for Joseph Smith and had opined “that  the extradition of the Prophet was unconstitutional.” 110 This was an opinion in which Judge Stephen A. Douglas concurred. 111 According to Butterfield, the proposed extradition was  unconstitutional because the US Constitution allowed only the  extradition of a “fugitive from justice.” Joseph Smith could not  be a fugitive from justice in Missouri on accessory or attempted  murder charges since he was in Illinois rather than Missouri at all  material times and had never been charged with those crimes. While  Emma had made this same argument to Governor Carlin in two letters in  July that year and had been sharply dismissed, 112 the US District Attorney’s sophisticated version of the same  argument gave the new Governor, Thomas Ford pause. 113 Butterfield had thus advised Joseph to voluntarily take the matter  “to the state supreme court, assuring him the justices were  unanimously in his favor.” 114 But ultimately the matter was taken before Judge Nathaniel Pope of  the United States Circuit Court in Springfield, Illinois, on December  31, 1842, with Justin Butterfield now retained as counsel. A decision  in Joseph’s favor was handed down on January 5, 1843. 115

[49] [Page 298] Before  the matter came before the court, Butterfield was careful to satisfy  every procedural requirement. Governor Carlin’s old warrant for  Joseph’s arrest was still in the possession of Sheriff King more  than 100 miles away in Quincy, and obtaining it in a timely manner  would cause significant delay. So cooperative arrangements were made  for a new arrest warrant to be issued by Governor Thomas Ford. Justin  Butterfield then filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus with  the United States Circuit Court in Springfield, and Joseph was duly  arrested by General Wilson Law of the Nauvoo militia. 116 Butterfield asked the court to issue a writ of habeas corpus on the  grounds that Joseph could not be a fugitive from Missouri justice  since he was not in Missouri at the time of the crime. Judge Pope set  the matter down for hearing on Monday, January 2, 1843. On that day,  Illinois Attorney-General Josiah Lamborn sought a continuance to  allow more preparation time, and the matter was adjourned till  Wednesday, January 4th.

[50] Walker  has provided detailed commentary on the motions filed and the  arguments made by both sides in the contest. The procedural  cooperation of the parties, the decision to try the matter in a  federal court because of its constitutional significance in the  1840s, and the fact that the resulting decision was cited in other  habeas corpus cases for more than 100 years afterward demonstrate  that this event had significance well beyond the municipal city  limits of Nauvoo. Ex parte Smith in 1843 117 was a test case with national significance. That the United States  Circuit Court so readily issued a writ of habeas corpus shows that  the Nauvoo Municipal Court’s issue of a similar writ, four months  earlier on August 8, 1842, was soundly based on habeas corpus law and  practice in the pre-Civil War United States.

[51] There  were two reasons why this should have been an end of the matter for  Joseph. The first reason was evidentiary. While the charges against  Orrin Porter Rockwell were not dealt with in Missouri until a year  later, 118 there was no evidence that Joseph had hired Rockwell to assassinate  Boggs. If there had been such evidence, as might have been the case  if a Rockwell trial had adduced such evidence, then Joseph Smith  could have been re-arrested on accessory charges. 119 But more compellingly, the accessory before the fact requisition had  now been tested in federal court before an independent federal judge.  Joseph had been represented by the US District Attorney for Illinois  (though acting in a private capacity for a private client), and the  Illinois State Attorney General had presented Missouri’s case  after being allowed time for preparation. If Missouri had taken the  matter further, their mistreatment of Joseph Smith and the  extermination order against the latter-day Saints may have been  brought into stark focus. The absence of an evidentiary connection  between Joseph Smith and the Missouri facts could easily have been  interpreted as evidence of Missouri’s vindictiveness against the  Latter-day Saints in the court of public opinion.

[52] The  third Missouri requisition for Joseph Smith’s arrest was based on a  new indictment for treason issued by the Daviess County Circuit [Page 302] Court  in Missouri in June 1843. 120 Hedges confirms that this new indictment was a renewal of the old  Mormon War charges dismissed in August 1839. 121 Governor Reynolds, who issued the third requisition, knew the old  charges had been dismissed because he was a Missouri Supreme Court  Justice at the time and had dismissed them shortly before he became  Governor. This requisition should never have been issued on  double-jeopardy grounds, since jeopardy had attached and the case had  been dismissed in a competent Missouri court. Perhaps Reynolds  interpreted the double-jeopardy provision in the State’s 1820  Constitution as allowing this action because the underlying matters  had never come before a jury for trial despite the attachment of  jeopardy. 122 But for a man who had served as a Supreme Court Justice in both  Illinois and Missouri, that is unlikely. 123

[53] What  seems inescapable is that Governor Reynolds knew neither Joseph nor  his lawyers knew at the time that the underlying indictments had been  dismissed, and so they did not know (and were unlikely to find out)  that constitutional double jeopardy was in play. 124 Even though legal ethics were not well defined in the U.S. in the  1840s, and Governor Reynolds may not have considered himself bound to  observe applicable legal ethics since he was no longer practicing as  a lawyer or a judge, [Page 303] there was nothing honorable about the abuse of  process which he twice condoned against Joseph Smith. Whether he was  complicit in the issue of the new Daviess County indictments in June  1843 to try and cover this abuse of process is not something that is  likely to be uncovered, unless he referred to such a plan in  correspondence that has been preserved.

[54] The  power to grant writs of habeas corpus afforded to the City of Nauvoo  under its December 1840 Charter was unremarkable. Suggestions that  this power was anti-republican or oppressive are best explained by  the agendas of those who suggested irregularity. In accordance with  Jeffersonian principle in the 1840s, the State of Illinois was in the  business of distributing power, including judicial power, to local  people and institutions unless they were incapable of exercising that  power. 125 The Mormons in Nauvoo were no exception to that trend. [Page 304] Rather, in  1840 the Mormons were seen by the Illinois legislature as the very  epitome of a people prepared to rule themselves.

[55] Anthony  Gregory has identified a decentralized approach to the habeas corpus  power in America generally when he wrote that even “the language of  the [federal] Constitution” intended “a lower court power over  the central state’s detention authority.” 126 Indeed, while it is shocking to modern Americans to understand that  the Suspension Clause provisions in the federal Constitution were  included to protect state power, including state “power to review  federal detentions,” this was “a radical states’ rights power  and was intended as an institutionally diffuse check on federal  authority.” 127 Gregory is certain of this, despite the “common assumption that the  Framers intended the Suspension Clause to protect the power of  federal courts to test the validity of federal detentions.” 128

[56] [T]he  Alton Charter provided that “the judge of the Municipal Court of  the city of Alton shall have power … to issue writs of Habeas  Corpus … with the jurisdiction of said court; and the  same proceedings shall be had thereon before said judge and course as  may be had … before the circuit courts of this state.” Alton’s  court thereby limited the power of the Madison County Circuit Court.  In Alton and Nauvoo, then, the lesser government unit had influence  over the greater one, at least for a time. 129

[57] The  revocation of the Nauvoo Charter on January 27, 1845, was the result  of majoritarian politics in the greater State of Illinois and  confirms [Page 305] only that outside forces had broken down the rule of law in  Nauvoo by then. 130 The fact that the habeas corpus power had been conferred by the  Illinois State Legislature when Nauvoo was chartered indicates that  the Nauvoo Municipal Court did indeed have the power to hear and  decide cases arising within its jurisdiction. To suggest that the  Nauvoo City Council’s power usurped the powers of the Supreme Court  of Illinois or of the United States Circuit Court in that state is to  misunderstand the legal context of the time.

