[Page vii] Abstract :  In April 2006, Dallin H. Oaks, in unpublished remarks at the naming  of the Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship (as the  successor to FARMS),  reminded listeners that “this institute  belongs to God.” On November 10, 2018, Elder Jeffrey R. Holland  (also in unpublished remarks, titled “The Maxwell Legacy of the  21st Century”) renewed that commitment: the Institute should be “as  faithful as eternal truth, and as bright as the light of truth that  is in us.” This is, likewise, the vision of The Interpreter  Foundation, in contrast to Latter-day Saint “academic ventures”  at some universities. It should be “significantly different from  the present national pattern,” Elder Holland emphasized. “There  are times when our faith will require an explicit defense.” The  Interpreter Foundation aspires to be in the fore of any such efforts.

In  unpublished remarks presented on 26 April 2006 at a relatively  small dinner celebrating the naming of the Neal A. Maxwell Institute  for Religious Scholarship, Elder Dallin H. Oaks, then of the Quorum  of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day  Saints (and currently first counselor in the Church’s First  Presidency), was forthright: “This institute belongs to God,” he  said.

As  one of the leaders of the Maxwell Institute (formerly known as the  Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, or FARMS) at that  time, I was present for that memorable dinner, at which  President Boyd K. Packer of the Twelve also spoke to us. (I hope  that someday the texts of both speeches will be publicly available.)  It was a thrilling evening and an inspiring one. Their vision of  the work of the Maxwell Institute was also ours, and I hope and  believe it is the vision of those of us involved today with The  Interpreter Foundation. It was also an emotional evening for us as  well as for others, including members of the Maxwell family who were  in attendance. Elder Maxwell, who had died nearly two years before,  on 21 July 2004, had been a beloved friend and an open,  articulate, encouraging supporter of our efforts.

On  Saturday evening, 10 November 2018, Elder Jeffrey R. Holland of the  Council of the Twelve delivered the 2018 Neal A. Maxwell Lecture on  the Provo, Utah, campus of Brigham Young University. His remarkable  address, given under the auspices of the University’s Neal A.  Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship, was entitled “The  Maxwell Legacy in the 21st Century.”

“I  am speaking only to the work of the Maxwell Institute tonight,”  Elder Holland said, “and not to the whole of BYU’s academic  effort.” Still, he added, “I hope that much I say will apply  across the entire campus and beyond” (1).

In  my judgment, his remarks indeed apply beyond his immediate audience  at the Maxwell Institute, and in what I hope is the spirit of  1 Nephi 19:23, I will make an effort here to begin to apply  them to the work of The Interpreter Foundation, with which I have  been associated since it was launched shortly after my departure from  the Maxwell Institute in 2012: “I did liken all scriptures unto  us,” wrote Nephi, “that it might be for our profit and learning.”

The  2018 Neal A. Maxwell Lecture offers us, along with those at the  Maxwell Institute, an opportunity to evaluate what we’re doing in  the light of the teachings and priorities of those who have been  divinely called to lead the Church at this time — and a chance  to correct our course, if that should prove necessary. The Swiss  Protestant theologian Karl Barth (1886‒1968), borrowing a phrase  associated with St. Augustine, famously insisted that the [Page ix] Christian  church must be semper reformanda , “always reforming” or  “always reformed.” I like the phrase and the sentiment  behind it, and I believe it is true of all of us as individuals  and of every organization.

Elder  Holland’s speech had much to say about contemporary academia,  which, in a sense, is extraneous to The Interpreter Foundation,  since the Foundation operates independently, without  academic institutional support and without a campus base  because many of those involved with it do not occupy academic  positions. Still, many of us are professionally or  peripherally involved with scholarship, more than a few of us  were once deeply involved in the Maxwell Institute, and there is no  question — whether the broader scholarly world agrees with us or  not — that The Interpreter Foundation is deeply involved in  a scholarly enterprise. Elder Holland’s expectation that the  Maxwell Institute be “a faithful, rich, rewarding center of  faith-promoting gospel scholarship enlivened by remarkable  disciple-scholars” (3) is certainly our expectation or hope for  ourselves. Scholarship is scarcely limited to college and university  campuses; sometimes, in fact, especially when I observe American  academic life in general, I worry that scholarship may face some  of its most serious threats precisely there, among professors,  administrators, and bureaucrats.

Himself  a former dean and then, from 1980 to 1989, the ninth president  of Brigham Young University as well as the former commissioner of the  Church Educational System (1976‒1980), Elder Holland (PhD, Yale  University) left no doubt about the authority with which he spoke.  “With the humility incumbent upon anyone making such an assertion,”  he told his audience, “I come tonight in my true identity as an  Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ” (1).

> Although  I accept sole responsibility for all inadequacies, limitations,  errors, and missed opportunities in this message, I am here with  not only the blessing but also the rather explicit expectation of the  officers of the university’s board of trustees, whose executive  committee I currently chair. In that sense, I speak for all  of your governing advisers — not just for myself. (1)

“I  can think of few other entities on this campus,” he continued,

> that  have received the attention from the General Officers of the Church  that the Maxwell Institute has — at least lately. I offer my  non-campuswide, non‒Marriott Center appearance in this modest venue  as evidence of that tonight. The Lord’s Prophet, who chairs your  board, and his fellow Apostles, who sit with [Page x] him, sent me to you. We  hope it is affirming to you to have their strong, active interest in  you at a time when the direction and priorities of the Church  are being discussed as almost never before. We hope you welcome such  focused attention, as you are measured for your role in these  developments. (3)

Within  the first few minutes of his speech, Elder Holland referred to Joseph  Smith’s First Vision, the reality of continuing revelation, the  advent of the true King, and the significance of the “end times,”  observing that at least some in his audience “must be thinking this  opening a bit melodramatic for the purposes of this particular  gathering.” However, he continued, “I prefer to see it as  apostolic. These are the topics that absorb 15 of us who toss and  turn when we would like to sleep and slumber” (3).

Remarked  Elder Holland,

> These  programs are, for the most part, a way for other people to look  at us, making no particular call upon one’s belief and having no  particular covenantal consequence after the course is over or the  essay is written or the seminar has ended. (5)

And,  as he says, he is fine with that — for such non-Latter-day Saint  campuses. However, he declares,

> I would  be the first to oppose such an effort on this campus if all it meant was a thoughtful exploration of our religion’s  “richness” or its “intellectual substance” or its “historic  resilience.” … Certainly your trustees would find it troubling.  (5, emphasis in original) In  the spirit of full disclosure, you should know that initially I was  against any proposal to do at BYU what was called Mormon studies elsewhere because I knew what Mormon studies elsewhere  usually meant. However, over time I have come to see merit in  a Latter-day Saint studies effort at BYU if you are willing  to make it significantly different from the present national pattern. If you are willing to be truly unique, I can certainly  endorse the idea that BYU should have a hand on any  academic tiller dealing with the Church, becoming a place to  which other such programs and chairs and lectureships might look for  leadership. (5, emphasis in original)

In  other words, to the extent that “Mormon studies” (or whatever we  eventually come to call it) is to be practiced at Brigham Young  University, it can never be merely identical to what is done  elsewhere. And faithful Latter-day Saint scholarship will always tend  to be different: “Of necessity, we will often be ‘a peculiar  people’ in the academy as well as other arenas of life” (5).

One  way to maintain balance at the Maxwell Institute, Elder Holland  suggested to his audience in November, would be to remember that,  while the Maxwell Institute may include a Mormon studies  component, “albeit one determinedly unique in its nature,” it  cannot reduce itself to that alone.

> [Page xii] No,  as disciple-scholars who invite others to study us even as we study  ourselves and who speak to the faithful every bit as much as to the  detached, you will have to be comfortable being true oddballs, in  that you are going to speak to both groups. It will usually  not be in the same documents, probably not with the same vocabulary,  and seldom, I would guess, in the same venue — but both the  believers and the merely curious need to be able to see you as  a source for some of the answers to their questions, however  different that source material may be. By  speaking to two audiences, I’m not suggesting you be two faced.  This is not a call to hypocrisy but precisely the opposite. When  you’re writing for the household of faith, you should never write  anything that would give your doctoral advisor just cause to accuse  you of dishonesty. Likewise, when you are writing for an academic  journal, you should never write anything that would give your  ministering companion just cause to accuse you of disloyalty. Your  soul must be one — integrated, intact, and whole — even as your  voice may speak in different languages to different audiences. (7,  emphasis in original)

This  was my own long-standing aspiration for the Maxwell Institute. In  a sense, the position of The Interpreter Foundation — and,  accordingly, the challenge that it faces — is somewhat different  from that of the Maxwell Institute and somewhat simplified. Being  academically unaffiliated, the Foundation is under no obligation ever  even to affect neutrality on the subjects to which it devotes  its attention. We are committed Latter-day Saints, and we don’t  pretend otherwise. That said, however, we are committed to the  standards of sound scholarship, to rigorous canons of evidence and  analysis. In the long term, testimonies will not be sustained or  successfully defended by the abuse of evidence or by shoddy  reasoning. Moreover, we aspire to create a body of work that, at  least eventually, nobody will be able to ignore who is interested in  the subjects that we treat and on which we publish.

“But  the wonderful thing with Neal (and the thing I want for us),”  Elder Holland added,

> is  that it didn’t have to come down to a choice between intellect  and spirit. In a consecrated soul — consecration being one of  his favorite doctrinal concepts — they would be aligned  beautifully, a perfect fit, a precise overlay. But if it  did come down to a choice, it would be faith — the  yearning, burning commitment of the soul — that would always matter  most in the end. (3, emphasis in original)

To  both Elder Maxwell and Elder Holland, apologetics — the word is  somewhat foreign to ordinary Latter-day Saint usage, but in the  context of [Page xiv] the Restoration it refers, simply, to advocacy and defense  of the claims of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints —  describes, as appropriate, an important and even essential part of  such disciple-scholarship:

Ranking  high among Elder Maxwell’s most beloved writers was the great  English scholar and Christian apologist C. S. Lewis. And, in his  turn, Lewis was vocal throughout the years after his adult conversion  to Christianity about his admiration for, and his debt to, the  Scottish clergyman and writer George MacDonald. It was entirely  appropriate, therefore, that Elder Holland, too, quoted MacDonald in  the context of his insistence on the vital need for apologetics.

“Is  every Christian expected to bear witness?” asked MacDonald. And  then he answered his own question:

[Page xvi] “I  echo MacDonald’s insistence,” commented Elder Holland, “that  while we are not obligated to declare everything we believe at any  given time or in any one setting, we are also not even to look like  what we do not believe” (8, emphasis in original).

In  other words, although not every situation calls for testimony bearing  or explicit defense, faithful Latter-day Saint thinkers and scholars  must never seem or pretend to be neutral with regard to the  truth-claims of the Restoration and the Church.

Elder  Holland even suggested some topics on which the Maxwell Institute and  other Latter-day Saint scholars might have something unique to  contribute to the broader scholarly world:

> What  about the current interest in “sacred space” generally? Might we  have something to say to our colleagues that would let us elaborate  on the significance of holy space in our history and thought? And  we have only begun to mine the wonders of the Joseph Smith Papers.  How do we get those gems out to those not of our faith and get them  out without compromising their unique Latter-day Saint  characteristics? (7)

With  regard to Elder Holland’s mention of the Joseph Smith Papers  project, I hereby publicly confess that one of my dreams for The  Interpreter Foundation is for it to organize and host a conference  devoted to what that ongoing research, editing, and publishing effort  is disclosing to us about the personality and moral character of the  founding Prophet  of the Restoration.

There  remains much to be done, and much excitement to be had. Part of that  excitement will come in doing whatever we can to fulfill the  expectations and hopes shared, on behalf of his fellow living  Apostles and prophets, by Elder Jeffrey R. Holland. I’m grateful  for The Interpreter Foundation, and for all those who have made it  possible. It is a genuinely marvelous vehicle — not,  obviously, the only one, but a good one — for contributing to  the Kingdom.

---
Notes

[1] It  must pursue an unconditional commitment to His cause, without any  obsessions or any cultivation of cheering constituencies. The  work of the Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship must  be genuine and pervasive — as broad as the [Page viii] spiritual interests of  the children of God, as faithful as eternal truth, and as bright as  the light of truth that is in us. 1

[2] Elder  Holland even quoted from an email sent to him by Russell M. Nelson,  the president of the Church, on 25 October 2018, roughly two weeks  before his lecture at BYU. “Part of the Maxwell Institute problem  is its identity,” President Nelson wrote. He said Church leaders  need to help Maxwell Institute leaders “know who they are and why  they exist” (4). 2

[3] Elder  Holland noted that “Mormon studies programs on other campuses are  designed to be primarily academic ventures, not spiritual ones, which  is perfectly understandable” (5). He cited three examples. The  first is located at Utah State University, where it proclaims that it  “does not promote or reject any particular religion.” 3 The second, Claremont Mormon Studies in California, says it promotes  understanding of the Church “without necessarily advancing (or  disputing) the veracity of its faith claims.” 4 The University of Virginia’s Mormon studies program [Page xi] describes its  work principally as engaging “Mormonism both as a significant  cultural fact and as a research subject.” 5

[4] As  part of the background for his remarks which, he quipped, were very  much like “quickly step[ping] from one land mine to another” (4),  Elder Holland cited an unpublished December 2014 review of the [Page xiii] Maxwell Institute written by Terryl Givens, 6 David Holland, 7 and Reid Neilson. 8 “The current culture at MI,” says their review, “may have lost  some of the institute’s founding vision and original purpose”  (4). 9 The possibility of such drift had been a specific worry of Elder  Maxwell himself, voiced (for example) to a 1991 gathering of  what would, after his death, come to be known as the Maxwell  Institute. 10

[5] Over  the course of his public ministry, Neal A. Maxwell spoke often and  eloquently about his ideal of “the disciple-scholar,” and  Elder Holland, recalling that ideal, commented on “that  hyphenated noun Elder Maxwell left us as part of his marvelous  linguistic legacy.” “Not all truths are of equal importance,”  observed Elder Holland, saying that, for Elder Maxwell, “the  spiritual half of that union was always the more important.” (3)  “Though I have spoken of the disciple-scholar,” Elder  Maxwell himself wrote, “in the end all the hyphenated words come  off. We are finally disciples — men and women of Christ” (3) 11

[6] Regarding  that faith-filled scholarship of which Elder Maxwell speaks, may  I note plainly one thing we expect you to do because it is  central to your raison d’être. It is to undergird and  inform the pledge Elder Maxwell made when he said of uncontested  criticism, “No more slam dunks.” We ask you as part of a larger  game plan to always keep a scholarly hand fully in the face of  those who oppose us. As a ne’er-do-well athlete of yesteryear,  I was always told you played offense for the crowd, but you  played defense for the coach. Your coaches will be very happy to have  you play both superbly well. (3‒4) 12

[7] The  mission of the Maxwell Institute, Elder Holland declared, extends  well beyond a small, narrow, academic elite. 13 Referring to the 2014 review compiled by Drs. Givens, Holland, and  Neilson, Elder Holland commented that

[8] Whatever  else they had in mind, I thought it a marvelous  understatement for them to have said, “There will be times [Page xv] when our  faith will require an explicit defense.” We want the Maxwell  Institute and many others to contribute to that defense — with  solid, reputable scholarship intended as much for everyday,  garden-variety Latter-day Saints who want their faith bolstered, at  least as much as it might be intended for disinterested academic  colleagues across the country whose stated purpose will never be to  “prove or disprove the truth claims of the Church.” (4) 14

[9] A  man content to bear no witness to the truth is not of the kingdom of  heaven. One who believes must bear witness. One who sees the truth,  must live witnessing to it. Is our life, then, a witnessing to  the truth? Do we carry ourselves in [the] bank, on [the] farm, in  [the] house or shop, in [the] study or chamber or workshop, as the  Lord would, or as the Lord would not? Are  we careful to be true? … When contempt is cast on the truth, do we  smile? Wronged in our presence, do we make no sign that we hold by  it? I do not say we are called upon to dispute, and defend with  logic and argument, but we are called upon to show that we are on the  other side. … The  soul that loves the truth and tries to be true, will know when to  speak and when to be silent; but the true man [or woman] will never  look as if he [or she] did not care. We are not bound to say all we  think, but we are bound not even to look [like] what we do not think.  (8) 15

[10] We  know you can’t be credible in every circle if you are seen as  lacking scholarly substance and categorically defensive all the time.  But neither can you afford ever to be perceived as failing to serve  the larger, faith-oriented purposes of the Church. (7) Any  scholarly endeavor at BYU — and certainly anything coming under the  rubric of the Maxwell Institute — must never be principally characterized by stowing one’s faith in a locker while we  have a great exchange with those not of our faith. Neal Maxwell  phrased it this way: “A few hold back a portion of themselves  merely to please a particular gallery of peers. … Some hold  back by not appearing overly committed to the Kingdom, lest they  incur the disapproval of particular peers who might disdain such  consecration.” And some just hold back. Period. (5‒6) 16

[11] [Page xvii] I like  to think that The Interpreter Foundation is well positioned to  contribute to such discussions. We have, for example, convened  several conferences devoted to study of the temple — most recently,  the Temple on Mount Zion conference held at Brigham Young University  on 10 November 2018, the very day of Elder Holland’s evening  remarks to the Maxwell Institute — and published three books on the  topic. 17 And, as resources permit, we intend to expand and deepen our  commitment to temple studies.

