[Page 33] Abstract: Scriptural accounts are rife with information about the import of the  first Easter. Understanding the events of the week before the death  and resurrection of Christ can help us appreciate the words of the  witnesses as well as the importance of these events in our lives.

All  Easter celebrations, Orthodox or Western, reach back to the first  Easter, beginning that Sunday morning when the Galilean women  followers of Jesus went to the tomb and found it emptied of his body  but with two angelic messengers present, one of whom announced the  resurrection in what, we may presume, were well rehearsed words. That  the women were Galileans is settled by the presence of Mary Magdalene  and Joanna among them (Luke 8:2–3; 24:10). That Sunday was exactly  a week after Jesus had entered Jerusalem after his long climb  from Jericho (Mark 11:11). Although the Gospel accounts differ about  the order of events, it appears that, once inside the temple, Jesus  created havoc (Luke 19:45–46) before retreating back over the  Mount of Olives to the safety of Bethany on the mount’s eastern  slope.

Jesus  and his dozens of followers had arrived almost a week before  Passover to purify themselves as required by Jewish law. After  immersing themselves in ritual baths and receiving a sprinkling  of water mixed with the ashes of a red heifer from a priest  as they stepped onto the temple grounds, Jesus and his entourage  spent several days together while he taught the throngs of people who  had gathered from far and wide. Each night the moon grew fuller and  fuller, expanding to a full moon on Passover itself.

As  always, the mood in the city was light and happy; Passover was that  kind of holiday. But beneath the positive exterior of temple  authorities bubbled a boiling brew of anti-Jesus sentiment. From  long before the moment that he and his friends streamed through the  city [Page 34] gate, these officials sought means to trap him and eliminate  him. But how? Even though he was almost within their grasp, crowds of  adoring admirers attended his every move. It was impossible to touch  him. Then, like a puff of cooling air in their stifling room,  Judas appeared. With the chief priests he made a deal to deliver  Jesus to them (see Mark 14:10–11). The stage was now set with all  its props. What remained was for the main actors to carry out their  agreed roles. And indeed they did, with Judas leading a mixed  band of soldiers and temple police to Gethsemane, where, since about  midnight, Jesus had been suffering terribly, even “unto death,”  as Mark wrote (Mark 14:34), and sweating “as it were great drops of  blood” that fell onto “the ground,” as Luke reported (Luke  22:44).

Jesus’  suffering is partially captured in his movements in the garden. In  Mark’s account, evidently the earliest of the Gospels, we find  a series of verbs in the imperfect tense, a Greek tense  that, among other things, describes customary and repeated action.  For example, “She kept running” or “She was knitting  a sweater.” In Mark’s case, the scene that he presents is  Jesus going forward, falling onto the ground, and praying; then going  forward, falling, and praying; then again going forward, falling, and  praying (Mark 14:35). Jesus’ repeated actions remind us of an  athlete who, in performing at a level that causes extreme pain,  adjusts the body’s position to lessen the pain, even if the  adjustment brings only a tiny bit of relief. In Gethsemane, it  seems plain that Jesus kept moving and falling to the earth in an  effort to find any kind of relief from the pain and anguish that had  suddenly engulfed him.

In  quick sequence that morning came Jesus’ so-called “mock trial”  before Jewish authorities and his two appearances before the Roman  prefect Pilate, interspersed with his hearing in front of Herod  Antipas, who ruled Galilee but was in town for the Passover feast.  Although Pilate declared Jesus to be innocent no fewer than three  times, he caved in to the demands of the gathered allies of the  priests that Jesus be executed by crucifixion — “Crucify him,  crucify him” (Luke 23:21) — a type of death that Roman  soldiers had perfected in all its cruelty.

It  is notable that, according to Luke, Jesus kept up his litany of  warnings to the people of Jerusalem on his way to the place of  execution, anticipating the fall of the city 40 years later and  addressing particularly the women who were watching his steps. He  kept pleading, “weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for  your children, … [because] the days are coming, in the which they  shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and  the paps which never gave suck” (Luke 23:28– 29). The  Roman siege of the city, which Jesus foresaw, would bring “great  tribulation on the [Page 35] Jews, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, such  as was not before sent upon Israel, of God, since the beginning of  their kingdom until this time” (Joseph Smith–Matthew 1:18).

Hung  between two criminals, Jesus helped one of them to make peace with  his eternal destiny, somewhat improved because of his contrition,  securing a place at Jesus’ side “in paradise,” a scene  that only Luke narrates (Luke 23:43). At last, after three hours of  intense suffering, Jesus gave up his spirit, speaking in “a loud  voice, [and] saying, Father, it is finished, thy will is done”  (Joseph Smith Translation Matthew 27:54).

While  Jesus’ body lay in the tomb, on Saturday, the day before his  resurrection, he betook himself not to celebrate the Jewish Sabbath  but to free the spirits of people held captive in the spirit prison,  where the souls of all dead persons go after death. The New Testament  is home to a number of references to Jesus’ activities that  day because of their significance, but without much clarifying  description except in 1 Peter 3:18–19. There we read of  Jesus “being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the  Spirit: by which also he went and preached unto the spirits in  prison” (see also Luke 4:18; Ephesians 4:8–10; 1 Peter 4:6).  In art, in paintings typically carrying the title Anastasis ,  Jesus is portrayed as assisting Adam and Eve to escape the bonds of  that prison before anyone else. We might compare D&C 138:38–39,  where, in the vision of Joseph F. Smith, Adam and Eve receive  first mention, hinting that President Smith saw them before  seeing others.

Matthew  preserves the only account that comes close to an eyewitness report  of the resurrection itself. Even that rehearsal is unsure because we  don’t know if the guards posted at the tomb by Jewish authorities  saw Jesus depart the chamber. They apparently saw “the angel of the  Lord … [whose] countenance was like lightning” and who “descended  … and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.” By  that point, presumably, the guards were “as dead men” and did not  see Jesus leave the tomb (Matthew 28:2, 4). But enough detail lies in  the story to tell us that the guards talked, and people listened to  their experience (Matthew 28:11–15). Yet the angel was the  only on-site witness.

But  witnesses of a different sort soon made themselves known to  other believers. Early that Sunday, the now-resurrected Christ  granted appearances to three individuals. The first was to Mary  Magdalene (Mark 16:9). After reporting the empty tomb to the  disciples Peter and John and hurrying back to it, Mary lingered near  the tomb, where the risen Jesus appeared to her and empowered her to  bear witness to his “brethren” about his ascent to the “Father”  (John 20:1–18). From John’s narrative we [Page 36] learn that she was not  allowed to touch the risen Lord before she went to inform the other  disciples (the Greek verb haptomai means more than a mere  touch, instead signifying “to embrace” or “to cling to”). She  simply saw him, recognized him, and heard him speak, which was  enough.

Peter  received the second appearance. We know almost nothing about Peter’s  encounter with the Savior except that it occurred. Neither of the  sources records where and what time of day. But surely this meeting  was most important, because it established Peter as the chief  guarantor of the resurrection, as its chief witness among the Eleven  (Luke 24:34; 1 Corinthians 15:3–5).

The  risen Christ then went to his younger brother James. The Apostle Paul  merely mentions that Jesus “was seen of James”  (1 Corinthians 15:7).  A fragmentary apocryphal text,  excerpted by the early Christian author Jerome from the now-lost  Gospel of the Hebrews, may fill in some of the details. From it we  learn that James had begun to fast at the Last Supper, saying that he  would not eat “until he should see [Jesus] risen from among them  that sleep.” After his resurrection, we read, Jesus found James. In  a scene touched by a tender familial loyalty and love, “the  Lord … took the bread, and blessed it and brake it and give it to  James,” allowing his brother to break his long fast.

Other  appearances occurred during that Sunday, creating witnesses in  clumps. Early that morning, Jesus met the women who were rushing to  tell others about the empty tomb. In an act of adoration, these women  “came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him” (Matthew  28:8–10). During the afternoon, Jesus joined two believing  travelers on their way to the town of Emmaus. When the travelers  reached their destination, it became suddenly clear to them that they  had enjoyed the company and instruction of the resurrected Christ  (Luke 24:13–32).

In  the evening, Jesus came to a gathering of disciples that  included all the apostles except Thomas, the two travelers to Emmaus,  and others of his close associates from Galilee. With them he partook  of food and empowered them by giving them the gift of the Holy Ghost  to begin their ministries (Luke 24:33–44; John 20:19–23). All  this took place during an all-night teaching session wherein the  risen Jesus “opened … their understanding, that they might  understand the scriptures.” In the early morning light, “he led  them out as far as to Bethany” before ascending “into heaven”  (Luke 24:45, 50–51).

This  is not the end of the story, of course. We learn that Jesus spent  almost six weeks with the Eleven, and perhaps others, in Galilee and  Jerusalem, teaching them in a series of training meetings about  “the kingdom” (Matthew 28:16; Mark 16:7; John 21:1–19; Acts  1:1–4). According [Page 37] to Paul, at an important gathering “he was seen  of above five hundred brethren at once,” measurably adding to the  number of witnesses of his resurrection (1 Corinthians 15:6).  Now the resurrected Savior had created a wave of witnesses who  would wash across the landscape from Jerusalem to Rome and beyond,  bathing those first listeners in the fragrant liquid of the gospel  and carrying all believers like boats to a celestial place,  a celestial home.

That  first Easter is still commemorated to this day, and witnesses to the  resurrected Lord still tell the joyous and joyful message of his  conquering the grave. The message rings throughout the ages: he  lives, he lives who once was dead! This Easter, in a distant  echo of the first, believers can still be lifted and buoyed toward  their celestial home, reassured in the hope of a Christ risen  and appearing still.