[Page 199] Abstract: Selwyn Kātene has again assembled twelve essays written by the  descendants of famous Māori Latter-day Saints. This volume flows  from a revival of interest in the ground and content of the  faith of early Māori Saints that began in the late 1990s. In various  ways the essays in this volume add to and amend what has previously  been known about what began unexpectedly on Christmas Day in 1882,  when the first group of Māori joined the Church of Jesus Christ. Not  only did the Māori have Seers who opened the way, some of those  elite Māori men, who had been initiated into Māori esoteric  knowledge of divine things, also found that their temple endowment  fit rather snugly with their previous initiation ceremonies.  Unlike  other Christian missionaries, Latter-day Saint missionaries did not  see the Māori as primitive heathens, and Māori saw in the restored  gospel crucial elements of their own deeper understanding of divine  things. Latter-day Saint missionaries were seeking to liberate Māori  from the soul-destroying vices brought to them or enhanced by  British colonization, while relishing the most noble elements in the  Māori world.

Review  of Selwyn Kātene, ed., By Their Fruits You Will Know Them : Early Maori Leaders in the Mormon Church, vol. 2 (Wellington,  New Zealand: Steele Roberts Publishers, 2017). 295 pp. N.Z. $39.99  (hardback).

> In  1881 the prophet Paora Potangaroa told a gathering at Te Ore  Ore marae in the Wairarapa that a new and great power would come  from the direction of the rising sun. Later that year, the first  Mormon missionaries arrived from the United States of America in the  east; within two years, hundreds of Maori in the region were  converted to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.  Within ten years, one in twelve Maori, or roughly 3000, belonged to  the Mormon Church. Five years later approximately 4000 Maori had  committed themselves to the Book of Mormon. (p. 7.)

He  then explains that, beginning in 1882, Latter-day Saint missionaries

> moved  humbly through [Māori] communities, conversing in te reo Maori with  little concern for land or colonization but with an intense interest  in whakapapa [genealogy], a concept fundamental to all Maori. Rather than judging Maori as faithless heathens , which  happened in some quarters, this new church welcomed them as whanaunga  (relatives) with whakapapa to one of the twelve tribes of Israel. (p.  7, emphasis added)

These  insightful remarks set the stage for the accounts of the following  Māori Saints, three of whom are women, whose identity is shown by an  asterisk ( * ):

> Henare  Potae, 1828–1895 (pp. 21–37). Rangikawea  Hoani Puriri, 1840–1942 (pp. 38–58). Pere  Wihongi, 1848–1928 (pp. 59–74). [Page 201] Pepene  Eketone, 1848–1928 (pp. 75–97). * Haana  Cootes Wineera, 1858–1933 (pp. 98–122). * Alice  Matawai Mataira, 1861–1946 (pp. 123–42). Henare Hamon, 1873–1961  (pp.143–67). Hemi  Whautere Witehira, 1881–1965 (pp. 168–85). * Mereana  Hall Bean, 1888–1957 (pp. 186–202). Pere Ihimaera Smiler,  1888/89–1972 (pp. 203–20). Whakahe Tui Matenga, 1903–1976 (pp.  221–38). Sydney  Hutana Crawford, 1909–1991 (pp. 239–56).

Selwyn  Kātene again provides an “Introduction” (pp. 11–20), and  a “Conclusion” (pp. 257–69). In his “Conclusion” (pp.  261–68), he calls attention to six additional important early Māori  Latter-day Saints:


## Māori Matakite and Faithful Māori

By  Their Fruits has an Appendix (pp. 270–74) which begins with  Hirini Whaanga’s famous account of how he and his people had  been prepared in 1830 by Arama Toiroa, a famous Māori matakite (seer), for the Latter-day Saint missionaries and their message (pp.  270–71). My own preference is to see Arama Toiroa as the most  important of the Māori matakite whose declarations led Māori  to become faithful Saints. However, Paora Potangaroa (d. 1882) is  also seen as the key Māori “prophet” who opened the door for  both Latter-day Saint missionaries and their message.


## Critics  — and a Response

To  support her argument, Newton cites but does not quote a biographical  sketch of Paora Potangaroa. The crucial language reads as follows:

Please  notice that there is no mention in this account that Latter-day  Saint missionaries and their messages were seen in 1883 by those who  were directly familiar with Potangaroa’s prophecy as the authorized  messengers sent by God with the correct version of Christian faith.  There is no mention that Potangaroa’s Covenant had been dictated to  a scribe and placed in a concrete monument, and that the  crucial document was destroyed by humidity. Nor is there mention of  the recovery of a photograph of the Covenant.

The  fact is that in 1883, Latter-day Saint missionaries, who were not  even aware that there were matakite , nor that there was  a Paora Potangaroa, discovered that Māori in the Wairarapa saw  them and their message as having been predicted by Potangaroa. It was  the followers of Wiremu Ratana, in the 1920s, who claimed that he  fulfilled Potangaroa’s Covenant. This was, however, more than four  decades after that famous prophecy was dictated in 1881.


## The Io  Cult and Initiation in a Whare Wānanga


## Additional  Details in By Their Fruits

I have  previously mentioned my own fondness for the prophecy made in 1830 by  Arama Toiroa, which differs in detail from that of Paora Potangaroa.  It also led many Māori who then lived far to the north of where  Potangaroa’s Covenant was set down in writing (see pp. 270–71  for details) to join the LDS Church. In an appendix to By Their Fruits , entitled  “The Smith whanau and the LDS (Mormon) Church” (pp. 270–74),  there is a description of how the Whaanga/Smith extended family  were drawn to the Church of Jesus Christ. Hyran Smith, who is  unfortunately not identified, describes Hirini and Mere Whaanga’s  epic journey to Utah in 1894, where they were endowed in the Salt  Lake Temple. They took with them some of their whānau (extended family), including Walter Smith, Mere’s nephew, who  “would later become the foremost LDS church musician in New  Zealand” (p. 272). What then follows is an interesting account of  the Smith whānau .


## Light  Shining Out of Darkness


## Initiation  in Whare Wānanga and Māori Latter-day Saints

Cleve  Barlow’s initiation took place in the Hokianga region of the  Northland when he was young. He told me that the Māori Anglican  Priest who instructed him in that wānanga saw nothing in his  Anglican faith that resembled the instructions he provided in that wānanga . I wonder if some elite Māori men could have  been trained in a wānanga , and become or been Anglicans  or Methodists soon after those first Christian missionaries arrived  in the Bay of Islands, without those missionaries being aware of  those esoteric teachings, since those initiated took an oath not to  reveal what they had learned in a wānanga . In addition,  could some of those now Anglican and Methodist Māori who had been  initiated in a wānanga also continued living  in their own Māori world?

Some  of those early Māori Saints who were endowed in either the Salt Lake  Temple, or later in the temple in Laie, had been initiated in a whare  wānanga . And much later, Cleve Barlow, after having been trained  in a wānanga , joined the Church of Jesus Christ and  became a faithful Latter-day Saint. He found in both the Church  of Jesus Christ, and especially in the Latter-day Saint temple  endowment, much that matched, as well as deepened, his own  understanding of Māori tikanga (the correct or proper way of  being Māori), as well as his own striving to be a genuine  Latter-day Saint. There are reasons to believe that this was also  true with many of those first Latter-day Saint Māori men who had  also been initiated in a whare wānanga and who later saw  a congruence between their own Māori world and their temple  endowment. By Their Fruits contains several appropriately  cautious references to the esoteric instruction that certain elite  Māori underwent in whare wānanga (see pp. 15, 42, 61, 168,  170, 174, 257, 259).

The  problem was getting those Māori who were attracted to the faith  brought to them by Latter-day Saint missionaries to jettison their  dependence on vices brought to them by English colonizers. Those who  had been initiated in a whare wānanga clearly saw the  teaching of Latter-day Saint missionaries in the light of their  own Māori understanding of divine things. This often grounded their  longing for the necessary moral and spiritual discipline needed to  eventually return to the highest heaven. All of this is an important  part of the Māori Latter-day Saint historical narrative. Now, of  course, greater challenges threaten the Māori world. Meeting these  challenges can, I believe, be aided by remembering the first  staunch Māori Latter-day Saint disciples of Jesus Christ.

However,  this contrasts with the kind of Christian faith taught to the Māori  by Anglicans, Methodists, or Roman Catholics, which did not seem to  either Māori or their Christian teachers to have anything in common  with the older, authentic Māori understanding of divine things. Nor  did the Māori tend to see elements of their own esoteric lore in  versions of Christian faith to which they were first introduced by  Anglican missionaries beginning in 1814 by Samuel Marsden.


## The  Impact of the Bible on the Māori

Those  first Anglican missionaries eventually made portions of the Bible  available to the Māori, who could then read of divine revelations,  visions and dreams, theophany, and so forth. Their Christian teachers  restricted these to the Bible, and were alarmed when some Māori who  had become Christian began to receive their own manifestations from  God. Those first Anglican and Methodist missionaries insisted on sola  scriptura (Bible alone) and hence were also radical cessionists —  that is, all real, divine, special revelations had ceased with the  death of the Apostles. Māori saw this as strange, while what little  those CMS missionaries understood of the Māori understanding of  human and divine things seemed to them to be primitive, crude  superstition.

The  English struggled with written Māori. For example, very simple place  names like Kerikeri might be written as Kitty Kitty , Keddi Keddi , or even Kiddee Kiddee . Teaching Māori to  read their own language forced those first CMS missionaries to find  a way of fixing the orthography of written Māori before they  could begin to publish portions of the Bible in te reo .

I began  my own missionary endeavors in August 1950 in the Whangarei area, and  especially in the wonderful Bay of Islands, where the Bible  reading/Bible translation began. I did not realize that the  Williams Memorial Church on Marsden Road in Paihia was the fourth  building on that plot of land. However, the wooden Christ Church in  Russell is the oldest functioning church in New Zealand. In 1950, the  Māori Saints in Paihia met in the famous Waitangi Treaty House,  since Peter Heperi, the branch president, was then in charge of the  Treaty grounds. That entire complex has now become a major  tourist attraction. I had a look at Russell, which was in  1950 a quaint, quiet little town. But it was once known as  Kororareka, when it was the “hell hole of the Pacific,” with grog  shops, prostitution, gambling, and violence. All of these vices, and  more, were soon, unfortunately, to be introduced to the Māori.


## The  Larger Context

Samuel  Marsden, the harsh Anglican chaplain of the Parramatta penal colony  in Australia, made his first of many visits to New Zealand in 1814.  He preached the first sermon to the Māori on Christmas Day. However,  bringing Christian faith to the Māori proved difficult. It was in  1825, eleven years later, when the first Māori was baptized. There  are several reasons. At first, instead of preaching the gospel of  Jesus Christ to the Māori, CMS missionaries struggled to survive.  They made a living by trading muskets to the Māori for  provisions with which to sustain themselves. Henry Williams  arrived in Paihia on Marsden’s fourth visit. Since muskets and  Māori did not mix at all well, he ended the musket trade. But the  Nga Puhi iwi had secured weapons that led to brutal raids  in what is known as the Musket War, in which Māori sought to settle  old accounts, and hence also fought and killed each other in large  numbers with muskets.

Despite  all of this and more, those first CMS missionaries eventually had  remarkable success, primarily because those CMS missionaries made the  Bible available in te reo and also trained the Māori to read  it in their own language. Elsmore describes this in both Like Then  That Dream and Mana from Heaven . This also, she argues,  eventually led Māori who were deeply troubled by the English  incursion in New Zealand to fashion their own versions of faith,  often based on the Old Testament rather than the Christian faith  brought to them by Anglican and Methodist missionaries. The leaders  of these movements also sought to use biblical imagery in radical  protest movements. There were several short-lived Māori movements  laced with elements drawn from the Bible, some even to justify  guerilla warfare against the Crown, as well as those Māori who sided  with the Crown. The primary issue driving these movements seems to  have been the promiscuous appropriation of Māori land.

[Page 216] However,  the Māori who were attracted to the Church of Jesus Christ were, as  both of the books edited by Selwyn Kātene demonstrate, essentially  peace makers — that is, eager to find ways to live peacefully with  the Pākehā.


## Disillusionment  with Anglican Christianity

Colvin  provides a fine account of the Anglican career of Potea  (pp. 24–33). She also describes the earlier rapid social  transformation that began when the “Napuhi’s rampage across the  North Island saw the decimation of many Ngati Porou hapu at the hands  of Hongi Hika and Pomare” (p. 24). This was, of course, the sour  fruit of CMS missionaries in the Bay of Islands, who traded muskets  for provisions, which made it possible for the Nga Puhi iwi from the Northland to make war on other iwi in the North  Island. Colvin ably sets out these grisly details (pp. 23–25).

This  grim history is introduced (see pp. 21–22) by a stunning  account by Hana Espie Tukukino, “the great-great-granddaughter of  Henare Potae,” who was once headed for the delights of Tolaga Bay  when she “heard the unmistakable voice of her deceased grandmother  speaking to her: “Hoki ki te kainga [go back to the home], there is  something there for you” (p. 21). She disappointed her kids by not  going directly to the beach, but “to the old family homestead —  to what was left of her grandmother Tepora Kautuku Jury’s home”  (pp. 21–22).

Rummaging  around, she eventually found “a Maori version of the Book of Mormon  translated by Hoani Te Whatahoro Jury, Henare Potae and Piripi Te  Maari,” and other copies of Latter-day Saint scriptures (p. 22).  She had connected with her noble ancestor and also with his truly  remarkable whānau .

This  fine essay ends with a truly beautiful korero (speech)  from Hana Espie Tukukino, addressed to Henry Potae, her beloved  ancestor (p. 33). This is the Māori world at its very best.


## A Small  Beginning


## [Page 219] The  First Māori Latter-day Saint Branch

[Page 220] Bromley’s  journal contains a separate “summary” of his own endeavors  to teach the restored gospel to the Māori which he inserted in his  journal immediately after his Tuesday 6 March 1883 entry.  His journal entry for 23 December 1882 reads as follows:

By  25 February 1883, there were, according to Bromley, 27  Māori ready to be organized into the first Māori Latter-day Saint  Branch, in Waotu, which is about 18 miles south of Cambridge. With  William McDonnel back at work in Auckland, Thomas Cox could not have  been teaching them  the restored gospel, nor could he have conducted  the negotiations to determine who of the Māori men was willing to be  ordained to the priesthood and assume the difficult task of leading  this branch.

Anaru  Eketone provides a very detailed account of the ancestors of  Pepene, and also the strong attachment to the Wesleyan movement by  the Eketone whānau (pp. 75–77). Anaru indicates that Pepene “must  have been a student of considerable ability.” When he was 16  he attended the elite Auckland Grammar school, where he won prizes  within six months (p. 77). Then, when Pepene was 18, he was a star  student at the Wesleyan Three Kings school (p. 78), where he was  being readied for the Methodist ministry (p. 79). In 1882, and  married, he was in Cambridge translating for Māori camped there to  conduct business with the Native Land Courts (p. 79).

“Pepene  became an important part of the growth of the Mormon Church and was  often used as a translator,” according to Anaru (p. 79).  Without William McDonnel to translate for the Māori, Thomas Cox had  to rely entirely upon Pepene Eketone to translate, because those  other Māori could not understand English.

> On  February 18 Thomas Cox gathered together a group of twelve Maori  men to discuss giving some of them the Aaronic priesthood, but he was  limited in that he could only speak in English. Pepene translated for  Cox and was one of the twelve men asked if they were willing to be  ordained. After some discussion over a week it was decide that  Hare Te Katera should receive the ordination first, all the younger  men feeling that it was something that should be left to the oldest  in the group. (p. 79)

“We  are not sure at what stage Pepene left the Mormon Church,”  Anaru Eketone indicates, “but we do know that he became an  important member of the Ratana movement in the 1920s” (p. 88).  Pepene’s vast experience in those Native Land Courts and his  subsequent struggles for justice from the Crown seem to have molded  him for the Ratana movement, which has always had a deep  interest in the political struggle for social justice. Pepene’s  important role in the Ratana movement, both as advisor and companion,  is set out in detail in this essay. Pepene had a very “deep  commitment to justice,” and he was “a man of generosity and  dignity” (p. 92).

Why  the shift in his faith? “Pepene’s involvement in Methodism and  Mormonism concentrated on faith and good works in this life as  preparation for the next; Ratana focused more on the here and now”  (p. 89).


## “Let  it be done”

My  wife’s copy of The Whale Rider indicates that this novel was  finished on 14 August 1986. She purchased her copy at  Whitcoulls on Queen Street in Auckland early in 1987. I believe  this to be the initial New Zealand publication. It is filled with  Māori words and expressions, yet there is no glossary and no  translation. My wife noticed the Māori incantation hui e, haumi  e, taiki e at the end of about every other chapter, and she  insisted that I provide a translation. She thought that  language might be a key to understanding the novel, or at least  might help her grasp the meaning of the lush metaphors and curious  plot in the book.

[Page 226] Now  for my own little sermon. As I have indicated, I am pleased  that Witi Ihimaera has fashioned a moving, carefully worded  account of the faith of Pere Smiler, and also of his impact on his  posterity, including himself. In addition, the language I have  quoted from The Whale Rider seems to capture rather well  the end product of European post-enlightenment skepticism about  divine things that has infected the Māori world, and has also ended  up contributing to the plight of especially urban Māori, who are  vulnerable to the vices brought to them by British colonizers. In our  post-enlightenment world, where there is a deep skepticism about  divine things, faith in God is challenged precisely because humans  have “assumed a cloak of arrogance.”

In  addition, those first, often-dedicated, passionate Christian  missionaries brought with them both a dogmatic theology that  challenges much of the tikanga of the Māori world and  a worldview in which they saw the Māori as unenlightened, pagan  savages who had to be “civilized.” Part of what that included  was, among other things, that they did not understand the real value  of their land. And when they were converted to the sectarian version  of the Christian God, who once revealed himself to humans, they found  that God no longer can actually do that sort of thing, since genuine  divine, special revelations ceased with the death of those first  Apostles. The language I quoted from The Whale Rider , at  least from my perspective, also signals that if we apply it to the  current situation, there is a need to find wisdom in the very  best elements of the Māori past.


## A General  Assessment

This  second volume of essays assembled by Kātene helps to flesh out and  correct details in the truly singular Māori Latter-day Saint  historical [Page 227] narrative. Like the previous volume in this series, By  Their Fruits helps to remedy omissions and defects in earlier  sectarian and secular accounts of the faith of Māori Latter-day  Saints. These two volumes should also help current Latter-day Saints,  both Māori and Pākehā , to better understand why and how the  Church of Jesus Christ, beginning in the 1880s, rapidly became  essentially a Māori community of Saints, at least for the next  eight decades.

In  addition, knowing more about the faith journey of specific individual  Māori who became Latter-day Saints should help contemporary Māori  remember and thereby also emulate those early Saints in their own  endeavor to become genuine disciples of Jesus Christ. This,  I believe, is a crucial role of this series of volumes.  Accounts of the discipleship of early Māori Saints will also,  I believe, help build and sustain the Kingdom of God by  reinforcing the shield that the restored gospel has provided Māori  Saints from the continuing ravages of colonization that challenge  indigenous peoples everywhere.

Those  who currently identify as Māori and are faithful Latter-day Saints  have been liberated from the usual temptations that every human being  faces during their mortal probation, and also from the additional  evils thrust upon indigenous peoples everywhere by European  colonization.

This  fine collection of essays provides evidence of the sanctifying work  of the Wairua Tapu (Holy Spirit) in the lives of some  memorable Hunga Tapu (Saints), who also often found very good  reasons and proper ways to resist the very corrosive acids of secular  modernity. The Māori Latter-day Saint historical narrative should  not be constricted by secular religious studies explanations and  categories. I am therefore pleased that Māori, who are not in thrall  to such explanations, are now striving to recover available sources  and thereby add to and also amend portions of the truly remarkable  Māori Latter-day Saint historical narrative.

Despite  the death we all face, those determined to be genuinely Saints by  seeking sanctification can now thereby enjoy the hope for a truly  glorious life after life with their loved ones in the highest heaven,  without the disappointments and debilities we all face as we endure  our mortal probation.

---
Notes

[1] Like Turning the Hearts , 1 which was the first volume in this series, By Their  Fruits consists of  twelve essays written by the descendants of early Māori Latter-day  Saints who set out what can now be known [Page 200] about each on their own  journey of faith. There is a fine “Foreword” to this  anthology by Whatarangi Winiata, a distinguished Anglican 2 scholar. He begins by acknowledging that

[2] (1)  Roma Hoera Ruruku, whose daughter, Wetekia Ruruku Elkington, was  a matakite (seer) who also played a part in bringing  together the South Island Ngati Koata iwi (tribe) and the  Ngati Toa iwi that had earlier migrated to Porirua, which is  just north of Wellington, from Kawhia, which is much farther north on  the west coast of the North Island (pp. 261–62). (2)  Manihera Te Rangiakaiwaho, who in 1883 responded to what he heard and  saw from Elders Alma Greenwood and Ira Hinckley. He found that the  missionaries and their message matched the prophetic proclamation of  the Paora Potangaroa in 1881. In August 1883 he became a faithful  branch president (pp. 262–63). (3)  Piripi Te Maari became a Latter-day Saint on 2 June 1887,  and was one of those, with Te Whatahoro, who helped translate the  Book of Mormon into Māori (pp. 263–65). Piripi  benefitted considerably from the efforts of the Christian Missionary  Society (CMS), 3 since he had been trained in a school operated by William  Williams (1800–1878). 4 [Page 202] (4)  Eriata Nopera, who was among those who in 1881 had gathered at the Te  Ore Ore marae , and who therefore witnessed Paora Potangaroa  dictate his prophecy concerning the coming of a new and true  version of the Christian faith. In 1920, Nopera and his wife were  among those who went to Laie, Oahu, Hawaii, for their temple  endowments, when that temple was dedicated. He was also among a small  group of Māori who also traveled to Salt Lake City, where they were  greeted by President Heber J. Grant. He was the second Māori to be  ordained a high priest (pp. 265–66). (5)  Maihi Parone Kawiti (1807–1889), who was born in 1807 at Waiomio,  which is just south of Kawa Kawa in the Northland, and who was a son  of the paramount chief of the Ngati Hine hapu (subtribe). He  became a Latter-day Saint on 18 October 1888, when he  was 81, and passed away on 21 May 1889 from typhoid (pp.  266–68). (6)  Kātene also quotes at length a story told by Elder  Robert L. Simpson in 1975 about Hirini Taiwhanga Heremaia  (p. 286), who was a lively and colorful Māori Latter-day Saint  in 1950 when I was serving as a missionary in the Bay of  Islands.

[3] In  March of 1881, at a huge hui (conference) at Te Ore Ore marae , which is just outside of Masterton in the Wairarapa,  Paora Potangaroa responded to the question of which Christian  denomination the Ngati Kahunganu iwi (tribe) should join.  They were faced with several sectarian alternatives, which then  included the Anglican, Methodist, and Roman Catholic versions of  Christian faith. After a period of [Page 203] prayer, he dictated to  a scribe He Kawenata (the Covenant). 5 In 1883, after Potangaroa had passed away in 1882, Latter-day Saint  missionaries visited the Wairarapa. They and their message were seen  by many Māori as the authorized messengers bringing them the  authentic Christian faith as set out in the Covenant. 6

[4] Māori matakite (seers) opened the door for our missionaries,  but their message has been explained away, minimized, or ignored by  authors, some of whom have never been Latter-day Saints, and also by  some who still are but for various reasons decline to believe that  such things actually happen. These critics tend to focus on Paora  Potangaroa’s Covenant. They point out that the followers of  Tahupotiki Wiremu Ratana (1873–1939), a famous political  activist and faith healer, who launched his own church on  15 July 1925, claim that Ratana and his church were  identified in Potangaroa’s prophecy. In 1928, Ratana sought to  retrieve the copy of the famous Covenant that had been dictated to  a scribe and then placed in a cement monument located in  the carved house at the marae in Te Ore Ore. It had been  destroyed by humidity. 7 Without the document, Ratana’s followers had only stories about its  contents.

[5] In  1944, a photograph of the Covenant was recovered. The story of  its recovery involves Eriata Nopera (pp. 265–66). As a young  boy he was present at the hui (gathering) at the Te Ore Ore marae when Potangaroa dictated the Covenant to a scribe.  Nopera and Matthew Cowley were at a meeting of Latter-day Saints  in Masterton in 1944 when a previously unknown photograph of the  presumably lost document was given to Nopera, who presented it to  Elder Cowley, who published an account of its recovery and crucial  contents. Marjorie Newton has told this story reasonably well. 8 However, she has also stressed that “the followers of the [Page 204] Māori  prophet Ratana believe that Te Potangaroa’s prophecy foretold the  coming of the Ratana church in the 1920s.” 9

[6] Various  interpretations were made: it was believed to herald the arrival of  the gospel of Jesus Christ, as interpreted by the Mormons; and it was  believed that missionaries would come from the east and set in place  a new church. In 1928, when the religious leader T. W. Ratana  visited Te Ore Ore at the request of the people, he removed the stone  set up by Paora inside Nga Tau e Waru [the wharenui — carved  house], repositioning it outside. The move silenced the medium . 10 The coming of the Ratana faith is now widely believed to be  the fulfillment of Paora’s prophecy. 11

[7] However,  there is more. In Mormon and Maori , Marjorie Newton indicates  that “in New Zealand, where, Mormons believe, indigenous prophets  foretold the coming of a new religion, several such prophecies  are celebrated by Mormons.” 12 She then adds:

[8] [Page 205] Some  Maori religions, such as Ringatu and Ratana, have likewise been seen  as the fulfillment of these prophecies. Particularly is this true of  the prophecy most frequently quoted by Mormons, that of Paora  Potangaroa, made at Te Ore Ore, near Masterton in the Wairarapa  Valley, in 1881, one version of which reads: “There is a religious  denomination coming for us; perhaps it will come from the sea,  perhaps it will emerge here.” 13

[9] When  Wiremu Ratana went to Te Ore Ore in 1928 to retrieve the document, he  discovered that humidity had destroyed it. He then moved the monument  in which it had been placed outside of the building and took with him  some relics that had survived. Marjorie Newton seems to indicate that  there are competing “translations” of the Covenant that cast  doubt about the Māori Latter-day Saint understanding of the  Covenant. 14 Matthew Cowley possessed the photograph of the previously lost  Covenant dictated by Potangaroa and written down by Ranginui Kingi  on 16 March 1881. 15 So what we have is competing interpretations of the famous Covenant,  but not different translations.

[10] In Mormon and Maori , Newton cites Bronwyn Elsmore’s opinions  found in her Mana from Heaven on Potangaroa’s prophecy. 16 Elsmore quotes what she calls a “translation” of  Potangaroa’s Covenant made by James Rimene (1931–2017), who was  a prominent Te Ore Ore kaumātua (elder). 17 Elsmore also mentions conversations she had with Rimene and also with  both Rimene and Margaret Haeata, his wife, both of whom were [Page 206] devout  followers of Ratana. 18 Drawing from Elsmore, Newton claims that “Mormon accounts usually  give a slightly different ‘translation’ of the Potangaroa’s  famous Covenant.” 19 But a translation of what? The only copy of the Covenant is the  photograph that Eriata Nopera gave to Matthew Cowley in 1944.  What text was James Rimene “translating?” This seems to me to be  a matter of different and competing interpretations.

[11] Elsmore’s  informants on Potangaroa’s Covenant were James and Margaret Haeata  Rimene. 20 In 1985 they provided her with the Ratana understanding 21 fashioned more than four decades after Potangaroa dictated his  “Covenant.” Clearly, Ratana’s followers see in Potangaroa’s  Covenant a prophecy of him and his church. Then Marjorie Newton  focused on a phrase from Elsmore’s comments on Potangaroa’s  Covenant when she wrote Mormon and Maori , in which she brushes  aside these prophesies as merely Māori/ Mormon wishful thinking. 22 Beginning in 1950, I sought to understand the faith of Māori  Latter-day Saints, as well as that of Anglican and Ratana Māori.  They were all then disarmingly honest; they sometimes described  themselves merely as Beer Drinkers. Nearly seven decades later my own  affection for the ways of Māori Saints has not abated. The truly  remarkable stories of how God prepared some [Page 207] of them for the Church of  Jesus Christ must be told as honestly and fully as possible.

[12] In  her introduction to her remarks about Potangaroa, 23 Elsmore also explains the rise of “the King movement” among the  Māori, 24 which was an effort to unite all the Māori tribes under a monarchy.  She links this movement to the idea that there were

[13] meetings  of tohunga of a number of tribes being held for the purpose of  reconciling various accounts of ancient mythology into an acceptable  common version. As a result of this, knowledge of a traditional  cosmology headed by a supreme god called Io was spread. This  supreme figure, described by terms such as Io-matua, Io-roa, and many  more, was believed to be the eternal, omnipotent, uncreated,  originator of all. 25

[14] Elsmore  then points out that “this teaching was open to much debate, with  some scholars maintaining that the belief was not part of the old  tradition, but was post-European, being a result of Christian  teachings; and others answering that the doctrine was not generally  known because of the custom of the Māori to restrict the highest  esoteric spiritual knowledge to selected initiates of the whare  wananga.” 26 She does not directly indicate where she might stand on this crucial  issue. Instead, she merely indicates that in the 1860s “the  doctrine of Io had the effect [Page 208] of reestablishing the validity and  value of the traditional beliefs of the Māori, since Christian  missionaries had insisted that their traditional beliefs, as she puts  it, “were without truth or substance.” 27

[15] In  addition, especially the Anglican clergy, despite the fact that they  had made the Bible and their version of its teachings available to  the Māori, were no longer trusted. With “the ground so well  prepared,” Elsmore argues, some Māori found the message of  Latter-day Saint missionaries attractive. And hence the “initial  campaign” of the Latter-day Saint missionaries “between 1880 and  1900 ensured that the Mormon alternative was established for some  years at least.” 28 Her final assessment is that what Latter-day Saint missionaries  brought to the Māori “was essentially another foreign message  which also did not answer the needs of the Maori.” 29 She does not explain what those needs might have been, other than  having their own way of protesting against the Pakeha incursion into Aotearoa/New Zealand. Hence the last half of her book  is an account of various political/religious movements whose rhetoric  was often cast in biblical metaphors as they sought to deal with the  theft of land often backed by the Crown, which was often supported by  the Anglican clergy.

[16] The  twelve biographies that constitute the body of By Their Fruits are told from currently available sources; they are also often told  with much gritty detail and sometimes by those who are not Latter-day [Page 209] Saints. This is “warts and all” history, and there is no  indication of an effort to tidy things up. There is, however,  a serious effort to situate these individual Māori Saints in  the historical context. They are not, however, told from a “Mormon  studies perspective,” which is very often modeled on a secular  “religious studies” ideology. Instead, they are told from within  the categories of the Māori world and also the faith of Māori  Saints. This is made evident, for example, by many references to the  role played by Māori matakite (seers) in the first  conversions of Māori. There are numerous references to Arama Toiroa  (see pp. 12, 39, 222, 270–71) and to Paora Potangaroa (see pp. 6–7,  12, 19, 169, 182, 222–23, 263, 265). Among others, it was these two  Māori seers who had authentic divine, special revelations, first in  1830 and then in 1881, that opened the door for Latter-day Saint  missionaries and their message. 30

[17] Given  the very limited resources, both human and otherwise, then available  to the Church of Jesus Christ, the Latter-day Saint missionary  endeavor among the Māori depended upon those first often dedicated  and stalwart Anglican, Methodist, and Roman Catholic missionaries who  had earnestly sought to bring their versions of Christian faith to  the Māori 68 years before the first Māori became Latter-day Saints.  In addition, those first CMS missionaries to reach New Zealand simply  could not avoid “judging the Maori as faithless heathens,” given  the dogmatic theology in which they had been indoctrinated, and not  merely “in some quarters,” as Whatarangi Winiata has it (see p.  7). 31

[18] However,  this must be contrasted with Latter-day Saint missionaries who did  not see the Māori as savages in need of being civilized. In  addition, those same Latter-day Saint missionaries saw nothing  incongruous when they suddenly discovered that Māori had genuine  seers. Instead, they rejoiced to discover that, to gloss the words  that begin the famous poem by William Cowper (1731–1800), entitled  “Light Shining out of Darkness,” that God had moved in an  unexpected and even mysterious way to perform [Page 210] his wonders among some  Māori in Aotearoa/New Zealand. 32 I have argued that what we see with those Māori matakite opening the door for our missionaries is a providential  momentary merging of two authentic prophetic traditions. 33 This seems to me to have been made evident in several essays in By  Their Fruits , and especially in Wallace Wihongi’s essay on his  own beloved ancestor (see pp. 59–74).

[19] I first  met Dr. Cleve Barlow at the huge Pioneers in the Pacific Conference  that was held at BYU‒Hawaii on 7–11 October 1997. In  1999–2000 I had long conversations with him. He was then one  of the last three Māori to have actually been initiated in a whare  wānanga (house of learning). He felt free to discuss details of  his intense wānanga training with me because we had both been  endowed in a Latter-day Saint temple. 34 He insisted that the version of the whare wānanga initiation  published many years ago under the title Lore of the Whare  Wananga , by S. Percy Smith, from manuscripts provided  by Hemi Te Whatahoro Jury, 35 was garbled, perhaps intentionally.

[20] [Page 211] There  are hints that this is the case. According to Bronwyn Elsmore,  Aperahama Taoni, who “was taught at the Wesleyan mission at  Hokianga … apparently experienced an instance of religious  inspiration or revelation in September 1834” that involved “the  Messiah, the Son of God.” 36 This claim both confused and troubled the Wesleyan clergy. However,  for many years he was “a firm supporter of the Wesleyan Church.”  He was, she also claims, “an initiate of the whare wananga.” In  1856, Taonui, according to Elsmore, even “agreed to record his  sacred knowledge” for John White, a government interpreter, on  condition that it not be shown to the Māori. He later opened a whare  wānanga among the Ngati Whatua, the traditional enemies of his  own iwi . 37

[21] The  deepest Māori and Latter-day Saint understandings of both divine and  human things are remarkably consonant, while sectarian Christian  dogma clashes especially with the esoteric lore at the heart of the  Māori world. I simply cannot explain how the essentially tapu (sacred) initiation that elite Māori men underwent turned  out to be consonant with their own subsequent Latter-day Saint temple  endowment. However, it seems clear that those first endowed Māori  were thereby made powerful disciples of Jesus Christ and also very  able teachers and preachers when they returned to New Zealand. It  would be a mistake to overlook the role played by elite Māori  who had been initiated in a whare wānanga in efforts to  understand the grounds and contents of the faith of early Māori  Saints. This initiation seems to me [Page 212] to have yielded a more  nuanced and clear understanding of the gospel of Jesus Christ for  Māori Latter-day Saints. 38 This was certainly true of Hirini and Mere Whaanga, and it can be  seen in Hirini Whaanga’s impact on the faith of Wihongi whānau (see pp. 65–66).

[22] Some  Māori then began to see those who had brought them Christianity as  less than fully committed to what they found when they began to read  the Bible in Māori, which those dedicated CMS [Page 213] missionaries had made  possible. Though I have criticized Bronwyn Elsmore’s chapter  on Paora Potangaroa 39 and find her comments on the faith of Latter-day Saints deeply  flawed, 40 she properly stresses the crucial role of CMS missionaries in making  possible both remarkable Māori literacy and also making the Bible  available in te reo .

[23] To  do this properly, Thomas Kendall (1778–1832), a CMS  missionary, traveled to England with Hongi Hika (1772–1828), the  famous Nga Puhi paramount chief, to consult with Samuel Lee  (1773–1852), a linguist who was a professor of Arabic at  Cambridge University. Lee sorted the Māori orthography, which has  subsequently remained the same, except for the conventions on long  vowels. Soon portions of the Bible were available in Māori. William  Williams (1800–1887), also a CMS missionary, quickly became  fluent in te reo . He was able to fashion a grammar and,  in 1844, published A Dictionary of the Maori Language . 41 Those endeavors made it possible for Māori to read the Bible in  their own language. And soon, most Māori were Christians. For the  Latter-day Saint missionary endeavors that began in the late 1880s,  this was necessary and, I believe, providential.

[24] [Page 214] Just  north of Russell is Maiki Hill, with its famous flagstaff. This was  where Hone Heke began the first Māori war with the Crown by cutting  down the flagstaff to show his opposition to the British claim that  Waitangi Treaty, which had been sort of signed on 6 February 1840,  led the British to think it made the Māori subjects of the British  monarchy. The first time he did this was on 11 March 1844.  I also had a look at most of the places where that war,  which ended on 11 January 1845, was fought. I heard  the stories of those dreadful battles, and also had a look at  where most of them took place. Māori who were Christians fought on  both sides. 42 I still find that fact deeply troubling. However, I now  like knowing that the flagstaff was finally replaced in January 1858  by Maihi Paraone Kawiti, whose father, Te Ruki Kawiti, had fought  with Hone Heka. The motivation was a desire for peace (see p.  266). I like knowing that it was a Latter-day Saint who was  responsible for that gracious symbolic act.

[25] Elsmore  calls attention to how many of those she calls Māori “prophets”  appropriated the language of the Bible in fashioning what they taught  in opposition to the Crown. They were, she argues, borrowing  metaphors from the Bible to express their disappointment with the  behavior of Christian missionaries. 43 She opines about Māori “prophets” in two books. In Mana from  Heaven she uses only the English word prophet , which she  uses to describe Māori who launched protest movements or founded  Māori churches. However, she does give attention to the Māori word matakite (seer) in Like Them that Dream . 44 One needs to keep in mind that in the Book of Mormon, seers  are greater than [Page 215] prophets. 45 Prophets speak for God, while seers, among other things, actually  encounter divine beings. I am confident that something like this  explains why, in Mana from Heaven , Elsmore mentions only one  “prophet” — Paora Potangaroa — who opened the door for  Latter-day Saint missionaries, while ignoring Arama Toiroa and  several others.

[26] According  to Peter Lineham, “The Mormon mission to the Māori flourished from  1882 in a direct reaction to the lowered reputation of other  churches among the Maori.” 46 Most of the Māori who became Latter-day Saints seem to have been  disillusioned Anglicans. This is illustrated in the remarkable  account of Henare Potea by Gina Colvin and Hana Espie Tukukino (pp.  21–37). Potea was a devout Anglican who resisted radical Māori  factions for much of his adult life. Then, in 1884, when he  encountered Latter-day Saint missionaries, he became a faithful  Latter-day Saint to the end of his life.

[27] Henare  Potae was a scholar who could read and write both Māori and  English; he also had “expertise in translating and editing texts” [Page 217] (p. 23). He began as a devout Anglican. “But in 1884  Henare disaffiliated from Anglicanism and joined the Church of Jesus  Christ of Latter-day Saints” (p. 22). Unfortunately, little is  known about him “beyond his contribution to the Maori translation  of the Book of Mormon” (p. 22), 47 which task is not insignificant. It is possible and perhaps likely,  according to the authors of this essay, that he had experienced “some  kind of witness or charismatic event that caused this radical  conversion to a church that was fairly unpopular on the East  Coast” of the North Island of New Zealand (p. 22). He also “dared  to go against every cultural and social expectation of a person  of his standing and join the fledgling and audacious Mormons to the  end of his days” (p. 23).

[28] William  Bromley (1839–1911), 48 who first served a brief mission in England in 1871, 49 was called early in November 1880 to preside over the Australasian  Mission 50 of The Church of Jesus Christ. Then, on 11 December, he was  instructed by John Taylor to strive to teach the [Page 218] Māori, after which  he was set apart by Franklin D. Richards. 51 He arrived in Auckland, New Zealand, on 4 December 1880  with two new missionaries. There were two missionaries on the South  Island, both of whom were about to return home, and there were no  missionaries in Australia. 52 (Bromley never visited or assigned missionaries to Australia.)

[29] Though  Bromley brought with him a letter from the president’s office,  signed by John Taylor and Joseph F. Smith, and addressed to “the  Saints in New Zealand,” indicating that he had been called to  preside over them,” on Thursday 20 January 1881, at  a meeting of the priesthood of the Auckland Branch, he  “presented his credentials and was received by the unanimous vote  of the meeting as President of the New Zealand Mission, and upon  being requested, appointed Auckland as the headquarters of the  mission.” 53 This was also approved. This seems to have been necessary because he  was there essentially without purse or scrip, which meant that those  often-quarreling Saints 54 had agreed to provide him with lodging, food, clothing, travel,  expenses, and so forth, which they did. 55

[30] Bromley’s  own ardent first efforts to teach Māori the restored gospel were  fruitless, and those of his few missionaries were bizarre, clumsy  failures. Then Bromley, after rebaptizing William John McDonnel, 56 who was the graver at the Dry Dock in Auckland, also called him to be  a missionary to the Māori 57 and blessed him to learn the Māori language. 58 This he did. 59 McDonnel then met, taught, and on 18 November 1881 baptized  Ngataki, 60 the first Māori to become a Latter-day Saint in New Zealand. 61

[31] However,  the real breakthrough took place later when Bromley accepted an  invitation to visit Thomas Cox, who had moved from Auckland to  Cambridge, which is 14 miles south of Hamilton, where he hoped to  make a living as a bootmaker. The Cox family had previously  been members of the quarreling Auckland Branch. Bromley and Cox were  surprised when William McDonnel, as a result of didactic dreams,  turned up before breakfast on the morning of Christmas Eve. 62 McDonnel and Cox reconciled, 63 and then the three soon set out to pass out copies of a tract in  the Māori language which McDonnel had managed to have fashioned and  printed. Later in the day those three met Hare Teimana, who either  had a dream or, as I believe, had a visit from the  Apostle Peter, who then in a vision showed those three  Latter-day Saints to Teimana and explained that they were authorized  to act for him. 64 Teimana also explained that his daughter was seriously ill. They gave  her a blessing, and the next morning she had mostly recovered. 65

[32] Then,  after instructions by McDonnel, who could do this in te reo , 66 in the evening of Christmas Day, Teimana, his wife, and Hare Te  Katere (Harry Carter) were baptized in the Waikato River, with other  Māori observing. 67 On 26 December, William McDonnell left early in the morning for  Auckland, but on 29 December Bromley sent a telegraph message to  McDonnel asking him to come back to Cambridge to administer the  sacrament for the new Māori Saints on Sunday, 31 December, and to  explain the gospel to a group of Māori. 68 On 1 January 1883, six more Māori were baptized. 69 Bromley also makes it clear that those Māori were camped near the  Māori Land Court, with which they had important business. 70 They had to secure a legal title to specific plots of land,  since the Māori had no idea of private property prior to being  “civilized” by the British. They had to do this or risk not  owning the land upon which they depended.

[33] President  Bromley visited Cambridge, and on the same date, Elder McDonnel was  so impressed that he could not resist the influence which prompted  him to follow. He had been warned in dreams, in relation to the  matter, among other things it was shown to him that the Maories were  waiting to receive the truth. He accordingly left Auckland at 4.15  P.M. and upon arriving in Hamilton completed the journey on foot to  Cambridge, fourteen miles, and arrived at daybreak the next morning.  After partaking of breakfast which was hospitably supplied by brother  [Thomas] Cox, President Bromley, Elders McDonnel [and] Cox visited  the Maories [ sic ] in the vicinity, but at first met with  little encouragement, and as the party were returning from the  journey, Elder McDonnel was led to visit a party of natives not  before seen. He found them anxious to hear and they received the  word, one of the party relating a dream wherein he had been  forewarned in relation to the truths presented, and on the following  day, 25 Dec 1882 two males, and one female, all adults were  baptised, Elder McDonnel officiating, confirmation by Prest Bromley &  Elder Cox. January 1 1883 six other adults, natives, were baptised,  and much enquiry is manifest. Elder Wm Jno McDonnel interpreted, and  was blest in enjoying the spirit of his calling, prompt to act when  called upon. 71

[34] Anaru  Eketone’s essay (pp. 75–97) is a richly detailed account of  Pepene Eketone, who was baptized in Cambridge on 9 January 1883  by [Page 221] Thomas Cox. He became an important member of the Waotu Branch.  I had entirely forgotten that in 1985, R. Lanier Britsch had  called attention to Eketone’s baptism and his immediate crucial  assistance to the Church of Jesus Christ. 72 Now Anaru Eketone has fleshed out the brief account provided by  Britsch by showing that before his becoming a Latter-day Saint,  Pepene “was raised a Methodist by his native missionary  parents, but became an early member of the Mormon Church and later  the Ratana church, traveling with its leader as a kaumatua and  advisor on two world tours” (p. 75).

[35] And  on 25 February 1883, Thomas Cox organized the 74 Māori  members of The Church of Jesus Christ into the Waotu Branch (p. 79). [Page 222] However, when his business failed, Cox and his family went back to  Auckland in mid-1883. “Without help and leadership,” according to  Marjorie Newton, “the initial enthusiasm of the Waikato Maori  waned, and the mission to the Maori in the Waikato was temporarily  abandoned by the end of July 1883, though success began to occur  elsewhere and soon resumed in the Waikato.” 73 Anaru Eketone demonstrates that Newton was wrong about this. He does  this in part by providing an accurate account of the what began on  Christmas Day in 1882 (p. 79), and what soon followed.

[36] “All  of what we know about Pepene’s subsequent involvement in the Mormon  Church,” according to Anaru Eketone, “came from the journals of  William Gardner, who spent over three years ministering in the  Waikato area in the mid-1880s, and from Francis Kirkham, who was  there in the late 1890s” (p. 81). Anaru Eketone is, of course,  aware that “William Gardner visited Cambridge in December 1884 to  find out what had become of the Waotu Branch but claimed that most of  the early converts had turned their backs on the Church” (p. 80). 74

[37] However,  Anaru Eketone, by drawing on the journals of both William Gardner and  Francis Kirkham, has been able to demonstrate that there were Māori  Latter-day Saints scattered around the Waikato, some with ties to  that first branch. He points out that Cambridge, in 1882, “was  a frontier town,” where Māori camped while waiting to have  their claims heard by the Native Land Court; hence “it is unlikely  that many of the early converts actually lived in Cambridge  permanently” (p. 80), 75 and he is able to trace some of those early Saints who were visited  first by William Gardner and later Francis Kirkham. And Papene  Eketone was still a faithful Latter-day Saint in 1898 (p. 81). 76 Also, his “translation [Page 223] skills were put to use when he translated  a four-page Mormon tract by William Bromley entitled ‘Ko nga  korerohari mo te haringa nui: Glad tidings of great joy’ in 1883″  (p. 80).

[38] Witi  Ihimaera (aka Witi Tame Ihimaera-Smiler) is a truly gifted  writer; he has published novels, collections of essays and short  stories, much very astute social commentary, and autobiographical  essays. He also has considerable musical talent in fashioning opera  and as a librettist. 77 From 1973 to 1989 he was a diplomat in the New Zealand Ministry  of Foreign Affairs, but also a very productive author. 78 Then for two decades he taught Māori literature at Auckland  University. He is the single most important Māori writer. I am  delighted that he has written a celebration of his Latter-day  Saint grandfather and his descendants. 79

[39] The  first of his novels that I read was The Matriarch . 80 I was enthralled by the rich detail about the Māori world on  the East Coast of the North Island, including their struggles with  the steady Pākehā incursion into [Page 224] their world. This is all  woven together in this complex and intriguing novel. There is  a subtle account of a string of Māori protest movements  that resisted, even at times violently, the British colonizers  messing with their world. When I first read this novel, it was  for me, among other things, a very beautifully crafted  “history,” but without quibbles and footnotes, and with very  penetrating and troubling insights 81 than what one very often finds in stuffy academic historiography.

[40] Latter-day  Saints are mentioned once or twice in this novel. Then there is  a rather detailed description of the mode of instruction given  in a whare wānanga — what Witi Ihimaera described as  “the university of the Maori, one of the most exclusive  universities in the world, erected by priests and selected members of  the rangatira and ariki. No commoners took part in the raising of the  building and the students were selected from among the high-born.” 82 What follows the instruction of elite Māori was roughly what I later  heard from Cleve Barlow about his training from an Anglican priest in  the Hokianga.

[41] When  I reached Chapter 15 in The Matriarch I was  convinced that its author was a Latter-day Saint, or had been,  or somehow knew a great deal about the faith of Māori  Latter-day Saints. I have been beguiled by Witi Ihimaera’s  writings from the moment I read The Matriarch . Perhaps  his most famous novel is a rather slim story presumably written  for children entitled The Whale Rider , 83 which was made popular by the film adaption by the same name. 84 This novel was written in New York when he was living “in an  apartment overlooking the Hudson River,” he explains in the  American edition, “when my daughters … arrived on vacation from  New Zealand.” One of his daughters wondered, “Why are the boys  always heroes?” At the same time a whale turned up in [Page 225] the  Hudson River. Ihimaera, in three weeks, had written this so-called  “children’s novel.” 85

[42] The  American edition of The Whale Rider includes a glossary, 86 in which hui e, haumi e, taiki e is said to be a “ritual  incantation: join everything together, bind it together, let it be  done.” This “incantation” ends 10 of the 21 chapters. 87 In the American edition, each repetition of this ritual language is  followed by the English “let it be done.”

[43] Nearing  the crisis in this tale, “the chief, Koro Appirana,” explains to  those faced with the death of the mighty whale: “Once, our world  was one where the Gods talked to our ancestors and man talked with  the Gods. Sometimes the Gods gave our ancestors special powers.” 88 Koro then adds the following:

[44] But  then … man assumed a cloak of arrogance and set himself up  above the Gods. He even tried to defeat Death, but failed. As he grew  in his arrogance, he started to drive a wedge through the  original oneness of the world. In the passing of Time he divided the  world into that half he could believe in and that half he could not  believe in. The real and the unreal. The natural and supernatural.  The present and the past. The scientific and the fantastic. He put  a barrier between both worlds, and everything on his side was  called rational and everything on the other side was called  irrational. Belief in our Maori Gods … has often been  considered irrational. 89

[45] Then,  at a decisive moment, Koro thunders, “If we have forgotten the  communion then we have ceased to be Maori!” 90

[46] In  the late 1990s there was a renewed interest in old Māori arcane  lore among Māori Latter-day Saints.  The informal wānanga held by Heriwini Jones were for several years an important  source for convert baptism and reactivation;  followed by other  similar and related public presentations by Cleve Barlow and others, 91 as well as the remarkable collection of photographs taken by  Latter-day Saint missionaries and assembled by Rangi Parker, which  provides a visual record of Māori Saints. 92 This seems to me to have prepared the way for Selwyn Kātene’s fine  series of books on remarkable early Māori Latter-day Saints.

