[Page 247] Abstract: Matthew L. Bowen’s book compels readers to consider both the Book  of Mormon’s construction and the significance of names in the text.  Bowen and his coauthors invite readers to contemplate not only  scripture but its stages of construction to completion, be they first  draft, editing, final abridgement, or translation. Bowen’s work  reveals how, in the endeavor to sacralize the act of scripture  reading, specific details like names and their meanings can  invigorate one’s understanding of the narrative and its theology,  preventing such reading from becoming a rote endeavor.

Review  of Matthew L. Bowen, Name as Key-Word: Collected Essays on  Onomastic Wordplay and the Temple in Mormon Scripture (Salt Lake  City: The Interpreter Foundation and Eborn Books, 2018). 408 pp.,  $24.95.

There  is a rich and complex tradition for names and their etymologies in  both biblical texts and subsequent scholarly tradition, collectively  referred to as onomastics .  In Name as Key-Word:  Collected Essays on Onomastic Wordplay and the Temple in Mormon  Scripture ,  Matthew L. Bowen not only builds from this tradition but  catapults into broader territory. His understanding of the linguistic  aspects of his material is as comprehensive as it is attentive to  data and grammar. In addition, he includes in his narrative an  exposition of the more technical aspects of his selected text.  Through careful, intentional analysis of Book of Mormon names and  their meanings in selected passages, Bowen highlights the internal  awareness of these texts that are independent units, and yet he is  mindful of the traditions from which they are built. This book  succeeds in narrowly examining how onomastic wordplay [Page 248] informs the  text while simultaneously maintaining a firm perspective on the  larger narrative and explaining its relevance for modern readers.

The  premise of this book is to explore the meaning that a study of  onomastics provides to selected texts. The introduction states that  “[a]n awareness of the meaning of names in their narratological  context often leads to a deeper understanding of the messages  intended by ancient authors and editors and enhances our appreciation  of the meaning of the temple and its ordinances which are, among many  things, very name centric” (lviii). Each of the book’s 16  chapters expands on this through well researched etymological  exposition that is both grounded in the grammar of ancient Semitic  languages and previous work done by Nibley, Tvedtnes, and others.  This is no easy feat, as there is often no primary text available for  comparison, a fact that severely limits definitive linguistic  answers. Despite this limitation, Bowen conscientiously extrapolates  an astounding amount of data from what is recorded in the translated  text.

For  example, in chapter 13, “Place of Crushing: Heshlon,” co-written  with Pedro Olavarria, the authors discuss the possibility that the  name of the plains in which Coriantumr and Shared battle (Ether  13:28) is a toponym originally translated by Mosiah from the  Jaredite record. In his abridgement of the text, Moroni later  augments the name through a chiastic construction of the passage. The  authors demonstrate that Joseph Smith left the toponym untranslated,  as opposed to those of Desolation and Bountiful, which emphasize  place meaning over name (Alma 63:5, 3 Nephi 3:23; see also 237). They  further show how, “…the untranslated toponym ‘Heshlon,’  serves as a kind of literary cenotaph for what eventually happened to  both the Jaredites and Nephites due to their failure to heed  prophetic warnings: they were crushed and ultimately destroyed”  (238). This discussion of the etymological background of Ether  establishes an additional layer in the Book of Mormon translation  process, yet the authors navigate the potential historical and  linguistic implications with a studied grasp of the text.

Linguistic  extrapolation aside, the book reveals its true strength in Bowen’s  dedication to broadening onomastic wordplay from literary device into  theological commentary. He utilizes onomastic analysis as a  springboard to discuss the larger theological composition of the text  and the meaning it provides. “‘See That Ye Are Not Lifted Up’:  Zoram and the Rameumptom” (141) is an exemplary model of the type  of multi layer onomastic wordplay central to Bowen’s proposed  readings. In this chapter, the wordplay begins with Zoram himself (1  Nephi 4 and 2 Nephi 1) and continues with “several of Zoram’s  descendants [Page 249] (e.g., Zoram3, Jacob2, Amalickiah, Ammoron, and Tubaloth)  [as they become] some of the most infamous and notorious figures in  the long Lamanite Nephite history as Mormon recounts it. The  name Zoram (one who is high/ exalted) receives distinctly  pejorative treatment from the time of the great Zoramite apostasy and  the rise of Amalickiah” (141).

Using  the momentum gained from the proposed etymology of Zoram, Bowen  proceeds to connect both the texts that deal with the thematic  element of being high/lifted up (1 Nephi 11:34–36 and Jacob 2:13,  Alma 31:8–14, 21, etc.) and the figures who are specifically named  as having Zoramite heritage. Bowen then presents a new analysis of  the history of those who identify as Zoramites throughout Book of  Mormon, questioning whether their status as a clan/tribe was similar  to that of the Nephites and their subsumed tribes (148). By drawing  out Zoram’s silent character through analysis of wordplay on his  name and establishing him as a founding figure whose people are then  individualized outside the foremost tribal dichotomy, the identity  attached to Lamanite and Nephite tribes is recast into a more complex  societal structure.

Herein  Bowen’s holistic approach to the narrative is highlighted. Reaching  across history and authors, he analyzes the text’s construction  with the abridger in mind, seeking out that which was intended by the  original author(s) and connecting it to the abridger’s discourse.  By coupling this viewpoint with precise analysis of the narrative’s  poetic structure, emphasis on thematic words/phrases, and more,  expanded patterns emerge and provide new insight into the nuanced  nature of the text in question. That nuance is then applied to the  narrative’s argument, showing that “The Zoramites and their  apostasy represent a type of Latter-day Gentile pride and apostasy,  of which Nephi, Mormon, and Moroni warned repeatedly” (liv). A  greater relevance for narratological structure is achieved by  connecting the text to the author’s intent toward the reader.

If  Bowen’s intention was to convince his readers that no scripture is  written in a vacuum, he has greatly succeeded. Across the 306 pages  of this work, he unravels the intricacies that name-based literary  constructions produce. He expands the texts in question to match the  rendered data, thereby elucidating greater connection and meaning for  the entire work. Each suggestion is tendered with impeccable  linguistic and grammatical analysis and is appropriately attentive to  the detail such an examination requires. Even while tackling more  challenging passages, the nuanced arguments admit limitation while  simultaneously pushing the envelope regarding meaning and intent. On  a personal note, I found that Name  as Key-Word provided new perspective and gave me [Page 250] the framework to approach Mormon  scripture with fresh eyes, bridging previously isolated pockets of  information into a new, more connected viewpoint on the narrative I  love. The book achieves its intended goal. Through study of the  meaning and placement of names in Mormon scripture’s narrative,  Bowen provides readers with internal theological perspective as well  as an expanded commentary on the utility of the text in answering  today’s religious questions.