My  initial reaction was to conclude that this was not a research program  any would think could dovetail well with Mormon thought. I was,  however, mistaken — at least a few individuals believe such  a reconciliation is both possible and desirable.

It  would be impossible to represent every nuance in perspective held by  members of the movement in a brief essay such as Cannon’s. Adding  to that difficulty is the reputation that Transhumanists have  acquired for being diverse and fractious. As one author observed:

Mormon  Transhumanists seem no different. Cannon writes, “Mormon  transhumanists do not have one vision of the future. We have many  visions — many dreams. And we express them in many narratives”  (210).

So,  I make no claim that the analysis here applies to all Transhumanists,  all Mormon Transhumanists, or even all that Cannon has written and  said elsewhere. This review serves as a preliminary study, by a  newcomer to these ideas, of a single introductory paper intended to  help beginners get up to speed.


## A  Roadmap for What Follows

In  Part 1, I examine a series of syllogisms which Cannon offers as  evidence that “Mormonism actually mandates transhumanism” (213).  We will find that most of the premises upon which these syllogisms  rest are not accurate representations of LDS thought. We will see  that Cannon often either misreads or misrepresents LDS scripture. On  a superficial reading, his citations may appear to support his  argument. A closer look reveals that any support they appear to  offer Transhumanism is a mirage.

Of  particular significance for orthodox Mormons is my observation that  Cannon puts a great deal of emphasis on humanity’s mastering  techniques to achieve immortality, which creates what seem to be  insurmountable difficulties for his account of LDS doctrine.

In  Part 2, I investigate Cannon’s portrayal of human nature and  Transhumanism’s purported ability to alter it now and in the  future. We find that LDS theology and Transhumanism use the concept  of human nature in different ways. We note that while Cannon’s  account of Jesus highlights the ways in which we might imitate him  and adopt his salvific role, it omits discussion of the areas in  which his role — as a perfected and glorified celestial being whose  Atonement performed a unique and once-and-for-all act to bring  immortality and the possibility of eternal life to all mankind — is  incommensurate with our role and possibilities as beings living in a  fallen world.

In  Part 3, I conclude by reviewing some of what I take to be Cannon’s  misreadings of LDS doctrine, particularly those focused on matters of  dualism, materialism, and the nature of spiritual experiences.

> P1: “God commands us to use ordained means to participate in God’s  work.” Supporting  statements: 1a)	1  Nephi 3:7 — “God prepares ways for us to accomplish God’s  commands.” 1b)	Alma  60:11, 21–23 — “God will not save us unless we use the means  God has already provided.” 1c)	D&C  58:27–28 — “We should engage in good causes without waiting for  God to provide specific commands.” P2: “Science and technology are among the means ordained of God.” Supporting  statements: 2a)	1  Nephi 17:8–11, 16 — “God commands Nephi to construct a ship to  save his family.” 2b)	Alma  37:38–39 — “God gave Nephi a compass to guide his family to the  promised land.” 2c)	D&C  88:78–79 — “God commands us to study and teach everything from  astronomy and geology to history and politics.” 2d)	D&C  121:26–33 — “We will learn all the physical laws of the world  before attaining heaven.” [Page 166] P3: “God’s work is to help each other attain Godhood.” Supporting  statements: 3a)	3  Nephi 12:48 — “Jesus commands us to be perfect like God.” 3b)	D&C  76:58–60, 92–95 — “God would make us Gods of equal power with  him.” 3c)	Moses  1:39 — “God’s work is to make us immortal in eternal life.” P4: “An essential attribute of Godhood is a glorified immortal body.”

> Supporting  statements: 1a)	1  Nephi 3:7 — “God prepares ways for us to accomplish God’s  commands.” 1b)	Alma  60:11, 21–23 — “God will not save us unless we use the means  God has already provided.” 1c)	D&C  58:27–28 — “We should engage in good causes without waiting for  God to provide specific commands.”

> 1a)	1  Nephi 3:7 — “God prepares ways for us to accomplish God’s  commands.” 1b)	Alma  60:11, 21–23 — “God will not save us unless we use the means  God has already provided.” 1c)	D&C  58:27–28 — “We should engage in good causes without waiting for  God to provide specific commands.”

> Supporting  statements: 2a)	1  Nephi 17:8–11, 16 — “God commands Nephi to construct a ship to  save his family.” 2b)	Alma  37:38–39 — “God gave Nephi a compass to guide his family to the  promised land.” 2c)	D&C  88:78–79 — “God commands us to study and teach everything from  astronomy and geology to history and politics.” 2d)	D&C  121:26–33 — “We will learn all the physical laws of the world  before attaining heaven.”

> 2a)	1  Nephi 17:8–11, 16 — “God commands Nephi to construct a ship to  save his family.” 2b)	Alma  37:38–39 — “God gave Nephi a compass to guide his family to the  promised land.” 2c)	D&C  88:78–79 — “God commands us to study and teach everything from  astronomy and geology to history and politics.” 2d)	D&C  121:26–33 — “We will learn all the physical laws of the world  before attaining heaven.”

> Supporting  statements: 3a)	3  Nephi 12:48 — “Jesus commands us to be perfect like God.” 3b)	D&C  76:58–60, 92–95 — “God would make us Gods of equal power with  him.” 3c)	Moses  1:39 — “God’s work is to make us immortal in eternal life.”

> 3a)	3  Nephi 12:48 — “Jesus commands us to be perfect like God.” 3b)	D&C  76:58–60, 92–95 — “God would make us Gods of equal power with  him.” 3c)	Moses  1:39 — “God’s work is to make us immortal in eternal life.”

> First  Conclusion: “Because God commands us to use ordained means  to participate in God’s work [P1] , and because science and  technology are among those means [P2] , we can deduce [C1] that God commands us to use science and technology to participate  in God’s work .” Second  Conclusion: “Because God commands us to use science and  technology to participate in God’s work [C1] , and because  God’s work is to help each other attain Godhood [P3] , we can  deduce [C2] that God commands us to use science and  technology to help each other attain Godhood .” Third  Conclusion: “ Because God commands us to use science  and technology to help each other attain Godhood [C2] , and  because an essential attribute of Godhood is a glorified immortal  body [P4] , we can conclude [C3] that God commands us  to use science and technology to help each other attain a glorified  immortal body .”

Cannon  concludes, “If we began with premises that accurately reflect  Mormonism, then Mormonism mandates transhumanism” (214). Even a  valid argument (i.e., one that follows the rules of logic) produces  truth only if its premises are true — and we will find that none of  his premises accurately reflect LDS doctrine.

[Page 167] Note  that each conclusion depends upon the truth of the conclusion that  went before: the first must be true for the second to have any force,  while the second is required for the third. A failure at any point  destroys the entire argument downstream.

Let  us first examine the use to which Cannon’s argument puts the  scriptures invoked in his first two premises.


## The  First Premise (P1)

Few  Latter-day Saints would quarrel with the idea that God provides means  for mortals to accomplish the purposes he sets them (1a).

One  is justified, for example, in spending vast human resources, research  capital, and intellectual firepower to digitize and upload a human  personality only if such an undertaking is (1) possible and (2)  desired by God. If such things are either impossible or improper,  such efforts are at best a colossal waste of time, money, and talent  that could be better spent on a thousand other pressing needs or at  worst a type of fatal hubris, sin on a vast scale. They would not  then be “good causes” in the sense required by Cannon’s  argument, even if they arise out of noble motives with lofty goals.

Let  me draw an analogy from technological advancements in my field of  study and career (medical science): (P1) God wants happy families and  (P2) many scientists have worked wonders to ease the technical and  legal obstacles to elective abortion as a contraceptive method. But  abortion as contraception is hardly an undertaking that LDS doctrine  endorses, even if we believe it will make for a happier family (a  good cause!) and even if the means have been “given us” to carry  it out.

This  analogy is not farfetched. Cannon writes somewhat rhapsodically of  one of “many narratives … reflecting some common expectations and  aspirations, and illustrating parallels between Mormonism and  transhumanism” (210). He then describes how in one Mormon  Transhumanist future, “Reproduction technology permits infertile  and gay couples, as well as individuals or groups, to conceive their  own genetic children. Some recoil from perceived threats to  tradition, while others celebrate perceived gifts to new families”  (210).

I  have trouble seeing the common aspirations and parallels between this  vision of Transhumanism and Mormon thought. As a footnote to this  scenario, Cannon refers to D&C 88:33, which I will quote, though  Cannon did not: “For what doth it profit a man if a gift is  bestowed upon him, [Page 169] and he receive not the gift? Behold, he rejoices  not in that which is given unto him, neither rejoices in him who is  the giver of the gift.”

It  is not clear how this is relevant to his argument, which is perhaps  why the text was not included — does Cannon mean that such capacity  for single individuals or groups of more than two individuals or  partners of the same sex to create children through technology ought  to be seen as a gift from God? Or that Mormon Transhumanists view it  as such?

Cannon  seems to classify a negative religious reaction to these projects as  merely due to “perceived threats to tradition,” but the Mormon  view would probably see it as inimical to the very foundation [Page 170] of the  divine family and exaltation itself. One begins to suspect this  particular Mormon Transhumanist view is not terribly Mormon at all  and even hostile to Mormon thought in spots. To cite scripture wholly  out of both its context and the broader LDS understanding of these  matters is troubling, especially when Cannon aims to provide  “premises that accurately reflect Mormonism” (214).

In  short, the first premise sets the stage for a circular argument; it  prepares to “beg the question” and must twist LDS scripture to do  it. This is not an auspicious beginning.


## The  Second Premise (P2)

The  second premise holds that “Science and technology are among the  means ordained of God.” As an accurate description of LDS doctrine,  this formulation is also flawed, since the argument uses it as if the  premise were “ any and all science and technology are among  the means ordained of God.” The implied claim is clearly false —  again, we can draw no conclusions about whether or not the  technological wonders offered by Transhumanism are consistent with  God’s purposes without examining each case. Poison and nuclear  weapons are forms of human science and technology, yet God does not  necessarily mandate their use.

The  scriptures cited do not help the position that Cannon advances. True,  Nephi built a ship to save his family (2a) — but he did so at God’s  explicit command, and under God’s tutelage. Nephi emphasizes that  he “did not work the timbers [of the ship] after the manner which  was learned by men, neither did I build the ship after the manner of  men; but I did build it after the manner which the Lord had shown  unto me; wherefore, it was not after the manner of men” (1 Nephi  18:2). So Nephi did not use human-inspired or -directed technology at  all. He did not undertake a kind of naval Manhattan Project in the  pre-Second Temple era. The Lord did not send him to shipwrights and  carpenters, though plenty of these existed.

[Page 171] For  the example of Nephi’s ship to be on point, we must ask if God has  explicitly commanded that we focus our efforts on Transhumanist  approaches. Clearly, he has not — and it is this difficulty that  the second premise attempts to paper over.

Cannon’s  second scripture, like the first, makes precisely the opposite point  that his argument requires. True, Lehi and family were guided by the  compass-like Liahona in their journey (2b), but here again Lehi did  not design the device, nor did technocrats help forge it. Instead, it  appeared fully-formed outside Lehi’s tent. (Alma even insists that  its construction was beyond any human ability; see Alma 37:39.)  Despite being a material object (and thus “technology” by some  definitions) it did not work according to any physical principles or  scientific laws known to Lehi or us — instead “it did work for  them according to their faith in God”. It was a “miracle” like  “many other miracles wrought by the power of God”. It would stop  working when they “were slothful, and forgot to exercise their  faith and diligence” (Alma 37:40–41). The Liahona is simply not a  model for man’s technological prowess contributing to the  accomplishment of God’s purposes — if anything, it is a call for  faith, obedience, humility, and trust in God’s revelations.

In  neither case do Nephi and Lehi urge their followers to a research  program to develop the technocratic tools they think God might want.  God simply provides the expertise with the explicit rationale that  his purposes need to be accomplished. Nephi’s nautical construction  does not set off a pre-Columbian shipbuilding renaissance. Lehi does  not need to understand the principles by which the Liahona works,  much less build his own mass-production line so every Nephite home  can have one. Instead, he learns that it works via diligent faith in  the arm of God — hardly a Transhumanist virtue. Transhumanism, by  contrast, applauds empiricism and technical mastery over nature  through humanity’s native powers. Nephi’s ship and the Liahona  help to accomplish a specific purpose and are then retired from use.  The Nephites do not continue to use and improve their ocean-crossing  tech based on Nephi’s prototype; Nephite armies are not equipped  with Liahonas.

The  third scripture serves Cannon’s argument no better. True, the  Saints are enjoined to study many topics, even “all things that  pertain unto the kingdom of God” (2c). These include “things both  in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have  been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass;  things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the  perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land;  and a knowledge also of countries and of [Page 172] kingdoms” (D&C  88:78–79). Such study explicitly includes analyzing wars and  political strife — yet we do not thereby conclude that war is to be  a tool we seize to implement God’s purposes. If anything, a study  of war and the like ought to temper any illusions we have about human  adequacy to solve the fundamental problems we face through  technology.

Why  study such things? The scripture tells us, but Cannon’s argument  ignores the implications. The recipients are to study so

> that  ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to  magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with  which I have commissioned you. Behold, I sent you out to testify  and warn the people, and it becometh every man who hath been warned  to warn his neighbor. Therefore, they are left without excuse, and  their sins are upon their own heads …. Therefore, tarry ye, and  labor diligently, that you may be perfected in your ministry to go  forth among the Gentiles for the last time. (D&C 88:80–82, 84)

God  does not, we note well, command such study so that his children can  solve the technical problems that will enable resurrection or  personal continuity beyond the grave. He has already solved those  problems and through the Atonement of Christ will provide them freely  to all humanity (Alma 40:4). Instead, we are commanded to study such  “worldly” or “secular” matters so we will be more able and  convincing when we warn others of the need to repent. The little band  of Saints was doing and could do nothing whatever to inch humanity  along the road to the Singularity. But through their efforts to  preach the Gospel, they could prepare mortals to stand singly at the  bar of God to answer for their deeds and moral agency.

The  fourth and final scripture is even less relevant. Cannon glosses it  as saying that “We will learn all the physical laws of the world  before attaining heaven,” (2d) but this is misleading. The  scripture text describes a method of knowledge acquisition that  differs from that of science: “God shall give unto you knowledge by  his Holy Spirit , yea, by the unspeakable gift of the Holy  Ghost , that has not been revealed since the world was until now”  (D&C 121:26, emphasis added). Such knowledge is not merely the  operation of the spirit of Christ on one’s reason or intellect, and  it is not the product of inspired scientific research or experiment,  however valuable those may be — rather, it is knowledge revealed to those who possess the gift of the Holy Ghost.

This  revelatory experience will reveal everything — presumably  “everything” will include physical laws, but that is not the  focus or [Page 173] thrust of the promise: “A time to come in the which  nothing shall be withheld, whether there be one God or many gods,  they shall be manifest” (v. 28). These are simply not in the main  the sort of facts with which Transhumanist science — or any science  — has anything to do, even though God promises to reveal “glories,  laws, and set times” (v. 31).

As  for such knowledge coming to mortals “before attaining heaven,”  verse 32 avers that God’s council declared such things “should be  reserved unto the finishing and the end” of the “dispensation of  the fulness of times … when every man shall enter into his eternal  presence and into his immortal rest” (D&C 121:31–32). Such  revelation does not seem so much a prerequisite to attaining heaven  but is instead a final gift of divine self-disclosure that makes  heaven possible. Given that the time of their revelation is decreed  for “the end,” an aggressive scientific research program is  unlikely to reveal them any sooner.

So  the second premise, like the first, has elements of circularity baked  into it. Here the degree of scriptural distortion and  special-pleading is even more pronounced.


## Taking  Stock: The First Conclusion (C1)

Furthermore,  since each subsequent conclusion relies upon this first one, none of  his “reasoned” syllogisms produce logical truth. We could stop  here, since the argument has been reduced to shambles.


## The  Second and Third Conclusions (C2 and C3)


## Immortality

What  Cannon’s account ignores is the fact that receiving a glorified  physical body is something LDS theology tells us has already been  taken care of on our behalf. “It is requisite and just,” taught  Alma, “according to the power and resurrection of Christ, that the  soul of man should be restored to its body, and that every part of  the body should be restored to itself,” and thus “there is a time  appointed that all shall come forth from the dead” (Alma  41:2; 40:4). Christ has already been resurrected, and at that time  “many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and came out of the  graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and  appeared unto many” (Matthew 27:52–53). The resurrection is  already in motion; God did not need to await human technical mastery  to bring it about. Furthermore, no human action is needed to assure a  universal resurrection. God’s work and glory certainly targets “the  immortality and eternal life” of his children, but the immortality  is a done deal. It is strange, then, to see Transhumanists suggest  that scientific research is needed or even commanded to accomplish  it. There is a point of contact with traditional LDS thought here,  but that brief touch quickly veers off on a tangent.


## Eternal  Life and Exaltation

In  contrast to immortality, the receipt of exaltation, or theosis, remains a matter that human agency — coupled with the grace of God  — can influence. Each individual must choose to make  divinely-ordained covenants as part of priesthood ordinances, and  then endure to the end in faithfulness to those covenants. We are  surely called to labor in that undertaking, both for our own sakes  (D&C 18:15) and the sakes of others (Alma 29:15).

Technology  can certainly be enlisted in such efforts — just as hand copied  texts could have wider dissemination than oral preaching, so now  printed or digital scriptures are easier to make and cheaper to  distribute than handwritten ones. Boats transported the apostle Paul  as he preached; intercontinental airlines now deliver modern apostles  to their destinations. Telephones and video conferencing help govern [Page 175] a worldwide Church while, by contrast, a much smaller primitive  Church soon lapsed into apostasy, lacking frequent contact with  steadying apostolic hands. In a rapid eclipse of the communication  technologies that preceded it, the Internet allows individuals to  teach others anywhere in the world in real-time. Thus, in one sense,  it is certainly true that “God commands us to use science and  technology to help each other attain Godhood,” and few Latter-day  Saints would find such uses as I’ve described remarkable or novel  in the least. Such means are not, however, the primary substance of  Transhumanist hopes.

One  would not know it from Cannon’s formulation, but God has repeatedly  told us what role we have in accomplishing his purposes. God nowhere  says, “Develop the technology to have ageless bodies” (see  207), nor “Go out and resurrect your fellows via ‘complete models  of the bodies and brains of our dead ancestors individually'”  (see 211) . Nor does he say, “Use data-mining to restore lost  ecosystems” (see 210–11). He instead tells us, “Say nothing  but repentance unto this generation” (D&C 6:9; 11:9). God  focuses relentlessly on the nature of our wills, our fallen nature,  and our mortal propensity to sin.

The  concept offered by Cannon’s syllogism is also egocentric and  presentist. In his formulation, the entire world has been waiting for  us or our technological near-heirs. There is no way the Israelites —  a bunch of Bronze Age pastoralists — could hope to participate in  (for example) the project to somehow retrieve and archive all humans’  past genetic codes to assure a universal resurrection (217). At best,  for Cannon’s syllogism, the vast majority of humanity is merely  marking time, unable to do much of [Page 176] anything toward achieving God’s  purposes. Even we, today, cannot do much.

If,  instead, the problem is human nature and moral agency — as the  scriptures repeatedly affirm — the modern has no privileged place  in the sun. Indeed, we may even be at something of a disadvantage if  we entertain hubristic dreams of a crescendo of redemptive science  and technology. A Palestinian peasant under the Caesars was at least  at scant risk of mistaking himself for someone potent, transcendent,  or world-changing.

And  so the second and third conclusions, like the first, fail to be  accurate accounts of LDS theology.

We  could, once again, stop our investigation here — Cannon has chosen  to conclude his introduction to Mormon Transhumanism with a deeply  flawed attempt to suggest equivalencies where there are none.

This  degree of confusion or muddled thinking is unlikely, however, to  exist in a vacuum. As we prod Cannon’s argument, we find that when  Transhumanism and Mormonism are in conflict, it is Transhumanism that  prevails.


## Part 2:  Human Nature and Transhumanism

Cannon  begins his article by announcing:

> As  Transhumanists, we have discarded the old assumption that human  nature is or ever was static, not only because science has  demonstrated biological evolution, but especially because history  itself is cultural and technological evolution. (202)

Such  a claim trades on the multiple possible understandings of the term  “human nature.” To be sure, if we see the term to refer to  something like “human nature began with a hunter-gatherer  life-style using stone age tools,” it is trivially and  obviously true that human nature has been and likely will continue to  be in constant flux. Literacy, numeracy, metallurgy, moveable type,  the scientific method, calculus, materials science, cybernetics,  information technology — all have altered “human nature” in  this sense, or the nature of the types of lives that humans live.

One  sees the same tension around “human nature” in Cannon’s  footnoted source. He cites Nick Bostrom, a leading Transhumanist  philosopher and advocate. Like Cannon, Bostrom holds that:

In  Cannon’s essay, we see the same conviction that human nature is  plastic, “up for grabs.” And that human nature is determined and  altered by technology, meaning not merely new styles of life, but a  change in “who and what [humans] are” at a fundamental level.  Cannon appeals to the same types of ideas, invoking technology such  as a computing device to read; glasses, contacts, or surgically  modified eyes; hearing aids or cochlear implants; clothing; and drugs  that target pain, heighten attention, or facilitate growth as  examples of changes in human nature wrought by science (206).

In  religious terms, however — especially LDS religious terms — none  of these shifts represent changes to what is most basic and important  in human nature.

To  pick one simple case, we are mortal with fallible memories — thus  speech, written language, moveable type printing, and computer  information technology can compensate for the fact that fallible  memory is part of human nature (in the Cannon/Bostromian sense), and  thus these technologies can change “who and what [we] are.”

This  is not, however, what LDS scriptures address when discussing human  nature.

For  example, King Benjamin advised his people that “the natural man is  an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be,  forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy  Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through  the atonement of Christ the Lord” (Mosiah 3:19).

He  does not, we remark, suggest that more rapid access to information or  an eidetic memory would change this fundamental aspect of human  nature. Instead, only through an exercise of moral agency — a  yielding of the will to the Holy Spirit — can human nature be  changed. And this [Page 178] change comes not from biotechnology or  nanotechnology or drugs or cybernetics — but through the Atonement  of Christ enabling us to “put off” the natural man. Without the  Atonement, the human nature of the natural man persists eternally.

Nephi  too cautioned,

> O  that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties,  and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are  wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it  aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is  foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish. But to  be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God. (2 Nephi  9:28–29)

For  Nephi, more learning, more knowledge, and more technical prowess do  not change the fundamental dynamic. Indeed, he argues that such  things can actually exacerbate the problem — learning and technical  mastery can stir us to pride and an exaggerated trust in our own  capabilities and perspectives. This can lead us to disregard counsel  from God and his Holy Spirit — we therefore do not yield, and we  perish despite our knowledge.

Neither  Nephi nor I desire to denigrate knowledge — it is better to have  knowledge than not to have it — but it is not the scientific or  engineering knowledge that saves us. It may, in fact, threaten us if  we are not wary.

Alma  is blunt and speaks in terms that could be addressed to a modern  Transhumanist. Humans have “become carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature ” (Alma 42:10, emphasis added).


## Mormon  Transhumanism and Jesus

Cannon’s  article makes much, initially, of Mormonism as “an immersive  discipleship of Jesus Christ” (203). But after this introductory  paragraph, little or nothing is said about Jesus or his Atonement.  Even this paragraph paints mortals as “messiahs” and “saviors  for each other,” though these terms mean something quite different  in Mormonism when applied to us than they do in the Transhumanist  context — another example of the fallacy of equivocation.  Invocation of the terms in that context is less about Jesus than  about us. “With Jesus, we would trust in, change toward, and fully  immerse our bodies and minds in the role of Christ” (203). Again,  the emphasis is on what we do — which matches the  Transhumanist technocratic approach to the problems of human  existence: sickness, scarcity, death, and so forth.

I  am not convinced that Cannon’s description of discipleship is on  target. We do not take on “the role of Christ” except in a very  circumscribed sense different from his paper’s implication. Cannon  appeals to but does not quote from Mosiah 5:9: “whosoever doeth  this shall be found at the right hand of God, for he shall know the  name by which he is called; for he shall be called by the name of  Christ” (215n15).

This  verse says nothing about taking on the role of Christ.  Instead, the saved are called by his name because Jesus claims them  as his own: “the good shepherd doth call you; yea, and in his own  name he doth call you, which is the name of Christ; and if ye will  not hearken unto … the name by which ye are called, behold, ye are  not the sheep of the good shepherd” (Alma 5:38). In fact,  immediately after the verse cited by Cannon, the scripture continues:  “For how knoweth a man the master whom he has not served …? [D]oth a  man take an ass which belongeth to his neighbor, and keep him? I say  unto you, Nay … . [E]ven so shall it be among you if ye know not  the name by which ye are called” (Mosiah 5:13 14).  Servants and [Page 180] asses do not take upon themselves the master’s role or  decide that they claim the master — it is the master who claims them (see also Revelation 22:3–4; 3 Nephi 27:5; D&C  18:23–25, 76:59).

Of  the redeemed, the Doctrine and Covenants asserts frankly, “They are  Christ’s,” and others less valiant “are Christ’s at his  coming” (D&C 88:98–99). Jesus blessed those who gave even a  cup of water to his disciples, “because ye belong to  Christ,” (Mark 9:41, emphasis added). These have taken his name  upon them; they have not taken on the messianic role.

Here  we see one of Cannon’s many light contacts with an LDS idea, only  to have Transhumanism angle off into decidedly non-LDS territory.


## Part 3:  Mistaking LDS Theology

Given  his apparent confusion about how LDS doctrine sees human nature, it  is perhaps not surprising that Cannon seems either to misunderstand  or misrepresent LDS scripture and theology in other areas.


## The  Council in Heaven


## Dualism?

> Mormonism  posits a metaphysics, in contrast to classical substance dualism,  that is consistent with some accounts of physicalism and naturalism.  According to our scriptures, everything is material, including our  minds; and everything is embodied, including God. (203)

Cannon  is correct that substance dualism does not quite capture Mormon  doctrine — but it is misleading to leave the matter there with the  claim that “some accounts” of physicalism do Mormon thought  justice.

Why  does this matter? Because the Transhumanist vision insists very  strongly upon physicalism or naturalism. One thread of Transhumanist  thought is convinced that the road to a posthuman future includes the  ability to “upload” human minds to digital computers:

[Page 183] Given  how central such a vision of mind is to Transhumanism, it is not  surprising that Cannon focuses on any parallels for it in LDS  thought. He seems to invoke these ideas when he writes:

> The  ability to read and write data to and from every neuron in the brain  begins to connect us experientially, both sensorially and  emotionally, with each other and with our environment. … The  functions of the brain and body are virtualized, and we begin  extending or transitioning our minds into more robust bodies,  biological and otherwise — as innumerable and diverse as the stars.  … Data  storage and materials engineering ensures our minds and bodies are  maintained or restored as needed in perpetuity, banishing death as we  know it. (211)

Visions  of reading and writing data to every individual neuron and the  ability to “virtualize” the brain and “transition … our  minds” to other bodies (biological and otherwise) all echo the  standard Transhumanist line. Likewise, “data storage” which  “ensures our minds … are maintained or restored as needed in  perpetuity,” is bread-and butter Transhumanism with no Mormon  gloss whatever.

> 7  There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure , and can only be discerned by  purer eyes ; 8 We cannot see it; but when our bodies are  purified we shall see that it is all matter. (D&C 131:7–8,  emphasis added)

The  implications for a Mormon Transhumanism are substantial — any idea  of uploading the mind, “virtualizing” it, off-loading its core  functions to silicon, or backing up and restoring it is simply a  non starter. If we cannot detect the finer spirit matter, we  cannot measure it. And if we cannot measure its properties and  states, we can hardly instantiate it in another coarse physical  medium. Reading and writing to each individual neuron — even if  possible — is simply not enough.

Likewise,  Cannon’s account of “brain and body preservation patients from  previous decades [being] resuscitated” is implausible from an LDS  point of view — a resuscitated brain requires something else that  departs at death: the purer-material spirit.


## Engineering Spiritual  Experiences

I  conclude with a final example of Cannon’s thoroughgoing materialism  (in the classical sense):

> As  spiritual experiences become easily reproducible and malleable,  teachers shift focus from general encouragement to careful  discernment between helpful and harmful esthetics. (211)

Of  all Cannon’s claims, this one troubled me most. His formulation  appears to assume that:

  - “spiritual”  experiences are strictly materialist in the scientific sense (or  otherwise, they could not be easily reproduced by technology), and
  - these  experiences are “malleable,” meaning they can be controlled,  altered and manipulated at will.

But  this is not how LDS doctrine understands the workings of the Holy  Spirit upon the believer. Mormons see such experiences as actual  communication from one being to another. One can reproduce or  manipulate such events with science no more than one could replace my  telephone conversation with a friend by manipulating my auditory  cortex so that I hallucinate about chatting, even though no one else  is on the line. It might be a delightful aesthetic experience but not  a conversation.

[Page 186] Thus,  the inevitable conclusion from Cannon’s approach seems to me to be:

  - Because  they are strictly materialist (from a), and because they can be  manipulated with technical means (from b), spiritual experiences are  not “real” in the sense of being actual communication from a  divine being (because a divine being is not needed to  manipulate, reproduce, and control them — only science is).

Cannon  pictures a future in which a techno-teacher, equipped with the  ability to reproduce and alter spiritual experiences, can help the  posthuman believer learn to “careful[ly] discern … between  helpful and harmful esthetics.”

The  point seems not to be the truth of the divine communication —  because for Cannon’s schema there is no divine being needed, and no  “more pure matter” spirit to receive the divine communion.  Instead, we have only brute, “common” matter responding on the  level of neurons and neurochemicals.

One  is reminded of C.S. Lewis’ classic essay, Men without Chests — for everything is happening in the spiritual pupils’ heads:


## [Page 187] Conclusion

Like  perhaps many readers, I began my study of Cannon’s article knowing  only a little about Transhumanism, and even less about the Mormon  variety.

As  should now be clear, I have come away neither convinced nor  reassured. Cannon’s presentation of even some of the basics of LDS  doctrine seems shaky at best. The slightest parallel between  Transhumanism and LDS thought is emphasized, but none of the profound  and weighty differences are acknowledged or addressed. At best, the  Transhumanism presented has a thin skin of Mormon-like terms, hiding  a world of difference beneath.

I  suspect and hope that Cannon and other Mormon Transhumanists do not  rely on their mistaken claims and premises to embrace the ultimate  conclusions implied by them. That would not be unusual — people  often avoid embracing the logical consequences of their beliefs,  decreasing error at the cost of internal consistency.

But  there is always the possibility that some members or interested  outsiders will mistake these mistaken premises for an accurate  account of LDS scripture and doctrine. It would be unfortunate if  they followed those missteps to their logical end. There are enough  Men Without Chests in the world.

---
Notes

[1] [Page 161] Abstract: Some sources have described Mormonism as the faith most friendly to  the intellectual movement known as Transhumanism. This paper reviews  an introductory paper by the past President of the Mormon  Transhumanist Association. A syllogism that purports to show that  Mormonism is compatible with — or even requires — Transhumanism  is analyzed. The syllogism’s premises are shown to misunderstand or  misrepresent LDS scripture and doctrine. The proffered Transhumanist  conception of “human nature” and the perspective offered by LDS  scripture are compared and found to be incompatible. Additional  discrepancies between the Transhumanist article’s representation of  LDS doctrine and the actual teachings of LDS scripture and leaders on  doctrinal matters (the Premortal Council in Heaven, the relationship  between substance dualism and LDS thought, and the possibility of  engineering or controlling spiritual experiences) are examined. The  article does not accurately reflect LDS teachings, and thus has not  demonstrated that Transhumanism is congenial to LDS scripture or  doctrine. 1

[2] In  conversation recently, I was asked about Mormon  Transhumanism ,  a movement about which I knew very little. 2 A longtime obsession with [Page 162] science-fiction literature made me aware of Transhumanism ,  which urges the alteration of human nature and capability through  science and technology, particularly via GNR — Genetics,  Nanotechnology, Robotics and information technology. Chief among  Transhumanism’s goals are the abolition of death from aging, 3 the enhancement and replacement of biological cognition with machine  equivalents, and the emergence of the Singularity, a moment of  explosive cultural evolution triggered by the development of a  self-improving machine- or biological-machine hybrid-intelligence. 4

[3] The  Mormon Transhumanist Association (MTA) describes itself as “the  world’s largest advocacy network for ethical use of technology and  religion to expand human abilities, as outlined in the Transhumanist  Declaration.” 5 As of this writing, they report 591 members, of whom 376 have made  their names public. 6

[4] The  MTA website includes an article written by the group’s past  president, Lincoln Cannon. 7 It is targeted at a general readership, and Cannon’s other work has  been cited in the academic literature as [Page 163] evidence that “the Church  of Latter-day Saints [sic] … is also the tradition that exhibits  the most positive attitude toward transhumanism.” 8 This is a somewhat extravagant claim when we consider that the Mormon  Transhumanist Association then had only 255 members. 9 If Mormonism represents the most favorable faith, Transhumanism’s  stock amongst the religious must be low indeed. 10 An author in First Things was more skeptical, writing “rather  than rejecting their faith, Mormon transhumanists can come to the  movement because of their religion. Or so says Cannon. Mormon  authorities, I suspect, would disagree.” 11

[5] In  this essay, I offer a review and reaction to the claims in Cannon’s  article from my own believing LDS perspective. I will say nothing  about Transhumanism’s scientific claims, though I have enough of  the scientist in me to be deeply skeptical about many of them. 12

[6] Transhumanism  is not a static or crystallized doctrine — it has already had its  share of schisms and internecine skirmishes. … This recent but  quickly growing movement is part science, [Page 164] part philosophy, but also  part science-fiction, and I might add, part faith. 13

[7] [Page 165] Part 1:  Mormonism Mandates Transhumanism? 14

[8] Cannon  advances what he concedes is “a controversial claim.” “Some  Mormon transhumanists,” he writes, “contend that … Mormonism  actually mandates transhumanism .… [O]ne cannot be a Mormon without  being a transhumanist.” He goes on to assure us that “we can use  Mormon scripture to formulate a supporting argument” (213). He  offers four premises, accompanied by appeals to LDS scripture: 15

[9] Given  these four premises, Cannon declares that “we can reason” and  thereby draws three conclusions: 16

[10] Cannon’s  second scripture is cited to support the idea that “God will not  save us unless we use the means God has already provided” (1b).  This formulation trades on the fact that the scripture cites Captain  Moroni’s speaking of being “delivered” (Alma 60:11, 20, 21)  from a temporal, military threat — yet oddly Cannon uses the term save instead, a term never used in the verses cited. 17 Rendering Moroni’s claim as “saved” allows the argument to  imply matters of eternal salvation rather than deliverance in war.  The remainder of Cannon’s argument requires that Moroni’s words  be understood in a religious sense.

[11] Perhaps  without intending to do so, Cannon has already shifted the scriptural  ground — a command about using available means to escape a mortal,  physical threat in the political realm has been shaded through choice  of language into a command about how we ought to approach matters of  human salvation (in the eschatological sense). This shift is not an  inconsequential move. Either Cannon is unaware of what he has done,  or he hopes we won’t notice. 18

[12] This  lack of precision is compounded when Cannon’s third scripture is  used to argue that we “ought to engage in good causes without [Page 168] waiting for God to provide specific commands” (1c). Here the  argument implicitly lays the ground to assume — without evidence —  what it will eventually be enlisted to prove. An admonition to engage  in good causes without being commanded in the details (1c) applies in  this case only if the transhumanist approach to salvation is a  good one . 19 But that is ultimately the point at issue. We cannot assume it  at the outset.

[13] It  seems so, since some see these techniques as “gifts to new  families.” But in the LDS view, an infertile married couple does  not become a “new family” when children arrive — it is a family  already. It does not need biological children to become one. 20 And single individuals, homosexual unions, or scenarios which allow a  child to have more than two biological parents are not family  structures conducive to God’s purposes, given LDS doctrine  reflected in the Proclamation on the Family . 21

[14] To  pick an example not more extreme than some Transhumanist reveries,  one might conceive of a brain-control device that prevents humans  from committing acts of sin. God clearly does not want humans to sin,  yet using technology to assure that they would not or could not do so  is not a righteous act in LDS theology. 22

[15] Cannon’s  first conclusion fails, since both premises are faulty accounts of  LDS thought and scripture. The syllogism is also misleading since it  leaves unaddressed the core question: which technologies does God  command, and which would he oppose? 23 Cannon evinces no awareness that this question needs to be addressed.

[16] The  second and third conclusions move even further than the first from  anything that can be called an accurate sketch of LDS theology.  Cannon tells us that since God’s purpose is to achieve our  exaltation, “God commands us to use science and technology to help  each other attain Godhood,” (C2) and since godhood requires a  physical body, “God [Page 174] commands us to use science and technology to  help each other attain a glorified immortal body” (C3). 24

[17] After  all, it is not in this trivially true sense that Cannon’s syllogism  intends the idea that God endorses the use of science and technology  to help exalt his children. None of these or a thousand other  examples have anything to do with the technical implementation of  resurrection and exaltation that Cannon’s syllogism mandates. 25 The Transhumanist project of his syllogism ironically focuses on the  one thing — personal immortality — that can already be checked  off the to-do list under LDS doctrine. These claims risk, then,  distracting us from the work still to be done: “Perhaps someday we  might transfigure ourselves into ageless bodies” (207).

[18] The  new paradigm [of Transhumanism] rejects a crucial assumption that is  implicit in both traditional futurology and practically all of  today’s political thinking. This is the assumption that the “human  condition” is at root a [Page 177] constant. Present-day processes can be  fine-tuned; wealth can be increased and redistributed; tools can be  developed and refined; culture can change, sometimes drastically; but  human nature itself is not up for grabs. This  assumption no longer holds true. Arguably it has never been true.  Such innovations as speech, written language, printing, engines,  modern medicine and computers have had a profound impact not just on  how people live their lives, but on who and what they are. 26

[19] Modernity  seems, to me, to offer very little ground for believing that much  about human nature has changed despite our accelerating technical and  scientific knowledge. Intelligent and educated modern luminaries such  as Rousseau, Marx, Ibsen, Tolstoy, Hemmingway, Bertrand Russell, and  Jean-Paul Sartre present a melancholy spectacle with their neglect or  abandonment of their children, serial infidelities, mistreatment of  women, and the vacuity of their moral lives. 27 The [Page 179] great physicists of quantum physics fare little better. 28 The problem of the natural man or woman is perennial.

[20] Cannon  says we should be “consoling and healing and raising, as  exemplified and invited by Jesus” (203) — which is certainly  true. But this focus on outward ethics and acts leaves unmentioned  the problem of the inner nature and its transformation effected by  the Atonement, for it is only “by the blood [that] ye are  sanctified” (Moses 6:60). Likewise, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught  that “[b]eing born again comes by the Spirit of God through  ordinances,” 29 but nowhere are the ordinances mentioned in Cannon’s essay. The  ability to meaningfully console, heal, and help in the salvation of  others is all predicated upon Christ’s gracious transformation of  our nature — and I fear that omitting this fact from mention may  not be coincidental because it touches precisely upon those areas  Transhumanism reserves for itself.

[21] Elsewhere,  Cannon’s article writes of how “[a]t a grand council in heaven  before the creation of this world, the children of God presented two  plans. … God chose the first and war ensued” (204). In fact, LDS  doctrine teaches that God presented a single plan. Satan  offered an [Page 181] alternate scenario, which God rejected. There were not two  possible plans, and God did not need to choose between them. There  could, in fact, only be one option from God’s perspective. 30 God’s children could choose to either support or reject God’s  plan. That Cannon muddles this matter does not increase the reader’s  confidence that his more speculative attempts to tie Mormonism to  Transhumanism will be accurate.

[22] An  additional illustrative example is Cannon’s discussion of Mormonism  and substance dualism , the idea that physical bodies and  mind/spirit/ soul are different types of things. Each has a  separate existence, with “mental things … [lacking] any extension  in the physical world”: 31

[23] [Page 182] The  claim that Mormonism is “consistent with some accounts of  physicalism and naturalism” lacks a footnote, which is unfortunate  — it would be helpful to know more precisely of which accounts  Cannon is speaking. Physicalism and naturalism hold  that physical matter of the everyday kind — the sort that makes up  tables and flowers and human brains — is all there is. There is no  ineffable “spirit” or “mind” which exists on a different  plane or level of reality; minds require only physical embodiment. To  create an exact copy of my physical brain would be to completely  duplicate my mental processes — I am “nothing but” my physical  body. 32

[24] In  her celebrated book How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in  Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics (1999), N. Katherine  Hayles summarizes the features of the posthuman condition: patterns  of information are more essential to the state of being than any  material instantiation; the embodiment in a biological substrate is  seen as an accident of history rather than an inevitability of life;  there is no immaterial soul, and consciousness is an epiphenomenon;  the body is nothing more than a prosthesis, and to exchange this  prosthesis for another is simply an extension of that relation; and a  human being is capable of being seemingly articulated with  intelligent machines. Posthuman existence meant that there is no  demarcation between bodily existence and computer simulation,  cybernetic mechanism and biological organism, robot technology and  human goals. In the posthuman condition there no separation between  humans and their environment, between “the thing that thinks and  the thing that is thought,” and “no inherent dichotomy between  mind and matter.” 33

[25] Nevertheless,  Cannon seizes on the fact that LDS doctrine insists that spirit is  also material: “There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All  spirit is matter” (D&C 131:7). 34 So far, so good, but, he stops his analysis there and ignores the  implications of the rest of the verse and the one that follows it:

[26] Cannon  is correct; classical substance dualism is not really at home in  Mormonism. But physicalism and naturalism are likewise uneasy  boarders in LDS thought. Spirit is matter, true — but a type of  matter that cannot be perceived by mortals. This is not an invitation  to create better electron microscopes, since glorified, perfected, purified bodies are needed to detect it. 35 Spirit matter is not amenable to scientific research, [Page 184] measurement, or  manipulation, and it is not simply a subset of “regular” matter.  These caveats leave us a metaphysics that looks a lot like dualism.

[27] A  standard objection to physicalism is the issue of qualia —  the interior, subjective experience of receiving sense input. 36 A canonical thought experiment involves a scientist who lives in a  black and white world — for her entire life she has been surrounded  by only shades of black and white. Despite this, she knows additional  colors have been reported by other observers. She studies optics and  visual processing and manages to learn everything about what happens  to eyes and brains when they encounter visible light of the color  frequency. Then suddenly one day she is able to walk out of her  black-and-white world and into a world of color. She sees color for the first time. Does she know something more or  something different than she knew before? Non-physicalists argue that  she does: she knows what the subjective experience of color is  like for her. A computer or robot could receive all the same inputs  and do all the same signal processing and yet still not have the  internal experience a conscious being can have. 37

[28] Not  surprisingly, this remains a contentious issue and is one facet of  what has been dubbed “the hard problem of consciousness.” 38 Some regard it as fundamentally insoluble, others as a non-problem. 39

[29] [Page 185] This  entire issue has provoked an enormous philosophical literature. I do  not expect that Cannon would have the space to settle or even address  such issues, any more than I would attempt to do so here. 40 He should at least help the reader realize, however, that this  presumption is a prerequisite for his arguments’ cogency. I suspect  most Latter-day Saints would be uncertain that physicalism in the  sense required for his argument accurately reflects revealed  doctrine.

[30] Values  are now mere natural phenomena. Judgements of value are to be  produced in the pupil as part of the conditioning. … The ultimate  springs of human action are no longer, for them, something given.  They [the springs] have surrendered — like electricity: it is the  function of the Conditioners [the Transhumanist technocratic  teachers] to control, not to obey them. They know how to produce conscience [and spiritual experiences] and decide what kind of  conscience [and spiritual experiences] they will produce. [The  Conditioners and Transhumanist technocrats] themselves are outside,  above. 41

[31] As  I concluded my research, I learned that the Mormon Transhumanist  Association has annually surveyed its members about their beliefs.  Approximately 14% of their membership responded to the 2014 survey:  59% of these were believers in God, while 21% were agnostics, 13%  atheists, and 4% had “no opinion.” 42 One must wonder in what meaningful sense an organization can embody  “Mormon” 43 ideas if roughly 40% do not even affirm the existence of God. 44

[32] Although  I believe what I have read of Mormon Transhumanism seriously  misrepresents Mormonism, I do not attribute malign motives to Cannon  or others who share his beliefs. The more contentious Transhumanist  proposals are, for now, little more than amusing [Page 188] speculations, much  like some of the unfortunate detours taken during High Priests’  Group lessons on warm Sunday afternoons. 45 The implications of the Transhumanists’ views are, however,  much less amusing.

