BY THE MOUTH OF WITNESSES

Shall the Truth be Established

MOSES voiced the word of Jehovah unto Israel, saying that by the testimony of competent witnesses should questions of fact be established; and our Lord in the flesh reaffirmed the ancient rule for common observance (Matt. 18:16), and, on a particular occasion, cited it in vindicating to the casuistical Jews His claim to Divine authority. (John 8:17, 18). It is a vital element of jurisprudence, and is at once reasonable and indispensable in practise.

The Book of Mormon predicts its own coming forth in latter times, and presents the specific prophecy that the plates on which the ancient record was engraved would be shown to three witnesses, and later to certain others. The sacred character of the plates forbade their display for the gratification of curiosity; and, moreover, it was the stated purpose of the Lord that the restored Scriptures be accepted or rejected by men according to the reader's measure of faith or lack thereof.

Respecting the bringing forth of the Book of Mormon in the latter days, the Lord thus spake through Nephi the prophet: "Wherefore at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the things therein. And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men: for the Lord God hath said, That the words of the faithful should speak as if it were from the dead. Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good, will he establish his word; and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God." (2 Nephi 27).

The angel, Moroni, who delivered the plates to Joseph Smith, received them back into his keeping after the translation of the unsealed portion had been effected. The latter-day prophet had been instructed to guard the plates with vigilant care, and was warned against any temptation to use the sheets of gold for personal gain. They were preserved inviolate while in his hands; and were shown by him only as the Lord directed. In June, 1829, three men, designated through revelation, were chosen to view the plates, and the occasion was one of heavenly visitation.

The Testimony of Three Witnesses

"Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people unto whom this work shall come, that we, through the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which contain this record, which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken; and we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shewn unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these things are true; and it is marvellous in our eyes, nevertheless the voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall dwell with Him eternally in the heavens. And the honour be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God. Amen. Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Martin Harris."

This solemn affirmation was never revoked nor in the least degree modified, though all of the three were later severed from the Church for transgression. To the time of death each maintained the truth of his testimony, despite ridicule and divers sufferings through persecution.

Shortly after the witnessing of the plates by the three, other eight persons were permitted to see and handle the records, as they thus attest:

The Testimony of Eight Witnesses

"Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people unto whom this work shall come, that Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator of this work, has shewn unto us the plates of which hath been spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated, we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we bear record with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shewn unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the world to witness unto the world that which we have seen; and we lie not, God bearing witness of it. Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jun., John Whitmer, Hiram Page, Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith."

Three of these eight died out of the Church, yet not one of the whole number ever was known to deny his testimony. Had policy figured in the matter, as doubtless would have been the case in the fraudulent exploitation of a spurious book, the Church might have been expected to tolerate misconduct on the part of members so vitally prominent in its affairs; but the ban of excommunication fell, as justice demanded, without respect to persons. The biography of each of the eleven witnesses has been widely published. Their testimonies appear in every copy of the Book of Mormon. Read and consider.
