FROM GOD TO MAN

Divine Communication in the Current Age

WE believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that he will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. (Articles of Faith, No. 9).

Revelation, direct and personal from God to men, is the dominant theme of Scripture. Expunge from the Bible all record of actual revelation and reference thereto, and what remains? Nothing more than a variety of historical sketches, chronicles, genealogical data, some chapters of ethical value, a few poetical rhapsodies, proverbs, and allegories.

Every believer in the authenticity of the Holy Bible acknowledges that God literally spake to Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Jacob, and Moses, and that specific revelation was given to Israel during the time of the Judges, and on to David and Solomon, thence to John who was the immediate forerunner of the Messiah. The actuality of Divine revelation through duly constituted prophets, seers, and revelators, has been so generally accepted throughout the ages, and is so abundantly attested, that by all rules of argument and debate the burden of proof naturally and properly falls upon him who denies.

Continued revelation of the Divine will and purpose is in harmony with the spirit of the times. In no phase of human effort and advancement, save only that of the soul's salvation, do men venture to assert or even think that we have learned all there is to learn. What of a college professor in chemistry, geology, or astronomy, who would confine his students to the conning of books that tell of early discoveries, with the dictum that nothing remains to be discovered, instead of guiding them in laboratory and field, and in the searching of the outer deep with telescope and spectroscope, in the confident hope of finding new truths?

Revelation is God's means of communication with His children, and we deny the consistent and unchangeable character of Deity when we say that God has revealed Himself to man, but cannot or will not do so again. Is it reasonable to hold that in one age the Church of Christ was blessed, enlightened, and guided by direct revelation and that at another time the Church is to be left to itself, sustained only by the dead letter of earlier days? The living Church must be in vital communication with its Divine Head.

The Christ Himself was a revelator, through whom the Father's will was made known to man. Notwithstanding His personal authority as Jehovah, God though He had been, was, and is, while He lived as a Man among men Jesus Christ declared His work to be that of One greater than Himself, from whom He had been sent, and by whom He was instructed and directed. Note His words: "For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak." (John 12:49-50).

The recreant and unbelieving Jews rejected their Lord because He came to them with a new revelation. Had they not Moses and the prophets? What more could they need? They openly boasted "We are Moses' disciples," and added "We know that God spake unto Moses; as for this fellow, we know not from whence he is." (John 9:28-29). Those who deny the possibility of present day revelation are not distinguished by originality; they follow a beaten path, hard trodden by ignoble feet.

The Apostles ministered under the guiding influence of revelation. Paul writing to the Corinthians said: "But God hath revealed them [Divine truths] unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God. For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God." (1 Cor. 2:10-12).

The imperative need of continued revelation appears in the fact that new conditions and unprecedented combinations of circumstances arise with the passage of time, and Divine direction alone can meet the new issues.

The Apostle John knew that in the last days, these present days, the voice of God would be heard calling His people from the Babylon of sin to the Zion of safety: "And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:4; see also 14:6).

Nephi, an ancient prophet whose record appears in the Book of Mormon, addressed himself to the unbelievers of the last days, and thus predicted the bringing forth of additional Scriptures: "And it shall come to pass, that the Lord God shall bring forth unto you the words of a book, and they shall be the words of them which have slumbered. And behold the book shall be sealed: and in the book shall be a revelation from God." (2 Nephi, 27: 6-7).

Through the Hebrew prophet Malachi the Lord promised additional revelation in the last days, by the coming of Elijah with a special and particular commission. (Mal. 4: 5-6). These prophecies have been fulfilled to the letter in modern time, the first by the bringing forth of the Book of Mormon and its publication to the world: the latter by the inauguration of vicarious work for the dead through the personal visitation of Elijah, a work now in vigorous prosecution in the Temples erected and maintained by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Not only has the voice of God been heard in modern times, but His words spell rebuke and reproof unto those who would close His mouth and estrange Him from His people. Verily hath He spoken, "proving to the world that the Holy Scriptures are true, and that God does inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old, thereby showing that he is the same God yesterday, to-day, and for ever." (D&C 20:11-12). Of old the Lord proclaimed: "Wo be unto him that shall say, We have received the word of God, and we need no more of the word of God, for we have enough" (Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi 28:29); and in this age hath He spoken words of admonition and warning: "Deny not the Spirit of revelation, nor the Spirit of prophecy, for wo unto him that denieth these things." (D&C 11:25).
