A. Lynn Scoresby, Foundations for a Happier Marriage ( 1986)

1

Sharing in Marriage

As I entered the hospital and walked down the corridor to the adolescent psychiatric unit, I thought about the young person I had come to see. She was not yet fourteen years old, but she had been sent to the hospital by the juvenile authorities. Officially, she was in trouble because her abuse of alcohol and drugs had brought her to a crisis: she had consumed so much alcohol that she had passed out during school. Without proper medical care, she could have died from what she had done. Yet this behavior was really only the result of a far deeper pain.

I knew that since her parents' divorce three years before, this child had suffered continuously from the arguments going on between her mother and her father. The reasons for their divorce didn't matter to her. What mattered was that they had divorced and that they were still angry with one another—so angry, in fact, that they were quite unaware of how they affected this girl, her sisters, and her brothers. These parents either had forgotten or had never known that children have emotional ties to both parents. When parents separate or engage in considerable conflict, they cause painful, emotional division in the children that prevents them from living happy, normal lives.

I wondered if I could help create conditions that would allow this child to know the simple satisfactions of a stable life—going to school, doing homework, being with friends, and having a reasonable amount of contact with both her father and her mother. I knew it would be difficult. I have seen so many children in this situation, and I never fail to be saddened by it.

I know that for some couples divorce is better than remaining together. In rare instances, a divorce can even be better for the children than living with certain kinds of conflict. Far more often, however, divorce brings enormous pain to parents and children, creating a condition of instability that is difficult to repair. Children who must live with such instability may be unable to focus their energies constructively. They may begin to fail in school as their ability to concentrate and their desire for achievement lessen. They may become calloused and selfish because they have learned to manipulate parents by pitting one against the other to obtain privileges and possessions. I have known children who, because of parental conflict, have attempted suicide, and I have known a few who succeeded. For "the sake of the children" is no empty phrase—any couple in conflict should do all in their power to prevent the breakup of their family.

The children are not the only ones who suffer, though. I have seen mothers unprepared for wage earning, unable to find employment, humiliated when they have to seek welfare services from their church and state because the fathers no longer provide. I have seen other women in distress because their work outside the home has cost their children the companionship of the only parents left to them. Deprived of the emotional support required to live happily, families in such circumstances live a barren routine of sadness. When the situation could have been avoided, the tragedy is indeed great.

Beyond all of this, I know that people who experience divorce face a profound loneliness that takes many forms. As the word divorce implies, divorced people find themselves separate, alone. Even though there may be children or friends to occupy part of their time, there are no other intimately concerned adults with whom to share companionship. Many lonely hours can be spent in depressed silence. Loneliness can also stem from the shocking realization that there aren't many others who could be desirable companions. And, in spite of how exciting dating relationships may have seemed in memory, they seem surprisingly shallow and difficult for most people who have known the emotional depth of marriage. I have listened to women talk of their disgust and frustration when they are viewed as pieces of goods to be auctioned off at one or another singles' activity to the available men. I have heard lonely men, too, complain of the insincerity of many women.

As good as any other relationship may be, no other relationship has the potential for happiness and fulfillment that a good marriage has. Furthermore, any marriage can increase in happiness if productive effort is applied by husband or wife separately or, preferably, together.

I have ached for those I've known who have gone through the pain of divorce. I have wished I could give them something more than advice and solace. I have wished I could help them find ways to be happy together, to somehow give them the skills to change their lives. As I have searched the professional literature describing marriage as a place of love and happiness, I find virtually no educational programs available to help people prepare for such a state, nothing to help people learn what I have found in my personal life and in my counseling of others. That is, I find only inadequate descriptions of the need for and the process involved in preparing for cooperative, involved sharing. Marriage, above all else, requires us to share skillfully and in many ways in order for us to be happy.

What Is Marriage?

The first step in increasing marital happiness is understanding what marriage is. There are surprisingly many notions available to us about the nature of marriage. Some of these seem to me better than others in providing foundations for a happier marriage. In my experience, learning what marriage is and acting according to that knowledge enable couples to increase the satisfaction in their relationship.

In some ways, every marriage is different from any other because two people together create a unique personality for their marriage. But in other ways, all marriages are alike. I believe it is best to see marriage as a set of shared situations, created simply by the state of being married. Such situations provide some of life's most personal and profound experiences.

In using this definition, I assume that the married couple plan to live together under the same roof, in which case they will naturally share shelter, food, and worldly goods. But by "shared situations" I mean much more than these. Being married means we present many of our thoughts and feelings and most of our actions to each other. We share happily if we present them accurately and freely; we share unhappily if we withhold. In any case, we do share. In marriage, even silence and absence are shared, and even those who find ways to avoid involvement are sharing. (It is exceptionally ironic to me that people will marry to find companionship yet be unable or unwilling to acknowledge that they share a relationship and a responsibility for the quality of that relationship.) Sharing in marriage is not only unavoidable, but also determines the quality of our marriages.

As children or single adults, we are seldom required to share as much as happy marriages require us to share. Nor are we confronted very often with the need to learn that sharing also includes being separate, allowing another person time alone. The gradual process of learning to balance these two concepts—creating intimacy and allowing separateness—is the major task in building happy marriages.

Accepting the fact that we cannot not share in marriage, our only choice, if we want happiness, is to learn more fully and more accurately how to disclose our own thoughts and feelings and how to understand what is disclosed to us. One difficulty with this is that the major sharing situations in marriage involve life's most personal and profound experiences. However difficult though, sharing in marriage results in some of life's greatest rewards. I have summarized six of the most common areas of sharing in marriage (see Table 1):

Skills in Sharing

Like many boys, I learned early to believe that talking about or showing my feelings was not manly. Through athletic competition or through arguments with other boys, I had felt ridiculed for showing any fear, hurt, or sadness. As a result, I learned to avoid open displays of my emotions by isolating myself from other people.

Table 1 Six Primary Areas Shared in Marriage

Areas What We Share 1. Sexual relationship All forms of (or lack of) affection, warmth, expressions of love, sexual activity 2. Money and resources All activities, conversations, and management skills related to money, possessions, and resources needed for living 3. Child care All activities, discipline, teaching times, conversation involved with the rearing of children (also the inadequacies, uninvolvement, and indifferences between parent and child) 4. Social activities All social events, together or as individuals, all friendships, and all relationships with business and personal acquaintances 5. Religious activities All religious beliefs and all participation or nonparticipation in religious activities 6. Relatives Time spent with and thoughts and feelings concerning parents (natural parents and in-laws), grandparents, and other close relatives

Later, after I had been married for a while, I found myself facing the pressures of graduate school, work, and church callings, and experiencing more stress than I had ever experienced before. The pressure resulted in depression, frustration, and anxiety. Rather than try to express these feelings or allow them to come out inappropriately, I often came home for the evening and withdrew, sometimes sitting in front of the television set and other times retiring to my private study room. After I had done this many times, my wife told me that she was unhappy because she felt I did not need her. This astounded me because I felt her care of me and our children was vital to my success in graduate school. I knew how much I needed her in other ways too. I couldn't understand how she would not know this.

I realized, however, that because I would not share with her, in this case talk about my feelings, she did not know how to participate with me. She wisely made a direct request, asking me to talk to her more often. To my surprise, I found this very difficult, especially talking about things that seemed quite personal, but I made several attempts and was finally able to share what I was thinking and feeling. I discovered that having someone listen not only helped me, but also allowed my wife to participate comfortably in what was happening to me. Since then I have been able to refine my abilities, and now I enjoy talking with my wife about many things I had never imagined I could share. In other words, I know from experience that skills in sharing can be learned, and learning them reaps a rich reward.

In attempting to evaluate the needs of a happy marriage, I have found that skill in the following eight areas is extremely beneficial: talking and listening, showing commitment, receiving love, making love last, discovering new rewards, using differences, reducing anger, and accepting with hope.

Talking and Listening

One foundation for marital happiness is an ability to understand combined with a confidence of being understood. This reciprocation allows a couple to continuously incorporate the discoveries they make about each other into the actual way they live. Through understanding and being understood a couple may find peace of mind, and by engaging in the talking and listening that permit understanding to occur, any married person can improve the quality of his or her marriage.

Showing Commitment

Healthy human beings are active: they do things. What they do reveals the nature of their commitments; and how they use their time shows where their interests are. Husbands and wives can often measure the satisfaction they find in their marriages by the acts of commitment they show to the marriage relationship. For instance, comparing the amount of time devoted to the marriage with the amount of time spent on other things will help determine the level of commitment. If the commitment to the marriage is weak, if a companion is ignored in order to do other things, the relationship will quickly become less satisfying.

One young married couple described the following situation. The wife was very unhappy. Before they were married, the husband had spent a great deal of time for many years with a small group of close friends. These young men assumed that their companionship would continue after marriage as it had existed before marriage. As an example of her frustrations, the wife told of a time when she and her husband were watching television and had begun to be affectionate. Just at the moment when they had decided to extend their affection to something more intimate, they heard a car horn. Her husband said, "Oh, that's the guys," and, putting on a coat, he opened the door and left. He was, of course, a bit embarrassed, but he was still confused as to why she was frustrated. He failed to see the situation as an act of uncommitment.

There are numerous acts of commitment that can be expressed throughout marriage. Learning how to express them and choosing to do so increase sharing and happiness.

Receiving Love

It is quite common for children to worry about whether they are or can be loved by another person. Many individuals who are unhappy in marriage have had experiences that reinforced that childhood worry: they have grown up fearing they cannot be loved. When people are unable to believe in their own lovableness, two things generally happen. The first is that fearful people tend to respond to the unloving behavior of their partners more readily than to expressions of love. The second is that the inadequate reception of love stifles further expressions of love in the relationship. If a husband, for example, tries to communicate that he loves his wife, but his wife cannot receive the message, he will eventually discontinue his expressions for lack of response. Then, if she expresses love less often because he is seldom expressing love, their relationship will become even more barren.

Both spouses should examine themselves to determine whether they fear they are unlovable. Admitting such a fear can lead to a resolution of it. Failure to resolve the fear can lead to blaming problems on the partner and arguing over who is at fault. Gaining confidence that we are loved and learning to accept love from another person are major steps in making marriage more satisfying.

Making Love Last

A marriage may be the only situation we enter into with the understanding or hope that we will be loved and be required to love. Love and marriage are inextricably interwoven. Couples who express love frequently report more satisfaction than those couples who express it infrequently. Nearly everyone accepts this idea; yet many still fail to express love to their partners or to improve how they do it.

Ensuring that those I love know I love them is vitally important to me. It gives me a great deal of peace and satisfaction when I know that my wife truly understands how much I love her. This requires that I express my love for her in many different and new ways. Any couple can improve the quality of their marriage by making sure that both know love is still there and still strong.

Discovering New Rewards

Our involvement with one another increases according to the amount of security and safety we feel with each other. As our lives continue together, this increased involvement is fertile ground for a continuous discovery of what makes us happy. Many people focus so much attention on their problems and conflicts that they fail to think about, let alone emphasize, what they find of value. Even though we all give lip service to the idea that marriages should be happy, many of us refuse to look for the positive aspects of marriage and to experiment in order to increase the number of things we find rewarding.

One husband reported, that for many years, his wife had invited him to go for walks in the evening. Since he saw no practical purpose in doing this, he always refused, saying that he had other important things to do. One day, with nothing to do, he relented. He walked with his wife down their street and out into a wooded area near their home. As they walked they began to talk, and their conversation continued through the paths in the nearby park. Because she had taken this route on other occasions, she could point out to him several little places of beauty. He felt himself relax and began to appreciate the companionship and his wife's view of nature. It took them approximately thirty-five minutes. Arriving home, they both felt closer, and he felt relieved of much of the pressure he had brought home from his day's work. He said, "I never thought I would stop doing some business in order to go for a walk with my wife, but I found it to be one of the most rewarding things we have ever done together. I look forward to those walks and have even taken a day or two off each year just so we could walk alone in the park and in the nearby mountains."

This man's experience shows how easy it is to discover new rewards. Though we may not find walking together as rewarding as this couple did, we can uncover areas that appeal especially to us. Unfortunately, such areas in marriage will remain unknown if we fail to look for them. Discovering new rewards is a fairly simple thing to do, and increasing the number of rewarding events we share will improve the quality of our married life.

Using Differences

We often think that we argue because we are different from each other, and so conclude that our differences cause us problems. We may fail to understand that our differences and their resolution spark our growth. To be happy we must learn to use our differences to strengthen our marriage.

This is not as difficult as we often think. We have only to learn patience and skill in making adjustments. The results will be two-fold: we will no longer argue about differences, and we will be more confident in our abilities to face what may yet come. Differences do not mean disloyalty. They simply suggest an opportunity for us to grow.

Reducing Anger

Most anger is not useful, but many people believe it is all right to express it. In fact, many married people do better at learning new ways to express their anger than they do learning new ways to express love. Learning ways to reduce the amount of time we spend feeling angry can increase our ability to share.

Fear of becoming angry is also a common reason for not sharing. It seems better to many to avoid talking or participating with their spouses, at least temporarily, so that anger will not erupt. Couples may end up not sharing in money management or in rearing their children, for example, simply to avoid anger. Unfortunately, this strategy diminishes happiness. More importantly, avoidance of anger perpetuates the problem. Any problem that could be resolved at one stage simply takes on added dimensions when it is left unsolved to continue to plague the marriage.

Viewing anger reduction as an important sharing skill, we can work to associate with one another without "blowing up" or "getting out of sorts." Much of anger reduction can be a matter of conscious control, just deciding not to get angry, to talk calmly instead. Frequently, however, we must understand what causes anger in order to decrease it. Then, when we learn ways to resolve those causes, we will have increased our ability to share the marriage in happiness.

Accepting with Hope

I have often wondered why some couples fail to realize that the anger and intense frustration they feel would not exist if there were not a great deal of love between husband and wife. We do not usually get angry at people for whom we feel indifference. More often we become angry at the ones we care about, or from whom we expect things, and with whom we fail. It is no surprise that marriage partners produce such intensity of feeling in each other. We could realize that the very anger we feel toward our partners is an indication of the amount of hope we should have for the continuation of the marriage relationship. The challenge is learning how to turn this hurt into happiness.

One way of doing this is to learn how to express acceptance and hope. Most of the time, this means to simply stop trying to make something of our partners that they are not and to recognize the value of what is there. In other words, we learn to acknowledge exactly what we are and what our companions are and to remove from our thoughts and conversation the notion that they should be or should not be something else. Acceptance of what is, combined with hope for improvement in the relationship, precedes any change. It is an important sharing skill.

If we add this skill to those for reducing anger, using differences, discovering new rewards, making love last, receiving love, showing commitment, and talking and listening, we can increase the emotional value of the shared marital experience. This will allow a marriage to grow into a relationship that provides two people with life's greatest satisfactions. Throughout the rest of the book, I will describe these sharing skills and apply them to the six general areas of sharing: sexual relationship, money and resources, child care, social activities, religious activities, and relatives.
