A. Lynn Scoresby, Foundations for a Happier Marriage ( 1986)

2

Talking and Listening

Books about marriage seldom fail to include a section about communication. This is because communication is so basic and such an important part of interpersonal satisfaction. The amount of information that couples are able to transmit between themselves is related to how happy and satisfied they are with their relationship.

Too often we form ideas about marriage that are based on preconceived images we have of typical personality traits: a dominant husband and submissive wife, or a controlling wife with hen-pecked husband, for instance. These images distract us from the more important tasks of seeing each person on his or her own merits and fostering good communication.

In childhood, a person begins to learn a talking style. Over a long period of time, this style develops to include the amount of talking a person feels comfortable about doing, the topics a person is informed about, and the situations in which a person will or will not talk. By adulthood, this style is quite stable and tends to resist much change.

A graduate student I supervised based his dissertation research on this idea. He found several married couples who were willing to participate in his study and gave them a test that measured the satisfaction they found in their family. He then sent each couple a set of cards with personal and interpersonal discussion topics written on them. The couples agreed to discuss one topic a day. At the conclusion of his study six weeks later, the student retested the participants to see if their satisfaction had increased or decreased. Those—both husbands and wives—who had discussed more of the topics reported the greatest increase in satisfaction.

Fortunately, marriage communication does not depend solely on talking. Satisfying communication is created not only when two people can disclose personal information, such as a husband's telling of his thoughts and feelings, but also when they can pay attention to events that occur between them.

Listening is also a learned trait. A listening style can be changed more easily than a talking style, however. Listening depends on one's willingness to patiently gather information while encouraging the speaker to continue talking. One could rightly expect that as listening skills improve, talking tends to become more accurate.

Failure to Communicate Accurately

The actual amount of talking and listening varies from marriage to marriage, but each couple, to be happy, has to find a suitable amount for them. Otherwise, one or both spouses experience increased confusion. When a couple spend little time in talking or listening, they feel greater anxiety because the likelihood for misinterpretation and doubt increases. For instance, a woman whose husband doesn't talk to her very often may wonder if he likes her. Consequently, when couples fail to share enough ideas and thoughts with each other or fail to share accurately, they increase the possibility that their anxiety will distort what they perceive about their marriages.

Such conclusions stem from the notion that a desire to talk is a form of expressing attraction. Conversely, failing to talk or to listen to someone who wants to talk is viewed as rejection or lack of consideration. Many couples have been able to improve their marriages by simply having two or three "marriage conferences" a week. These conferences are designed to last for thirty minutes, during which time each person is to ask the other a total of five questions, listening to the answers without interruption. Oftentimes a couple should establish the rule that the person who asks the questions cannot agree or disagree with any responses he hears—the listener can only state whether a message is understood. It is surprising how much good two or three half-hour marriage conferences will do for a couple who have previously avoided talking with each other.

Anyone who has been married will recognize that when feelings have been hurt, a common reaction is to refuse to discuss the situation. This refusal begins a self-enclosed cycle that can last a whole lifetime. Any frequently disputed subject can become associated with volatile emotions, and the same emotions will tend to reappear whenever the subject comes up again. A couple may then decide to not discuss the topic so as to avoid arguments, even though the failure to communicate well is what caused their unhappiness in the first place. Eventually, one person's thoughts and feelings are so distorted by inaccurate sending and poor listening that a sender cannot get an accurate message to the receiver. A couple in this situation have created a lasting problem.

When we are emotionally aroused, we usually distort what we say, and we do not understand clearly. We may speak forcibly or lose our sense of tact and consideration. We may become defensive, concentrating on warding off words rather than receiving them. We may verbally attack the other. Then, because we cannot solve the problem we argue about, we adopt a compensating strategy of separating ourselves, which suspends the fight but does not bring complete peace of mind. It is unfortunate that we allow these conditions to be created at all. Such a situation, however, is usually not unsolvable, and a couple who are willing to learn and rehearse certain skills can change their relationship into one of accurate talking and clear understanding.

What to Talk About

All of the shared situations in marriage involve expectations about how people should act. These expectations are formed from observations, ideas, and other information accumulated as we grow from childhood to maturity. Here is a simple example: If a husband's parents had a clear separation between "men's work" and "women's work," the husband might enter marriage expecting the relationship to conform to his experience. His justification for not involving himself in some domestic duties would be that they were not his work, but his wife's. This example, although simple, is still part of many marriages, even in this day of "raised consciousness," even when wives work outside the home. Many working women, knowing they work the same hours and carry the same load as their husbands, expect their husbands to share more domestic responsibility. Yet there is evidence that wives who work outside the home are still left, because of long-standing cultural expectations, with a preponderance of the domestic duties.

There are many other common marital expectations. In regard to a sexual relationship, most people in North American society come into marriage expecting that sex is something a male does to and for his wife and that the wife should make herself available. Women generally expect men to find them attractive and sexually desirable; men are often expected to initiate encounters.

I am not suggesting that these expectations are morally or psychologically correct. I am only proposing that these are commonly held expectations. In any case, one of the most important things to be talked about in any shared situation is what the husband expects of his wife and what the wife expects of her husband.

When a husband and wife can tell what they want from each other, they can see more clearly and begin to make the necessary adjustments in their behavior or their expectations. I know of a woman who complained that her husband was a crude and clumsy lover. After hearing a little about his behavior, I had to agree, but I inquired about her response to him. She said, "I am always so turned off that I can barely stay in the same room with him." I wondered aloud whether he had been able to get any information about what she wanted. "We never talk about it," she said. I pointed out that a male is in a position of risk because he is often the initiator, and unless she communicated in some way what she preferred, he might feel so incompetent that he would make more, not fewer, mistakes. We discussed some possibilities for more open communication, but she refused, saying that it was improper for a woman to be openly suggestive about what she wanted. We talked about this for a while in an attempt to alleviate her guilty feelings. She finally agreed to try two or three of the more subtle suggestions I proposed. They were so subtle that I was afraid a person would need ESP to discern them. Her husband evidently had enough awareness, though, for when I saw her again, she said he had become a better lover. She shyly revealed that they might even talk about it one day.

Talking about what we expect from our spouses frees us from only some marriage problems. Unfortunately many of us marry with false expectations, one of the most common being the notion that our spouses are, and should be, the cause of our happiness. We therefore blame our partners unjustly for any unhappiness and feel perfectly justified in criticizing, blaming, or suggesting improvements. This whole notion, if not corrected, can cause a miserable life. When a wife, for example, depends on her husband for happiness, her husband will often conclude that he is being controlled and will begin to resist her attempts. This unleashes a whole cycle of strategies to improve the partner and counterstrategies to resist improving.

For instance, men will often try to communicate that they want more frequent and more passionate sexual responses from their wives. This message can be sent in hints—tales of other women's uninhibited desires for their husbands, gifts of suggestive lingerie, performance of favors (with strings attached)—or even in blatant demands for certain behavior. On the other hand, women will often want more emotional intimacy and warmth than their husbands ordinarily offer. A wife may think, with some justification, that she cannot be more passionate unless she first has intimacy. A husband may want to achieve intimacy through sex. The resulting strategies, resistance, and counter-strategies can become so elaborate as to be humorous. One man realized that the sparring had gone too far when the simple act of helping his wife set the table for dinner made her suspect he was trying to obligate her. "Oh, no, you don't!" she defiantly announced. "I know what you're after, and it won't work." This whole situation can be averted when couples talk about "what I want to be" in addition to "what I want from you."

As mature persons, we have gradually developed a set of ideas or principles about how we want to live regardless of how we are treated by someone else. In my case, being able to express my affection and warmth to my wife is very important. I learned that no matter how well my wife treated me, I could not be fully content or satisfied until I had acted consistently with "what I wanted to be." To create clear and accurate communication, both husband and wife need to formulate clear sets of ideas about their preferred way of acting and to communicate those to one another. This means that each must learn about "what I want to be" in as many shared marital situations as possible.

Most unhappy people are so involved in their marital struggle that they fail to recognize what they truly want for themselves and that they are responsible for their own happiness. When confronted with these ideas, most people see how reasonable they are. Some, at first, think the ideas seem selfish, but they are selfish only if we are exploiting our partner. A man I know sent his wife some flowers. For the rest of the day he felt uplifted, knowing that on the following day his wife would receive something to make her happy. It occurred to him that his feelings were improved even before his wife knew about the flowers. After she received them and said, "Thank you for the flowers you sent," he responded, "The flowers are for you, but the sending of them is for me." This man correctly understood that a good portion of his happiness was created by his own actions and not by how his wife treated him.

This sharing skill—talking about what we want from our partners and what we prefer for ourselves, and then listening for the same from our partners—can be easily applied to a sexual relationship. Both husband and wife can talk about a range of topics that may include an actual sexual encounter, the relationship of physical contact and affection, the conditions in which sexual activity best takes place, and the results each wants from participation in giving and receiving. This all sounds good, but can it work when conflict about sex has been long-standing? Yes. Unless there are physical problems that contribute to the difficulty, the solution to a troubled sexual relationship must be found in communicating and in making adjustments. Here, as with other marital problems, the first two steps will always be to do what is necessary to understand what each wants from the other and what each one wants to be.

How to Talk—How to Listen

Someone once said to me that more than ten thousand different messages can be transmitted between two conversing human beings in a five-minute span. I thought this number was excessive until I made a point of watching couples engage in fairly intense conversations. I observed messages such as voice tone, eye blinks, rate of talking, body posture, vocal hesitations, and word selection. I knew then that ten thousand was probably too conservative an estimate. I point this out to emphasize that in any attempt at communication, a good deal more information is sent than anyone will ever be able to comprehend. The best listeners are people who can get as much information as possible, paying attention to facial expressions, body movement, intensity of feelings, and who try to comprehend the speaker's motives. The best talkers are those whose speech and other messages are consistent and accurate in portraying the talker's intention. And, as I have said before, talking tends to become more accurate as listening skills improve.

When a husband and wife are unhappy, both tend to be suspicious and wary of one another. Without realizing it, they tend, in their listening and perceiving, to identify the words and actions they think will hurt them most. It is like a general who decides to spend his time on the beach watching for incoming bombers because his troops have been previously bombed by the enemy, and he wants to minimize further damage. Were we seeking to protect ourselves from pain, this might seem like an appropriate solution, but actually it only perpetuates the problem by narrowing the range of attention to just those potentially hurtful acts.

A list of ineffective listening styles illustrates the focus fear and suspicion create:

Nonattending. The person ignores messages he doesn't want to discuss. Example: Speaker—"Do you think the kids watch too much television?" Listener—"There's nothing wrong with watching sports."

Computing. The person notices the logical facts of messages and ignores the underlying feelings and purpose of the speaker. Example: Speaker (wife who hopes for support and warmth)—"I've had it! I'm so tired of the children I can't stand it!" Listener (husband)—"Every woman with five children would rather do something else."

Defending. A person assumes that any statement made is an attack from which he must defend himself. Example: Speaker (wife)—"We ought to talk about how we're spending our money." Listener (husband)—"You waste just as much as I do, so don't blame me."

History giver. A person creates security by responding with historical facts, removing the focus from the present conversation. Example: Speaker (wife)—"I would like to have another baby." Speaker (husband)—"You say that every time you see someone with a new baby."

Evidence user. A person fears being wrong, so he supports each response with evidence. Example: Speaker—"I want to go out at least once a week." Listener—"No one goes out that often. Besides, what would we do without enough money to have fun?"

The first step in listening correctly is to expand the amount of information we receive. This means to use more inquiries that begin with such phrases as "I wonder if you could tell me . . . ," "I'm interested in knowing . . . ," or "I would appreciate it if you could explain to me. . . ." If we use these and then just ask more questions for general information, avoiding sensitive areas, we can lengthen the time between our negative reactions and reduce the emotional intensity of any conversation.

That is easy to explain why. When listeners are fearful, not only do they focus just on what they are willing to pay attention to, but they also attempt, at the first sound of something that seems harmful, to protect themselves by shutting off the speaker's comments. The speaker typically interprets this not as a self-protective device but as an attack, and responds defensively. A listener's responsibility is to forestall development of this self-protective and fearful cycle by responding in a noncommittal way, but with attention to and interest in what the speaker has to say. This first step promotes a safe environment for the speaker and reduces tension.

The second step in listening is based on the idea that any message sent is actually three messages: (1) the meaning of the words spoken, (2) the reactions the sender wants from the listener, and (3) the underlying feelings associated with the message. All communication occurs at these three levels simultaneously. A good listener will be able to interpret all three and identify which is the most important to the sender at the time.

In the happiest marital relationships, couples simply respond first with an understanding of the literal meaning of the words. They then use this interpretation to understand what they should do and how the speaker feels. However, during conflict, miscommunication can occur at any or all three levels. Couples may misinterpret the meaning of the words, they may fail to understand what actions are desired, and they may be insensitive to or inaccurately perceive how the speaker feels.

If the meaning of the words is unclear, the listener can concentrate instead on the third message—understanding the underlying feelings. Most people think that their own feelings are more important than anyone else's and appreciate any effort by others to understand their feelings. Periodically asking if the speaker is feeling unhappy, lonely, frustrated (or some other emotion) can reduce the speaker's anxieties and allow him to focus better on what he is saying.

Table 2 Three Messages

Suppose a couple has been arguing over some aspect of their sexual relationship—for example, the husband's tendency to initiate sexual relations without regard for the emotional context in which they occur. Perhaps the stress or frustration in his own life has raised the need for a strong emotional response from his wife. From her perspective, she may feel that they have been together a great deal but that there has been little affection expressed between them. She may see herself simply as the person who must give her husband an emotional release. This, in her mind, places her in a highly unfavorable situation.

Before this situation can be resolved, the husband must feel that his wife understands the emotional background for his request for sexual involvement and the emotional outcome he is seeking. Furthermore, the husband must be able to understand the emotions of his wife, who believes that some of her emotional needs are being neglected and perhaps even abused because he seems insensitive to them. In my experience, no successful solution is ever found unless the two can first understand the emotions involved. The solution depends on the couple's ability to say that they can feel and understand each other's emotions. Then they can usually make the modest adjustments that allow them to answer their partner's emotional needs.

The third step in listening stems from the position a listener is in. If a speaker has sent a message and a listener has received it, the listener must decide on a response. This response can greatly increase the effectiveness of the communication. Simple statements such as "I appreciate knowing that," or "I'm really glad you've told me," or "It's nice to know how you're feeling about this matter" are effective ways of using praise as a response to the speaker's statement. Much, of course, has been written about the use of positive responses, but the simple truth remains that there is seldom enough praise in any marriage relationship, and its importance to happiness cannot be overestimated.

Some people may wonder how they could think of anything nice to say when they're angry at their spouses. I would suggest that there never is a time when something in their spouse cannot evoke in them a positive response. The listener simply has to look for it. Taking the time to look is a small price to pay for marital happiness.

I saw the dramatic effects of this one day when a wife, quite justifiably, vented her anger at her husband. Her tirade went on for two or three minutes while he sat listening, not reacting to anything she said. Her statements had been fairly angry, even cruel. Instead of responding similarly, he smiled a bit and said, "Although I don't agree with everything you've said, I want you to know I really appreciate what you've said, and I know you wouldn't have said it unless you cared about our marriage." His statement took the wind out of her sails, and diminished her anger. She then acknowledged that her frustrations had been somewhat exaggerated but were still basically as she had expressed them. He acknowledged the need for some adjustment on his part, and a resolution was made within a few minutes. This problem had been building in pressure for some weeks, but they resolved it easily. A person with lesser confidence would have responded to anger with anger, and the couple would have been further from a solution.

Talking and Listening: How to Begin

We can begin to develop the basic sharing skills of talking and listening by following a simple outline. This outline presents a sequence that is useful in sharing an experience without argument.

All human beings benefit from the knowledge that someone understands them. This is especially true in an emotionally laden relationship like marriage. A sensitive listener who can pay attention to the emotional aspects of a message does much to help the speaker show kindness and speak clearly.

Any couple who wants a more productive marriage can begin by improving the sharing skills of talking and listening. All they need is a willingness to allow both to participate. It is wise, I believe, to view learning to talk and to listen as learning to dance. Talking and listening is the artful dance of communication. It is an ebb and a flow, a giving and a receiving, a speaking and an understanding that eventually create a bond of trust, a firm foundation for marital happiness.
