A. Lynn Scoresby, Foundations for a Happier Marriage ( 1986)

3

Showing Commitment

People in love are often surprised at the intensity of their feelings. Many fear this intensity and feel susceptible to the other person's influence. Yet, as couples marry and share conversation, sexual intimacy, childbirth, and financial problems, a deep bond is forming that commits each to the other. This bonding is natural and unavoidable, and as long as both are committed to the relationship, it will be positive and satisfying. However, if one or both spouses distance themselves from each other, conflict and alienation will result. A bond will still be created, but it will be weak, and the commitment will take a negative form.

Negative commitment can be identified quite easily. Usually, expressions of affection are absent or infrequent. Rather than live in a climate of total indifference, either party will occasionally say or do something that strikes a note of painful response in the other. The resulting reaction, even though negative, is an indication that one can still influence or affect the other. This achieves a perverse form of satisfaction.

Negative commitment can sometimes affect physical well-being. Many lonely and uncared-for wives and husbands have developed symptoms of physical illness, the most common being headaches, depression, back pain, or a general flu-like malaise. In many cases the stress and pain of noninvolvement results in actual physical disability. The physical illness causes the companion to pay attention.

An example of this can be found in the marriage of one busy professional. His work appeared to require excessive amounts of his time. Since he held a position of importance in his company, he had a telephone pager attached to his belt so that he could respond at any time. The result, of course, was that his wife felt neglected and saw herself as unimportant to him. She attempted to compensate by developing activities of her own. She joined some civic groups, participated in her church activities, and devoted increased amounts of time to her children. Then she strained her back quite severely in a minor automobile accident.

Since she was now required to rest in bed, her husband rearranged his work schedule so that he could attend to her at home and take care of their children. The attention she received and the commitment she felt from him made her much happier than she had been before. As time passed, she was unable to recover as rapidly as her physician expected. She also had relapses for no apparent reason. Finally her physician told her and her husband that there was no longer any medical basis for her back problem. She insisted that the physician must be mistaken and went to another clinic. They also found no physical problem, but they gave her some medication anyway.

When her husband complained that his work was suffering, she argued that some problem must still exist or she would not have to take the medication. This pattern continued for many years. She visited numerous clinics, but in each case she was unable to resolve her back problem completely. I wonder what would have happened to these two people had they been willing and able to organize their lives to evidence a strong and positive commitment without one of them feeling the need to be disabled.

Perhaps the most negative forms of commitment are the use of threats and the tactic of withdrawal from the relationship. Quite frequently, during an argument, one or both partners will threaten to leave the marriage. Although the couple will not follow through on these threats at first, eventually one spouse will test the commitment of the other by threatening to withdraw immediately. This approach assumes that, if one threatens and acts as if he will leave, the other will protest and say something like "No, please don't go! I can't stand being away from you." Such threats, however, are more often met by angry rejection, so that, instead of the desired result of increased commitment, the actual result is separation of some kind. Many divorces have occurred simply because, having threatened to separate, one person feels compelled to carry out the threats to avoid giving in or losing face or pride.

The most common form of negative commitment is found in the use of power. One or both spouses, fearing the other is not committed, can demand evidence of commitment. One woman I know used love tests. When feeling neglected, she would ask her husband to do a few things for her. On one occasion she asked him to change the blown-out light in the hallway. He was busy, and assuming that it was a minor chore, he neglected to do it for three or four days. At the end of that time she erupted, announcing angrily that he certainly must not love her very much—otherwise he would not have ignored her request. There were many other, more creative tests of love she gave him. She often insisted that a loving husband would help with the dishes or other housework. A loving husband, she said, was willing to spend time with his wife in activities outside the home. Many of her love tests were conducted in such secrecy that her husband was not aware of them. If she told him, how could they be a true test of his commitment? As a result, he failed most of them. When he failed a love test, she would write a note suggesting that a loving and committed husband would sacrifice his own life in one way or another to satisfy his wife. She would probably not have engaged in love tests had she been more secure and, more importantly, had her husband shown his commitment more openly.

All of the foregoing are ways in which couples show negative commitment. Insecurity, the fear of one or both spouses that they are not loved—these result in acts of negative commitment. Ironically, it would take considerably less energy to simply show positive commitment. Many people live entire lives seeking to obtain commitment through negative means, not realizing that their time is being filled with anxiety instead of affection. No couple can fill their marriage with negative acts and hope to achieve the marriage relationship they desire.

Commitment And Freedom

The first step in developing skill in positive commitment is to recognize that every person wants a certain amount of freedom along with companionship. Freedom here means the opportunity to choose and act on one's choice. Restricting a spouse's freedom will curtail the growth of commitment, as the following list of ways to diminish freedom illustrates:

Interruptions. A person who interrupts demonstrates disregard for another person's words and opinion. Frequent interruptions form the impression that the interrupted person's viewpoint is not reliable.

Accusations and blame. Accusations focus on negative behavior and invite defensiveness. Fear of being wrong or of losing the argument restricts one's sense of freedom. Blame places the responsibility on another's shoulders and involves a refusal to accept responsibility for one's own actions.

Disregard. When a person disregards another, keeping his thoughts and decisions to himself, he creates suspicion and allows for misinterpretation.

Explosive anger. Anger intimidates; it creates fear and dependence. Since anger attempts to overpower the person to whom it's directed, spouses should pay attention to their angry partners with caution.

Overconcern. When a partner worries excessively about the other, he asks questions or expects certain behavior, both of which apply pressure.

Overconformity. Some people develop an excessive obligation to conform to customs and rules. This appears in perfectionism, guilt, and dependence on some form of authority.

Immaturity. A person shows immaturity when he consistently resists proper authority or custom, is often indecisive, and frequently acts impatient. Since these characteristics cannot be ignored, immaturity forces a person to respond.

These seven kinds of behavior all limit freedom in some way by attempting to control the spouse's behavior and limiting one's own actions. They also weaken the bonds in marriage and are forms of negative commitment. Interestingly, the only way we can find out if our partners are truly committed is by allowing them freedom. If a person is free, without constraint, then any acts of commitment he does are truly as they appear. In contrast, the same acts done under some form of pressure are probably the result of acquiescence than of commitment. In order for true commitment to be expressed and to grow, freedom must exist within the marriage.

Freedom in marriage can be enhanced in two important ways. First is to restrict the number of limiting actions, particularly those on the preceding list. Second is to willingly increase one's acts of commitment without expecting any response from the other. One person acting in a constructive way, on a sustained basis, can alone increase the amount of freedom because the marriage benefits from greater stability and calm.

When we consistently act according to our own choice, we will learn that the responsibility for our behavior lies within ourselves and that our behavior does not have to be determined by pressure from another. Of course, we can all think of times when we have tried to be nice to someone who did not reciprocate. Some of us may have concluded that in marriage one person cannot improve the situation if the other is not willing to participate. This is true, I believe, in some instances. Much more often, however, one person's sustained acts of love and commitment will have enormous power, regardless of the spouse's response.

If one person has treated a marriage partner considerately for a period of time and has experienced little improvement, setting up prearranged reciprocal bargains can be helpful. For example, if a wife wants her husband to spend more time with her, the husband could ask the wife for a reciprocal response—something he wants from her. Positive "bargains" like these are not only appropriate but exceptionally useful in helping each spouse feel more committed to the other. All a couple need to do is identify what each wants from the other and agree about exchanging fairly and equally. I will discuss this process later.

Commitment And Sacrifice

Everyone fails to perform perfectly at one time or another. If a marriage is to be stable, one partner's failure will elicit understanding support from the other. Over a lifetime both spouses will be involved in giving support during failure or need, but oftentimes there is only one who is giving unselfishly. Such a person is sacrificing something of himself, an important act of commitment.

Sacrifice may be best understood in the life of Jesus Christ. This one person has engendered more commitment from people than anyone else. What is the cause of this extraordinary degree of commitment? I believe it is because he embodies the principle of and devoted his life to sacrifice, especially to a sacrifice that would allow us to obtain eternal life. He chose to act and perform, without coercion and at great cost to himself, a sacrifice not only of his life but of all his energy, time, and resources, and demanded no guaranteed reward for his sacrifice. He simply offered it to everyone but allowed each person freedom to choose whether he would use it. The combination of these conditions—acting without coercion, sacrificing self without a guaranteed reward—impels us to question in order to understand, to learn in order to be faithful, and to commit in order to express gratitude. These same conditions can be applied in the lives of married people with results that may not be as universal but are still as dramatic.

I have known a married couple who, for the greater part of their twenty-year marriage, have lived without much expression of affection or commitment. Both worked hard on their respective duties in marriage, but neither was happy. Because of their religious values, divorce did not appear to be a suitable solution to their unhappiness. The alternative, remaining in such a sterile, unhappy marriage, finally overtook them, and they sought ways to resolve their discord. Neither had experienced much of the positive side of life in their childhood. Both tended to be critical, emotionally distant, and unable to express much love. For example, on birthdays one person mould remember the birthday and give the other a gift, but the other would typically fail to acknowledge the gift, and then an argument would ensue. Although they had had many discussions about their problems, neither seemed willing to change.

Finally, more out of desperation than anything else, the woman decided that she would be willing to begin sacrificing for her marriage. She decided that she would try to express fondness and care for her husband by traditional acts of commitment—giving gifts, paying compliments, and serving in one way or another. Eventually she attempted more elaborate acts of commitment—inviting her husband to spend a weekend with her in a hotel, for instance. During the weeks that followed she occasionally became very discouraged. Nothing she did seemed to affect her husband's behavior, and she often wept lonely, hopeless, and bitter tears. When she told me about her efforts, I explained that, if she chose to persist, she must do so without expecting her husband to change. She responded, "Then what good is it to do what I'm doing?" I asked her if she felt better about herself. Her response was that she did. She said that she had "come alive" and felt happier about herself than she had for many years. I then said, "You can see at least one benefit from acting in a committed fashion. Your husband has lived the way he has lived for many years, and you would not expect him to undergo a dramatic change simply from a few weeks of your positive example. You must realize that your husband is not one who knows how to act committed and that he's choosing not to learn. He simply does not know how to express himself as a committed man to a woman."

She was not content to let my statements go unsupported and asked for evidence. I pointed to his early background and to his actions in the marriage and asked her if she had ever known him to act in a loving way on a sustained basis with her. She thought for a moment and replied that he gave her some additional money when asked. He had never been able to demonstrate, except sporadically, acts of love and care for her.

Their situation continued as it was for some time, with some ups and downs. Finally, when she gained enough strength and learned to sacrifice without expecting any response of commitment from her husband, she began to feel calmer and happier about her marriage. Ironically, that was the time her husband confessed that he recognized his ineptness as a husband and, although he had much to learn, began a process of showing his commitment to her more openly. I do not mean to suggest that this couple changed dramatically and went, within a matter of days or weeks, from unhappiness to sheer happiness. They have, even now, much more progress to make, but they have begun to see the rewards already: they argue less frequently, they know fewer painful experiences, and when negative interaction happens, it does not last as long as before.

This improvement resulted from the consistency of one partner. Since the wife applied no pressure to act in a prescribed way, the husband could choose to show or to not show commitment. Further, she expected no guarantee that their life would be different. Her sacrifice and commitment and the atmosphere of freedom altered their lives significantly for the better.

I am not suggesting that this will always be the result. But I am proposing that when one partner does not do his or her part, the other must face a decision: to get angry and frustrated or to offer a loving sacrifice. When we are mature enough to choose sacrifice, we are unmistakably demonstrating our commitment to our marriage.

Commitment and Parents

Most of us find that we marry a family as well as a spouse. We are fortunate if the relationship with parents is harmonious, less so if the relationship is difficult. Sometimes one or both spouses cannot make the emotional separation from parents. At times the parents cannot let go, intruding on the married couple through frequent visits, too much advice or too much financial help, or too much involvement in marital problems. It can be worse if married children are tied to a family business.

Another common problem with parents stems from one spouse speaking negatively about the other to the parents and then telling the offended spouse the parental reaction. Personality differences can also cause awkwardness between in-laws and spouses. Sometimes the couple and their in-laws will avoid each other, but this too may lead to even more difficulty.

The most common cause of in-law problems, however, is a failure to recognize that, because of marriage, parents and children both are facing new ways of doing things. A son- or daughter-in-law is faced with the spouse's family style and traditions. Instead of just one marriage relationship to organize, they must find a place for relationships with two other families—a complex task that some fail to master.

In-law relationships can be organized happily if we use the skills of sharing. This means, ideally, that before negative conditions arise, we begin to create a positive bond. The table on the following page shows the kinds of situations a couple may face with their in-laws and suggests a few steps to improve relationships between them.

The process of commitment sometimes seems to be juggled between devotion to our marriage and time, attention, and emotional involvement with our parents. Generally it is wise to emphasize marital commitment before and during any contact with parents. Doing this for a while will eventually assure our spouses of our priorities and help them be pleased about in-law relationships.

One couple went to the same high school and grew up a few miles from each other. After marriage they attended a university in a neighboring state. When they visited their home town they received invitations from both sets of parents and felt obligated to spend equal time at each place. This led to two Thanksgiving dinners, two Christmas celebrations, and to complex scheduling. The frustration created arguments between them, and they argued nearly every time they visited their parents. On one occasion as they were traveling toward their parents' homes, they discussed the problem and found that both had similar feelings: they wanted to please their parents and felt guilty if they failed. They decided to do what they themselves wanted to do, sometimes being together in one home and sometimes separating. They both had to tell their respective parents "no" on occasion, but their visits became much more pleasant.

Table 3 In-laws and Commitment

Situation Improvement

Your spouse has loving Easiest situation to share. Improve good experiences relationships with his or by communicating positive things about your her parents. in-laws to your spouse and about your spouse to your in-laws. Participate in some important traditional family her parents activities. Your spouse has Make separation complete by emphasizing your difficulty relating to his marriage, screening out conflict with in-laws. The or her parents solution is to mutually agree on a style of relating to (or avoiding) your in-laws. Show support of the spouse to the parents, but don't be active in conflict. Your spouse has Use the most appropriate strategy: relatives who intrude and (1) Confront the issue openly. The spouse try to control your family. who is the child must do this. (2) Modify behavior where necessary. A couple may be inadvertently allowing parental involvement through their indecisiveness or disorganization. (3) Avoid complaining to your spouse or criticizing his or her family. Work out ways to reduce communication with in-laws except on your terms. Your spouse keeps too Since this prevents marital sharing, calmly discuss close an emotional bond the situation and ask for adjustments. Don't talk to with his or her parents your in-laws about your marriage. If no change occurs, seek professional help as quickly as possible. This kind of problem can persist for a long time. You have difficulty Use the most appropriate strategy: relating to your in-laws (1) Agree to disagree, and allow your spouse to have a good relationship with his or her parents, even if you don't participate. (2) Join in short-term family activities to get to know each other better. Some problems are from poor communication. (3) Encourage your spouse to give positive feedback about you to your in-laws.

This example illustrates how every marriage must be protected by the two people in it. Even though their parents were being considerate and were not trying to exert control, the emotional ties both felt to their parents led to too much effort to please them and to too little concern for their own relationship. Their recommitment to their union resolved the problem, but it required that they both communicate to their parents where their true loyalties lay. Having done this, they were happier.

Most of us can have good marriages and maintain good relationships with our parents and in-laws. It requires a balance between priority to the marriage and regard for our relatives. When this condition is created, marriage is shared positively, and our circle of happiness is enlarged.
