A. Lynn Scoresby, Foundations for a Happier Marriage ( 1986)

4

Receiving Love

Love and marriage have been tied so closely together in song and literature that we usually cannot think of one without the other. Whatever love comes to mean as we mature, we assume that marriage is going to provide it. For some of us, however, these expectations are not met. Often, this is not because marriage itself could not provide a loving environment, but because married individuals find some way to diminish love. The most common reason for the diminishment of love in marriage is that one or both spouses feel insecure and fail to admit or accept the love in their marriage as authentic. In other words, those who cannot find love in their marriages may accuse their partners of not loving them but instead are often merely incapable of recognizing love when they see it or of accepting it when it is given. Those same people may fear expressing their own love to their partners because they do not wish to be obligated, to be vulnerable to someone who might not love in return. All who cannot receive love, who fail to notice it, or who refuse to accept its obligations will diminish it.

So, while most people want love, many fear it as well, or at least find their desire to be loved accompanied by so much anxiety that they cannot calmly and securely receive love. For some reason, believing that we are loved requires that we rely on someone else's ability to express it to us. This can be terrifying to some people. Fear of such vulnerability can be great enough to cause these people to deny love.

The causes of this fear stem from previous social experiences, usually ones that occurred during childhood and that involved suffering. A woman I know was reared in a family where abuse was common. Neither of her parents was very good at loving. She told me of her father's explosive temper. She said she never knew when he would erupt into anger and vent his hostility on her. Furthermore, her father was given to periods of depression often lasting for several days. During such periods he withdrew emotionally from his wife and children. Even in the best of times, he was not given to much demonstration of affection or warmth. He frequently argued with his children, and as they matured he became increasingly sarcastic and bitter in his arguments. His wife was a quiet, compliant person, cowed by his explosiveness. She failed to establish a bond of warmth with this daughter, who grew up believing that her mother did not love her.

As a child, my friend adapted to these circumstances by using her intellect: she developed a strong sense of competition characterized by zealous use of logic. Her preoccupation with rational thought excluded intuition or reliance on emotion. Her intense motivation to achieve hid her mistrust of other people, She could receive praise for her achievements and her excellent organizational ability. In fact, later she became known as a capable and efficient woman who occupied many positions of leadership in church and community. She could not receive affection, though. When her husband said or did anything loving, she was unresponsive, often speechless. In fact, she would fly in the face of the obvious and frequently conjure up from her husband's mistakes evidence that he didn't care about her.

When I met him I immediately saw his frustration. He was a kind and demonstrative man who was truly in love with his wife. She was an attractive, talented woman. Although she had an intellectual appreciation for the need to be loving and could be superficially affectionate, she could not easily receive the affection of others, nor would she allow herself to feel any strong feelings toward them. Her fear had created an emotional desert in her. It was painful to watch how she would refuse to face the possibility that her husband's love was genuine. Without realizing why, she would magnify his small foibles into faults, causing conflict that would distance herself from her husband's affection. Many times she accused him of neglect, only to retreat from her position when confronted with his version of the facts.

On some level, of course, this woman wanted a loving marriage. It was obvious from her choice of a mate. She also wanted to be able to express love openly and freely to her husband and children. However, all attempts she made to improve her ability to accept and express love increased her apprehension. This resulted in a frustrating cycle—she would invest small amounts of love, only to follow them with increased periods of distance and isolation.

I wish this woman's experience were uncommon. Unfortunately, it is not. Many people seek marriage in order to find the love that eluded them as children, failing to realize that inexperience is a poor teacher. We cannot express or receive what we have had no chance to feel and know. Since a successful marriage requires higher levels of giving and receiving love than any other relationship, these people, naive and unprepared, enter a relationship that intensifies their fears and increases their unhappiness.

There are other reasons besides insecurity and fear for the failure to believe in a companion's love. A significant one is guilt. This may come from sexual abuse by some inconsiderate and irresponsible person. Even though sexually abused people have been dominated by people more powerful than they, such people typically feel as if they should bear part of the shame and guilt. Of course, nothing could be further from the truth. Sexually abusive events are so traumatic that disturbed feelings result, feelings so strange that they cannot be explained; and this confusion perpetuates the memory of them.

Equally unfortunate are the results of sexual promiscuity. I have known many people who, prior to marriage, established sexual relations with several partners. At the time they felt that sharing sex was simply a means to establish a sense of closeness, to strengthen a relationship with another person. But the truth is that for every temporary bond there is a distance and isolation that follows. In effect, sexual activity prior to marriage is a form of emotional alienation that increases the likelihood that one will fear a close relationship.

People whose pasts are cluttered with promiscuous kinds of experiences will often find their ability to love and to be loved in marriage impaired. These often become people who, in their anxiety, frequently create love tests for their companions. But, as we saw earlier (in chapter three), love tests don't work. Any behavior motivated by anxiety actually creates conditions that can prevent a person from having his emotional needs fulfilled. Oddly enough, people who are afraid of not being loved actually engage in behavior that prevents someone from loving them. This behavior can take several forms:

Denial. A person makes statements about not being loved. Very often associated with feelings of inferiority, such statements are an indirect invitation for the spouse to say, "But I do love you." A spouse's proclamation of love is rejected by further denial, "Oh, no, you don't."

Accusation. A person accuses a spouse of not being loving. A person picks out negative incidents and uses them as evidence, meanwhile ignoring loving gestures.

Refusal. A person does not respond to attempts that communicate love. If a gift is given, for example, the person demonstrates only perfunctory appreciation. Many attempts are wholly ignored.

Love tests. A person sets up a task or decides on certain ways a spouse should act to "prove" his or her love. Sometimes an unsuspecting spouse inadvertently "passes the test," which leads the insecure spouse to develop another test.

Pouting and sulking. A person sullenly withdraws, which is supposed to invite demonstrations of love; or the "unloved" person acts in a way that implies he or she is not loved. If the pouting person at first refuses the loving response and then relents, the stage is set for a rerun, and a cycle of negative behavior begins.

If happiness in marriage depends, at least in part, on how abundant the loving experiences are, we must conclude that a satisfying marriage requires that partners overcome their fear of being loved. Because the rewards are so great, we might think that this would be easy, but if someone has been victim to abuse or neglect, that person tends to believe an absence of love constitutes part of reality. When this belief has been confirmed by repeated experiences, changing this conviction is as difficult as modifying any other part of a personality. I have seen people literally tremble at the prospect of accepting the idea that someone loves them. Feeling love toward their mates is all right, but believing they were loved in return was something beyond their abilities.

Social Experiences and Receiving Love

Those who fail to receive love are often participants in unsatisfactory social experiences, which leads to frustration or discomfort as a married couple attempt to organize their social life with friends and neighbors. Sometimes one person, feeling confident, will seek the companionship of others only to find that the spouse neither likes these friends nor wants their company. The result is that one person has a satisfactory social life and the other does not, or neither has much of a social existence, or they pursue their social experiences separately. Failure to share positively in a balanced social life impairs marital intimacy.

In attempting to resolve fear, we must assume that the hurt caused by humans can in part be cured by humans. This means that, to overcome the fear of being loved, we must incorporate positive social experiences into our plan. Furthermore, if we are married, experiencing these social experiences as a couple is important because a shared experience benefits the marriage relationship more than a positive experience had by only one of the partners. This is not to say that a spouse should not experience individual social rewards. I am merely suggesting that, in a relationship where one or both partners fear love, seeking out more positive shared social experiences can help.

One couple had been invited to join a mixed bowling team organized by the husband's work associates. They had turned down the invitation several times, but at my insistence they reluctantly joined and bought their shirts and some equipment. On the first night of their league game, they neither helped the team greatly nor hindered it, but they met their goal, which was to learn the names of all the people on the team. They felt at least more comfortable at the end of the evening than at the beginning. On a subsequent night they helped the team by scoring higher than the team average. As they told me of this experience, I asked if anyone had praised them or shown appreciation. The wife said that she had received several compliments, but the husband said he couldn't remember any. This was not surprising to me, since he had had an unhappy early life. When his wife pointed out that several team members had complimented him, only then was he able to remember.

As we discussed this incident, the husband considered the possibility that other people at work, at church, or in community groups had responded to him positively. He was, however, largely unprepared or unwilling to accept their appreciation. I asked him to identify, in the next few days, how many times he failed to acknowledge other people's positive responses. I was interested in helping him recognize that there were helpful people in his life. After several days he returned to say that he had failed to acknowledge encouragement from others on four or five occasions.

His next assignment was to emphasize his denial, actively disqualifying or ignoring people's attempts to express affection and warmth to him. On the second day after our conversation he telephoned to ask if he could discontinue this assignment. He said that he had become more fully aware of what he had been doing his whole life and that he had rejected the positive gestures of people who he thought disapproved of him. His final remark has always stayed in my mind: "I have been the one who has refused to love by refusing to let people love me."

This man and his wife sought out an increased number of social opportunities. They found a few close friends and joined a church group. They found that increased social activity enabled them to feel better about themselves and helped them to communicate (that is, give and receive) affection in their marriage.

Social Activities and Self-Esteem

The fear of being loved is closely related to low self-esteem. Anyone who feels a sense of inadequacy can easily disbelieve another person's love. Part of self-esteem is the amount of comfort and confidence we feel in social relationships. Therefore, as we use shared social experiences to overcome fears of being loved, we can reasonably expect that self-esteem will also improve.

Subtle communication failures can also result in low self-esteem. For example, downcast eyes or fragmented statements when talking to people can cause a person to miss communication cues from other people, which increases the probability of misunderstanding. When we either misperceive or send messages difficult to understand, social discomfort is heightened.

A friend of mine told me of a problem in his marriage that indicated he was a person who feared love. Although he had been married, apparently happily, for several years, he felt as though his wife didn't love him. There was little evidence that this was true, so he asked me how he could eliminate this fear. I noticed as he talked with me that his eyes were averted from mine. Other times while talking he would scrutinize my responses so intensely that he failed to express himself coherently.

I suggested to him that, for the next few days whenever he talked to someone, he should focus his attention on the person's Adam's apple. I told him that since a person cannot tell exactly where a listener's eyes are focused, he would appear to be noticing the speaker's face without having to actually do it. He agreed to try this for several days and report back.

He found that speaking to others when he didn't look at their faces was somewhat easier for him. I then suggested that he make up a story, any story, and tell it to his family or close friends. He was reluctant at first, but he finally agreed. When he returned a few days later, he said that he had found the courage to do it only three times, and all three of those were to his wife and children, whose responses were positive. He pressed me for the reason behind this request. I explained that we cannot tell a story of any kind, even one made up, that does not reveal something about ourselves. My intention was to get him to present some personal information in a disguised form (the made-up story) to other people. This way he could judge their responses to him without having to overtly reveal personal things about himself. Since the responses he had received were positive, he was willing to take the next step—actually telling others about himself and about his experiences. He learned that they responded positively to those experiences as well.

This raises a crucial point. Anyone seeking to improve his or her social experiences must recognize that social warmth is contingent on the ability to speak about and to listen to personal information. When one person tells a personal experience to another who understands it, the understanding confirms the speaker's experience. This social confirmation is sought by all human beings.

So I next asked my friend to think of personal experiences that would be appropriate to share in various social situations. We identified some social settings at work, at home, and at his church, and we talked about a personal experience he could tell in each of these settings. He agreed to try this. When he reported back, the look on his face and the light in his eyes were evidence to me that he had found other people who were genuinely interested in him. He acknowledged that he noticed smiles, nods of understanding, and compliments in response to his ideas. He was on his way to overcoming his fear of receiving love from other people.

I would like to emphasize that I did not fabricate nice things to say to him to improve his self-esteem, nor did I attempt to demonstrate logically that his feelings were inappropriate. His gradual and modest attempts to invest in some social behavior brought the success. Everyone needs and benefits from good companionship. When we seek this out as individuals and couples, still keeping some private time for our marriage, the quality of our marriage relationship improves.

Acknowledging Love

Merely by acknowledging love, we can increase the flow of it in marriage. When we say, "I feel loved by you," in words or actions, we increase the probability that more gestures of love will be forthcoming. There are many ways to acknowledge love, including expressing gratitude and resolving differences. Though the reconciliation of differences is not usually thought of as a way to acknowledge love, attempts to resolve differences, as the following list indicates, promote a positive social life and clearly send the messages "I love you" and "I feel loved by you."

Taking turns. A couple can take turns meeting each other's needs—a good way to resolve differences.

Finding variety. A couple can find some new activities and do them together every month or two.

Sharing an activity. A couple can plan an activity, such as a dinner party, and divide the responsibilities for preparation equally.

Declaring a truce. A couple can establish a rule that any social activity will be a time for a truce. Any criticisms (about being late, for example) and discussions of marital problems would be off limits during social activities.

Giving. A couple can plan social activities that involve giving small gifts, doing favors, or making extra efforts to please each other.

There is little in marriage more important than feeling successful at being loved. Knowing that we are loved builds self-esteem, and giving and receiving love creates intimacy. A person who is capable of receiving love from his or her spouse enriches their love and makes their marriage happier.
