A. Lynn Scoresby, Foundations for a Happier Marriage ( 1986)

5

Making Love Last

At first it seemed a bit unmanly to admit to myself that loving someone and being loved in return were the most important things in my life. One could judge from my actions that success in my career took priority in my life. But as I acquired more experience, I found that, although my work was satisfying, it did not create as much happiness for me as the time I spent with my wife and children. Though I was aware of this feeling, it still took some time before I could acknowledge that a lasting love was more important to me than anything else. I did not tell anyone for quite a while because I was still unsure of what others would think, but as time passed I became less shy about feeling it. I found out that loving another person was a gradual experience: I knew less about it at the beginning than I thought I did. My marriage has improved because I know more about love now, and the more I know, the more important it becomes to me.

I will always remember the moment I admitted to myself that loving my family was the most important of life's experiences. At that time I felt the panic and uncertainty the unskilled feel when faced with a task they do not know how to perform. I felt that I did not know how to love my wife or receive her love except in a superficial way.

I have known some people who can love only temporarily. They express love until they encounter some difficulty, and then their love is replaced by the disruption that follows. I don't want that for myself. I want a lasting love, one that exists even when difficulties arise. If husbands or wives fail to learn how to make love last, their marriages are likely to be unhappy. Love for them becomes a temporary condition; their marriages become a sporadic mix of love and other less desirable emotions.

Temporary Love

There are many reasons that cause love between a husband and wife to become temporary rather than lasting. One of the worst is the attitude of external control. Briefly, people who are bound by notions of external control believe that what happens is always caused by someone or something outside themselves. They think that their unhappiness is a result of events or actions beyond their control. Thinking themselves innocent, they simply react to what is done to them.

When this belief is brought into marriage, the spouse is assigned responsibility for happiness. Such people conclude that if they are unhappy, their partners must be failing in some respect. Even if the unhappiness stems from some situation outside marriage, someone in the marriage will usually be partly blamed. This is also true for married people who believe that their partners' first responsibility is to please them. When they become dissatisfied with their marriages, they decide that their partners are responsible for their dissatisfaction.

The belief in external control unleashes a set of strategies instigated by one partner to make the other do what is desired, which are followed by counterstrategies to resist the loss of freedom. Marriages can become filled with strategies and resistance, counterstrategies and counterresistance. I have known couples whose marriage relationship is based totally on such interaction. Great instability is the result. As long as a spouse believes that the other spouse causes his problems and is responsible for his happiness, the couple's love will be temporary.

Another reason why love may be temporary can be found in childhood experiences, or rather in lack of experience. People who have learned to survive situations in which love is not often or openly expressed tend to attach importance to physical or concrete things. We call this "materialism." When such people are forced to choose between communicating some form .of love and doing something that will gain possessions, they will more often choose the latter.

It is surprising, in light of the emphasis we all place on love, that temporary love is so widespread. Indeed, many place work before kindness and sensitivity; many place being "right" before understanding; and many live with pressures to succeed financially, cutting back on companionship with their families. We yield to social influence rather than show loyalty to our partners. We spend time pursuing new possessions rather than spend time showing love for each other. Then we wonder why our love is only part-time.

Equal in importance to the other reasons for temporary love is the third reason. Some adults have had unhappy experiences during dating and courtship years and believe they have been exploited by members of the other sex. If this attitude is present in marriage, it results in one person measuring the giving of love against the receiving of love. When a couple measure the love they give and receive, they limit its exchange because each is waiting for the other. This is selfish, and the measuring makes love occasional. People who love selfishly and immaturely try to enhance their own desires, and their selfishness becomes the parent of new exploitations of others. They thus establish a negative pattern in marriage that affects successive generations.

The Investment

I have wondered what prevents us from expressing love. What risks do we face? Do we fear exploitation so much that we do not want to love more than our companions can or will? Why do we not instead realize that efforts on our part to increase the happiness of our partners will nearly always be returned, in most cases many times over our original investment?

The idea that love is reciprocal is often lost on those who measure the giving and receiving of love. Yet this reciprocity is basic to all aspects of love in married life. One couple had a lively disagreement about the type of Christmas tree they should buy. He liked full symmetrical trees, but she wanted fir trees with distinct branches. Their solution, as you might expect, was to alternate years, but she had difficulty finding a good specimen of the type of tree she preferred, so for two or three years the Christmas trees she selected were not very attractive. All of the children began to prefer the trees that daddy bought. One year, when it was his turn, he found a beautiful tree exactly like his wife would want. He bought it and took it home, putting it on the front porch. Later that evening he asked her if she wanted to look at his Christmas tree. When she saw it, she was astonished and said, "This is my tree!" He feigned puzzlement and, walking around the tree, replied, "How could that be? I've made a terrible mistake." She caught on and embraced him, touched by his concern. In the following days she spent much of her time thinking of ways to express her love to him.

This couple could tell us of the true nature of reciprocal giving. In most instances one partner merely needs to start the giving. When expressions of love include help for a companion, praise and approval, and warmth and affection, the result is nearly always much better than simply balancing the love you give with what you believe you have received.

Responsibility to Develop Lasting Love

Lasting love, then, can be present only in marriages in which the partners are emotionally stable and can assume responsibility for their own feelings. Such people have a sense of inner control. They believe they can create positive feelings and, to some extent, eliminate negative feelings within themselves. They have learned responsibility by feeling a certain amount of freedom to make their own choices and by experiencing the consequences of their actions. When a couple allow each other to voice opinions and accept each other's opinions often, they create in marriage a climate of freedom that increases love. This kind of freedom is not license to do anything. It is simply a situation in which the husband and wife can participate openly and equally in making decisions.

Most people think that they are responsible, or at least not irresponsible, but many do not realize that they may be shirking much of the responsibility in marriage. One wife I know complained bitterly about the "pressure" she received from her husband. Yet, when asked about her goals for her marriage, she could not state what she wanted for herself in any area of marriage. Her husband complained that she was a reluctant sexual partner, that she was a disorganized housekeeper and mother, and that she was usually depressed. I suggested that, if she wished to stay married, she would have to decide what she wanted and get moving.

To my surprise, she hotly retorted, "I don't have to do anything!" Realizing that the anger she felt toward her husband masked her immaturity, I replied, "That's right—you don't have to do anything. You can walk out right now. You also never have to grow up. But if you fail to be responsible for yourself, you have no one to blame but yourself." She was crying by this time. I rose and left the room. She hurried out, and I thought I would not see her again. Two weeks later, I did. Her hand was outstretched as she said, "Thank you for waking me up."

My part was very small compared to her efforts. She described a week of depression, and then told how she had finally organized her home and work routine. She was obviously more confident as she talked about the ideas she had for her marriage. She had quite a ways to go, but she had begun to create her own freedom by assuming more responsibility for herself, expecting less and blaming less. She had begun to understand that she would experience an increase in love because of what she was willing to do.

Love is the companion of many other virtues, such as patience and gratitude. When we work to be more patient and to express gratitude more often and openly, we increase our ability to give and receive love. I have given assignments to people to spend one or two days practicing a positive trait. Merely by consciously focusing on one virtue, these people have improved the quality of their emotional lives. One woman who was practicing gratitude took the opportunity to write notes, to speak to people personally, and to do things for others as a way of expressing thankfulness. She said she had learned that gratitude pleased the receiver and ennobled the giver.

This emphasis on positive traits can sound maudlin to people who are accustomed to the realities of unhappiness; but to those who experience a great deal of love in their lives, the development of positive characteristics makes immediate sense. Those who have or wish to have lasting love will recognize the need for numerous positive character traits to sustain such a love.

Finally, a lasting love can only be maintained when people increase their variety in expressing it. Overt acts such as sending flowers and saying "I love you" are some of the most common. Just listening to someone's opinion, or helping when someone is tired, or being loyal when spouses are being criticized will also maintain love. One woman said she felt better about herself as she found new ways of expressing love to her husband. She said, "You will probably think this is trite, but I noticed that when we had guests for dinner I always served them first. One time I served my husband first and then the guests. As I walked by him, he reached up and squeezed my hand. I had not realized the significance of such small things." If we began to look for new ways to express love and could learn one or two methods a month, we would still find that throughout the many years of marriage we could not exhaust the possibilities.

Child Care

There are, of course, unwanted children or "inconvenient" children, but a new human life born of a loving union is good evidence that a husband and wife's love for each other is meant to be lasting. The challenge is to find ways to remain in love while we go through the process of rearing our children.

Those who have children know that child care requires a consuming and complex effort and isn't always fun. It requires handling very strong emotions. Our feelings for our children are among the most intense feelings we will ever have. This intensity combined with the complexity of the task can create enough pressure to drive couples apart rather than bring them together.

About half of the married couples, by one spouse allowing the other a predominant role, avoid arguments. While this may reduce the number of arguments concerning the children, it increases resentment and frustration. Sharing the responsibilities is usually more effective—that means we commit ourselves to sharing evenly in the task of rearing our children, learn how to do it well, and then work to make it rewarding.

Understanding the most common reasons for not rearing children well will improve the quality of sharing in child care. One of these reasons, obviously, is that the amount of work involved in attending children is usually unequally divided. This happens most often when one parent is employed away from the home while the other is home taking care of the children. The more domestic parent may feel a great deal of frustration with the increasing pressures and demands of child rearing, especially when the other parent is away or has come home ready to rest from a "hard day at the office." Also, there is still the unfortunate residue of belief that child care is woman's work, and men, being less competent, should stay out of it.

There is much evidence, however, to show that fathers play a very significant part in child development. When both parents are not involved in child care, the children and the one uninvolved parent will surely miss some of life's best possible experiences.

Another common hindrance to happy child rearing lies in differing philosophies of child management. Married couples will usually encounter some differences due to their family backgrounds, beliefs, and personalities, and if they fail to work for harmony, the differences will persist, even increase. For example, if one parent is more indulgent than the other, the indulgent parent may see the strict parent as being unnecessarily harsh and may respond with increased warmth to balance the harshness. The stricter parent may then see the other parent's indulgence as being detrimental to the child's character, therefore compensating by being even firmer and stricter. Both become more extreme than they really want to be, and they share child care negatively because they have not found a compromise.

Husbands and wives who battle each other's management techniques fail to fully appreciate the consequences for the children. Most children will begin to use the situation to exploit their parents. They may also be inclined to learn deviant behavior because the parents, not being united, are often powerless to control how the child acts.

Differences in abilities can also obstruct effective parenting. If one parent is highly organized and desires to maintain a fairly regular routine while the other parent is fairly lax, their differences can prevent constructive child care. I once asked a couple to separately write down, without consulting each other, the rules they believed their children should follow. The husband handed me one piece of paper with six rules. The wife brought me four pieces of paper with single-spaced, typewritten rules covering each page. At first I could not believe she was serious. I soon realized, however, that part of their problem came from the fact that the mother had more rules than their children could possibly follow. Since the husband didn't share her attitude, he was unwilling to support her in her attempts to enforce the rules, and she was critical of his seeming indifference. Their family life, I might add, resembled a circus of angry people.

Yet another common difficulty between parents occurs when they have different notions about what they want their children to become. For instance, one parent may want a self-reliant, individualistic child, and so will try some form of "tough love." If the other parent wants a sensitive, compliant, conforming child, the strategy might be to envelop the child in warmth, protectiveness, and kindness. These objectives and methods could be coordinated, since both have value, even in cases where a couple feel no compromise is possible because they perceive their objectives to be so different. Of course, differences would also occur if one parent had clearly thought about desired characteristics for the children and if the other parent had not considered them much at all.

A serious pitfall in child rearing is the temptation to involve children in marital problems. This can happen in several ways. One is when one or both parents tell the child about the marital problems. What usually results is an inordinate sense of responsibility in the child that often prevents him or her from maturing healthily. A second way parents involve a child in marital conflict is to make the child the object of a marital message. An example of this could be when a husband, confronted with a wife who is not very affectionate, trains his daughter to be affectionate and on occasion mentions that he is happy his daughter is "warm and affectionate like a true woman should be"—obviously a message to the wife through the daughter.

Parents will also affect children through their marital problems. When married people spend energy in conflict about children, they often have little energy or interest left for the demanding tasks of child care. Marital conflict causes instability for the children and reduces the likelihood that parents will follow through on important child care responsibilities. Moreover, if children overhear conflicts, they may feel guilt, or they may fear that they are the cause of the pain. As children grow, they may begin to use marital conflict to manipulate their parents. As the children sense their parents' guilt, they can become very powerful in the home, more powerful than their parents. When they receive criticism, they can point out how imperfect their parents are. Through verbal abuse or other emotional ploys, they can demand that parents do what the children want. I have seen this tragic reversal of parent and child roles in an amazingly large number of families.

Couples should recognize that one of the most common difficulties in child care lies in the incompetence and/or ignorance of one or both parents. Sometimes what parents do is entirely inappropriate for them and their children, and the result is usually an emotional garble of distress and unhappiness. Physical or emotional abuse, including sexual molestations, are extreme manifestations of parental incompetence. Not able to constructively resolve their own feelings of inadequacy, such parents subject their innocent children to perverted forms of power and authority.

Finally, it is common for parents to not enjoy their relationships with their children. Many of us believe that enjoying our children should be inherent. But I have seen many mothers and fathers who, for some reason or another, do not like their children and do not enjoy being around them. While they may feel quite guilty and frustrated, they are often unwilling to do what is necessary to learn how to love their own children. In order for us to develop a lasting love in marriage and to share the tasks of child rearing, each partner must be able to find rewards as a parent. I have seen difficulty arise when a wife, filled with the day's frustrations, would give her husband a negative report about the children as soon as he walked through the door from work. He would feel divided between his loyalty for his wife and his desire to have a good relationship with his children. Sometimes he would support his wife, ignoring the damage to his relationship with the children; other times he would work on his friendship with the children, ignoring his wife's comments. In this situation the wife could put off her complaints until later.

To this point, I have described some of the causes that make child care miserable. However, if couples can commit to improving their strategies, if they will apply to child care the tactics for building a lasting love, all aspects of family life will improve.

Child care should be a positive experience. If a couple are committed to making their love last, they will realize how important child care is to that goal. Not surprisingly, most skills used to develop a lasting love will also help in rearing children. Parents could project themselves forward to the day when their last child leaves home and ask such questions as "What am I glad I did with my children? Did I spend enough time with them? How did I treat them? Did I help them become what I wanted them to be?" Parents could then discuss how to achieve the answers they would want. Following is a list of areas they could discuss and suggestions for being effective in each area:

Deciding on Goals for Each Child

After thinking about what makes each child satisfied, parents could have a talking-and-listening session about objectives for their children. Couples need to be able to identify the characteristics they want most in their children, including such traits as emotional competence, affection, academic accomplishment, and loyalty. Parents may find that they cannot describe what they want because they do not have enough knowledge about children in general. They can find books to read, lectures to attend, or knowledgeable people to talk to. Deciding and participating together on the children's development will naturally lead to better understanding.

Agreeing on Rules and Consequences

A rule is any expected standard of behavior ranging from a family routine to a firm guideline about how children should perform at a given time, such as at meals or when cleaning a room. Since family rules will involve both parents, the mother and the father should discuss and agree on the setting up and enforcing of rules before attempting to implement them. Each partner should remember that the consequences of failure to agree are worse than adapting to the other person's point of view, unless the other person's view is actually destructive.

Sharing in the Supervision of Children

Both parents can participate in the supervision of children's performances, including their work at home, their school tasks, or any other thing a child does. When both parents notice a child's actions, discuss them with the child, and reinforce good behavior, the child benefits much more than when only one parent participates.

Sharing in Teaching Correct Behavior

Sometimes we let children alone until they do something wrong. Then we are forced to pay attention to what is undesirable. Teaching children how to behave correctly is much more effective (and fun). It is simply a matter of following these steps: (a) show them, (b) tell them, (c) encourage them to try it, (d) praise them.

Teaching Respect for Both Parents

To get their way, children will frequently attempt to divide their parents by saying, "But Dad (or Mom) said . . . ," or they will tell one parent of their mistreatment at the hands of the other parent. If both parents are actively and positively sharing in child care, children will benefit when the parents make clear to them that (1) one parent will not allow the children to show disrespect for the other parent, (2) agreement between parents is more important than what the child wants to do, and (3) a child's criticism of the other parent may be understood, but it will not be acted upon in front of the children.

Finding Ways to Enjoy Children

Parents can benefit from identifying ways to increase their enjoyment of their children. They can dare to do some things with the family just because they want to. Sometimes parents believe in the necessity of continual sacrifice for the children rather than recognize that parents have the right to enjoy their children in ways that also contribute to their children's development.

For example, if we wish our children to do well in school, we can find a way to enjoy helping them do school work. This may sound like a contradiction in terms, but helping a child with school projects can be very enjoyable. It can be a time filled with conversation, encouragement, and abundant praise, bringing parent and child closer.

I propose that child care is made more worthwhile through learning to enjoy our children. If we think through what will, at the same time, bring satisfaction to us and help our children grow, we can organize an effective child-care plan to follow.

Demonstrating Love for Each Other

Parents should also discuss and agree on the answer to this question: How shall we express our love in front of the children? Often the single best thing a parent can do for his or her children is to love the other parent. Indeed, observing affection between parents is very important for children. It sets an emotional climate beneficial to children, providing an example of the kind of behavior they will want to take into their marriages; in other words, it makes them happy now, and it will help them know how to be happy later.

Learning to share child care happily and confidently makes love between parents stronger; and their stronger love makes them even happier, better parents. Couples will find themselves creating a wonderful circle of marital satisfaction.
