A. Lynn Scoresby, Foundations for a Happier Marriage ( 1986)

6

Discovering New Rewards

"I'm sorry I'm late," she whispered as they walked out to the car. She had taken one child to the doctor and another to a piano lesson. She had whipped up dinner for the children. Then, just as she was about to get herself ready, the fourth grader had announced a big school assignment. She had spent a few minutes helping him, and now she had no time left to bargain with. She would be late.

She didn't have to look to see if he was perturbed—his arm was unbending and his walk was stiff. "Uh-oh," she thought. He didn't say anything until they were in the car. Then he said to her loudly enough for their friends in the front seat to hear, "When are you ever going to be on time!" She explained her day's schedule but found, as always, that it didn't help. "You're just disorganized," he retorted. "Just once I wish you would be on time." She knew he was embarrassed because their friends had had to wait, and so she became silent. Why couldn't he be loyal to me, she thought, instead of criticizing me to make himself look good?

Their evening together was ruined. Later, at home, he even criticized her for being uninvolved and for spoiling the evening. They had had an opportunity to enjoy themselves together and had missed it. Had they been able to defer until later their expressions of disappointment in one another, they might have been able to enjoy their time together. As it was, his criticism and her silence made it unsatisfying. They failed to look for and find the rewards of being together.

We human beings are quite adaptable. We can even adapt to living with unhappiness. When we do adapt, we create a set of blinders that influence what we will see and believe in the future.

The reason for this is found in the role emotions play in human behavior. Our emotions stem from what we experience, but we remember experiences inseparably from the emotions that accompanied them: we remember what we felt. After we have had many experiences of different types, our brains classify them into categories. Emotions—sadness, anger, happiness—are the names of the categories in which our memories are stored. That is why one sad experience, for example, will trigger memories of other sad experiences.

Any couple will have some unrewarding experiences. If, however, there are many of these, they will collect in each partner's mind, affecting what each will think of his or her marriage. Then, any happy experiences that may happen will either be quickly forgotten or will seem strange or unrealistic. Unfortunately, unhappiness in marriage tends to create expectations for unhappiness, and the expectations tend to be met.

In order to shake loose from this cycle and to be free to find happiness in such a marriage, partners must look for, discover, and promote more rewarding marriage experiences, building up a category of loving memories. If more than half of the events the husband and wife share are rewarding, they will likely stay together. When fewer than half are rewarding, they begin to wonder if their efforts are worthwhile. Obviously, if their despair is too great, nothing will be rewarding. So trying to create more rewarding marital experiences is only appropriate for those who have enough commitment to want to try.

Looking for rewarding things is almost as important as actually finding them. If we concentrate on finding rewarding activities, we will be less likely to find the opposite. I remember talking with a young couple who had been married less than two years. They had been having a prolonged argument about some aspect of their marriage. Both of them said they didn't feel that their married life was rewarding. They felt that arguments meant they did not love each other. Their fear of failure showed in their faces, and I saw their discomfort and awkwardness. This argument they could not end had created for them a much greater problem—the possibility that their marriage would fail.

I asked them to recount how the argument had started. As they took turns recounting the series of arguments that had led to the present impasse, I pressed for more and more information about their feelings, the intensity of their reactions, and the frustration that encompassed them. After forcing them through one painful episode after another, I looked at both squarely and said, "You must love each other a great deal." Their surprise was obvious, and the husband voiced what I am sure both felt: "That is the last thing I thought you'd say."

I explained to him that, in a marriage relationship, love and commitment meant that each person could influence the other's feelings. I pointed out that their anger could not have been so intense nor their frustrations so great if they were not deeply in love. The emotional tension in the room eased immediately. Both became more relaxed, and I suggested to them that reducing the fears that their marriage was in serious trouble was the start to solving their conflict. As they left my office, I noticed that he reached for her hand and she gave it to him.

I had only been trying to help the two of them gain enough confidence to solve an ordinary marital problem. In the process of doing so, I made a discovery that has left me with a lasting impression. People often base their predictions about the future on their interpretation of the past. If a couple's past has been unhappy, they can become prisoners of unhappiness in the future merely through expecting their future to be unhappy. To break out of their shared misery, couples must learn how to discover or to create a more positive present for themselves in spite of the past.

Looking for Rewards

Confronted by a husband who insisted that his marriage was unrewarding, I proposed that he ask several friends what they found rewarding in their marriages and make a list of what they said. He returned with over twenty-five items. He had frankly expected that few if any would find marriage rewarding, but saw that he was wrong. The next step was simple. He selected some items on the list and began to experiment. His story would have had a nice ending if I could report that to his surprise he had immediately found more rewards from his marriage. The truth is that his and his wife's growth have been gradual. They are still struggling to make their marriage more rewarding.

The next place to look for potential rewards is in family relationships. These can frequently come from changing our perspectives. One wife complained to her husband about small jammy handprints on the sliding glass door. Her husband looked up from his newspaper and said, "In thirty years we'll be willing to pay a hundred dollars for one small jammy handprint on our window. We had better enjoy them while we can." His wife immediately recognized the truth of his statement. Cleaning up a household mess had suddenly become a rewarding experience.

Social psychologists have identified several conditions that are inherently rewarding to human beings. These conditions satisfy us emotionally just as food satisfies us physically. They can be created or strengthened to help us find new rewards in marriage.

Interpersonal Attention

Interpersonal attention simply means that when we are attended to by someone else—when they compliment us, for example—we feel more expansive, more confident, and more expressive. Researchers have found that we keep talking longer when someone is paying attention to us. Attention also increases our enthusiasm for what we are saying and stimulates a more open expression of humor. Furthermore, attentiveness by a loved person stimulates arousal of the senses.

Interpersonal attention, then, acts upon our most positive characteristics. This attentiveness includes subtle signals like dilated pupils that increase the exposure of the eye to the view of others (women, using eye makeup to attract attention, have always known about this) as well as more obvious signals like touching or asking questions. This is why conversations when both talk and listen are so pleasant.

Warmth

One of the most interesting studies I have read reported that warmth is the one characteristic that both men and women prefer above all others in people they date. It is more attractive than physical beauty. Many of us have never learned to express warmth well, and it may take some effort to feel comfortable in doing it. But there is abundant evidence that increasing the amount of warmth we express increases the rewards we find in marriage.

Warmth is expressed in voice tones, in quiet physical contact, in praise, in the giving of small gifts or the performing of acts of service. Warmth is conveyed in greetings and good-byes. It is found in straightening mussed hair (or in mussing up neat hair). It is sometimes expressed merely by moving toward another person or by touching someone on the arm.

Warmth is partly related to what people expect—remembering important dates, for example. But surprises are even better. One wife knew of an important meeting her husband was to have one afternoon with some business associates and arranged to have a pink carnation delivered to his office that morning. The note with it read, "I have a pink passion for you." The meaning of the flower held some romantic promise as well as thoughtfulness. She knew how to send a message of warmth.

It is customary to think of men as being less warm than women, but I have found that they just express it differently. Men, for example, are more likely to give gifts or to do something for women. Women generally will express warmth through interpersonal attention. Everyone, I believe, can make his or her marriage more intimate by finding the rewards warmth can bring. One husband has a goal of expressing one new form of warmth every month. He says that meeting the goal has made him happier and has created a good climate at home.

Security and Peace

The security that comes from predictability and stability can be one of the most rewarding aspects of being married. One wife has said that she treasures her husband's ability to make her feel secure. The absence of suspicion and apprehension regarding her husband's activities gives her a great deal of satisfaction and peace.

We sometimes forget how important security and peace are to us; we may realize that we need it only when we don't have it. Most human beings do not function well under chronic periodic stress. If there is conflict, suspicion, or emotional pain in a marriage, the result can be insecurity and stress.

To increase the rewards we find in marriage, we may, for a time, have to agree that we will not incite each other to painful interchanges but instead will allow for times of quiet and peacefulness. Whenever we are filled with tension, whether from the marriage or from outside pressures, we will find it difficult to feel secure. In a sense, it is not actually money, or the in-laws, or the children, or any other commonly suggested cause that brings conflict into a marriage. It is the tension we feel and the resulting feeling of insecurity that are most often the causes of the conflict.

Companionship

There is something in us that makes us want to share our experiences with another person. Marriage affords us the ultimate opportunity for companionship, allowing us to share a multitude of experiences from shopping to vacations. Most people enjoy an experience more when another person sees and feels what they see and feel. Sharing what we experience stimulates our senses: it makes what we see, hear, taste, smell, and feel more intense than when we are alone.

I remember well a train ride down the Rhine Valley in Germany. As I traveled from Hamburg to Munich, I had a few extra hours and decided to take a small side trip through the valley. I was unprepared for how truly beautiful it was. The crystal clear river flowed slowly through the heavily wooded hills, which were interrupted occasionally by the silhouettes of ancient castles. Such peace and beauty were welcomed by most of the travelers on the train, but my reaction surprised me. I felt a great resentment and frustration that my wife could not witness what I was seeing. I felt as though I did not want to see another beautiful thing unless she could see it as well. I even felt a bit unfaithful having an experience that I knew she would have found exhilarating. Companionship took on a new and more significant meaning for me thereafter.

Response

We all find rewards in causing others to respond positively to us. In some marriages, the sterility of indifference creates a desperation that leads one partner, consciously or unconsciously, to repeatedly provoke the other. If positive provocation doesn't work, then a spouse may try negative provocation until he or she arouses some form of unhappy response.

I suppose a few people may actually prefer to cause unhappiness, but most of us would like to see someone else have joy as a result of what we do. Some people who have been constantly and heavily criticized may not feel able to bring happiness to the lives of other people. In contrast, those who lived with love and affection as children will likely assume that they can create warmth in the lives of others. I have a child who one day said something very funny during a family prayer. The resulting laughter encouraged him to try other humorous things. Most of them succeeded, so he was encouraged to believe that he could create laughter among people around him. Now, the ability to make people laugh has become a part of his personality.

We can find increased rewards in marriage when we attempt to converse, to compliment, to pay attention, and to love—all positive ways to invite a response from a spouse. There are many other techniques of "positive provocation" that we can find if we look for them. Trying them and receiving the consequent warm response will move us toward intimacy.

Finding Rewards in Shared Religion

I am not proposing that every couple be religious. It is true, however, that in most marriages, at least one partner will have had some form of religious training or experience, even if it is anti-religious. My objective here is to suggest that, when shared in an amiable and positive way, religion can bring greater satisfaction and intimacy to marriage.

When husband and wives experience discord over religious practices, it is because they cannot find a comfortable way of sharing them. People of the same religion who participate at different levels of activity may also experience discomfort. Religious differences will not go away by themselves—some adjustment must be made to increase compatibility.

The easiest way for a couple to do this is to identify the religious activities available and calmly discuss the degree to which each partner is willing to participate. Rather than argue about the position taken by either person, a couple would be wise to focus on what each spouse wishes to do. To get the best results, a couple will need to make some accommodations. Spouses can learn that paying attention to each other at a religious activity can increase the rewards of marriage just the same as paying attention to each other at any other activity, such as a sports event. The important thing is to participate together and to do so in a way that rewards both.

I know of one wife who was actively involved in her religion. Her husband was not a member of her church. Although he allowed her to practice her religion freely, he did not actively participate either at home or at church. She wished that he would become more involved, and her encouragement on occasion amounted to a modest amount of pressure. She found, of course, that he resisted, and eventually he refused to participate even as much as he had done previously. One day she announced that her local congregation was organizing a marriage seminar consisting of two evening meetings for married couples. She did not mention that it featured a weekend retreat at a nearby conference center.

This was something that appealed to him, so he came with his wife to the meeting held at church. The conversation was informative and enjoyable. Following the lecture he was introduced to several of her friends, and, as she reported later, on the way home she found herself paying more attention to him and giving him more affection than usual. At the time neither one would have attributed her response to his participation with her. Both felt that it was due to the ideas they had learned during the meeting. At the second meeting he learned for the first time of the weekend retreat. The good experience with the two evening meetings led him to suggest attending the retreat. During the weekend he met and made friends with many members of his wife's church. Several weeks later a Christmas party was held for the adults of the congregation. He willingly came and participated in the evening's festivities.

What had once been a source of difficulty had now become an area of positive sharing. He still was not a member of her religion, but they had changed a difficult part of their marriage into one that offered reward and fulfillment. Without really knowing it, they had made the change by experiencing all the inherently rewarding conditions discussed earlier: attention, warmth, security, companionship, and response.

Since religious situations vary greatly, no one strategy is applicable to all situations. The table on the following page suggests five different strategies for finding rewards in shared religion.

There is considerable evidence that people with strong religious beliefs have more stable and satisfying marriage relationships than those without them. I believe the reason for this is that religious beliefs, when actively observed, create a sense of stability and depth and give continuity and consistency to two people's relationship. Stability is a key factor in enjoying marriage. Without it, upheaval and uncertainty can quickly lead to conflict. Evidence also suggests that marriages are more stable if couples are of similar faiths. While this is not a necessary condition for a happy marriage, it seems to contribute greatly to happiness.

Some couples may conclude from this that their marriages might improve if they sought out religions of their choice and jointly participated to the degree they found mutually satisfying. The resulting social and spiritual benefits may add a dimension to their lives that had not previously existed. As a counselor, I have suggested this course whenever it was proper for me to do so. In most cases, following this suggestion led couples to new rewards in their marriages that they had not imagined could exist.

Table 4 Religion and Rewarding Sharing Strategies

Situation Strategy Both spouses are equally A couple can place emphasis on getting the most active in one religion from any participation. They can select appropriate activities that give them satisfaction and converse more often about religious topics. Both spouses are equally All religions have some commonalties, and a couple active in different can base their sharing on these. Partners can trade religions participation in important activities. If they avoid any participation in each other's religion, their sharing becomes negative. Friendly discussion and reassurances can be helpful. Both spouses are This is often the most difficult situation to share well. unequally active in one Pressure creates resistance, but pretending to religion participate (that is, participating without real belief or enjoyment) usually fails as well. The key is to decide on the minimum amount of shared participation and then work to make it rewarding. Both spouses are The more active partner can extend courtesies and unequally active in invitations to the less active partner to participate, different religions carefully avoiding pressure. The couple can also watch for important activities of interest in the church of the less active spouse. Both should make efforts to reinforce the importance of the marriage to each other. Neither spouse is If both spouses are indifferent to religion, their regularly involved in sharing will be based on other things. Each religious religious activity activity will require conversation and preparation because it will be unusual. In this situation, most arguments occur because one wishes to participate and the other does not. Spouses should honor and support each other's decision.
