A. Lynn Scoresby, Foundations for a Happier Marriage ( 1986)

7

Using Differences

People in troubled marriages often think that the cause of their unhappiness is the differences between them and their spouses. Whenever I hear this, I think how boring life would be if we were exactly like our marriage partners. In the first place, any man and woman will have differences just because one is male and the other female. In the second place, personality differences stemming from background and early family experiences will likely exist. People who live in satisfying marriages have as many differences between them as do people who are unhappy. The differences between us actually do not in themselves create any problems; the problems stem from the failure to see that differences are as much an opportunity for growth and happiness as they are a potential source of unhappiness.

When a couple allow differences to prevent mutually satisfying sharing in any of the important areas of marriage, they create a foundation for a lifetime of conflict. Rather than face differences that may arise, a couple may avoid each other in specific situations. For example, if the conflict is about money, a couple may decide that the husband will bring home the check, give it to his wife, and not talk about money again till the next paycheck. Or the wife may not feel comfortable about their sexual relationship but will continue to participate to avoid her husband's anger. One couple who came to my office had a problem with child care differences. The husband said, "We argued about how we should treat the kids, so we agreed that she would handle them and I would stay out of her way." Actually, this couple had agreed to perpetuate the differences and continue arguing. They might have temporarily decreased the frequency of their arguments, but they had not resolved their differences. Those differences would always exist as long as the couple avoided facing them. This couple's example is similar to many other couples.

Identifying and Resolving Differences

As I have said, couples face more than one type of difference in marriage. I want to propose here that successful resolution of a difference depends upon identifying the type of difference and responding to it appropriately. Generally, differences between husbands and wives can be divided into four categories. These are summarized in table 5 on the following page.

Nearly all differences between husbands and wives can be classified into at least one of these four categories, and a couple's strategy for resolving differences will be based on the type of difference itself. In the case of gender differences, for instance, couples can employ a strategy of accommodating each other, simply allowing each other the differences of being male and female.

In the case of deeply rooted personality traits, resolution of differences typically requires that both accept each other and calmly discuss the differences openly. Behavior closely tied to a long-standing system of values and beliefs is extremely resistant to change, so, rather than resist and argue, a couple will do better to look for ways to benefit from the differing beliefs and values. In this process, they will find that any value system has positive characteristics.

Differences in specific situations represent the most frequent type of marital difference. The best strategy for resolving such differences is to develop an ongoing system of reconciliation that requires behavior change in both spouses. A husband who is shy, for example, may find less interest in social get-togethers than his wife. The couple can adjust quite happily if both compromise somewhat, the husband making more effort to go out and enjoy group dates, the wife scheduling fewer such events. One of the great ironies of marriage is that oftentimes the behavior we deem inappropriate in our partner is either stimulated or reinforced by how we act. Therefore, to modify a partner's behavior, a person must also make a change in himself. A couple must remember that through changes personal growth takes place, and they become better people.

Table 5 Understanding Differences

Type of Difference How They are Expressed Suggestions for Responses Gender differences Gender differences are One person should yield traits that distinguish most to the spouse's wishes at males in a group from appropriate times. most females. They may be physical or cultural. For example, wives in North American society tend to want more discussion with their husbands about feelings than husbands tend to want. Deeply rooted Deeply rooted values or Both spouses should values beliefs are expressed in a accommodate and freely person's general behavior. accept but should also They are most clearly seen discuss each other's values. in the priorities people establish. Examples include a person's religious practices and a person's beliefs about how formally or informally one should present himself socially. Differences in Personality differences are Compromise and conciliation specific situations expressed in certain are possible. Both must situations. Examples expect to make some changes. include one spouse talking more openly with friends while being silent around strangers, or a spouse being fastidious at work but less so at home. Personal These are small personality A couple can change through mannerisms quirks expressed as by- bargaining. products of other actions. They may include facial expressions or a manner of speech that changes occasionally.

Personal mannerisms are usually more a form of annoyance than a source of real difference between spouses. Yet their significance can be great if the atmosphere of a marriage is charged with hostility, disappointment, or other negative emotions. In many cases a couple can resolve an annoyance if the observer will discreetly point out the mannerism to the spouse and ask for a change. Care should be taken not to hurt the spouse's feelings. Sometimes coexistence—simply allowing the mannerism to exist and not criticizing it—is best, especially when a mannerism is so habitual as to be difficult to change. Quite frequently once-annoying mannerisms become endearing when attention is focused on loving the person and not on insignificant behavior.

The Positive Use of Differences

A couple can begin to use their differences in positive ways if they can agree to the following steps: First, they must be willing to give up belittling or criticizing each other, defending themselves, and explaining in response to comments. Most can simply stop—they do not need a miracle or a terrible argument to motivate them. Criticizing people for annoying traits or belittling them for mistakes produces justification, defense, and elaborate explanation. This cycle will perpetuate the status quo and will not result in any constructive change. The first requirement, therefore, is to stop the cycle. The cycle itself accomplishes nothing: criticism does not promote behavioral change, and defensiveness does not stop criticism. If the initiator—the criticizer—won't stop, the receiver of criticism can still help by refusing to be defensive, though this takes great strength.

Second, a couple must be honest with each other. A husband and wife especially need to recognize the true nature of the difference between them. To accomplish this, a couple must be willing to examine each other's viewpoints and to create a "nonthreatening" atmosphere. One woman was married to a man who enjoyed making fun of her in front of their friends. Thinking he would soon stop, she patiently let him make her the butt of his jokes, but he kept on. She finally decided to talk it over with him. She prepared him by saying that she wanted to talk about something unpleasant and wished him to "listen kindly." Then she explained what she had observed and told him she was hurt whenever he did it. She asked if he could stop doing it. He attempted to pass off her statement by joking about it, but when she persisted, he knew she meant what she said. He agreed to change and found it was not difficult.

Third, a couple must understand that any discussion to resolve a difference has one central objective: to find a way of satisfying both spouses. Any resolution of differences is judged by whether it will produce happiness or fulfillment for both people. Successful couples find many ways to express this idea to each other. Satisfying both partners is central to the process of using differences to improve the marriage.

Management of Money and Resources

The most frequently discussed difference of opinion in marriage has to do with the management of money and resources. For success in money management a couple must first demonstrate the maturity to reduce the criticism and defensiveness they have manifested in previous arguments about money, and then take time to honestly understand the differences between them. A couple should understand that there are several ways couples could successfully manage their finances. They need only find one that helps both feel satisfied and regulates the flow of money adequately.

One difference, of course, centers around the issue of who controls or makes decisions about the use of available money. Traditionally, a husband may feel that managing the funds is a husband's prerogative, or his wife may claim the right because she sees herself as the better manager. Another frequent difference is related to each person's viewpoint of time. Some people would rather spend their money now to acquire things for the present, while others would prefer to save for some future purchase. Another common money difference relates to different personal values. One person may value material possessions, preferring to buy nice cars, homes, or clothes, while the other may be more interested in personal growth, using money for music lessons, pottery classes, family vacations, or college educations. Another frequent argument concerning money revolves around maintaining a public image or achieving private satisfaction. Some people wish to maintain a social position that requires a home and facilities equal to or better than the local standard. This becomes a source of conflict when someone with this orientation is married to someone who doesn't care about what other people think and who wants to put the money into less conspicuous areas.

Differences may also be evident in the ways people try to manage their money. A difference between spouses may exist, for example, in what they believe to be "good" and "bad" management. One reared in a family that operated on a budget and kept track of all expenditures may be fearful of a more flexible management system in which a budget or a record is not kept. The person who likes the more rigid system of money management is frightened that the flexible method will result in a squandering of resources. The one who favors the looser style becomes frustrated that the conservative person is so tight. The situation could have serious repercussions. The one who has a more conservative management style may become more cautious and tend to put off buying luxuries and even necessities. The one who is more flexible may make decisions more freely and purchase things impulsively.

Once money differences (there is almost always more than one) are understood, a couple can determine whether they stem from gender preferences, deeply rooted values and beliefs, or personality traits expressed in specific situations. Then an appropriate strategy for resolving the differences can be devised.

Resolving Money Differences

As a couple devises a strategy, they must realize that the only acceptable solution is one that will satisfy both. In fact, a couple should say this and agree to it openly, more than once, and with great sincerity. They should also decide to work on only one issue at a time.

Step 1. A husband and wife should say what they want to do with the money and what they expect from each other. This conversation is to clarify and promote understanding. Example: Wife—"I want us to save, to keep detailed books, and to pay cash for most of what we buy." Husband, after showing he has listened—"I can't stand all that detail. I want to have the feeling of being able to buy what I want to when I want to."

Step 2. A couple should then answer the question, "What will happen if I give you exactly what you want?" Example: Wife—"If we do what you want, I think we'll have more freedom, but I will be more afraid." Husband—"Yes, but if we follow your system, you will feel secure, but I'll feel trapped."

Step 3. A couple could then work out an adjustment, trying to find a mutually satisfactory solution. Example: Wife—"Let's see if we can set up two categories of spending. We'll be detailed for some things and flexible for others." Husband—"Then both of us will be detailed, and both will have more freedom."

Step 4. A couple should then try out what they have agreed to do, setting a time for future evaluation. For instance, they may decide to try the new system for thirty days. For other kinds of differences, they may have to set up a day-to-day evaluation and reinforcement procedure. They may, for example, reward themselves on successful days and penalize themselves on unsuccessful days. If previous conflicts about money have been vigorous or volatile, the day-to-day approach is usually helpful. Once a couple realizes a change of behavior, they may then go on to another specific issue and resolve it.

The successful resolution of any difference is based on the premise that differences are as useful and interesting as they are problematic. Every couple will find that calmly resolving differences will bring added satisfaction to their relationship.
