A. Lynn Scoresby, Foundations for a Happier Marriage ( 1986)

8

Reducing Anger

Many people believe that expressing anger is a good way to get rid of it. I am not sure that that is a good idea in any situation, and I am convinced that it is almost always inappropriate in marriage. Expressing anger in violent, explosive ways feeds the anger, increasing the chances that we will "blow up" again. The ways we act, speak, or feel will frequently entrench themselves in the marriage relationship because of ours and our spouses' responses and reinforcement. This happens whether the behavior is good or bad.

It is not realistic to assume that we will never get angry. It is usually better to expect anger and plan to deal with it in a way that does not add to our problems. Most anger in marriage comes from the idea that our spouse is not loyal, loving, or as attentive as we deserve and is choosing to be that way. It is the thought of conscious neglect that incites us. When we are given a good reason for someone's infuriating behavior, such as a handicap or ignorance, our anger diminishes. If we are wise, therefore, we will try hard to understand and to adapt to the sources of our marital anger.

When couples are not able to do this for one reason or another, they find that, whenever the anger-provoking situation recurs, the anger returns. Some couples believe that, if they do not talk about the explosive issues, the issues will go away, but no solutions are found this way. The people who feel that anything is better than having an argument fail to realize that avoiding the situation only forces anger underground. The problems we do not solve come up again and again; that is the nature of marriage. Failing to find resolutions produces hidden resentment that results in emotional distance. This hidden resentment can be lifelong. Such situations are avoidable because people who correctly understand the source of problems and correctly adapt to them can usually find solutions.

Anger and the Marriage Relationship

At this point we should note that marriage itself is a condition that can increase the likelihood of conflict. One reason for this is that marriage will naturally involve us in what is most important to us and will lower our threshold of control through the stresses of such responsibilities as child rearing, sexual relationships, and money management. (This is why many people experience more peace and less anger during trial separations. Then when they attempt life together again, they find that their separation has produced no lasting positive results.) Because this intensity is inherent in virtually all marriages, we could conclude that personal limitations might be exacerbated by marriage unless people mature emotionally and adjust properly to them.

I want to discuss here three sources of anger in marriage: (1) personal problems of one spouse or both, (2) self-defeating relationship styles, and (3) external pressures.

Personal Problems

Personal problems that affect the marriage relationship may range from an actual physical disability to a tendency to suffer from certain moods. Many personal problems can prevent full participation in the marriage relationship. As an example, one woman I know had an extremely authoritarian and abusive father. She had been glad to leave home and had become a competent and successful young adult. However, as she began to date her prospective husband and as her feelings for him deepened, she began to experience considerable amounts of anxiety. This anxiety was characterized by irrational criticisms of her fiancÃ©'s behavior.

She also felt so controlled by the relationship that she often wanted to escape and would withdraw, sulk, or pout. The couple resolved these problems well enough to gain confidence that they would enjoy being married. But when their sexual relationship began in marriage, she found that she could not respond warmly to his affection. The closer he came to establishing intimacy, the more frightened she became. Because he could not see how he was a direct part of the problem, he became angry at his wife's inability to act in an expected or normal way. His resentment, of course, worsened the problem, and she grew more afraid of her husband's insensitivity and frustration.

Another common personal problem that can invite anger into marriage is depression. When a person experiences prolonged periods of depression, he or she is unable to be fully involved or to function well in marriage. Even though a spouse may respond with empathy and sensitivity (which, incidentally, can sometimes worsen the situation), resentment begins to build and eventually may explode into anger.

Other personal problems that affect a marriage may include excessive alcohol consumption, drug abuse, physical injury, or the inability to organize one's schedule to allow time for sustaining the marriage relationship. One example of the last problem comes from the life of a physician who had created a successful medical practice. The doctor felt a considerable obligation to his patients. He had reason to feel obligated; his work was important. He believed it required long hours at three different hospitals and kept him busy from early morning to late at night. Having endured this for years, his wife finally got angry and threatened divorce.

His marriage was nearly saved when he became seriously ill with a viral infection. His confinement and recuperation gave the two of them time to talk about their marriage and to be involved with each other. Unfortunately, when he recovered, he quickly returned to his previous schedule. She quite correctly interpreted this as an indication that he felt more strongly about his patients and medical practice than he did about his marriage. She is now living with their children in their new, huge, and beautiful home. He is living alone in a small apartment near one of the hospitals.

If the personal limitations of marriage partners are relatively insignificant, are manifested rarely or temporarily, or are easily remedied, most couples can easily maintain a positive marital balance. If the limitations amount to chronic problems, however, anger will also compound the problems, and solutions will be more difficult to find.

If an offended spouse can see no remedies for a partner's problem, he or she will often decide to dissolve the marriage. But high praise should go to those who can choose a better option—to live in a less than satisfying marriage. These generous people are required to adjust their expectations and emotional needs and to do it without complaint. Such sacrifice can lead to a deeper understanding of faithfulness and love. Unfortunately, that understanding is not obtained easily and is not something all can attain. The choice to stay or to leave a marriage plagued by a chronic personal problem is among the most difficult choices anyone could make.

Relationship Styles

When the famous anthropologist Margaret Mead first began her observations of primitive tribes in New Guinea, her husband Gregory Bateson, also an anthropologist, traveled with her. We know less about him than about his wife because his work was in a more specialized field than hers, but he made significant contributions to understanding human relationships. He learned that all two-person relationships form styles of shared behavior that become habitual. He acquired his knowledge about relationship styles by watching how the members of the three prominent tribes treated each other.

He wrote that when the members of tribe A went to the village of tribe B, tribe A yelled and shook their spears and shields, and tribe B became increasingly submissive. Instead of placating the anger of tribe A, tribe B's submissiveness led to more agitation. In response to the increased agitation, the members of tribe B became even more submissive. This spiral of dominance and submission continued until the members of tribe A became so angry that one of them threw a spear, killing a member of tribe B.

Dr. Bateson did not fully understand what he was observing until, at a later time, he watched the members of tribe A visit the village of tribe C. When tribe A shook their spears, yelled, and rattled their shields, tribe C responded with identical behavior. This response stimulated tribe A to become even louder and more vicious, which drew a like response from tribe C. Their mutual anger escalated until a member of one of the tribes threw a spear and started a small skirmish, resulting in the death and injury of members of both tribes.

Dr. Bateson watched these events take place between the tribes on many different occasions. He concluded that people form relationship styles that tend to be habitual. Once learned, these styles continue to be acted out again and again. He identified a relationship style in which two participants exchange opposite behavior. That is, if one were dominant, the other would be submissive. If one were quiet, the other would be talkative. If one were clean, the other would be messy. If one were shy, the other would be gregarious.

When behavior is paired together often enough, as it tends to be in marriage, one person's behavior becomes a stimulus for the other's behavior. This means that the more dominating a husband might become, the more submissive the wife would be in response. Or the more the wife wanted to talk, the more quiet he would become. Dr. Bateson called this relationship style complementary because the two parties exchanged (or traded) opposite actions.

A couple with a complementary relationship style will face a sense of rigidity and control that stifles their freedom. Furthermore, such a style often leads to anger. For example, if one spouse is a dominating force, the other spouse develops ways to resist or to not respond. When the dominant partner demands a response, the other spouse will often resist by being late for appointments or by being passive. The dominant person, for instance, may ask the other to perform a simple task, but the submissive person appears to forget, resulting in the dominant person's anger.

Couples with strong complementary behavior have a unique pattern of arguing: one gives reasons, rationale, lessons, and sermonettes, while the other remains subdued. If the subdued spouse does not respond at all, the more outgoing person becomes even angrier and more frustrated, condemning the other for lack of response. The active spouse invariably forgets that the passive person is passive because the dominant person is dominant.

Couples should remember that both spouses act to create a complementary relationship. In a dominant/submissive relationship, one spouse cannot be dominant unless the other is submissive, nor can one spouse be submissive unless the other is dominant.

Gregory Bateson identified the second relationship style as one featuring identical or similar behavior. In the second style couples or groups develop symmetrical relationships. A couple with this style exchange identical actions—blaming, attempting to control, talking, not talking, approaching, withdrawing—one person in response to the other. For such a couple, any action may trigger a symmetrical response, even a positive action. One couple of my acquaintance reported that early in their marriage they had difficulty saying "I love you" to each other. The reason for this was that, if one spouse said, "I love you," the other spouse felt required to reciprocate. It became frustrating for one to say, "I love you," while the other felt forced to respond with "I love you, too." They both sensed a reduction in freedom. They attempted to solve this problem by not expressing their love for each other. Finally one suggested that for a brief period they agree to not respond in kind to declarations of love. When the husband told his wife he loved her, she remained silent or expressed her reaction by a touch or gesture. Gradually they changed their symmetrical relationship style into something more satisfying.

The emotions in a symmetrical relationship tend to be unstable, even volatile. There is intense competitiveness, and both spouses scrutinize each other's behavior, often resorting to mutual criticism and blame. Over a period of time, each accumulates an arsenal of verbal weapons. Like those in a complementary relationship, couples within a symmetrical one have a unique style of conflict: when an argument occurs, it starts with something relatively minor and escalates gradually, each spouse saying increasingly hurtful things until both spouses reach their limits in anger and frustration.

I watched an argument like this in my office. As I watched with great surprise, the wife accused her husband of being unable to provide properly for herself and the children. He responded that he did not feel motivated to provide for a wife who was frigid. She countered by suggesting that she could never be responsive to someone who was as unclean as her husband. He acknowledged his lack of cleanliness but suggested it was caused by her inability to organize the house, especially his clothes. This dialogue continued with escalating anger until she announced that she was no longer willing to tolerate his insults and would leave him. He had a response equal to his wife's threat: he simply said, "Good." She then countered by saying, "Oh, no, you don't. You want me to be the one to leave and be the guilty person." She announced that she would not be the one to leave the marriage, and they concluded their argument with angry silence.

Obviously, it does not matter what is talked about in either a complementary or a symmetrical argument. The issue is not the topic of conversation but the style of interaction that baits and catches both. Couples with these relationship styles have rehearsed their exchanges so frequently that their arguments have fallen into habitual patterns. Typically, both partners loyally carry out their roles even though they may both be unsatisfied by them.

Modest amounts of complementary and symmetrical interaction appear in most marriages. But when there is too much of either, the relationship is unhealthy and unhappy. Seeing someone responding exactly as you act or exactly opposite from the way you act does not create happiness. In both complementary and symmetrical relationships, couples are usually aware that they are caught in repetition, but they feel they can do little to break out of it. The anger comes from the habitual nature of the exchanges.

Stress from External Events

Yet another source of anger comes from events outside the marriage that increase stress or pressure, which in turn intensifies emotions. For example, pressures from work may be brought home in the form of frustration and simmering anger. This reduces the person's patience, and any arguments that occur are primarily attempts to release the preexisting stress. Another example is when one partner faces many tasks to be performed in a short period of time. Trying to get everything accomplished results in stress, increasing the likelihood of frustration and anger.

Relationships with friends and relatives, if unhappy, could also be considered sources of external pressure. One couple earned their livelihood by participating in a family business. The husband worked daily with other members of his immediate family, who also expected him to participate in family reunions and other family activities monthly. So demanding was this schedule that the wife correctly felt that he was unduly influenced by his family and not committed or involved enough in their family. The external pressure that he felt from his family and that she felt from his busy schedule caused their anger.

Sometimes external pressures are caused by events beyond our control. These may include loss of a job or a move in order to change a job. Other examples include neighborhood problems, children's problems at school, events that cause social embarrassment, or demands made because of church membership.

The point to remember is that external pressures overload emotions and increase the likelihood of anger. At first we may fail to recognize the source of pressure and mistakenly assume that someone else, such as a spouse or child, is the problem. In that case we misplace our anger, directing it to someone else who is innocent. As we mature, we can more easily recognize external pressure and can attempt to defuse our responses to it. If we are successful, we keep ourselves healthy and our homes more peaceful. If we fail, however, the sense of our inadequacy makes us even more vulnerable to the effects of stress.

What We Can Do

My purpose in describing problems is to help a couple recognize them more easily. When we identify a marital problem early and accurately, we go a long way toward avoiding married lives plagued by confusion and frustration. More importantly, we can plan our responses to the problems. Most people with a history of problems also have a history of attempted solutions that failed. Table 6 will help identify types of marital problems and their possible solutions:

Table 6 Marital Problems and Solutions

Problem Identifying Characteristics Possible Solutions Personal Problems A person suffers from The spouse without the behavior or from moods problem must avoid too that prevent him from much involvement with or participating fully in too strong a reaction to the ordinary marital activities. spouse with the problem. A mood or behavior can be The couple must achieve a periodic, such as depression, good balance between or chronic, such as behavior what they do separately arising from injury. and what they do together. Relationship styles: Spouses act in opposite A couple can increase the 1. Complementary ways. They feel a strong loss variety of what they do style of freedom and spontaneity. together and what they talk Their relationship style about. They can rehearse escalates toward increased for specific situations rigidity and bitterness. In responses that break their arguments one person is pattern of argument. active and the other is passive. 2. Symmetrical style The spouses' behavior A spouse can try behaving patterns are identical. The in new ways. A couple can couple's relationship rehearse noncombative escalates toward increased responses and use them at emotional instability. In critical times during arguments couples trade arguments. A couple can criticisms. Arguments are give each other permission poorly resolved and can in advance to act as they stopped only by withdrawal. are already acting (i.e., "When I talk loud, it's all right if you talk loud too"). External pressure The source of the pressure A couple can (1) identify is usually recognizable, but the source of the pressure, before it is correctly (2) attempt to alter it or its identified, it frequently effects, (3) work to results in misplaced and increase positive and immaturely expressed anger. pleasurable activities Sometimes the anger is together, and (4) learn accompanied by withdrawal ways to insulate the and self-pity. Spouses may marriage and family from feel that they no longer have the stress of external control over their lives. events.

I mentioned earlier that problems have a better chance to be solved by correctly matching a solution to the problem. The information provided in Table 6 shows that each problem must be met by a different solution.

Solving Personal Problems

Quite frequently, when a person is experiencing personal problems, the spouse becomes the caretaker or the "problem solver." Often, the problem solver's attempts to help are met by increased frustration, compounding the problem. It is usually better for the spouse without the problem to remain separate by (1) acknowledging there is a problem, (2) expressing concern, (3) offering availability if needed, and (4) not getting involved.

If attempts to help are not actually helpful, then an ugly pattern can evolve. The "disabled" person may actually begin using the problem to get attention, and the problem will continue as long as one spouse receives numerous responses from the other.

The suggested solution for personal problems is for the couple to maintain a healthy balance between separateness and togetherness. Suppose, for example, that a wife has episodes of depression. Her husband has attempted to help her out of the depression by doing things around the house and responding warmly and affectionately to her desires. Some of his actions may be appropriate, but they can lead to a habitual situation. It would be better for the husband to say that he notices his wife's situation and is therefore not insensitive and that he has a desire to help her and will do so whenever she requests help. This places responsibility for the solution of the problem on the person who has the problem. When this person must ask for help or must ask for some sort of support, the likelihood of anger between the two is reduced. The task for the spouse without the problem is to remain outside the problem area until the "emotionally disabled" person has taken some responsibility.

Another possible solution for a personal problem is to enlarge the discussion and explanation of it. Quite frequently one person carries an emotional problem from the past into the marriage and has tried to solve it privately. The spouse may be keeping the problem from open scrutiny and may continue to harbor false beliefs or unresolved attitudes. Part of the solution of a personal problem comes from a person explaining and talking about the problem, assuming responsibility for it, and using the partner only as a source of clarification and understanding. This allows the spouse without the problem to remain separate, help more effectively, and avoid anger.

Improving Relationship Styles

The proposed solution for anger stemming from a relationship style is fairly self-evident. If we increase the number of different ways we act toward each other, we are less likely to be caught in either a complementary or a symmetrical pattern. A couple could participate in new and different, even adventurous, activities and try new ways of acting in old situations. If a couple recognize that they both create the problem, they can cooperate in increasing the number of ways they act toward each other. Quite frequently some very specific situations, such as mealtimes or conversations about the children, are linked to complementary or symmetrical exchanges. It may be that the only time anger occurs in the relationship is at these specific times. Knowing this, a couple can decide exactly what they want to do in that specific situation, rehearse it, and, when the situation arises, carry out their new "noncomplementary" or "nonsymmetrical" behavior. Rehearsing for specific situations is an effective way to reduce the negative effects of relationship styles.

Reducing Stress from External Events

The start to solving problems stemming from external pressure is to identify the sources of stress. A couple can then work on alleviating the stress, being careful not to focus so much on the source of stress that they forget to have positive and satisfying experiences together. If they allow themselves to worry more about external things than about positive marital interaction, they will develop new problems and fail to create mutual support. When a couple face financial strain, for example, they can organize mutual activities that give both of them comfort and satisfaction. Although this does not directly solve the problem, it effectively reduces feelings of anger.

A couple can also increase the frequency of discussion about the stressful circumstances. Quite often a spouse will react to external pressure by keeping his or her family from it, secretly carrying all or part of the burden alone. A couple that frequently discuss the problem can develop the feeling that they are mutually working toward a solution. The reassurance both spouses feel because they are not alone will improve their ability to deal with the problem, and the closeness of working together will create a stronger bond.

Anger arising from problems is almost always an enemy of marital happiness. A couple can reduce the feelings and expression of anger through early and accurate recognition of problems, the maintenance of positive marital activities, and the knowledge that anger from problems is destructive. Many couples forget to solve their problems because each spouse is angry at the other for getting angry. Most of us do not function well when we hear or see someone else's anger. Expressions of anger tend to increase apprehension, which reduces effectiveness. When we diminish our anger by working to solve our problems, we increase the likelihood that we will be more steadfast in our marriage, achieving an actual change of behavior that can improve the quality of our lives.
