A. Lynn Scoresby, Foundations for a Happier Marriage ( 1986)

9

Accepting with Hope

A marriage flows along on a stream of time. It has a past, present, and future. Few of us truly realize that the way we view time affects the quality of the relationship. For instance, if a couple habitually recall and discuss unhappy memories, the sadness of the past will influence what they feel in the present, Likewise, if a person over-idealizes how things should or will be, his appreciation of what is actually happening in the present will be hindered.

Of all the attitudes we can have about marriage, two are especially important as touchstones of happiness: hope, belief that gradual improvements can be made as time passes; and acceptance, recognition and adaptation without blame or criticism. Linked together, these two attitudes can turn time into a powerful ally for marriage. Accepting with hope means bringing everything good from the past and the future to bear on the present.

I am not sure why we form illusions that prevent us from knowing exactly what is going on. I do know that people who are angry at their spouses, troubled about some aspect of their marriage, or just generally depressed fail to perceive reality. On occasion, I have asked someone in one of those categories to close his eyes and tell me how many pictures are on the walls of my office and how many plants are in the room. Even those who have been in the room several times fail to answer correctly. "What else are you missing?" I ask. When such a person is pressed to make more careful observation, he always finds that a great deal in his life has gone unnoticed, so focused was he on pain and trouble. Sometimes, after realizing this much, a person can take the next step to learn what he fails to understand.

Acceptance

Some couples live together as virtual strangers because they are unskilled in learning about each other. One or both spouses may be unable to talk personally or to be sensitive to each other's thoughts or feelings. Another person may focus so restrictedly on certain actions, such as expressions of nonloving behavior, that he or she will ignore all other actions. A common example of this is a man who has learned to focus so much on getting things done that he becomes concerned only about external productivity and cannot or will not recognize another person's—or even his own—feelings or motives. Such a man will discuss the need to be organized, while his wife feels misunderstood and unaccepted. Still other people are unwilling to spend the time necessary to learn about and understand a spouse and to maintain intimacy in the marriage.

Acceptance implies that we are willing to learn about another person, that we will notice. It also implies that we are willing to suspend judgment on our spouses' personalities and actions. As children, we probably learned to judge things by standards of good and bad, right and wrong. As adults, we expanded our judgment categories to include logical and illogical, rational and emotional. In marriage we may keep trying to fit our partners into one of these categories. All too frequently spouses will judge their partners to be "bad" or "illogical" at a time when their partners are just being themselves. Acceptance means understanding other people's reasons for behaving, and allowing them to act without judging them by our standards.

To illustrate how ludicrous judgments can be, consider the wife who says, "Gee, it's cold in here," while her husband seriously replies, "Oh, you're wrong. I'm so warm I feel like opening the window." Like many of us, he is assuming that if he feels something, he is right. If he is warm, someone who claims to be cold must be wrong. But he is trying to do the impossible: judge another's personal experience by his own. All of us are unique: we possess a set of lifetime experiences peculiar to ourselves, our own values, and our own personalities. When we choose to voice them or share them in other ways, acceptance requires that we suspend all judgment and attempt to understand. This only requires a little pause and an effort to seek for more information.

Acceptance also requires showing consistent warmth. I first became fully aware of this in a classroom discussion as a college student. While I was expressing an opinion, a fellow student nodded, smiled, and appeared interested in what I was saying. I felt his encouragement and support, but when I finished, he asked a question to clarify some point and then said, "I disagree with you." My first reaction was surprise, followed by a feeling of betrayal. As I thought about it later, however, I realized that he had been warmly attentive despite his disagreement. This characteristic was something I wanted to acquire, because I knew that when I did not approve of or did not agree with someone, I was less attentive to and less concerned about him.

Many married people display a warm involvement only when all is easy and is going well. They do not realize that such judgmental involvement leads their partners to say only what might be acceptable, so as to avoid rejection. Those who fear the withdrawal of warmth learn to close themselves and to not give all of themselves to a marriage. Many men who are stingy or inconsistent with warmth do not understand why their wives become less spontaneous and interested in them.

To succeed at warmth, we can learn to treat it as something that is always present because we are always willing to show it. By expressing care for the other person before discussing the issue, warmth, as part of acceptance, can be sustained even when conflict arises. The following examples show how this idea can be applied:

A wife has had an accident that crumpled the rear fender and bumper of her car. Her husband sees the car in the garage before he sees his wife. He asks first about her welfare and then about the accident, listening to her explanation and expressing gratitude for her safety. (No amount of anger will reduce the cost of the repairs, even if the accident was her fault.)

An overly stressed husband reacts improperly and angrily to his children. His wife hustles them out of his path, avoiding entering into the fray. Then she begins to comfort him by asking if he wants to talk, wants to rest, or wants to be alone. She tells of her care for him. (If she gets angry at him, he will only get angrier.)

A miscommunication results in a husband waiting for his wife for two hours at the wrong place. He expresses his frustration at the situation without accusing his wife of stupidity. He waits until he is calmer and then opens a discussion about how to prevent such a miscommunication from happening again. (Anger and accusation will only arouse defensiveness and hurt feelings.)

Acceptance has many benefits for marriage. It reduces the number of arguments because neither spouse feels judged or accused. Often this is the reason some couples can honestly say they do not argue with each other. Acceptance increases a couple's desire to be together. It reduces pressure and increases freedom since each spouse can determine on his own what he wants to be and wants to do. Frequently the absence of pressure increases a couple's desire for each other's companionship. Acceptance also increases the amount of security a spouse feels. If we want to feel more secure, we can do so not by trying to get others to accept us, but by beginning to accept others more.

Acceptance and Hope

I first learned about the importance of hope in marriage from a woman in her middle twenties. She was pretty and articulate but very unhappy. She had been happily and excitedly in love when she married three years earlier, but now she claimed to have no love for her husband. She could recall many happy times in her marriage before the day she told her mother about her wonderful sex life. Her mother cautioned her that being too aggressive sexually might be unbecoming. Furthermore, occasional comments from close relatives about her husband's "crude" eating habits or "funny" way of pronouncing some words finally began to affect her. This susceptible young woman started to notice these traits for the first time. She let them annoy her and began to withdraw her feelings from her husband, not only because of her negative thoughts, but also because she was thinking about him in an impersonal, almost clinical way. Eventually she concluded that she did not love him anymore and that she had no hope to ever love him again.

We might think her very immature to be so easily influenced. Hopefulness, however, is delicate, and for some of us it can be easily lost. If we concentrate on what is lacking in others, we will not keep trying to become better, and we will be unlikely to give them the encouragement they need to improve. Hope is found in the praise or compliments we give—"You do that very well"—to people who are not always as good at something as they could be. We praise because we believe, and hope that what is less than perfect will get better.

Statements of love for each other and refusal to criticize also convey hope. If we acknowledge the love we feel today, we create hope that love will continue in the future. When we experience enough hopeful moments in the present, we can share a belief that our marriage will succeed, and this belief will give us the strength to travel through rough spots ahead.

Hope and Happiness

Many people would not be willing to stake their happiness on something as intangible as hope. More often people consider basing their happiness on something more tangible, such as money, a nice home, or a social life. While such things may be important, some people are quite happy without any of these tangible supports. Indeed, each person's source of happiness is to some degree unique: what each of us is willing to rely on or to believe in may be different. Nevertheless, it is hopefulness—simple and sometimes subtle hope—that triggers the sense of happiness in all of us.

If couples in conflict could live one day together without conflict—without discussing sad memories, without blaming each other, without wishing for the perfect person whom neither will ever become—they would feel at the day's end a small ripple of hope that tomorrow could be even better. Just a little bit of hope makes a spouse feel safer from unkindness and secure enough to risk small gestures of affection. With that, the sending and receiving of messages of love become possible. As we are warmed by love, the hurt begins to fade. "It just might work," we think. "We might make it this time," an inner voice tells us. Even with setbacks, hope gives us the strength to try again. Our happiness increases because we begin to have confidence that whatever is good will remain.

Many married couples have times of despair, but they try again and through their efforts find more happiness. Unfortunately many people do not realize that their hope is what improved their feelings. If we could recognize the encouragement we get from hope, we would be more eager to find it and reduce the unhappiness we feel at times. How much effort do we need to make to say a few words of encouragement, to show some warmth, or to use a few gestures of caring? How difficult is it to ignore some hurtful memory in favor of a more pleasant memory? How much strain do we feel when we take time to listen, understand, and accept? We need only the will and consistency to do these things. On the other hand, recovery from the spiteful words we say, from rejection and critical judgments, or from withdrawal is much more difficult.

We can easily generate hope for ourselves that living together will be increasingly enjoyable. We need only recognize that happiness results from the hope expressed when we share pleasant things and when we show love at times we do not have to or at times our partner cannot.

Many marriages need not fail. We do need to not do the hurtful things humans are capable of doing when they do not care. We do not have to consign ourselves to the loneliness of divorce if we will believe in and rely on the hope that comes from communicating that we love each other, what we appreciate in each other, and when we feel attracted to each other.
