President Monson warns of attractive lures that can destroy us.

Many years ago, on an assignment to the beautiful islands of Tonga, I was privileged to visit our Church school, the Liahona High School. Entering one classroom, I noticed the rapt attention the children gave their instructor. In his hand he held a strange-appearing fishing lure made with a round stone and large seashells. I learned the Tongan word for this lure is maka-feke. It means “octopus lure.”

The teacher explained that Tongan fishermen glide over a reef, paddling their outrigger canoes with one hand and dangling the maka-feke over the side with the other. An octopus dashes out from its rocky lair and seizes the lure, mistaking it for a much-desired meal. So determined is the grasp of the octopus and so firm is its instinct not to give up the precious prize that the fisherman can flip it right into the canoe.

It was easy for the teacher to point out to the wide-eyed youth that the evil one—even Satan—has fashioned maka-fekes with which to ensnare unsuspecting persons.

Today we are surrounded by the maka-fekes with which Satan attempts to entice us and then ensnare us. Once grasped, such maka-fekes are ever so difficult—and sometimes nearly impossible—to relinquish.

Constantly before us are the maka-fekes of immorality and pornography. I mention next the maka-feke of drugs, including alcohol.

There are countless other maka-fekes which he dangles before us to lead us from the path of righteousness. Cunningly positioned are those cleverly disguised maka-fekes beckoning us to grasp them and to lose that which we most desire. Do not be deceived. Our Heavenly Father has given us the capacity to think and to love. We have the power to resist temptation.

Pause to pray. Listen to that still, small voice which speaks to the depths of our souls. By doing so, we turn from destruction, from death, and find happiness and life everlasting.

1.  Why does an octopus grab a maka-feke? Why won’t it let go? How does this relate to your own choices?

2.  How can we recognize Satan’s maka-fekes?

3.  Besides the maka-fekes of immorality, pornography, and drugs, what are some others to beware of?
