Section 1

1 Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on

high, and whose eyes are upon all men; yea, verily I say: Hearken ye people

from afar; and ye that are upon the islands of the sea, listen together. 2 For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape;

and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither

heart that shall not be penetrated.

3 And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities

shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed. 4 And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my

disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days.

5 And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have

commanded them.

6 Behold, this is mine authority, and the authority of my servants, and my

preface unto the book of my commandments, which I have given them to

publish unto you, O inhabitants of the earth.

7 Wherefore, fear and tremble, O ye people, for what I the Lord have decreed

in them shall be fulfilled.

8 And verily I say unto you, that they who go forth, bearing these tidings

unto the inhabitants of the earth, to them is power given to seal both on earth

and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious;

9 Yea, verily, to seal them up unto the day when the wrath of God shall be

poured out upon the wicked without measure—

10 Unto the day when the Lord shall come to recompense unto every man

according to his work, and measure to every man according to the measure

which he has measured to his fellow man.

11 Wherefore the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that

will hear may hear:

12 Prepare ye, prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh; 13 And the anger of the Lord is kindled, and his sword is bathed in heaven,

and it shall fall upon the inhabitants of the earth.

14 And the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they

who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants,

neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off

from among the people;

15 For they have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine

everlasting covenant;

16 They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man

walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in

the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth

old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall. 17 Wherefore, I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the

inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake

unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments;

section 1

1

things unto the world; and all this that it might be fulfilled, which was written

by the prophets—

19 The weak things of the world shall come forth and break down the mighty

and strong ones, that man should not counsel his fellow man, neither trust in

the arm of flesh—

20 But that every man might speak in the name of God the Lord, even the

Savior of the world;

21 That faith also might increase in the earth;

22 That mine everlasting covenant might be established;

23 That the fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the

simple unto the ends of the world, and before kings and rulers.

24 Behold, I am God and have spoken it; these commandments are of me, and

were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their

language, that they might come to understanding.

25 And inasmuch as they erred it might be made known;

26 And inasmuch as they sought wisdom they might be instructed;

27 And inasmuch as they sinned they might be chastened, that they might

repent;

28 And inasmuch as they were humble they might be made strong, and blessed

from on high, and receive knowledge from time to time.

29 And after having received the record of the Nephites, yea, even my servant

Joseph Smith, Jun., might have power to translate through the mercy of God,

by the power of God, the Book of Mormon.

30 And also those to whom these commandments were given, might have

power to lay the foundation of this church, and to bring it forth out of

obscurity and out of darkness, the only true and living church upon the face of

the whole earth, with which I, the Lord, am well pleased, speaking unto the

church collectively and not individually—

31 For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance; 32 Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord

shall be forgiven;

33 And he that repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he

has received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of

Hosts.

34 And again, verily I say unto you, O inhabitants of the earth: I the Lord am

willing to make these things known unto all flesh;

35 For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the

day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall

be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion. 36 And also the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their

midst, and shall come down in judgment upon Idumea, or the world. 37 Search these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the

prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled.

38 What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and

though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but

shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants,

2

section 1

39 For behold, and lo, the Lord is God, and the Spirit beareth record, and the

record is true, and the truth abideth forever and ever. Amen.

Section 2

1 Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the

prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. 2 And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the

fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers.

3 If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming.

Section 3

1 The works, and the designs, and the purposes of God cannot be frustrated,

neither can they come to naught.

2 For God doth not walk in crooked paths, neither doth he turn to the right

hand nor to the left, neither doth he vary from that which he hath said,

therefore his paths are straight, and his course is one eternal round.

3 Remember, remember that it is not the work of God that is frustrated, but

the work of men;

4 For although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many

mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the

counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal

desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him. 5 Behold, you have been entrusted with these things, but how strict were

your commandments; and remember also the promises which were made to

you, if you did not transgress them.

6 And behold, how oft you have transgressed the commandments and the

laws of God, and have gone on in the persuasions of men.

7 For, behold, you should not have feared man more than God. Although

men set at naught the counsels of God, and despise his words—

8 Yet you should have been faithful; and he would have extended his arm and

supported you against all the fiery darts of the adversary; and he would have

been with you in every time of trouble.

9 Behold, thou art Joseph, and thou wast chosen to do the work of the Lord,

but because of transgression, if thou art not aware thou wilt fall.

10 But remember, God is merciful; therefore, repent of that which thou hast

done which is contrary to the commandment which I gave you, and thou art

still chosen, and art again called to the work;

11 Except thou do this, thou shalt be delivered up and become as other men,

and have no more gift.

12 And when thou deliveredst up that which God had given thee sight and

power to translate, thou deliveredst up that which was sacred into the hands of

a wicked man,

13 Who has set at naught the counsels of God, and has broken the most sacred

promises which were made before God, and has depended upon his own

section 2

3

14 And this is the reason that thou hast lost thy privileges for a season— 15 For thou hast suffered the counsel of thy director to be trampled upon from

the beginning.

16 Nevertheless, my work shall go forth, for inasmuch as the knowledge of a

Savior has come unto the world, through the testimony of the Jews, even so

shall the knowledge of a Savior come unto my people—

17 And to the Nephites, and the Jacobites, and the Josephites, and the

Zoramites, through the testimony of their fathers—

18 And this testimony shall come to the knowledge of the Lamanites, and the

Lemuelites, and the Ishmaelites, who dwindled in unbelief because of the

iniquity of their fathers, whom the Lord has suffered to destroy their brethren

the Nephites, because of their iniquities and their abominations.

19 And for this very purpose are these plates preserved, which contain these

records—that the promises of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to

his people;

20 And that the Lamanites might come to the knowledge of their fathers, and

that they might know the promises of the Lord, and that they may believe the

gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith

in his name, and that through their repentance they might be saved. Amen.

Section 4

1 Now behold, a marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of

men.

2 Therefore, O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him

with all your heart, might, mind and strength, that ye may stand blameless

before God at the last day.

3 Therefore, if ye have desires to serve God ye are called to the work;

4 For behold the field is white already to harvest; and lo, he that thrusteth in

his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but

bringeth salvation to his soul;

5 And faith, hope, charity and love, with an eye single to the glory of God,

qualify him for the work.

6 Remember faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly

kindness, godliness, charity, humility, diligence.

7 Ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Amen.

Section 5

1 Behold, I say unto you, that as my servant Martin Harris has desired a witness

at my hand, that you, my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., have got the plates of

which you have testified and borne record that you have received of me; 2 And now, behold, this shall you say unto him—he who spake unto you,

said unto you: I, the Lord, am God, and have given these things unto you, my

servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and have commanded you that you should stand as

a witness of these things;

4

section 5

you should not show them except to those persons to whom I commanded

you; and you have no power over them except I grant it unto you.

4 And you have a gift to translate the plates; and this is the first gift that I

bestowed upon you; and I have commanded that you should pretend to no

other gift until my purpose is fulfilled in this; for I will grant unto you no other

gift until it is finished.

5 Verily, I say unto you, that woe shall come unto the inhabitants of the earth

if they will not hearken unto my words;

6 For hereafter you shall be ordained and go forth and deliver my words unto

the children of men.

7 Behold, if they will not believe my words, they would not believe you, my

servant Joseph, if it were possible that you should show them all these things

which I have committed unto you.

8 Oh, this unbelieving and stiffnecked generation—mine anger is kindled

against them.

9 Behold, verily I say unto you, I have reserved those things which I have

entrusted unto you, my servant Joseph, for a wise purpose in me, and it shall be

made known unto future generations;

10 But this generation shall have my word through you;

11 And in addition to your testimony, the testimony of three of my servants,

whom I shall call and ordain, unto whom I will show these things, and they

shall go forth with my words that are given through you.

12 Yea, they shall know of a surety that these things are true, for from heaven

will I declare it unto them.

13 I will give them power that they may behold and view these things as they

are;

14 And to none else will I grant this power, to receive this same testimony

among this generation, in this the beginning of the rising up and the coming

forth of my church out of the wilderness—clear as the moon, and fair as the

sun, and terrible as an army with banners.

15 And the testimony of three witnesses will I send forth of my word. 16 And behold, whosoever believeth on my words, them will I visit with the

manifestation of my Spirit; and they shall be born of me, even of water and of

the Spirit—

17 And you must wait yet a little while, for ye are not yet ordained— 18 And their testimony shall also go forth unto the condemnation of this

generation if they harden their hearts against them;

19 For a desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth,

and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent not, until

the earth is empty, and the inhabitants thereof are consumed away and utterly

destroyed by the brightness of my coming.

20 Behold, I tell you these things, even as I also told the people of the

destruction of Jerusalem; and my word shall be verified at this time as it hath

hitherto been verified.

21 And now I command you, my servant Joseph, to repent and walk more

uprightly before me, and to yield to the persuasions of men no more;

section 5

5

commanded you; and if you do this, behold I grant unto you eternal life, even

if you should be slain.

23 And now, again, I speak unto you, my servant Joseph, concerning the man

that desires the witness—

24 Behold, I say unto him, he exalts himself and does not humble himself

sufficiently before me; but if he will bow down before me, and humble himself

in mighty prayer and faith, in the sincerity of his heart, then will I grant unto

him a view of the things which he desires to see.

25 And then he shall say unto the people of this generation: Behold, I have

seen the things which the Lord hath shown unto Joseph Smith, Jun., and I

know of a surety that they are true, for I have seen them, for they have been

shown unto me by the power of God and not of man.

26 And I the Lord command him, my servant Martin Harris, that he shall say

no more unto them concerning these things, except he shall say: I have seen

them, and they have been shown unto me by the power of God; and these are

the words which he shall say.

27 But if he deny this he will break the covenant which he has before

covenanted with me, and behold, he is condemned.

28 And now, except he humble himself and acknowledge unto me the things

that he has done which are wrong, and covenant with me that he will keep my

commandments, and exercise faith in me, behold, I say unto him, he shall have

no such views, for I will grant unto him no views of the things of which I have

spoken.

29 And if this be the case, I command you, my servant Joseph, that you shall

say unto him, that he shall do no more, nor trouble me any more concerning

this matter.

30 And if this be the case, behold, I say unto thee Joseph, when thou hast

translated a few more pages thou shalt stop for a season, even until I command

thee again; then thou mayest translate again.

31 And except thou do this, behold, thou shalt have no more gift, and I will

take away the things which I have entrusted with thee.

32 And now, because I foresee the lying in wait to destroy thee, yea, I foresee

that if my servant Martin Harris humbleth not himself and receive a witness

from my hand, that he will fall into transgression;

33 And there are many that lie in wait to destroy thee from off the face of the

earth; and for this cause, that thy days may be prolonged, I have given unto

thee these commandments.

34 Yea, for this cause I have said: Stop, and stand still until I command thee,

and I will provide means whereby thou mayest accomplish the thing which I

have commanded thee.

35 And if thou art faithful in keeping my commandments, thou shalt be lifted

up at the last day. Amen.

Section 6

1 A great and marvelous work is about to come forth unto the children of men.

6

section 6

sharper than a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of both joints and

marrow; therefore give heed unto my words.

3 Behold, the field is white already to harvest; therefore, whoso desireth to

reap, let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day lasts,

that he may treasure up for his soul everlasting salvation in the kingdom of

God.

4 Yea, whosoever will thrust in his sickle and reap, the same is called of God. 5 Therefore, if you will ask of me you shall receive; if you will knock it shall

be opened unto you.

6 Now, as you have asked, behold, I say unto you, keep my commandments,

and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion;

7 Seek not for riches but for wisdom, and behold, the mysteries of God shall

be unfolded unto you, and then shall you be made rich. Behold, he that hath

eternal life is rich.

8 Verily, verily, I say unto you, even as you desire of me so it shall be unto you;

and if you desire, you shall be the means of doing much good in this

generation.

9 Say nothing but repentance unto this generation; keep my commandments,

and assist to bring forth my work, according to my commandments, and you

shall be blessed.

10 Behold thou hast a gift, and blessed art thou because of thy gift. Remember

it is sacred and cometh from above—

11 And if thou wilt inquire, thou shalt know mysteries which are great and

marvelous; therefore thou shalt exercise thy gift, that thou mayest find out

mysteries, that thou mayest bring many to the knowledge of the truth, yea,

convince them of the error of their ways.

12 Make not thy gift known unto any save it be those who are of thy faith.

Trifle not with sacred things.

13 If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be

saved in the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for

there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation.

14 Verily, verily, I say unto thee, blessed art thou for what thou hast done; for

thou hast inquired of me, and behold, as often as thou hast inquired thou hast

received instruction of my Spirit. If it had not been so, thou wouldst not have

come to the place where thou art at this time.

15 Behold, thou knowest that thou hast inquired of me and I did enlighten thy

mind; and now I tell thee these things that thou mayest know that thou hast

been enlightened by the Spirit of truth;

16 Yea, I tell thee, that thou mayest know that there is none else save God that

knowest thy thoughts and the intents of thy heart.

17 I tell thee these things as a witness unto thee—that the words or the work

which thou hast been writing are true.

18 Therefore be diligent; stand by my servant Joseph, faithfully, in whatsoever

difficult circumstances he may be for the word’s sake.

19 Admonish him in his faults, and also receive admonition of him. Be

patient; be sober; be temperate; have patience, faith, hope and charity.

section 6

7

therefore treasure up these words in thy heart. Be faithful and diligent in

keeping the commandments of God, and I will encircle thee in the arms of my

love.

21 Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I am the same that came unto

mine own, and mine own received me not. I am the light which shineth in

darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not.

22 Verily, verily, I say unto you, if you desire a further witness, cast your mind

upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know

concerning the truth of these things.

23 Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater

witness can you have than from God?

24 And now, behold, you have received a witness; for if I have told you things

which no man knoweth have you not received a witness?

25 And, behold, I grant unto you a gift, if you desire of me, to translate, even as

my servant Joseph.

26 Verily, verily, I say unto you, that there are records which contain much of

my gospel, which have been kept back because of the wickedness of the people; 27 And now I command you, that if you have good desires—a desire to lay up

treasures for yourself in heaven—then shall you assist in bringing to light,

with your gift, those parts of my scriptures which have been hidden because of

iniquity.

28 And now, behold, I give unto you, and also unto my servant Joseph, the

keys of this gift, which shall bring to light this ministry; and in the mouth of

two or three witnesses shall every word be established.

29 Verily, verily, I say unto you, if they reject my words, and this part of my

gospel and ministry, blessed are ye, for they can do no more unto you than

unto me.

30 And even if they do unto you even as they have done unto me, blessed are

ye, for you shall dwell with me in glory.

31 But if they reject not my words, which shall be established by the testimony

which shall be given, blessed are they, and then shall ye have joy in the fruit of

your labors.

32 Verily, verily, I say unto you, as I said unto my disciples, where two or three

are gathered together in my name, as touching one thing, behold, there will I

be in the midst of them—even so am I in the midst of you.

33 Fear not to do good, my sons, for whatsoever ye sow, that shall ye also reap;

therefore, if ye sow good ye shall also reap good for your reward.

34 Therefore, fear not, little flock; do good; let earth and hell combine against

you, for if ye are built upon my rock, they cannot prevail.

35 Behold, I do not condemn you; go your ways and sin no more; perform

with soberness the work which I have commanded you.

36 Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not.

37 Behold the wounds which pierced my side, and also the prints of the nails

in my hands and feet; be faithful, keep my commandments, and ye shall

inherit the kingdom of heaven. Amen.

8

section 6

1 And the Lord said unto me: John, my beloved, what desirest thou? For if you

shall ask what you will, it shall be granted unto you.

2 And I said unto him: Lord, give unto me power over death, that I may live

and bring souls unto thee.

3 And the Lord said unto me: Verily, verily, I say unto thee, because thou

desirest this thou shalt tarry until I come in my glory, and shalt prophesy

before nations, kindreds, tongues and people.

4 And for this cause the Lord said unto Peter: If I will that he tarry till I come,

what is that to thee? For he desired of me that he might bring souls unto me,

but thou desiredst that thou mightest speedily come unto me in my kingdom. 5 I say unto thee, Peter, this was a good desire; but my beloved has desired

that he might do more, or a greater work yet among men than what he has

before done.

6 Yea, he has undertaken a greater work; therefore I will make him as flaming

fire and a ministering angel; he shall minister for those who shall be heirs of

salvation who dwell on the earth.

7 And I will make thee to minister for him and for thy brother James; and

unto you three I will give this power and the keys of this ministry until I come. 8 Verily I say unto you, ye shall both have according to your desires, for ye

both joy in that which ye have desired.

Section 8

1 Oliver Cowdery, verily, verily, I say unto you, that assuredly as the Lord liveth,

who is your God and your Redeemer, even so surely shall you receive a

knowledge of whatsoever things you shall ask in faith, with an honest heart,

believing that you shall receive a knowledge concerning the engravings of old

records, which are ancient, which contain those parts of my scripture of which

has been spoken by the manifestation of my Spirit.

2 Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy

Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. 3 Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation; behold, this is the spirit by

which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry

ground.

4 Therefore this is thy gift; apply unto it, and blessed art thou, for it shall

deliver you out of the hands of your enemies, when, if it were not so, they

would slay you and bring your soul to destruction.

5 Oh, remember these words, and keep my commandments. Remember, this

is your gift.

6 Now this is not all thy gift; for you have another gift, which is the gift of

Aaron; behold, it has told you many things;

7 Behold, there is no other power, save the power of God, that can cause this

gift of Aaron to be with you.

8 Therefore, doubt not, for it is the gift of God; and you shall hold it in your

hands, and do marvelous works; and no power shall be able to take it away out

section 7

9

9 And, therefore, whatsoever you shall ask me to tell you by that means, that

will I grant unto you, and you shall have knowledge concerning it.

10 Remember that without faith you can do nothing; therefore ask in faith.

Trifle not with these things; do not ask for that which you ought not. 11 Ask that you may know the mysteries of God, and that you may translate

and receive knowledge from all those ancient records which have been hid up,

that are sacred; and according to your faith shall it be done unto you. 12 Behold, it is I that have spoken it; and I am the same that spake unto you

from the beginning. Amen.

Section 9

1 Behold, I say unto you, my son, that because you did not translate according to

that which you desired of me, and did commence again to write for my

servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., even so I would that ye should continue until you

have finished this record, which I have entrusted unto him.

2 And then, behold, other records have I, that I will give unto you power that

you may assist to translate.

3 Be patient, my son, for it is wisdom in me, and it is not expedient that you

should translate at this present time.

4 Behold, the work which you are called to do is to write for my servant

Joseph.

5 And, behold, it is because that you did not continue as you commenced,

when you began to translate, that I have taken away this privilege from you. 6 Do not murmur, my son, for it is wisdom in me that I have dealt with you

after this manner.

7 Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it

unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me.

8 But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then

you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom

shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right.

9 But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a

stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong;

therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me. 10 Now, if you had known this you could have translated; nevertheless, it is

not expedient that you should translate now.

11 Behold, it was expedient when you commenced; but you feared, and the

time is past, and it is not expedient now;

12 For, do you not behold that I have given unto my servant Joseph sufficient

strength, whereby it is made up? And neither of you have I condemned. 13 Do this thing which I have commanded you, and you shall prosper. Be

faithful, and yield to no temptation.

14 Stand fast in the work wherewith I have called you, and a hair of your head

shall not be lost, and you shall be lifted up at the last day. Amen.

10

section 9

1 Now, behold, I say unto you, that because you delivered up those writings

which you had power given unto you to translate by the means of the Urim

and Thummim, into the hands of a wicked man, you have lost them. 2 And you also lost your gift at the same time, and your mind became

darkened.

3 Nevertheless, it is now restored unto you again; therefore see that you are

faithful and continue on unto the finishing of the remainder of the work of

translation as you have begun.

4 Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength and means

provided to enable you to translate; but be diligent unto the end.

5 Pray always, that you may come off conqueror; yea, that you may conquer

Satan, and that you may escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do

uphold his work.

6 Behold, they have sought to destroy you; yea, even the man in whom you

have trusted has sought to destroy you.

7 And for this cause I said that he is a wicked man, for he has sought to take

away the things wherewith you have been entrusted; and he has also sought to

destroy your gift.

8 And because you have delivered the writings into his hands, behold, wicked

men have taken them from you.

9 Therefore, you have delivered them up, yea, that which was sacred, unto

wickedness.

10 And, behold, Satan hath put it into their hearts to alter the words which

you have caused to be written, or which you have translated, which have gone

out of your hands.

11 And behold, I say unto you, that because they have altered the words, they

read contrary from that which you translated and caused to be written; 12 And, on this wise, the devil has sought to lay a cunning plan, that he may

destroy this work;

13 For he hath put into their hearts to do this, that by lying they may say they

have caught you in the words which you have pretended to translate. 14 Verily, I say unto you, that I will not suffer that Satan shall accomplish his

evil design in this thing.

15 For behold, he has put it into their hearts to get thee to tempt the Lord thy

God, in asking to translate it over again.

16 And then, behold, they say and think in their hearts—We will see if God

has given him power to translate; if so, he will also give him power again; 17 And if God giveth him power again, or if he translates again, or, in other

words, if he bringeth forth the same words, behold, we have the same with us,

and we have altered them;

18 Therefore they will not agree, and we will say that he has lied in his words,

and that he has no gift, and that he has no power;

19 Therefore we will destroy him, and also the work; and we will do this that

we may not be ashamed in the end, and that we may get glory of the world. 20 Verily, verily, I say unto you, that Satan has great hold upon their hearts; he

stirreth them up to iniquity against that which is good;

section 10

11

they love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil; therefore they

will not ask of me.

22 Satan stirreth them up, that he may lead their souls to destruction. 23 And thus he has laid a cunning plan, thinking to destroy the work of God;

but I will require this at their hands, and it shall turn to their shame and

condemnation in the day of judgment.

24 Yea, he stirreth up their hearts to anger against this work.

25 Yea, he saith unto them: Deceive and lie in wait to catch, that ye may

destroy; behold, this is no harm. And thus he flattereth them, and telleth them

that it is no sin to lie that they may catch a man in a lie, that they may destroy

him.

26 And thus he flattereth them, and leadeth them along until he draggeth their

souls down to hell; and thus he causeth them to catch themselves in their own

snare.

27 And thus he goeth up and down, to and fro in the earth, seeking to destroy

the souls of men.

28 Verily, verily, I say unto you, wo be unto him that lieth to deceive because he

supposeth that another lieth to deceive, for such are not exempt from the

justice of God.

29 Now, behold, they have altered these words, because Satan saith unto them:

He hath deceived you—and thus he flattereth them away to do iniquity, to get

thee to tempt the Lord thy God.

30 Behold, I say unto you, that you shall not translate again those words which

have gone forth out of your hands;

31 For, behold, they shall not accomplish their evil designs in lying against

those words. For, behold, if you should bring forth the same words they will

say that you have lied and that you have pretended to translate, but that you

have contradicted yourself.

32 And, behold, they will publish this, and Satan will harden the hearts of the

people to stir them up to anger against you, that they will not believe my

words.

33 Thus Satan thinketh to overpower your testimony in this generation, that

the work may not come forth in this generation.

34 But behold, here is wisdom, and because I show unto you wisdom, and give

you commandments concerning these things, what you shall do, show it not

unto the world until you have accomplished the work of translation. 35 Marvel not that I said unto you: Here is wisdom, show it not unto the

world—for I said, show it not unto the world, that you may be preserved. 36 Behold, I do not say that you shall not show it unto the righteous; 37 But as you cannot always judge the righteous, or as you cannot always tell

the wicked from the righteous, therefore I say unto you, hold your peace until I

shall see fit to make all things known unto the world concerning the matter. 38 And now, verily I say unto you, that an account of those things that you

have written, which have gone out of your hands, is engraven upon the plates

of Nephi;

39 Yea, and you remember it was said in those writings that a more particular

12

section 10

40 And now, because the account which is engraven upon the plates of Nephi

is more particular concerning the things which, in my wisdom, I would bring

to the knowledge of the people in this account—

41 Therefore, you shall translate the engravings which are on the plates of

Nephi, down even till you come to the reign of king Benjamin, or until you

come to that which you have translated, which you have retained;

42 And behold, you shall publish it as the record of Nephi; and thus I will

confound those who have altered my words.

43 I will not suffer that they shall destroy my work; yea, I will show unto them

that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil.

44 Behold, they have only got a part, or an abridgment of the account of

Nephi.

45 Behold, there are many things engraven upon the plates of Nephi which do

throw greater views upon my gospel; therefore, it is wisdom in me that you

should translate this first part of the engravings of Nephi, and send forth in

this work.

46 And, behold, all the remainder of this work does contain all those parts of

my gospel which my holy prophets, yea, and also my disciples, desired in their

prayers should come forth unto this people.

47 And I said unto them, that it should be granted unto them according to

their faith in their prayers;

48 Yea, and this was their faith—that my gospel, which I gave unto them that

they might preach in their days, might come unto their brethren the

Lamanites, and also all that had become Lamanites because of their

dissensions.

49 Now, this is not all—their faith in their prayers was that this gospel should

be made known also, if it were possible that other nations should possess this

land;

50 And thus they did leave a blessing upon this land in their prayers, that

whosoever should believe in this gospel in this land might have eternal life; 51 Yea, that it might be free unto all of whatsoever nation, kindred, tongue, or

people they may be.

52 And now, behold, according to their faith in their prayers will I bring this

part of my gospel to the knowledge of my people. Behold, I do not bring it to

destroy that which they have received, but to build it up.

53 And for this cause have I said: If this generation harden not their hearts, I

will establish my church among them.

54 Now I do not say this to destroy my church, but I say this to build up my

church;

55 Therefore, whosoever belongeth to my church need not fear, for such shall

inherit the kingdom of heaven.

56 But it is they who do not fear me, neither keep my commandments but

build up churches unto themselves to get gain, yea, and all those that do

wickedly and build up the kingdom of the devil—yea, verily, verily, I say unto

you, that it is they that I will disturb, and cause to tremble and shake to the

center.

section 10

13

mine own received me not.

58 I am the light which shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth

it not.

59 I am he who said—Other sheep have I which are not of this fold—unto

my disciples, and many there were that understood me not.

60 And I will show unto this people that I had other sheep, and that they were

a branch of the house of Jacob;

61 And I will bring to light their marvelous works, which they did in my name; 62 Yea, and I will also bring to light my gospel which was ministered unto

them, and, behold, they shall not deny that which you have received, but they

shall build it up, and shall bring to light the true points of my doctrine, yea,

and the only doctrine which is in me.

63 And this I do that I may establish my gospel, that there may not be so much

contention; yea, Satan doth stir up the hearts of the people to contention

concerning the points of my doctrine; and in these things they do err, for they

do wrest the scriptures and do not understand them.

64 Therefore, I will unfold unto them this great mystery;

65 For, behold, I will gather them as a hen gathereth her chickens under her

wings, if they will not harden their hearts;

66 Yea, if they will come, they may, and partake of the waters of life freely. 67 Behold, this is my doctrine—whosoever repenteth and cometh unto me,

the same is my church.

68 Whosoever declareth more or less than this, the same is not of me, but is

against me; therefore he is not of my church.

69 And now, behold, whosoever is of my church, and endureth of my church

to the end, him will I establish upon my rock, and the gates of hell shall not

prevail against them.

70 And now, remember the words of him who is the life and light of the world,

your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Amen.

Section 11

1 A great and marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of

men.

2 Behold, I am God; give heed to my word, which is quick and powerful,

sharper than a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of both joints and

marrow; therefore give heed unto my word.

3 Behold, the field is white already to harvest; therefore, whoso desireth to

reap let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day lasts,

that he may treasure up for his soul everlasting salvation in the kingdom of

God.

4 Yea, whosoever will thrust in his sickle and reap, the same is called of God. 5 Therefore, if you will ask of me you shall receive; if you will knock it shall

be opened unto you.

6 Now, as you have asked, behold, I say unto you, keep my commandments,

and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion.

14

section 11

be unfolded unto you, and then shall you be made rich. Behold, he that hath

eternal life is rich.

8 Verily, verily, I say unto you, even as you desire of me so it shall be done

unto you; and, if you desire, you shall be the means of doing much good in this

generation.

9 Say nothing but repentance unto this generation. Keep my

commandments, and assist to bring forth my work, according to my

commandments, and you shall be blessed.

10 Behold, thou hast a gift, or thou shalt have a gift if thou wilt desire of me in

faith, with an honest heart, believing in the power of Jesus Christ, or in my

power which speaketh unto thee;

11 For, behold, it is I that speak; behold, I am the light which shineth in

darkness, and by my power I give these words unto thee.

12 And now, verily, verily, I say unto thee, put your trust in that Spirit which

leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously;

and this is my Spirit.

13 Verily, verily, I say unto you, I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall

enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy;

14 And then shall ye know, or by this shall you know, all things whatsoever

you desire of me, which are pertaining unto things of righteousness, in faith

believing in me that you shall receive.

15 Behold, I command you that you need not suppose that you are called to

preach until you are called.

16 Wait a little longer, until you shall have my word, my rock, my church, and

my gospel, that you may know of a surety my doctrine.

17 And then, behold, according to your desires, yea, even according to your

faith shall it be done unto you.

18 Keep my commandments; hold your peace; appeal unto my Spirit; 19 Yea, cleave unto me with all your heart, that you may assist in bringing to

light those things of which has been spoken—yea, the translation of my work;

be patient until you shall accomplish it.

20 Behold, this is your work, to keep my commandments, yea, with all your

might, mind and strength.

21 Seek not to declare my word, but first seek to obtain my word, and then

shall your tongue be loosed; then, if you desire, you shall have my Spirit and

my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men.

22 But now hold your peace; study my word which hath gone forth among the

children of men, and also study my word which shall come forth among the

children of men, or that which is now translating, yea, until you have obtained

all which I shall grant unto the children of men in this generation, and then

shall all things be added thereto.

23 Behold thou art Hyrum, my son; seek the kingdom of God, and all things

shall be added according to that which is just.

24 Build upon my rock, which is my gospel;

25 Deny not the spirit of revelation, nor the spirit of prophecy, for wo unto

him that denieth these things;

section 11

15

that you shall go forth.

27 Behold, I speak unto all who have good desires, and have thrust in their

sickle to reap.

28 Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I am the life and the light of the

world.

29 I am the same who came unto mine own and mine own received me not; 30 But verily, verily, I say unto you, that as many as receive me, to them will I

give power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on my name.

Amen.

Section 12

1 A great and marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of

men.

2 Behold, I am God; give heed to my word, which is quick and powerful,

sharper than a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of both joints and

marrow; therefore, give heed unto my word.

3 Behold, the field is white already to harvest; therefore, whoso desireth to

reap let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day lasts,

that he may treasure up for his soul everlasting salvation in the kingdom of

God.

4 Yea, whosoever will thrust in his sickle and reap, the same is called of God. 5 Therefore, if you will ask of me you shall receive; if you will knock it shall

be opened unto you.

6 Now, as you have asked, behold, I say unto you, keep my commandments,

and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion.

7 Behold, I speak unto you, and also to all those who have desires to bring

forth and establish this work;

8 And no one can assist in this work except he shall be humble and full of

love, having faith, hope, and charity, being temperate in all things, whatsoever

shall be entrusted to his care.

9 Behold, I am the light and the life of the world, that speak these words,

therefore give heed with your might, and then you are called. Amen.

Section 13

1 Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood

of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel

of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this

shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again

an offering unto the Lord in righteousness.

Section 14

1 A great and marvelous work is about to come forth unto the children of men.

16

section 14

sharper than a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of both joints and

marrow; therefore give heed unto my word.

3 Behold, the field is white already to harvest; therefore, whoso desireth to

reap let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day lasts,

that he may treasure up for his soul everlasting salvation in the kingdom of

God.

4 Yea, whosoever will thrust in his sickle and reap, the same is called of God. 5 Therefore, if you will ask of me you shall receive; if you will knock it shall

be opened unto you.

6 Seek to bring forth and establish my Zion. Keep my commandments in all

things.

7 And, if you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have

eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God.

8 And it shall come to pass, that if you shall ask the Father in my name, in

faith believing, you shall receive the Holy Ghost, which giveth utterance, that

you may stand as a witness of the things of which you shall both hear and see,

and also that you may declare repentance unto this generation.

9 Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, who created the

heavens and the earth, a light which cannot be hid in darkness;

10 Wherefore, I must bring forth the fulness of my gospel from the Gentiles

unto the house of Israel.

11 And behold, thou art David, and thou art called to assist; which thing if ye

do, and are faithful, ye shall be blessed both spiritually and temporally, and

great shall be your reward. Amen.

Section 15

1 Hearken, my servant John, and listen to the words of Jesus Christ, your Lord

and your Redeemer.

2 For behold, I speak unto you with sharpness and with power, for mine arm

is over all the earth.

3 And I will tell you that which no man knoweth save me and thee alone— 4 For many times you have desired of me to know that which would be of the

most worth unto you.

5 Behold, blessed are you for this thing, and for speaking my words which I

have given you according to my commandments.

6 And now, behold, I say unto you, that the thing which will be of the most

worth unto you will be to declare repentance unto this people, that you may

bring souls unto me, that you may rest with them in the kingdom of my Father.

Amen.

Section 16

1 Hearken, my servant Peter, and listen to the words of Jesus Christ, your Lord

and your Redeemer.

section 15

17

is over all the earth.

3 And I will tell you that which no man knoweth save me and thee alone— 4 For many times you have desired of me to know that which would be of the

most worth unto you.

5 Behold, blessed are you for this thing, and for speaking my words which I

have given unto you according to my commandments.

6 And now, behold, I say unto you, that the thing which will be of the most

worth unto you will be to declare repentance unto this people, that you may

bring souls unto me, that you may rest with them in the kingdom of my Father.

Amen.

Section 17

1 Behold, I say unto you, that you must rely upon my word, which if you do with

full purpose of heart, you shall have a view of the plates, and also of the

breastplate, the sword of Laban, the Urim and Thummim, which were given to

the brother of Jared upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to

face, and the miraculous directors which were given to Lehi while in the

wilderness, on the borders of the Red Sea.

2 And it is by your faith that you shall obtain a view of them, even by that

faith which was had by the prophets of old.

3 And after that you have obtained faith, and have seen them with your eyes,

you shall testify of them, by the power of God;

4 And this you shall do that my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., may not be

destroyed, that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of

men in this work.

5 And ye shall testify that you have seen them, even as my servant Joseph

Smith, Jun., has seen them; for it is by my power that he has seen them, and it

is because he had faith.

6 And he has translated the book, even that part which I have commanded

him, and as your Lord and your God liveth it is true.

7 Wherefore, you have received the same power, and the same faith, and the

same gift like unto him;

8 And if you do these last commandments of mine, which I have given you,

the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; for my grace is sufficient for you,

and you shall be lifted up at the last day.

9 And I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, have spoken it unto you, that

I might bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men. Amen.

Section 18

1 Now, behold, because of the thing which you, my servant Oliver Cowdery,

have desired to know of me, I give unto you these words:

2 Behold, I have manifested unto you, by my Spirit in many instances, that the

things which you have written are true; wherefore you know that they are true.

18

section 18

commandment, that you rely upon the things which are written;

4 For in them are all things written concerning the foundation of my church,

my gospel, and my rock.

5 Wherefore, if you shall build up my church, upon the foundation of my

gospel and my rock, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you.

6 Behold, the world is ripening in iniquity; and it must needs be that the

children of men are stirred up unto repentance, both the Gentiles and also the

house of Israel.

7 Wherefore, as thou hast been baptized by the hands of my servant Joseph

Smith, Jun., according to that which I have commanded him, he hath fulfilled

the thing which I commanded him.

8 And now, marvel not that I have called him unto mine own purpose, which

purpose is known in me; wherefore, if he shall be diligent in keeping my

commandments he shall be blessed unto eternal life; and his name is Joseph. 9 And now, Oliver Cowdery, I speak unto you, and also unto David

Whitmer, by the way of commandment; for, behold, I command all men

everywhere to repent, and I speak unto you, even as unto Paul mine apostle,

for you are called even with that same calling with which he was called. 10 Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God;

11 For, behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore

he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him. 12 And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto

him, on conditions of repentance.

13 And how great is his joy in the soul that repenteth!

14 Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people.

15 And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto

this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy

with him in the kingdom of my Father!

16 And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto

me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should

bring many souls unto me!

17 Behold, you have my gospel before you, and my rock, and my salvation. 18 Ask the Father in my name in faith, believing that you shall receive, and you

shall have the Holy Ghost, which manifesteth all things which are expedient

unto the children of men.

19 And if you have not faith, hope, and charity, you can do nothing.

20 Contend against no church, save it be the church of the devil.

21 Take upon you the name of Christ, and speak the truth in soberness. 22 And as many as repent and are baptized in my name, which is Jesus Christ,

and endure to the end, the same shall be saved.

23 Behold, Jesus Christ is the name which is given of the Father, and there is

none other name given whereby man can be saved;

24 Wherefore, all men must take upon them the name which is given of the

Father, for in that name shall they be called at the last day;

25 Wherefore, if they know not the name by which they are called, they

cannot have place in the kingdom of my Father.

section 18

19

unto Gentile and unto Jew;

27 Yea, even twelve; and the Twelve shall be my disciples, and they shall take

upon them my name; and the Twelve are they who shall desire to take upon

them my name with full purpose of heart.

28 And if they desire to take upon them my name with full purpose of heart,

they are called to go into all the world to preach my gospel unto every creature. 29 And they are they who are ordained of me to baptize in my name,

according to that which is written;

30 And you have that which is written before you; wherefore, you must

perform it according to the words which are written.

31 And now I speak unto you, the Twelve—Behold, my grace is sufficient for

you; you must walk uprightly before me and sin not.

32 And, behold, you are they who are ordained of me to ordain priests and

teachers; to declare my gospel, according to the power of the Holy Ghost

which is in you, and according to the callings and gifts of God unto men; 33 And I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, have spoken it.

34 These words are not of men nor of man, but of me; wherefore, you shall

testify they are of me and not of man;

35 For it is my voice which speaketh them unto you; for they are given by my

Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another; and save

it were by my power you could not have them;

36 Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my

words.

37 And now, behold, I give unto you, Oliver Cowdery, and also unto David

Whitmer, that you shall search out the Twelve, who shall have the desires of

which I have spoken;

38 And by their desires and their works you shall know them.

39 And when you have found them you shall show these things unto them. 40 And you shall fall down and worship the Father in my name.

41 And you must preach unto the world, saying: You must repent and be

baptized, in the name of Jesus Christ;

42 For all men must repent and be baptized, and not only men, but women,

and children who have arrived at the years of accountability.

43 And now, after that you have received this, you must keep my

commandments in all things;

44 And by your hands I will work a marvelous work among the children of

men, unto the convincing of many of their sins, that they may come unto

repentance, and that they may come unto the kingdom of my Father. 45 Wherefore, the blessings which I give unto you are above all things. 46 And after that you have received this, if you keep not my commandments

you cannot be saved in the kingdom of my Father.

47 Behold, I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, and your Redeemer, by

the power of my Spirit have spoken it. Amen.

20

section 18

1 I am Alpha and Omega, Christ the Lord; yea, even I am he, the beginning and

the end, the Redeemer of the world.

2 I, having accomplished and finished the will of him whose I am, even the

Father, concerning me—having done this that I might subdue all things unto

myself—

3 Retaining all power, even to the destroying of Satan and his works at the

end of the world, and the last great day of judgment, which I shall pass upon

the inhabitants thereof, judging every man according to his works and the

deeds which he hath done.

4 And surely every man must repent or suffer, for I, God, am endless. 5 Wherefore, I revoke not the judgments which I shall pass, but woes shall go

forth, weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth, yea, to those who are found on

my left hand.

6 Nevertheless, it is not written that there shall be no end to this torment, but

it is written endless torment.

7 Again, it is writteneternal damnation;wherefore it is more express than

other scriptures, that it might work upon the hearts of the children of men,

altogether for my name’s glory.

8 Wherefore, I will explain unto you this mystery, for it is meet unto you to

know even as mine apostles.

9 I speak unto you that are chosen in this thing, even as one, that you may

enter into my rest.

10 For, behold, the mystery of godliness, how great is it! For, behold, I am

endless, and the punishment which is given from my hand is endless

punishment, for Endless is my name. Wherefore—

11 Eternal punishment is God’s punishment.

12 Endless punishment is God’s punishment.

13 Wherefore, I command you to repent, and keep the commandments which

you have received by the hand of my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., in my name; 14 And it is by my almighty power that you have received them;

15 Therefore I command you to repent—repent, lest I smite you by the rod of

my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be

sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to

bear you know not.

16 For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not

suffer if they would repent;

17 But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

18 Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble

because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and

spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink— 19 Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my

preparations unto the children of men.

20 Wherefore, I command you again to repent, lest I humble you with my

almighty power; and that you confess your sins, lest you suffer these

punishments of which I have spoken, of which in the smallest, yea, even in the

least degree you have tasted at the time I withdrew my Spirit.

section 19

21

these things unto the world until it is wisdom in me.

22 For they cannot bear meat now, but milk they must receive; wherefore, they

must not know these things, lest they perish.

23 Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and

you shall have peace in me.

24 I am Jesus Christ; I came by the will of the Father, and I do his will. 25 And again, I command thee that thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s wife;

nor seek thy neighbor’s life.

26 And again, I command thee that thou shalt not covet thine own property,

but impart it freely to the printing of the Book of Mormon, which contains

the truth and the word of God—

27 Which is my word to the Gentile, that soon it may go to the Jew, of whom

the Lamanites are a remnant, that they may believe the gospel, and look not

for a Messiah to come who has already come.

28 And again, I command thee that thou shalt pray vocally as well as in thy

heart; yea, before the world as well as in secret, in public as well as in private. 29 And thou shalt declare glad tidings, yea, publish it upon the mountains,

and upon every high place, and among every people that thou shalt be

permitted to see.

30 And thou shalt do it with all humility, trusting in me, reviling not against

revilers.

31 And of tenets thou shalt not talk, but thou shalt declare repentance and

faith on the Savior, and remission of sins by baptism, and by fire, yea, even the

Holy Ghost.

32 Behold, this is a great and the last commandment which I shall give unto

you concerning this matter; for this shall suffice for thy daily walk, even unto

the end of thy life.

33 And misery thou shalt receive if thou wilt slight these counsels, yea, even

the destruction of thyself and property.

34 Impart a portion of thy property, yea, even part of thy lands, and all save the

support of thy family.

35 Pay the debt thou hast contracted with the printer. Release thyself from

bondage.

36 Leave thy house and home, except when thou shalt desire to see thy family; 37 And speak freely to all; yea, preach, exhort, declare the truth, even with a

loud voice, with a sound of rejoicing, crying—Hosanna, hosanna, blessed be

the name of the Lord God!

38 Pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your

blessing—yea, even more than if you should obtain treasures of earth and

corruptibleness to the extent thereof.

39 Behold, canst thou read this without rejoicing and lifting up thy heart for

gladness?

40 Or canst thou run about longer as a blind guide?

41 Or canst thou be humble and meek, and conduct thyself wisely before me?

Yea, come unto me thy Savior. Amen.

22

section 19

1 The rise of the Church of Christ in these last days, being one thousand eight

hundred and thirty years since the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ

in the flesh, it being regularly organized and established agreeable to the laws

of our country, by the will and commandments of God, in the fourth month,

and on the sixth day of the month which is called April—

2 Which commandments were given to Joseph Smith, Jun., who was called of

God, and ordained an apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the first elder of this

church;

3 And to Oliver Cowdery, who was also called of God, an apostle of Jesus

Christ, to be the second elder of this church, and ordained under his hand; 4 And this according to the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to

whom be all glory, both now and forever. Amen.

5 After it was truly manifested unto this first elder that he had received a

remission of his sins, he was entangled again in the vanities of the world; 6 But after repenting, and humbling himself sincerely, through faith, God

ministered unto him by an holy angel, whose countenance was as lightning,

and whose garments were pure and white above all other whiteness;

7 And gave unto him commandments which inspired him;

8 And gave him power from on high, by the means which were before

prepared, to translate the Book of Mormon;

9 Which contains a record of a fallen people, and the fulness of the gospel of

Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also;

10 Which was given by inspiration, and is confirmed to others by the

ministering of angels, and is declared unto the world by them—

11 Proving to the world that the holy scriptures are true, and that God does

inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well

as in generations of old;

12 Thereby showing that he is the same God yesterday, today, and forever.

Amen.

13 Therefore, having so great witnesses, by them shall the world be judged,

even as many as shall hereafter come to a knowledge of this work.

14 And those who receive it in faith, and work righteousness, shall receive a

crown of eternal life;

15 But those who harden their hearts in unbelief, and reject it, it shall turn to

their own condemnation—

16 For the Lord God has spoken it; and we, the elders of the church, have

heard and bear witness to the words of the glorious Majesty on high, to whom

be glory forever and ever. Amen.

17 By these things we know that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and

eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the framer

of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them;

18 And that he created man, male and female, after his own image and in his

own likeness, created he them;

19 And gave unto them commandments that they should love and serve him,

the only living and true God, and that he should be the only being whom they

should worship.

section 20

23

devilish, and became fallen man.

21 Wherefore, the Almighty God gave his Only Begotten Son, as it is written

in those scriptures which have been given of him.

22 He suffered temptations but gave no heed unto them.

23 He was crucified, died, and rose again the third day;

24 And ascended into heaven, to sit down on the right hand of the Father, to

reign with almighty power according to the will of the Father;

25 That as many as would believe and be baptized in his holy name, and

endure in faith to the end, should be saved—

26 Not only those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the

flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came,

who believed in the words of the holy prophets, who spake as they were

inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost, who truly testified of him in all things,

should have eternal life,

27 As well as those who should come after, who should believe in the gifts and

callings of God by the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and of

the Son;

28 Which Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God, infinite and eternal,

without end. Amen.

29 And we know that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus

Christ, and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to

the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God.

30 And we know that justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior

Jesus Christ is just and true;

31 And we know also, that sanctification through the grace of our Lord and

Savior Jesus Christ is just and true, to all those who love and serve God with all

their mights, minds, and strength.

32 But there is a possibility that man may fall from grace and depart from the

living God;

33 Therefore let the church take heed and pray always, lest they fall into

temptation;

34 Yea, and even let those who are sanctified take heed also.

35 And we know that these things are true and according to the revelations of

John, neither adding to, nor diminishing from the prophecy of his book, the

holy scriptures, or the revelations of God which shall come hereafter by the gift

and power of the Holy Ghost, the voice of God, or the ministering of angels. 36 And the Lord God has spoken it; and honor, power and glory be rendered

to his holy name, both now and ever. Amen.

37 And again, by way of commandment to the church concerning the manner of

baptism—All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be

baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness

before the church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing

to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve

him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of

the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received by

baptism into his church.

24

section 20

Christ—An apostle is an elder, and it is his calling to baptize;

39 And to ordain other elders, priests, teachers, and deacons;

40 And to administer bread and wine—the emblems of the flesh and blood of

Christ—

41 And to confirm those who are baptized into the church, by the laying on of

hands for the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, according to the scriptures; 42 And to teach, expound, exhort, baptize, and watch over the church; 43 And to confirm the church by the laying on of the hands, and the giving of

the Holy Ghost;

44 And to take the lead of all meetings.

45 The elders are to conduct the meetings as they are led by the Holy Ghost,

according to the commandments and revelations of God.

46 The priest’s duty is to preach, teach, expound, exhort, and baptize, and

administer the sacrament,

47 And visit the house of each member, and exhort them to pray vocally and in

secret and attend to all family duties.

48 And he may also ordain other priests, teachers, and deacons.

49 And he is to take the lead of meetings when there is no elder present; 50 But when there is an elder present, he is only to preach, teach, expound,

exhort, and baptize,

51 And visit the house of each member, exhorting them to pray vocally and in

secret and attend to all family duties.

52 In all these duties the priest is to assist the elder if occasion requires. 53 The teacher’s duty is to watch over the church always, and be with and

strengthen them;

54 And see that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each

other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking;

55 And see that the church meet together often, and also see that all the

members do their duty.

56 And he is to take the lead of meetings in the absence of the elder or priest— 57 And is to be assisted always, in all his duties in the church, by the deacons, if

occasion requires.

58 But neither teachers nor deacons have authority to baptize, administer the

sacrament, or lay on hands;

59 They are, however, to warn, expound, exhort, and teach, and invite all to

come unto Christ.

60 Every elder, priest, teacher, or deacon is to be ordained according to the

gifts and callings of God unto him; and he is to be ordained by the power of

the Holy Ghost, which is in the one who ordains him.

61 The several elders composing this church of Christ are to meet in

conference once in three months, or from time to time as said conferences

shall direct or appoint;

62 And said conferences are to do whatever church business is necessary to be

done at the time.

63 The elders are to receive their licenses from other elders, by vote of the

church to which they belong, or from the conferences.

section 20

25

certificate from him at the time, which certificate, when presented to an elder,

shall entitle him to a license, which shall authorize him to perform the duties

of his calling, or he may receive it from a conference.

65 No person is to be ordained to any office in this church, where there is a

regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that church; 66 But the presiding elders, traveling bishops, high councilors, high priests,

and elders, may have the privilege of ordaining, where there is no branch of the

church that a vote may be called.

67 Every president of the high priesthood (or presiding elder), bishop, high

councilor, and high priest, is to be ordained by the direction of a high council

or general conference.

68 The duty of the members after they are received by baptism—The elders or

priests are to have a sufficient time to expound all things concerning the

church of Christ to their understanding, previous to their partaking of the

sacrament and being confirmed by the laying on of the hands of the elders, so

that all things may be done in order.

69 And the members shall manifest before the church, and also before the

elders, by a godly walk and conversation, that they are worthy of it, that there

may be works and faith agreeable to the holy scriptures—walking in holiness

before the Lord.

70 Every member of the church of Christ having children is to bring them

unto the elders before the church, who are to lay their hands upon them in the

name of Jesus Christ, and bless them in his name.

71 No one can be received into the church of Christ unless he has arrived unto

the years of accountability before God, and is capable of repentance. 72 Baptism is to be administered in the following manner unto all those who

repent—

73 The person who is called of God and has authority from Jesus Christ to

baptize, shall go down into the water with the person who has presented

himself or herself for baptism, and shall say, calling him or her by name:

Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the

Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

74 Then shall he immerse him or her in the water, and come forth again out of

the water.

75 It is expedient that the church meet together often to partake of bread and

wine in the remembrance of the Lord Jesus;

76 And the elder or priest shall administer it; and after this manner shall he

administer it—he shall kneel with the church and call upon the Father in

solemn prayer, saying:

77 O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ,

to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it, that

they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O

God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of

thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has

given them; that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. 78 The manner of administering the wine—he shall take the cup also, and say:

26

section 20

to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of all those who drink of it, that they

may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, which was shed for them;

that they may witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they do

always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. 80 Any member of the church of Christ transgressing, or being overtaken in a

fault, shall be dealt with as the scriptures direct.

81 It shall be the duty of the several churches, composing the church of Christ,

to send one or more of their teachers to attend the several conferences held by

the elders of the church,

82 With a list of the names of the several members uniting themselves with the

church since the last conference; or send by the hand of some priest; so that a

regular list of all the names of the whole church may be kept in a book by one

of the elders, whomsoever the other elders shall appoint from time to time; 83 And also, if any have been expelled from the church, so that their names

may be blotted out of the general church record of names.

84 All members removing from the church where they reside, if going to a

church where they are not known, may take a letter certifying that they are

regular members and in good standing, which certificate may be signed by any

elder or priest if the member receiving the letter is personally acquainted with

the elder or priest, or it may be signed by the teachers or deacons of the church.

Section 21

1 Behold, there shall be a record kept among you; and in it thou shalt be called a

seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church

through the will of God the Father, and the grace of your Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Being inspired of the Holy Ghost to lay the foundation thereof, and to

build it up unto the most holy faith.

3 Which church was organized and established in the year of your Lord

eighteen hundred and thirty, in the fourth month, and on the sixth day of the

month which is called April.

4 Wherefore, meaning the church, thou shalt give heed unto all his words

and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them,

walking in all holiness before me;

5 For his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience

and faith.

6 For by doing these things the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea,

and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and

cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name’s glory.

7 For thus saith the Lord God: Him have I inspired to move the cause of

Zion in mighty power for good, and his diligence I know, and his prayers I

have heard.

8 Yea, his weeping for Zion I have seen, and I will cause that he shall mourn

for her no longer; for his days of rejoicing are come unto the remission of his

sins, and the manifestations of my blessings upon his works.

9 For, behold, I will bless all those who labor in my vineyard with a mighty

section 21

27

by the Comforter, which manifesteth that Jesus was crucified by sinful men for

the sins of the world, yea, for the remission of sins unto the contrite heart. 10 Wherefore it behooveth me that he should be ordained by you, Oliver

Cowdery mine apostle;

11 This being an ordinance unto you, that you are an elder under his hand, he

being the first unto you, that you might be an elder unto this church of Christ,

bearing my name—

12 And the first preacher of this church unto the church, and before the world,

yea, before the Gentiles; yea, and thus saith the Lord God, lo, lo! to the Jews

also. Amen.

Section 22

1 Behold, I say unto you that all old covenants have I caused to be done away in

this thing; and this is a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was

from the beginning.

2 Wherefore, although a man should be baptized an hundred times it

availeth him nothing, for you cannot enter in at the strait gate by the law of

Moses, neither by your dead works.

3 For it is because of your dead works that I have caused this last covenant

and this church to be built up unto me, even as in days of old.

4 Wherefore, enter ye in at the gate, as I have commanded, and seek not to

counsel your God. Amen.

Section 23

1 Behold, I speak unto you, Oliver, a few words. Behold, thou art blessed, and

art under no condemnation. But beware of pride, lest thou shouldst enter into

temptation.

2 Make known thy calling unto the church, and also before the world, and thy

heart shall be opened to preach the truth from henceforth and forever. Amen. 3 Behold, I speak unto you, Hyrum, a few words; for thou also art under no

condemnation, and thy heart is opened, and thy tongue loosed; and thy calling

is to exhortation, and to strengthen the church continually. Wherefore thy

duty is unto the church forever, and this because of thy family. Amen. 4 Behold, I speak a few words unto you, Samuel; for thou also art under no

condemnation, and thy calling is to exhortation, and to strengthen the church;

and thou art not as yet called to preach before the world. Amen.

5 Behold, I speak a few words unto you, Joseph; for thou also art under no

condemnation, and thy calling also is to exhortation, and to strengthen the

church; and this is thy duty from henceforth and forever. Amen.

6 Behold, I manifest unto you, Joseph Knight, by these words, that you must

take up your cross, in the which you must pray vocally before the world as well

as in secret, and in your family, and among your friends, and in all places. 7 And, behold, it is your duty to unite with the true church, and give your

language to exhortation continually, that you may receive the reward of the

28

section 23

Section 24

1 Behold, thou wast called and chosen to write the Book of Mormon, and to my

ministry; and I have lifted thee up out of thine afflictions, and have counseled

thee, that thou hast been delivered from all thine enemies, and thou hast been

delivered from the powers of Satan and from darkness!

2 Nevertheless, thou art not excusable in thy transgressions; nevertheless, go

thy way and sin no more.

3 Magnify thine office; and after thou hast sowed thy fields and secured

them, go speedily unto the church which is in Colesville, Fayette, and

Manchester, and they shall support thee; and I will bless them both spiritually

and temporally;

4 But if they receive thee not, I will send upon them a cursing instead of a

blessing.

5 And thou shalt continue in calling upon God in my name, and writing the

things which shall be given thee by the Comforter, and expounding all

scriptures unto the church.

6 And it shall be given thee in the very moment what thou shalt speak and

write, and they shall hear it, or I will send unto them a cursing instead of a

blessing.

7 For thou shalt devote all thy service in Zion; and in this thou shalt have

strength.

8 Be patient in afflictions, for thou shalt have many; but endure them, for, lo,

I am with thee, even unto the end of thy days.

9 And in temporal labors thou shalt not have strength, for this is not thy

calling. Attend to thy calling and thou shalt have wherewith to magnify thine

office, and to expound all scriptures, and continue in laying on of the hands

and confirming the churches.

10 And thy brother Oliver shall continue in bearing my name before the

world, and also to the church. And he shall not suppose that he can say

enough in my cause; and lo, I am with him to the end.

11 In me he shall have glory, and not of himself, whether in weakness or in

strength, whether in bonds or free;

12 And at all times, and in all places, he shall open his mouth and declare my

gospel as with the voice of a trump, both day and night. And I will give unto

him strength such as is not known among men.

13 Require not miracles, except I shall command you, except casting out devils,

healing the sick, and against poisonous serpents, and against deadly poisons; 14 And these things ye shall not do, except it be required of you by them who

desire it, that the scriptures might be fulfilled; for ye shall do according to that

which is written.

15 And in whatsoever place ye shall enter, and they receive you not in my

name, ye shall leave a cursing instead of a blessing, by casting off the dust of

your feet against them as a testimony, and cleansing your feet by the wayside. 16 And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall lay their hands upon you by

section 24

29

them according to your words, in mine own due time.

17 And whosoever shall go to law with thee shall be cursed by the law. 18 And thou shalt take no purse nor scrip, neither staves, neither two coats, for

the church shall give unto thee in the very hour what thou needest for food

and for raiment, and for shoes and for money, and for scrip.

19 For thou art called to prune my vineyard with a mighty pruning, yea, even

for the last time; yea, and also all those whom thou hast ordained, and they

shall do even according to this pattern. Amen.

Section 25

1 Hearken unto the voice of the Lord your God, while I speak unto you, Emma

Smith, my daughter; for verily I say unto you, all those who receive my gospel

are sons and daughters in my kingdom.

2 A revelation I give unto you concerning my will; and if thou art faithful

and walk in the paths of virtue before me, I will preserve thy life, and thou

shalt receive an inheritance in Zion.

3 Behold, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou art an elect lady, whom I have

called.

4 Murmur not because of the things which thou hast not seen, for they are

withheld from thee and from the world, which is wisdom in me in a time to

come.

5 And the office of thy calling shall be for a comfort unto my servant, Joseph

Smith, Jun., thy husband, in his afflictions, with consoling words, in the spirit

of meekness.

6 And thou shalt go with him at the time of his going, and be unto him for a

scribe, while there is no one to be a scribe for him, that I may send my servant,

Oliver Cowdery, whithersoever I will.

7 And thou shalt be ordained under his hand to expound scriptures, and to

exhort the church, according as it shall be given thee by my Spirit.

8 For he shall lay his hands upon thee, and thou shalt receive the Holy Ghost,

and thy time shall be given to writing, and to learning much.

9 And thou needest not fear, for thy husband shall support thee in the

church; for unto them is his calling, that all things might be revealed unto

them, whatsoever I will, according to their faith.

10 And verily I say unto thee that thou shalt lay aside the things of this world,

and seek for the things of a better.

11 And it shall be given thee, also, to make a selection of sacred hymns, as it

shall be given thee, which is pleasing unto me, to be had in my church. 12 For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the

righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon

their heads.

13 Wherefore, lift up thy heart and rejoice, and cleave unto the covenants

which thou hast made.

14 Continue in the spirit of meekness, and beware of pride. Let thy soul

delight in thy husband, and the glory which shall come upon him.

30

section 25

shalt receive. And except thou do this, where I am you cannot come. 16 And verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my voice unto all. Amen.

Section 26

1 Behold, I say unto you that you shall let your time be devoted to the studying

of the scriptures, and to preaching, and to confirming the church at Colesville,

and to performing your labors on the land, such as is required, until after you

shall go to the west to hold the next conference; and then it shall be made

known what you shall do.

2 And all things shall be done by common consent in the church, by much

prayer and faith, for all things you shall receive by faith. Amen.

Section 27

1 Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Lord, your God, and your Redeemer,

whose word is quick and powerful.

2 For, behold, I say unto you, that it mattereth not what ye shall eat or what

ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an

eye single to my glory—remembering unto the Father my body which was laid

down for you, and my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins. 3 Wherefore, a commandment I give unto you, that you shall not purchase

wine neither strong drink of your enemies;

4 Wherefore, you shall partake of none except it is made new among you;

yea, in this my Father’s kingdom which shall be built up on the earth. 5 Behold, this is wisdom in me; wherefore, marvel not, for the hour cometh

that I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth, and with

Moroni, whom I have sent unto you to reveal the Book of Mormon,

containing the fulness of my everlasting gospel, to whom I have committed the

keys of the record of the stick of Ephraim;

6 And also with Elias, to whom I have committed the keys of bringing to pass

the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since

the world began, concerning the last days;

7 And also John the son of Zacharias, which Zacharias he (Elias) visited and

gave promise that he should have a son, and his name should be John, and he

should be filled with the spirit of Elias;

8 Which John I have sent unto you, my servants, Joseph Smith, Jun., and

Oliver Cowdery, to ordain you unto the first priesthood which you have

received, that you might be called and ordained even as Aaron;

9 And also Elijah, unto whom I have committed the keys of the power of

turning the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children

to the fathers, that the whole earth may not be smitten with a curse; 10 And also with Joseph and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, your fathers, by

whom the promises remain;

11 And also with Michael, or Adam, the father of all, the prince of all, the

ancient of days;

section 26

31

whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be apostles, and especial

witnesses of my name, and bear the keys of your ministry and of the same

things which I revealed unto them;

13 Unto whom I have committed the keys of my kingdom, and a dispensation

of the gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times, in the which I will

gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on

earth;

14 And also with all those whom my Father hath given me out of the world. 15 Wherefore, lift up your hearts and rejoice, and gird up your loins, and take

upon you my whole armor, that ye may be able to withstand the evil day,

having done all, that ye may be able to stand.

16 Stand, therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, having on the

breastplate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of the

gospel of peace, which I have sent mine angels to commit unto you;

17 Taking the shield of faith wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery

darts of the wicked;

18 And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of my Spirit, which I will

pour out upon you, and my word which I reveal unto you, and be agreed as

touching all things whatsoever ye ask of me, and be faithful until I come, and

ye shall be caught up, that where I am ye shall be also. Amen.

Section 28

1 Behold, I say unto thee, Oliver, that it shall be given unto thee that thou shalt

be heard by the church in all things whatsoever thou shalt teach them by the

Comforter, concerning the revelations and commandments which I have

given.

2 But, behold, verily, verily, I say unto thee, no one shall be appointed to

receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant

Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses.

3 And thou shalt be obedient unto the things which I shall give unto him,

even as Aaron, to declare faithfully the commandments and the revelations,

with power and authority unto the church.

4 And if thou art led at any time by the Comforter to speak or teach, or at all

times by the way of commandment unto the church, thou mayest do it. 5 But thou shalt not write by way of commandment, but by wisdom; 6 And thou shalt not command him who is at thy head, and at the head of

the church;

7 For I have given him the keys of the mysteries, and the revelations which are

sealed, until I shall appoint unto them another in his stead.

8 And now, behold, I say unto you that you shall go unto the Lamanites and

preach my gospel unto them; and inasmuch as they receive thy teachings thou

shalt cause my church to be established among them; and thou shalt have

revelations, but write them not by way of commandment.

9 And now, behold, I say unto you that it is not revealed, and no man

knoweth where the city Zion shall be built, but it shall be given hereafter.

32

section 28

10 Thou shalt not leave this place until after the conference; and my servant

Joseph shall be appointed to preside over the conference by the voice of it, and

what he saith to thee thou shalt tell.

11 And again, thou shalt take thy brother, Hiram Page, between him and thee

alone, and tell him that those things which he hath written from that stone are

not of me and that Satan deceiveth him;

12 For, behold, these things have not been appointed unto him, neither shall

anything be appointed unto any of this church contrary to the church

covenants.

13 For all things must be done in order, and by common consent in the

church, by the prayer of faith.

14 And thou shalt assist to settle all these things, according to the covenants of

the church, before thou shalt take thy journey among the Lamanites. 15 And it shall be given thee from the time thou shalt go, until the time thou

shalt return, what thou shalt do.

16 And thou must open thy mouth at all times, declaring my gospel with the

sound of rejoicing. Amen.

Section 29

1 Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I Am, whose arm

of mercy hath atoned for your sins;

2 Who will gather his people even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her

wings, even as many as will hearken to my voice and humble themselves before

me, and call upon me in mighty prayer.

3 Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, that at this time your sins are forgiven

you, therefore ye receive these things; but remember to sin no more, lest perils

shall come upon you.

4 Verily, I say unto you that ye are chosen out of the world to declare my

gospel with the sound of rejoicing, as with the voice of a trump.

5 Lift up your hearts and be glad, for I am in your midst, and am your

advocate with the Father; and it is his good will to give you the kingdom. 6 And, as it is written—Whatsoever ye shall ask in faith, being united in

prayer according to my command, ye shall receive.

7 And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect

hear my voice and harden not their hearts;

8 Wherefore the decree hath gone forth from the Father that they shall be

gathered in unto one place upon the face of this land, to prepare their hearts

and be prepared in all things against the day when tribulation and desolation

are sent forth upon the wicked.

9 For the hour is nigh and the day soon at hand when the earth is ripe; and all

the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them

up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that wickedness shall not be upon the earth; 10 For the hour is nigh, and that which was spoken by mine apostles must be

fulfilled; for as they spoke so shall it come to pass;

11 For I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the

section 29

33

and the wicked shall not stand.

12 And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, and it hath gone forth in a firm

decree, by the will of the Father, that mine apostles, the Twelve which were

with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of

my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with

crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of

Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none

else.

13 For a trump shall sound both long and loud, even as upon Mount Sinai, and

all the earth shall quake, and they shall come forth—yea, even the dead which

died in me, to receive a crown of righteousness, and to be clothed upon, even

as I am, to be with me, that we may be one.

14 But, behold, I say unto you that before this great day shall come the sun

shall be darkened, and the moon shall be turned into blood, and the stars shall

fall from heaven, and there shall be greater signs in heaven above and in the

earth beneath;

15 And there shall be weeping and wailing among the hosts of men;

16 And there shall be a great hailstorm sent forth to destroy the crops of the

earth.

17 And it shall come to pass, because of the wickedness of the world, that I will

take vengeance upon the wicked, for they will not repent; for the cup of mine

indignation is full; for behold, my blood shall not cleanse them if they hear me

not.

18 Wherefore, I the Lord God will send forth flies upon the face of the earth,

which shall take hold of the inhabitants thereof, and shall eat their flesh, and

shall cause maggots to come in upon them;

19 And their tongues shall be stayed that they shall not utter against me; and

their flesh shall fall from off their bones, and their eyes from their sockets; 20 And it shall come to pass that the beasts of the forest and the fowls of the

air shall devour them up.

21 And the great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth,

shall be cast down by devouring fire, according as it is spoken by the mouth of

Ezekiel the prophet, who spoke of these things, which have not come to pass

but surely must, as I live, for abominations shall not reign.

22 And again, verily, verily, I say unto you that when the thousand years are

ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but

for a little season;

23 And the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed

and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth.

24 For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the

heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the

fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea;

25 And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of

mine hand.

26 But, behold, verily I say unto you, before the earth shall pass away, Michael,

mine archangel, shall sound his trump, and then shall all the dead awake, for

34

section 29

27 And the righteous shall be gathered on my right hand unto eternal life; and

the wicked on my left hand will I be ashamed to own before the Father; 28 Wherefore I will say unto them—Depart from me, ye cursed, into

everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

29 And now, behold, I say unto you, never at any time have I declared from

mine own mouth that they should return, for where I am they cannot come,

for they have no power.

30 But remember that all my judgments are not given unto men; and as the

words have gone forth out of my mouth even so shall they be fulfilled, that the

first shall be last, and that the last shall be first in all things whatsoever I have

created by the word of my power, which is the power of my Spirit.

31 For by the power of my Spirit created I them; yea, all things both spiritual

and temporal—

32 First spiritual, secondly temporal, which is the beginning of my work; and

again, first temporal, and secondly spiritual, which is the last of my work— 33 Speaking unto you that you may naturally understand; but unto myself my

works have no end, neither beginning; but it is given unto you that ye may

understand, because ye have asked it of me and are agreed.

34 Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and

not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal; neither any

man, nor the children of men; neither Adam, your father, whom I created. 35 Behold, I gave unto him that he should be an agent unto himself; and I gave

unto him commandment, but no temporal commandment gave I unto him,

for my commandments are spiritual; they are not natural nor temporal,

neither carnal nor sensual.

36 And it came to pass that Adam, being tempted of the devil—for, behold,

the devil was before Adam, for he rebelled against me, saying, Give me thine

honor, which is my power; and also a third part of the hosts of heaven turned

he away from me because of their agency;

37 And they were thrust down, and thus came the devil and his angels; 38 And, behold, there is a place prepared for them from the beginning, which

place is hell.

39 And it must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men, or

they could not be agents unto themselves; for if they never should have bitter

they could not know the sweet—

40 Wherefore, it came to pass that the devil tempted Adam, and he partook of

the forbidden fruit and transgressed the commandment, wherein he became

subject to the will of the devil, because he yielded unto temptation.

41 Wherefore, I, the Lord God, caused that he should be cast out from the

Garden of Eden, from my presence, because of his transgression, wherein he

became spiritually dead, which is the first death, even that same death which is

the last death, which is spiritual, which shall be pronounced upon the wicked

when I shall say: Depart, ye cursed.

42 But, behold, I say unto you that I, the Lord God, gave unto Adam and unto

his seed, that they should not die as to the temporal death, until I, the Lord

God, should send forth angels to declare unto them repentance and

section 29

35

43 And thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his

probation—that by his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto

eternal life, even as many as would believe;

44 And they that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be

redeemed from their spiritual fall, because they repent not;

45 For they love darkness rather than light, and their deeds are evil, and they

receive their wages of whom they list to obey.

46 But behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the

foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten;

47 Wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt

little children, until they begin to become accountable before me;

48 For it is given unto them even as I will, according to mine own pleasure,

that great things may be required at the hand of their fathers.

49 And, again, I say unto you, that whoso having knowledge, have I not

commanded to repent?

50 And he that hath no understanding, it remaineth in me to do according as

it is written. And now I declare no more unto you at this time. Amen.

Section 30

1 Behold, I say unto you, David, that you have feared man and have not relied on

me for strength as you ought.

2 But your mind has been on the things of the earth more than on the things

of me, your Maker, and the ministry whereunto you have been called; and you

have not given heed unto my Spirit, and to those who were set over you, but

have been persuaded by those whom I have not commanded.

3 Wherefore, you are left to inquire for yourself at my hand, and ponder

upon the things which you have received.

4 And your home shall be at your father’s house, until I give unto you further

commandments. And you shall attend to the ministry in the church, and

before the world, and in the regions round about. Amen.

5 Behold, I say unto you, Peter, that you shall take your journey with your

brother Oliver; for the time has come that it is expedient in me that you shall

open your mouth to declare my gospel; therefore, fear not, but give heed unto

the words and advice of your brother, which he shall give you.

6 And be you afflicted in all his afflictions, ever lifting up your heart unto me

in prayer and faith, for his and your deliverance; for I have given unto him

power to build up my church among the Lamanites;

7 And none have I appointed to be his counselor over him in the church,

concerning church matters, except it is his brother, Joseph Smith, Jun. 8 Wherefore, give heed unto these things and be diligent in keeping my

commandments, and you shall be blessed unto eternal life. Amen.

9 Behold, I say unto you, my servant John, that thou shalt commence from

this time forth to proclaim my gospel, as with the voice of a trump.

10 And your labor shall be at your brother Philip Burroughs’, and in that

region round about, yea, wherever you can be heard, until I command you to

36

section 30

11 And your whole labor shall be in Zion, with all your soul, from henceforth;

yea, you shall ever open your mouth in my cause, not fearing what man can do,

for I am with you. Amen.

Section 31

1 Thomas, my son, blessed are you because of your faith in my work.

2 Behold, you have had many afflictions because of your family; nevertheless,

I will bless you and your family, yea, your little ones; and the day cometh that

they will believe and know the truth and be one with you in my church. 3 Lift up your heart and rejoice, for the hour of your mission is come; and

your tongue shall be loosed, and you shall declare glad tidings of great joy unto

this generation.

4 You shall declare the things which have been revealed to my servant, Joseph

Smith, Jun. You shall begin to preach from this time forth, yea, to reap in the

field which is white already to be burned.

5 Therefore, thrust in your sickle with all your soul, and your sins are forgiven

you, and you shall be laden with sheaves upon your back, for the laborer is

worthy of his hire. Wherefore, your family shall live.

6 Behold, verily I say unto you, go from them only for a little time, and

declare my word, and I will prepare a place for them.

7 Yea, I will open the hearts of the people, and they will receive you. And I

will establish a church by your hand;

8 And you shall strengthen them and prepare them against the time when

they shall be gathered.

9 Be patient in afflictions, revile not against those that revile. Govern your

house in meekness, and be steadfast.

10 Behold, I say unto you that you shall be a physician unto the church, but

not unto the world, for they will not receive you.

11 Go your way whithersoever I will, and it shall be given you by the

Comforter what you shall do and whither you shall go.

12 Pray always, lest you enter into temptation and lose your reward.

13 Be faithful unto the end, and lo, I am with you. These words are not of man

nor of men, but of me, even Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, by the will of the

Father. Amen.

Section 32

1 And now concerning my servant Parley P. Pratt, behold, I say unto him that as

I live I will that he shall declare my gospel and learn of me, and be meek and

lowly of heart.

2 And that which I have appointed unto him is that he shall go with my

servants, Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer, Jun., into the wilderness among

the Lamanites.

3 And Ziba Peterson also shall go with them; and I myself will go with them

and be in their midst; and I am their advocate with the Father, and nothing

section 31

37

4 And they shall give heed to that which is written, and pretend to no other

revelation; and they shall pray always that I may unfold the same to their

understanding.

5 And they shall give heed unto these words and trifle not, and I will bless

them. Amen.

Section 33

1 Behold, I say unto you, my servants Ezra and Northrop, open ye your ears and

hearken to the voice of the Lord your God, whose word is quick and powerful,

sharper than a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of the joints and

marrow, soul and spirit; and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the

heart.

2 For verily, verily, I say unto you that ye are called to lift up your voices as

with the sound of a trump, to declare my gospel unto a crooked and perverse

generation.

3 For behold, the field is white already to harvest; and it is the eleventh hour,

and the last time that I shall call laborers into my vineyard.

4 And my vineyard has become corrupted every whit; and there is none

which doeth good save it be a few; and they err in many instances because of

priestcrafts, all having corrupt minds.

5 And verily, verily, I say unto you, that this church have I established and

called forth out of the wilderness.

6 And even so will I gather mine elect from the four quarters of the earth,

even as many as will believe in me, and hearken unto my voice.

7 Yea, verily, verily, I say unto you, that the field is white already to harvest;

wherefore, thrust in your sickles, and reap with all your might, mind, and

strength.

8 Open your mouths and they shall be filled, and you shall become even as

Nephi of old, who journeyed from Jerusalem in the wilderness.

9 Yea, open your mouths and spare not, and you shall be laden with sheaves

upon your backs, for lo, I am with you.

10 Yea, open your mouths and they shall be filled, saying: Repent, repent, and

prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight; for the kingdom

of heaven is at hand;

11 Yea, repent and be baptized, every one of you, for a remission of your sins;

yea, be baptized even by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire and of the

Holy Ghost.

12 Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and remember that

they shall have faith in me or they can in nowise be saved;

13 And upon this rock I will build my church; yea, upon this rock ye are built,

and if ye continue, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you.

14 And ye shall remember the church articles and covenants to keep them. 15 And whoso having faith you shall confirm in my church, by the laying on of

the hands, and I will bestow the gift of the Holy Ghost upon them.

16 And the Book of Mormon and the holy scriptures are given of me for your

38

section 33

17 Wherefore, be faithful, praying always, having your lamps trimmed and

burning, and oil with you, that you may be ready at the coming of the

Bridegroom—

18 For behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, that I come quickly. Even so.

Amen.

Section 34

1 My son Orson, hearken and hear and behold what I, the Lord God, shall say

unto you, even Jesus Christ your Redeemer;

2 The light and the life of the world, a light which shineth in darkness and

the darkness comprehendeth it not;

3 Who so loved the world that he gave his own life, that as many as would

believe might become the sons of God. Wherefore you are my son;

4 And blessed are you because you have believed;

5 And more blessed are you because you are called of me to preach my

gospel—

6 To lift up your voice as with the sound of a trump, both long and loud, and

cry repentance unto a crooked and perverse generation, preparing the way of

the Lord for his second coming.

7 For behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, the time is soon at hand that I shall

come in a cloud with power and great glory.

8 And it shall be a great day at the time of my coming, for all nations shall

tremble.

9 But before that great day shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the

moon be turned into blood; and the stars shall refuse their shining, and some

shall fall, and great destructions await the wicked.

10 Wherefore, lift up your voice and spare not, for the Lord God hath spoken;

therefore prophesy, and it shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost. 11 And if you are faithful, behold, I am with you until I come—

12 And verily, verily, I say unto you, I come quickly. I am your Lord and your

Redeemer. Even so. Amen.

Section 35

1 Listen to the voice of the Lord your God, even Alpha and Omega, the

beginning and the end, whose course is one eternal round, the same today as

yesterday, and forever.

2 I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who was crucified for the sins of the

world, even as many as will believe on my name, that they may become the

sons of God, even one in me as I am one in the Father, as the Father is one in

me, that we may be one.

3 Behold, verily, verily, I say unto my servant Sidney, I have looked upon thee

and thy works. I have heard thy prayers, and prepared thee for a greater work. 4 Thou art blessed, for thou shalt do great things. Behold thou wast sent

forth, even as John, to prepare the way before me, and before Elijah which

section 34

39

5 Thou didst baptize by water unto repentance, but they received not the

Holy Ghost;

6 But now I give unto thee a commandment, that thou shalt baptize by water,

and they shall receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, even as the

apostles of old.

7 And it shall come to pass that there shall be a great work in the land, even

among the Gentiles, for their folly and their abominations shall be made

manifest in the eyes of all people.

8 For I am God, and mine arm is not shortened; and I will show miracles,

signs, and wonders, unto all those who believe on my name.

9 And whoso shall ask it in my name in faith, they shall cast out devils; they

shall heal the sick; they shall cause the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf

to hear, and the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk.

10 And the time speedily cometh that great things are to be shown forth unto

the children of men;

11 But without faith shall not anything be shown forth except desolations

upon Babylon, the same which has made all nations drink of the wine of the

wrath of her fornication.

12 And there are none that doeth good except those who are ready to receive

the fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth unto this generation. 13 Wherefore, I call upon the weak things of the world, those who are

unlearned and despised, to thresh the nations by the power of my Spirit; 14 And their arm shall be my arm, and I will be their shield and their buckler;

and I will gird up their loins, and they shall fight manfully for me; and their

enemies shall be under their feet; and I will let fall the sword in their behalf,

and by the fire of mine indignation will I preserve them.

15 And the poor and the meek shall have the gospel preached unto them, and

they shall be looking forth for the time of my coming, for it is nigh at hand— 16 And they shall learn the parable of the fig tree, for even now already

summer is nigh.

17 And I have sent forth the fulness of my gospel by the hand of my servant

Joseph; and in weakness have I blessed him;

18 And I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which

have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world,

and the things which shall come from this time until the time of my coming, if

he abide in me, and if not, another will I plant in his stead.

19 Wherefore, watch over him that his faith fail not, and it shall be given by

the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, that knoweth all things.

20 And a commandment I give unto thee—that thou shalt write for him; and

the scriptures shall be given, even as they are in mine own bosom, to the

salvation of mine own elect;

21 For they will hear my voice, and shall see me, and shall not be asleep, and

shall abide the day of my coming; for they shall be purified, even as I am pure. 22 And now I say unto you, tarry with him, and he shall journey with you;

forsake him not, and surely these things shall be fulfilled.

23 And inasmuch as ye do not write, behold, it shall be given unto him to

40

section 35

prove his words, as they shall be given him.

24 Keep all the commandments and covenants by which ye are bound; and I

will cause the heavens to shake for your good, and Satan shall tremble and

Zion shall rejoice upon the hills and flourish;

25 And Israel shall be saved in mine own due time; and by the keys which I

have given shall they be led, and no more be confounded at all.

26 Lift up your hearts and be glad, your redemption draweth nigh.

27 Fear not, little flock, the kingdom is yours until I come. Behold, I come

quickly. Even so. Amen.

Section 36

1 Thus saith the Lord God, the Mighty One of Israel: Behold, I say unto you, my

servant Edward, that you are blessed, and your sins are forgiven you, and you

are called to preach my gospel as with the voice of a trump;

2 And I will lay my hand upon you by the hand of my servant Sidney Rigdon,

and you shall receive my Spirit, the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which

shall teach you the peaceable things of the kingdom;

3 And you shall declare it with a loud voice, saying: Hosanna, blessed be the

name of the most high God.

4 And now this calling and commandment give I unto you concerning all

men—

5 That as many as shall come before my servants Sidney Rigdon and Joseph

Smith, Jun., embracing this calling and commandment, shall be ordained and

sent forth to preach the everlasting gospel among the nations—

6 Crying repentance, saying: Save yourselves from this untoward generation,

and come forth out of the fire, hating even the garments spotted with the flesh. 7 And this commandment shall be given unto the elders of my church, that

every man which will embrace it with singleness of heart may be ordained and

sent forth, even as I have spoken.

8 I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God; wherefore, gird up your loins and I will

suddenly come to my temple. Even so. Amen.

Section 37

1 Behold, I say unto you that it is not expedient in me that ye should translate

any more until ye shall go to the Ohio, and this because of the enemy and for

your sakes.

2 And again, I say unto you that ye shall not go until ye have preached my

gospel in those parts, and have strengthened up the church whithersoever it is

found, and more especially in Colesville; for, behold, they pray unto me in

much faith.

3 And again, a commandment I give unto the church, that it is expedient in

me that they should assemble together at the Ohio, against the time that my

servant Oliver Cowdery shall return unto them.

section 36

41

Even so. Amen.

Section 38

1 Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I Am, Alpha and

Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide

expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was

made;

2 The same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine

eyes;

3 I am the same which spake, and the world was made, and all things came by

me.

4 I am the same which have taken the Zion of Enoch into mine own bosom;

and verily, I say, even as many as have believed in my name, for I am Christ, and

in mine own name, by the virtue of the blood which I have spilt, have I pleaded

before the Father for them.

5 But behold, the residue of the wicked have I kept in chains of darkness until

the judgment of the great day, which shall come at the end of the earth; 6 And even so will I cause the wicked to be kept, that will not hear my voice

but harden their hearts, and wo, wo, wo, is their doom.

7 But behold, verily, verily, I say unto you that mine eyes are upon you. I am

in your midst and ye cannot see me;

8 But the day soon cometh that ye shall see me, and know that I am; for the

veil of darkness shall soon be rent, and he that is not purified shall not abide

the day.

9 Wherefore, gird up your loins and be prepared. Behold, the kingdom is

yours, and the enemy shall not overcome.

10 Verily I say unto you, ye are clean, but not all; and there is none else with

whom I am well pleased;

11 For all flesh is corrupted before me; and the powers of darkness prevail

upon the earth, among the children of men, in the presence of all the hosts of

heaven—

12 Which causeth silence to reign, and all eternity is pained, and the angels are

waiting the great command to reap down the earth, to gather the tares that

they may be burned; and, behold, the enemy is combined.

13 And now I show unto you a mystery, a thing which is had in secret

chambers, to bring to pass even your destruction in process of time, and ye

knew it not;

14 But now I tell it unto you, and ye are blessed, not because of your iniquity,

neither your hearts of unbelief; for verily some of you are guilty before me, but

I will be merciful unto your weakness.

15 Therefore, be ye strong from henceforth; fear not, for the kingdom is yours. 16 And for your salvation I give unto you a commandment, for I have heard

your prayers, and the poor have complained before me, and the rich have I

made, and all flesh is mine, and I am no respecter of persons.

17 And I have made the earth rich, and behold it is my footstool, wherefore,

42

section 38

18 And I hold forth and deign to give unto you greater riches, even a land of

promise, a land flowing with milk and honey, upon which there shall be no

curse when the Lord cometh;

19 And I will give it unto you for the land of your inheritance, if you seek it

with all your hearts.

20 And this shall be my covenant with you, ye shall have it for the land of your

inheritance, and for the inheritance of your children forever, while the earth

shall stand, and ye shall possess it again in eternity, no more to pass away. 21 But, verily I say unto you that in time ye shall have no king nor ruler, for I

will be your king and watch over you.

22 Wherefore, hear my voice and follow me, and you shall be a free people,

and ye shall have no laws but my laws when I come, for I am your lawgiver, and

what can stay my hand?

23 But, verily I say unto you, teach one another according to the office

wherewith I have appointed you;

24 And let every man esteem his brother as himself, and practice virtue and

holiness before me.

25 And again I say unto you, let every man esteem his brother as himself. 26 For what man among you having twelve sons, and is no respecter of them,

and they serve him obediently, and he saith unto the one: Be thou clothed in

robes and sit thou here; and to the other: Be thou clothed in rags and sit thou

there—and looketh upon his sons and saith I am just?

27 Behold, this I have given unto you as a parable, and it is even as I am. I say

unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine.

28 And again, I say unto you that the enemy in the secret chambers seeketh

your lives.

29 Ye hear of wars in far countries, and you say that there will soon be great

wars in far countries, but ye know not the hearts of men in your own land. 30 I tell you these things because of your prayers; wherefore, treasure up

wisdom in your bosoms, lest the wickedness of men reveal these things unto

you by their wickedness, in a manner which shall speak in your ears with a

voice louder than that which shall shake the earth; but if ye are prepared ye

shall not fear.

31 And that ye might escape the power of the enemy, and be gathered unto me

a righteous people, without spot and blameless—

32 Wherefore, for this cause I gave unto you the commandment that ye should

go to the Ohio; and there I will give unto you my law; and there you shall be

endowed with power from on high;

33 And from thence, whosoever I will shall go forth among all nations, and it

shall be told them what they shall do; for I have a great work laid up in store,

for Israel shall be saved, and I will lead them whithersoever I will, and no

power shall stay my hand.

34 And now, I give unto the church in these parts a commandment, that

certain men among them shall be appointed, and they shall be appointed by

the voice of the church;

35 And they shall look to the poor and the needy, and administer to their

section 38

43

commanded them;

36 And this shall be their work, to govern the affairs of the property of this

church.

37 And they that have farms that cannot be sold, let them be left or rented as

seemeth them good.

38 See that all things are preserved; and when men are endowed with power

from on high and sent forth, all these things shall be gathered unto the bosom

of the church.

39 And if ye seek the riches which it is the will of the Father to give unto you,

ye shall be the richest of all people, for ye shall have the riches of eternity; and

it must needs be that the riches of the earth are mine to give; but beware of

pride, lest ye become as the Nephites of old.

40 And again, I say unto you, I give unto you a commandment, that every man,

both elder, priest, teacher, and also member, go to with his might, with the

labor of his hands, to prepare and accomplish the things which I have

commanded.

41 And let your preaching be the warning voice, every man to his neighbor, in

mildness and in meekness.

42 And go ye out from among the wicked. Save yourselves. Be ye clean that

bear the vessels of the Lord. Even so. Amen.

Section 39

1 Hearken and listen to the voice of him who is from all eternity to all eternity,

the Great I Am, even Jesus Christ—

2 The light and the life of the world; a light which shineth in darkness and

the darkness comprehendeth it not;

3 The same which came in the meridian of time unto mine own, and mine

own received me not;

4 But to as many as received me, gave I power to become my sons; and even

so will I give unto as many as will receive me, power to become my sons. 5 And verily, verily, I say unto you, he that receiveth my gospel receiveth me;

and he that receiveth not my gospel receiveth not me.

6 And this is my gospel—repentance and baptism by water, and then cometh

the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which showeth

all things, and teacheth the peaceable things of the kingdom.

7 And now, behold, I say unto you, my servant James, I have looked upon thy

works and I know thee.

8 And verily I say unto thee, thine heart is now right before me at this time;

and, behold, I have bestowed great blessings upon thy head;

9 Nevertheless, thou hast seen great sorrow, for thou hast rejected me many

times because of pride and the cares of the world.

10 But, behold, the days of thy deliverance are come, if thou wilt hearken to

my voice, which saith unto thee: Arise and be baptized, and wash away your

sins, calling on my name, and you shall receive my Spirit, and a blessing so

great as you never have known.

44

section 39

preach the fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth in these last days, the

covenant which I have sent forth to recover my people, which are of the house

of Israel.

12 And it shall come to pass that power shall rest upon thee; thou shalt have

great faith, and I will be with thee and go before thy face.

13 Thou art called to labor in my vineyard, and to build up my church, and to

bring forth Zion, that it may rejoice upon the hills and flourish.

14 Behold, verily, verily, I say unto thee, thou art not called to go into the

eastern countries, but thou art called to go to the Ohio.

15 And inasmuch as my people shall assemble themselves at the Ohio, I have

kept in store a blessing such as is not known among the children of men, and it

shall be poured forth upon their heads. And from thence men shall go forth

into all nations.

16 Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, that the people in Ohio call upon me

in much faith, thinking I will stay my hand in judgment upon the nations, but

I cannot deny my word.

17 Wherefore lay to with your might and call faithful laborers into my

vineyard, that it may be pruned for the last time.

18 And inasmuch as they do repent and receive the fulness of my gospel, and

become sanctified, I will stay mine hand in judgment.

19 Wherefore, go forth, crying with a loud voice, saying: The kingdom of

heaven is at hand; crying: Hosanna! blessed be the name of the Most High

God.

20 Go forth baptizing with water, preparing the way before my face for the

time of my coming;

21 For the time is at hand; the day or the hour no man knoweth; but it surely

shall come.

22 And he that receiveth these things receiveth me; and they shall be gathered

unto me in time and in eternity.

23 And again, it shall come to pass that on as many as ye shall baptize with

water, ye shall lay your hands, and they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost,

and shall be looking forth for the signs of my coming, and shall know me. 24 Behold, I come quickly. Even so. Amen.

Section 40

1 Behold, verily I say unto you, that the heart of my servant James Covel was

right before me, for he covenanted with me that he would obey my word. 2 And he received the word with gladness, but straightway Satan tempted

him; and the fear of persecution and the cares of the world caused him to

reject the word.

3 Wherefore he broke my covenant, and it remaineth with me to do with him

as seemeth me good. Amen.

section 40

45

1 Hearken and hear, O ye my people, saith the Lord and your God, ye whom I

delight to bless with the greatest of all blessings, ye that hear me; and ye that

hear me not will I curse, that have professed my name, with the heaviest of all

cursings.

2 Hearken, O ye elders of my church whom I have called, behold I give unto

you a commandment, that ye shall assemble yourselves together to agree upon

my word;

3 And by the prayer of your faith ye shall receive my law, that ye may know

how to govern my church and have all things right before me.

4 And I will be your ruler when I come; and behold, I come quickly, and ye

shall see that my law is kept.

5 He that receiveth my law and doeth it, the same is my disciple; and he that

saith he receiveth it and doeth it not, the same is not my disciple, and shall be

cast out from among you;

6 For it is not meet that the things which belong to the children of the

kingdom should be given to them that are not worthy, or to dogs, or the pearls

to be cast before swine.

7 And again, it is meet that my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., should have a

house built, in which to live and translate.

8 And again, it is meet that my servant Sidney Rigdon should live as seemeth

him good, inasmuch as he keepeth my commandments.

9 And again, I have called my servant Edward Partridge; and I give a

commandment, that he should be appointed by the voice of the church, and

ordained a bishop unto the church, to leave his merchandise and to spend all

his time in the labors of the church;

10 To see to all things as it shall be appointed unto him in my laws in the day

that I shall give them.

11 And this because his heart is pure before me, for he is like unto Nathanael

of old, in whom there is no guile.

12 These words are given unto you, and they are pure before me; wherefore,

beware how you hold them, for they are to be answered upon your souls in the

day of judgment. Even so. Amen.

Section 42

1 Hearken, O ye elders of my church, who have assembled yourselves together in

my name, even Jesus Christ the Son of the living God, the Savior of the world;

inasmuch as ye believe on my name and keep my commandments.

2 Again I say unto you, hearken and hear and obey the law which I shall give

unto you.

3 For verily I say, as ye have assembled yourselves together according to the

commandment wherewith I commanded you, and are agreed as touching this

one thing, and have asked the Father in my name, even so ye shall receive. 4 Behold, verily I say unto you, I give unto you this first commandment, that

ye shall go forth in my name, every one of you, excepting my servants Joseph

46

section 42

5 And I give unto them a commandment that they shall go forth for a little

season, and it shall be given by the power of the Spirit when they shall return. 6 And ye shall go forth in the power of my Spirit, preaching my gospel, two

by two, in my name, lifting up your voices as with the sound of a trump,

declaring my word like unto angels of God.

7 And ye shall go forth baptizing with water, saying: Repent ye, repent ye, for

the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

8 And from this place ye shall go forth into the regions westward; and

inasmuch as ye shall find them that will receive you ye shall build up my

church in every region—

9 Until the time shall come when it shall be revealed unto you from on high,

when the city of the New Jerusalem shall be prepared, that ye may be gathered

in one, that ye may be my people and I will be your God.

10 And again, I say unto you, that my servant Edward Partridge shall stand in

the office whereunto I have appointed him. And it shall come to pass, that if

he transgress another shall be appointed in his stead. Even so. Amen. 11 Again I say unto you, that it shall not be given to any one to go forth to

preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some

one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and

has been regularly ordained by the heads of the church.

12 And again, the elders, priests and teachers of this church shall teach the

principles of my gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, in

the which is the fulness of the gospel.

13 And they shall observe the covenants and church articles to do them, and

these shall be their teachings, as they shall be directed by the Spirit.

14 And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye

receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach.

15 And all this ye shall observe to do as I have commanded concerning your

teaching, until the fulness of my scriptures is given.

16 And as ye shall lift up your voices by the Comforter, ye shall speak and

prophesy as seemeth me good;

17 For, behold, the Comforter knoweth all things, and beareth record of the

Father and of the Son.

18 And now, behold, I speak unto the church. Thou shalt not kill; and he that

kills shall not have forgiveness in this world, nor in the world to come. 19 And again, I say, thou shalt not kill; but he that killeth shall die.

20 Thou shalt not steal; and he that stealeth and will not repent shall be cast

out.

21 Thou shalt not lie; he that lieth and will not repent shall be cast out. 22 Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and

none else.

23 And he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith,

and shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out. 24 Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and

repenteth not, shall be cast out.

25 But he that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and

section 42

47

26 But if he doeth it again, he shall not be forgiven, but shall be cast out. 27 Thou shalt not speak evil of thy neighbor, nor do him any harm.

28 Thou knowest my laws concerning these things are given in my scriptures;

he that sinneth and repenteth not shall be cast out.

29 If thou lovest me thou shalt serve me and keep all my commandments. 30 And behold, thou wilt remember the poor, and consecrate of thy properties

for their support that which thou hast to impart unto them, with a covenant

and a deed which cannot be broken.

31 And inasmuch as ye impart of your substance unto the poor, ye will do it

unto me; and they shall be laid before the bishop of my church and his

counselors, two of the elders, or high priests, such as he shall appoint or has

appointed and set apart for that purpose.

32 And it shall come to pass, that after they are laid before the bishop of my

church, and after that he has received these testimonies concerning the

consecration of the properties of my church, that they cannot be taken from

the church, agreeable to my commandments, every man shall be made

accountable unto me, a steward over his own property, or that which he has

received by consecration, as much as is sufficient for himself and family. 33 And again, if there shall be properties in the hands of the church, or any

individuals of it, more than is necessary for their support after this first

consecration, which is a residue to be consecrated unto the bishop, it shall be

kept to administer to those who have not, from time to time, that every man

who has need may be amply supplied and receive according to his wants. 34 Therefore, the residue shall be kept in my storehouse, to administer to the

poor and the needy, as shall be appointed by the high council of the church,

and the bishop and his council;

35 And for the purpose of purchasing lands for the public benefit of the

church, and building houses of worship, and building up of the New Jerusalem

which is hereafter to be revealed—

36 That my covenant people may be gathered in one in that day when I shall

come to my temple. And this I do for the salvation of my people.

37 And it shall come to pass, that he that sinneth and repenteth not shall be

cast out of the church, and shall not receive again that which he has

consecrated unto the poor and the needy of my church, or in other words,

unto me—

38 For inasmuch as ye do it unto the least of these, ye do it unto me.

39 For it shall come to pass, that which I spake by the mouths of my prophets

shall be fulfilled; for I will consecrate of the riches of those who embrace my

gospel among the Gentiles unto the poor of my people who are of the house of

Israel.

40 And again, thou shalt not be proud in thy heart; let all thy garments be

plain, and their beauty the beauty of the work of thine own hands;

41 And let all things be done in cleanliness before me.

42 Thou shalt not be idle; for he that is idle shall not eat the bread nor wear

the garments of the laborer.

43 And whosoever among you are sick, and have not faith to be healed, but

48

section 42

that not by the hand of an enemy.

44 And the elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for

and lay their hands upon them in my name; and if they die they shall die unto

me, and if they live they shall live unto me.

45 Thou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss

of them that die, and more especially for those that have not hope of a glorious

resurrection.

46 And it shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death,

for it shall be sweet unto them;

47 And they that die not in me, wo unto them, for their death is bitter. 48 And again, it shall come to pass that he that hath faith in me to be healed,

and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed.

49 He who hath faith to see shall see.

50 He who hath faith to hear shall hear.

51 The lame who hath faith to leap shall leap.

52 And they who have not faith to do these things, but believe in me, have

power to become my sons; and inasmuch as they break not my laws thou shalt

bear their infirmities.

53 Thou shalt stand in the place of thy stewardship.

54 Thou shalt not take thy brother’s garment; thou shalt pay for that which

thou shalt receive of thy brother.

55 And if thou obtainest more than that which would be for thy support, thou

shalt give it into my storehouse, that all things may be done according to that

which I have said.

56 Thou shalt ask, and my scriptures shall be given as I have appointed, and

they shall be preserved in safety;

57 And it is expedient that thou shouldst hold thy peace concerning them, and

not teach them until ye have received them in full.

58 And I give unto you a commandment that then ye shall teach them unto all

men; for they shall be taught unto all nations, kindreds, tongues and people. 59 Thou shalt take the things which thou hast received, which have been given

unto thee in my scriptures for a law, to be my law to govern my church; 60 And he that doeth according to these things shall be saved, and he that

doeth them not shall be damned if he so continue.

61 If thou shalt ask, thou shalt receive revelation upon revelation, knowledge

upon knowledge, that thou mayest know the mysteries and peaceable

things—that which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal.

62 Thou shalt ask, and it shall be revealed unto you in mine own due time

where the New Jerusalem shall be built.

63 And behold, it shall come to pass that my servants shall be sent forth to the

east and to the west, to the north and to the south.

64 And even now, let him that goeth to the east teach them that shall be

converted to flee to the west, and this in consequence of that which is coming

on the earth, and of secret combinations.

65 Behold, thou shalt observe all these things, and great shall be thy reward;

for unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom, but unto the

section 42

49

66 Ye shall observe the laws which ye have received and be faithful.

67 And ye shall hereafter receive church covenants, such as shall be sufficient

to establish you, both here and in the New Jerusalem.

68 Therefore, he that lacketh wisdom, let him ask of me, and I will give him

liberally and upbraid him not.

69 Lift up your hearts and rejoice, for unto you the kingdom, or in other

words, the keys of the church have been given. Even so. Amen.

70 The priests and teachers shall have their stewardships, even as the members. 71 And the elders or high priests who are appointed to assist the bishop as

counselors in all things, are to have their families supported out of the

property which is consecrated to the bishop, for the good of the poor, and for

other purposes, as before mentioned;

72 Or they are to receive a just remuneration for all their services, either a

stewardship or otherwise, as may be thought best or decided by the counselors

and bishop.

73 And the bishop, also, shall receive his support, or a just remuneration for all

his services in the church.

74 Behold, verily I say unto you, that whatever persons among you, having put

away their companions for the cause of fornication, or in other words, if they

shall testify before you in all lowliness of heart that this is the case, ye shall not

cast them out from among you;

75 But if ye shall find that any persons have left their companions for the sake

of adultery, and they themselves are the offenders, and their companions are

living, they shall be cast out from among you.

76 And again, I say unto you, that ye shall be watchful and careful, with all

inquiry, that ye receive none such among you if they are married;

77 And if they are not married, they shall repent of all their sins or ye shall not

receive them.

78 And again, every person who belongeth to this church of Christ, shall

observe to keep all the commandments and covenants of the church. 79 And it shall come to pass, that if any persons among you shall kill they shall

be delivered up and dealt with according to the laws of the land; for remember

that he hath no forgiveness; and it shall be proved according to the laws of the

land.

80 And if any man or woman shall commit adultery, he or she shall be tried

before two elders of the church, or more, and every word shall be established

against him or her by two witnesses of the church, and not of the enemy; but if

there are more than two witnesses it is better.

81 But he or she shall be condemned by the mouth of two witnesses; and the

elders shall lay the case before the church, and the church shall lift up their

hands against him or her, that they may be dealt with according to the law of

God.

82 And if it can be, it is necessary that the bishop be present also.

83 And thus ye shall do in all cases which shall come before you.

84 And if a man or woman shall rob, he or she shall be delivered up unto the

law of the land.

50

section 42

the land.

86 And if he or she shall lie, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the

land.

87 And if he or she do any manner of iniquity, he or she shall be delivered up

unto the law, even that of God.

88 And if thy brother or sister offend thee, thou shalt take him or her between

him or her and thee alone; and if he or she confess thou shalt be reconciled. 89 And if he or she confess not thou shalt deliver him or her up unto the

church, not to the members, but to the elders. And it shall be done in a

meeting, and that not before the world.

90 And if thy brother or sister offend many, he or she shall be chastened before

many.

91 And if any one offend openly, he or she shall be rebuked openly, that he or

she may be ashamed. And if he or she confess not, he or she shall be delivered

up unto the law of God.

92 If any shall offend in secret, he or she shall be rebuked in secret, that he or

she may have opportunity to confess in secret to him or her whom he or she

has offended, and to God, that the church may not speak reproachfully of him

or her.

93 And thus shall ye conduct in all things.

Section 43

1 O hearken, ye elders of my church, and give ear to the words which I shall
