speak unto you.

2 For behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye have received a

commandment for a law unto my church, through him whom I have

appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations from my hand. 3 And this ye shall know assuredly—that there is none other appointed unto

you to receive commandments and revelations until he be taken, if he abide in

me.

4 But verily, verily, I say unto you, that none else shall be appointed unto this

gift except it be through him; for if it be taken from him he shall not have

power except to appoint another in his stead.

5 And this shall be a law unto you, that ye receive not the teachings of any

that shall come before you as revelations or commandments;

6 And this I give unto you that you may not be deceived, that you may know

they are not of me.

7 For verily I say unto you, that he that is ordained of me shall come in at the

gate and be ordained as I have told you before, to teach those revelations which

you have received and shall receive through him whom I have appointed. 8 And now, behold, I give unto you a commandment, that when ye are

assembled together ye shall instruct and edify each other, that ye may know

how to act and direct my church, how to act upon the points of my law and

commandments, which I have given.

9 And thus ye shall become instructed in the law of my church, and be

section 43

51

all holiness before me—

10 That inasmuch as ye do this, glory shall be added to the kingdom which ye

have received. Inasmuch as ye do it not, it shall be taken, even that which ye

have received.

11 Purge ye out the iniquity which is among you; sanctify yourselves before

me;

12 And if ye desire the glories of the kingdom, appoint ye my servant Joseph

Smith, Jun., and uphold him before me by the prayer of faith.

13 And again, I say unto you, that if ye desire the mysteries of the kingdom,

provide for him food and raiment, and whatsoever thing he needeth to

accomplish the work wherewith I have commanded him;

14 And if ye do it not he shall remain unto them that have received him, that I

may reserve unto myself a pure people before me.

15 Again I say, hearken ye elders of my church, whom I have appointed: Ye are

not sent forth to be taught, but to teach the children of men the things which I

have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit;

16 And ye are to be taught from on high. Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be

endowed with power, that ye may give even as I have spoken.

17 Hearken ye, for, behold, the great day of the Lord is nigh at hand.

18 For the day cometh that the Lord shall utter his voice out of heaven; the

heavens shall shake and the earth shall tremble, and the trump of God shall

sound both long and loud, and shall say to the sleeping nations: Ye saints arise

and live; ye sinners stay and sleep until I shall call again.

19 Wherefore gird up your loins lest ye be found among the wicked.

20 Lift up your voices and spare not. Call upon the nations to repent, both old

and young, both bond and free, saying: Prepare yourselves for the great day of

the Lord;

21 For if I, who am a man, do lift up my voice and call upon you to repent, and

ye hate me, what will ye say when the day cometh when the thunders shall

utter their voices from the ends of the earth, speaking to the ears of all that live,

saying—Repent, and prepare for the great day of the Lord?

22 Yea, and again, when the lightnings shall streak forth from the east unto the

west, and shall utter forth their voices unto all that live, and make the ears of

all tingle that hear, saying these words—Repent ye, for the great day of the

Lord is come?

23 And again, the Lord shall utter his voice out of heaven, saying: Hearken, O

ye nations of the earth, and hear the words of that God who made you. 24 O, ye nations of the earth, how often would I have gathered you together as

a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not!

25 How oft have I called upon you by the mouth of my servants, and by the

ministering of angels, and by mine own voice, and by the voice of thunderings,

and by the voice of lightnings, and by the voice of tempests, and by the voice of

earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines and pestilences

of every kind, and by the great sound of a trump, and by the voice of judgment,

and by the voice of mercy all the day long, and by the voice of glory and honor

and the riches of eternal life, and would have saved you with an everlasting

52

section 43

26 Behold, the day has come, when the cup of the wrath of mine indignation is

full.

27 Behold, verily I say unto you, that these are the words of the Lord your God. 28 Wherefore, labor ye, labor ye in my vineyard for the last time—for the last

time call upon the inhabitants of the earth.

29 For in mine own due time will I come upon the earth in judgment, and my

people shall be redeemed and shall reign with me on earth.

30 For the great Millennium, of which I have spoken by the mouth of my

servants, shall come.

31 For Satan shall be bound, and when he is loosed again he shall only reign

for a little season, and then cometh the end of the earth.

32 And he that liveth in righteousness shall be changed in the twinkling of an

eye, and the earth shall pass away so as by fire.

33 And the wicked shall go away into unquenchable fire, and their end no man

knoweth on earth, nor ever shall know, until they come before me in judgment. 34 Hearken ye to these words. Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Savior of the

world. Treasure these things up in your hearts, and let the solemnities of

eternity rest upon your minds.

35 Be sober. Keep all my commandments. Even so. Amen.

Section 44

1 Behold, thus saith the Lord unto you my servants, it is expedient in me that

the elders of my church should be called together, from the east and from the

west, and from the north and from the south, by letter or some other way. 2 And it shall come to pass, that inasmuch as they are faithful, and exercise

faith in me, I will pour out my Spirit upon them in the day that they assemble

themselves together.

3 And it shall come to pass that they shall go forth into the regions round

about, and preach repentance unto the people.

4 And many shall be converted, insomuch that ye shall obtain power to

organize yourselves according to the laws of man;

5 That your enemies may not have power over you; that you may be preserved

in all things; that you may be enabled to keep my laws; that every bond may be

broken wherewith the enemy seeketh to destroy my people.

6 Behold, I say unto you, that ye must visit the poor and the needy and

administer to their relief, that they may be kept until all things may be done

according to my law which ye have received. Amen.

Section 45

1 Hearken, O ye people of my church, to whom the kingdom has been given;

hearken ye and give ear to him who laid the foundation of the earth, who made

the heavens and all the hosts thereof, and by whom all things were made which

live, and move, and have a being.

section 44

53

hour when ye think not the summer shall be past, and the harvest ended, and

your souls not saved.

3 Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your

cause before him—

4 Saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in

whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed,

the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified;

5 Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that

they may come unto me and have everlasting life.

6 Hearken, O ye people of my church, and ye elders listen together, and hear

my voice while it is called today, and harden not your hearts;

7 For verily I say unto you that I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and

the end, the light and the life of the world—a light that shineth in darkness

and the darkness comprehendeth it not.

8 I came unto mine own, and mine own received me not; but unto as many as

received me gave I power to do many miracles, and to become the sons of God;

and even unto them that believed on my name gave I power to obtain eternal

life.

9 And even so I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a

light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to

seek to it, and to be a messenger before my face to prepare the way before me. 10 Wherefore, come ye unto it, and with him that cometh I will reason as with

men in days of old, and I will show unto you my strong reasoning.

11 Wherefore, hearken ye together and let me show unto you even my

wisdom—the wisdom of him whom ye say is the God of Enoch, and his

brethren,

12 Who were separated from the earth, and were received unto myself—a city

reserved until a day of righteousness shall come—a day which was sought for

by all holy men, and they found it not because of wickedness and

abominations;

13 And confessed they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth;

14 But obtained a promise that they should find it and see it in their flesh. 15 Wherefore, hearken and I will reason with you, and I will speak unto you

and prophesy, as unto men in days of old.

16 And I will show it plainly as I showed it unto my disciples as I stood before

them in the flesh, and spake unto them, saying: As ye have asked of me

concerning the signs of my coming, in the day when I shall come in my glory in

the clouds of heaven, to fulfil the promises that I have made unto your fathers, 17 For as ye have looked upon the long absence of your spirits from your

bodies to be a bondage, I will show unto you how the day of redemption shall

come, and also the restoration of the scattered Israel.

18 And now ye behold this temple which is in Jerusalem, which ye call the

house of God, and your enemies say that this house shall never fall.

19 But, verily I say unto you, that desolation shall come upon this generation

as a thief in the night, and this people shall be destroyed and scattered among

all nations.

54

section 45

not be left one stone upon another.

21 And it shall come to pass, that this generation of Jews shall not pass away

until every desolation which I have told you concerning them shall come to

pass.

22 Ye say that ye know that the end of the world cometh; ye say also that ye

know that the heavens and the earth shall pass away;

23 And in this ye say truly, for so it is; but these things which I have told you

shall not pass away until all shall be fulfilled.

24 And this I have told you concerning Jerusalem; and when that day shall

come, shall a remnant be scattered among all nations;

25 But they shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the

Gentiles be fulfilled.

26 And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole

earth shall be in commotion, and men’s hearts shall fail them, and they shall

say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth.

27 And the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound.

28 And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth

among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel; 29 But they receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their

hearts from me because of the precepts of men.

30 And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

31 And there shall be men standing in that generation, that shall not pass until

they shall see an overflowing scourge; for a desolating sickness shall cover the

land.

32 But my disciples shall stand in holy places, and shall not be moved; but

among the wicked, men shall lift up their voices and curse God and die. 33 And there shall be earthquakes also in divers places, and many desolations;

yet men will harden their hearts against me, and they will take up the sword,

one against another, and they will kill one another.

34 And now, when I the Lord had spoken these words unto my disciples, they

were troubled.

35 And I said unto them: Be not troubled, for, when all these things shall

come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you

shall be fulfilled.

36 And when the light shall begin to break forth, it shall be with them like

unto a parable which I will show you—

37 Ye look and behold the fig trees, and ye see them with your eyes, and ye say

when they begin to shoot forth, and their leaves are yet tender, that summer is

now nigh at hand;

38 Even so it shall be in that day when they shall see all these things, then shall

they know that the hour is nigh.

39 And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for

the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son

of Man.

40 And they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the

heavens above, and in the earth beneath.

section 45

55

42 And before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and

the moon be turned into blood, and the stars fall from heaven.

43 And the remnant shall be gathered unto this place;

44 And then they shall look for me, and, behold, I will come; and they shall

see me in the clouds of heaven, clothed with power and great glory; with all

the holy angels; and he that watches not for me shall be cut off.

45 But before the arm of the Lord shall fall, an angel shall sound his trump,

and the saints that have slept shall come forth to meet me in the cloud. 46 Wherefore, if ye have slept in peace blessed are you; for as you now behold

me and know that I am, even so shall ye come unto me and your souls shall

live, and your redemption shall be perfected; and the saints shall come forth

from the four quarters of the earth.

47 Then shall the arm of the Lord fall upon the nations.

48 And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount, and it shall cleave in

twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also

shall shake.

49 And the Lord shall utter his voice, and all the ends of the earth shall hear it;

and the nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see

their folly.

50 And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed;

and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the

fire.

51 And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in

thine hands and in thy feet?

52 Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These

wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.

I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God. 53 And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament

because they persecuted their king.

54 And then shall the heathen nations be redeemed, and they that knew no

law shall have part in the first resurrection; and it shall be tolerable for them. 55 And Satan shall be bound, that he shall have no place in the hearts of the

children of men.

56 And at that day, when I shall come in my glory, shall the parable be fulfilled

which I spake concerning the ten virgins.

57 For they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy

Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived—verily I say unto you, they

shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day. 58 And the earth shall be given unto them for an inheritance; and they shall

multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto

salvation.

59 For the Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them, and

he will be their king and their lawgiver.

60 And now, behold, I say unto you, it shall not be given unto you to know any

further concerning this chapter, until the New Testament be translated, and in

it all these things shall be made known;

56

section 45

prepared for the things to come.

62 For verily I say unto you, that great things await you;

63 Ye hear of wars in foreign lands; but, behold, I say unto you, they are nigh,

even at your doors, and not many years hence ye shall hear of wars in your own

lands.

64 Wherefore I, the Lord, have said, gather ye out from the eastern lands,

assemble ye yourselves together ye elders of my church; go ye forth into the

western countries, call upon the inhabitants to repent, and inasmuch as they

do repent, build up churches unto me.

65 And with one heart and with one mind, gather up your riches that ye may

purchase an inheritance which shall hereafter be appointed unto you. 66 And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a

place of safety for the saints of the Most High God;

67 And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also

shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be

called Zion.

68 And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not

take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety. 69 And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it

shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another.

70 And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against

Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand. 71 And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from

among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy. 72 And now I say unto you, keep these things from going abroad unto the

world until it is expedient in me, that ye may accomplish this work in the eyes

of the people, and in the eyes of your enemies, that they may not know your

works until ye have accomplished the thing which I have commanded you; 73 That when they shall know it, that they may consider these things. 74 For when the Lord shall appear he shall be terrible unto them, that fear may

seize upon them, and they shall stand afar off and tremble.

75 And all nations shall be afraid because of the terror of the Lord, and the

power of his might. Even so. Amen.

Section 46

1 Hearken, O ye people of my church; for verily I say unto you that these things

were spoken unto you for your profit and learning.

2 But notwithstanding those things which are written, it always has been

given to the elders of my church from the beginning, and ever shall be, to

conduct all meetings as they are directed and guided by the Holy Spirit. 3 Nevertheless ye are commanded never to cast any one out from your public

meetings, which are held before the world.

4 Ye are also commanded not to cast any one who belongeth to the church

out of your sacrament meetings; nevertheless, if any have trespassed, let him

not partake until he makes reconciliation.

section 46

57

meetings who are earnestly seeking the kingdom—I speak this concerning

those who are not of the church.

6 And again I say unto you, concerning your confirmation meetings, that if

there be any that are not of the church, that are earnestly seeking after the

kingdom, ye shall not cast them out.

7 But ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and

that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all

holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your

salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be

seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men;

for some are of men, and others of devils.

8 Wherefore, beware lest ye are deceived; and that ye may not be deceived

seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given; 9 For verily I say unto you, they are given for the benefit of those who love me

and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do; that all may be

benefited that seek or that ask of me, that ask and not for a sign that they may

consume it upon their lusts.

10 And again, verily I say unto you, I would that ye should always remember,

and always retain in your minds what those gifts are, that are given unto the

church.

11 For all have not every gift given unto them; for there are many gifts, and to

every man is given a gift by the Spirit of God.

12 To some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited

thereby.

13 To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son

of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world.

14 To others it is given to believe on their words, that they also might have

eternal life if they continue faithful.

15 And again, to some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know the differences of

administration, as it will be pleasing unto the same Lord, according as the Lord

will, suiting his mercies according to the conditions of the children of men. 16 And again, it is given by the Holy Ghost to some to know the diversities of

operations, whether they be of God, that the manifestations of the Spirit may

be given to every man to profit withal.

17 And again, verily I say unto you, to some is given, by the Spirit of God, the

word of wisdom.

18 To another is given the word of knowledge, that all may be taught to be

wise and to have knowledge.

19 And again, to some it is given to have faith to be healed;

20 And to others it is given to have faith to heal.

21 And again, to some is given the working of miracles;

22 And to others it is given to prophesy;

23 And to others the discerning of spirits.

24 And again, it is given to some to speak with tongues;

25 And to another is given the interpretation of tongues.

26 And all these gifts come from God, for the benefit of the children of God.

58

section 46

ordain to watch over the church and to be elders unto the church, are to have it

given unto them to discern all those gifts lest there shall be any among you

professing and yet be not of God.

28 And it shall come to pass that he that asketh in Spirit shall receive in Spirit; 29 That unto some it may be given to have all those gifts, that there may be a

head, in order that every member may be profited thereby.

30 He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God; wherefore

it is done even as he asketh.

31 And again, I say unto you, all things must be done in the name of Christ,

whatsoever you do in the Spirit;

32 And ye must give thanks unto God in the Spirit for whatsoever blessing ye

are blessed with.

33 And ye must practice virtue and holiness before me continually. Even so.

Amen.

Section 47

1 Behold, it is expedient in me that my servant John should write and keep a

regular history, and assist you, my servant Joseph, in transcribing all things

which shall be given you, until he is called to further duties.

2 Again, verily I say unto you that he can also lift up his voice in meetings,

whenever it shall be expedient.

3 And again, I say unto you that it shall be appointed unto him to keep the

church record and history continually; for Oliver Cowdery I have appointed

to another office.

4 Wherefore, it shall be given him, inasmuch as he is faithful, by the

Comforter, to write these things. Even so. Amen.

Section 48

1 It is necessary that ye should remain for the present time in your places of

abode, as it shall be suitable to your circumstances.

2 And inasmuch as ye have lands, ye shall impart to the eastern brethren; 3 And inasmuch as ye have not lands, let them buy for the present time in

those regions round about, as seemeth them good, for it must needs be

necessary that they have places to live for the present time.

4 It must needs be necessary that ye save all the money that ye can, and that

ye obtain all that ye can in righteousness, that in time ye may be enabled to

purchase land for an inheritance, even the city.

5 The place is not yet to be revealed; but after your brethren come from the

east there are to be certain men appointed, and to them it shall be given to

know the place, or to them it shall be revealed.

6 And they shall be appointed to purchase the lands, and to make a

commencement to lay the foundation of the city; and then shall ye begin to be

gathered with your families, every man according to his family, according to

his circumstances, and as is appointed to him by the presidency and the bishop

section 47

59

received, and which ye shall hereafter receive. Even so. Amen.

Section 49

1 Hearken unto my word, my servants Sidney, and Parley, and Leman; for

behold, verily I say unto you, that I give unto you a commandment that you

shall go and preach my gospel which ye have received, even as ye have received

it, unto the Shakers.

2 Behold, I say unto you, that they desire to know the truth in part, but not

all, for they are not right before me and must needs repent.

3 Wherefore, I send you, my servants Sidney and Parley, to preach the gospel

unto them.

4 And my servant Leman shall be ordained unto this work, that he may

reason with them, not according to that which he has received of them, but

according to that which shall be taught him by you my servants; and by so

doing I will bless him, otherwise he shall not prosper.

5 Thus saith the Lord; for I am God, and have sent mine Only Begotten Son

into the world for the redemption of the world, and have decreed that he that

receiveth him shall be saved, and he that receiveth him not shall be damned— 6 And they have done unto the Son of Man even as they listed; and he has

taken his power on the right hand of his glory, and now reigneth in the

heavens, and will reign till he descends on the earth to put all enemies under

his feet, which time is nigh at hand—

7 I, the Lord God, have spoken it; but the hour and the day no man knoweth,

neither the angels in heaven, nor shall they know until he comes.

8 Wherefore, I will that all men shall repent, for all are under sin, except

those which I have reserved unto myself, holy men that ye know not of. 9 Wherefore, I say unto you that I have sent unto you mine everlasting

covenant, even that which was from the beginning.

10 And that which I have promised I have so fulfilled, and the nations of the

earth shall bow to it; and, if not of themselves, they shall come down, for that

which is now exalted of itself shall be laid low of power.

11 Wherefore, I give unto you a commandment that ye go among this people,

and say unto them, like unto mine apostle of old, whose name was Peter: 12 Believe on the name of the Lord Jesus, who was on the earth, and is to

come, the beginning and the end;

13 Repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, according to the holy

commandment, for the remission of sins;

14 And whoso doeth this shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, by the laying

on of the hands of the elders of the church.

15 And again, verily I say unto you, that whoso forbiddeth to marry is not

ordained of God, for marriage is ordained of God unto man.

16 Wherefore, it is lawful that he should have one wife, and they twain shall be

one flesh, and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation; 17 And that it might be filled with the measure of man, according to his

creation before the world was made.

60

section 49

same, is not ordained of God;

19 For, behold, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which

cometh of the earth, is ordained for the use of man for food and for raiment,

and that he might have in abundance.

20 But it is not given that one man should possess that which is above another,

wherefore the world lieth in sin.

21 And wo be unto man that sheddeth blood or that wasteth flesh and hath no

need.

22 And again, verily I say unto you, that the Son of Man cometh not in the

form of a woman, neither of a man traveling on the earth.

23 Wherefore, be not deceived, but continue in steadfastness, looking forth

for the heavens to be shaken, and the earth to tremble and to reel to and fro as

a drunken man, and for the valleys to be exalted, and for the mountains to be

made low, and for the rough places to become smooth—and all this when the

angel shall sound his trumpet.

24 But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the

wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose.

25 Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains, and shall

be assembled together unto the place which I have appointed.

26 Behold, I say unto you, go forth as I have commanded you; repent of all

your sins; ask and ye shall receive; knock and it shall be opened unto you. 27 Behold, I will go before you and be your rearward; and I will be in your

midst, and you shall not be confounded.

28 Behold, I am Jesus Christ, and I come quickly. Even so. Amen.

Section 50

1 Hearken, O ye elders of my church, and give ear to the voice of the living God;

and attend to the words of wisdom which shall be given unto you, according as

ye have asked and are agreed as touching the church, and the spirits which have

gone abroad in the earth.

2 Behold, verily I say unto you, that there are many spirits which are false

spirits, which have gone forth in the earth, deceiving the world.

3 And also Satan hath sought to deceive you, that he might overthrow you. 4 Behold, I, the Lord, have looked upon you, and have seen abominations in

the church that profess my name.

5 But blessed are they who are faithful and endure, whether in life or in

death, for they shall inherit eternal life.

6 But wo unto them that are deceivers and hypocrites, for, thus saith the

Lord, I will bring them to judgment.

7 Behold, verily I say unto you, there are hypocrites among you, who have

deceived some, which has given the adversary power; but behold such shall be

reclaimed;

8 But the hypocrites shall be detected and shall be cut off, either in life or in

death, even as I will; and wo unto them who are cut off from my church, for

the same are overcome of the world.

section 50

61

righteousness before me.

10 And now come, saith the Lord, by the Spirit, unto the elders of his church,

and let us reason together, that ye may understand;

11 Let us reason even as a man reasoneth one with another face to face. 12 Now, when a man reasoneth he is understood of man, because he reasoneth

as a man; even so will I, the Lord, reason with you that you may understand. 13 Wherefore, I the Lord ask you this question—unto what were ye ordained? 14 To preach my gospel by the Spirit, even the Comforter which was sent forth

to teach the truth.

15 And then received ye spirits which ye could not understand, and received

them to be of God; and in this are ye justified?

16 Behold ye shall answer this question yourselves; nevertheless, I will be

merciful unto you; he that is weak among you hereafter shall be made strong. 17 Verily I say unto you, he that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the

word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the

Spirit of truth or some other way?

18 And if it be by some other way it is not of God.

19 And again, he that receiveth the word of truth, doth he receive it by the

Spirit of truth or some other way?

20 If it be some other way it is not of God.

21 Therefore, why is it that ye cannot understand and know, that he that

receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the

Spirit of truth?

22 Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one

another, and both are edified and rejoice together.

23 And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness.

24 That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in

God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until

the perfect day.

25 And again, verily I say unto you, and I say it that you may know the truth,

that you may chase darkness from among you;

26 He that is ordained of God and sent forth, the same is appointed to be the

greatest, notwithstanding he is the least and the servant of all.

27 Wherefore, he is possessor of all things; for all things are subject unto him,

both in heaven and on the earth, the life and the light, the Spirit and the

power, sent forth by the will of the Father through Jesus Christ, his Son. 28 But no man is possessor of all things except he be purified and cleansed

from all sin.

29 And if ye are purified and cleansed from all sin, ye shall ask whatsoever you

will in the name of Jesus and it shall be done.

30 But know this, it shall be given you what you shall ask; and as ye are

appointed to the head, the spirits shall be subject unto you.

31 Wherefore, it shall come to pass, that if you behold a spirit manifested that

you cannot understand, and you receive not that spirit, ye shall ask of the

Father in the name of Jesus; and if he give not unto you that spirit, then you

may know that it is not of God.

62

section 50

proclaim against that spirit with a loud voice that it is not of God— 33 Not with railing accusation, that ye be not overcome, neither with boasting

nor rejoicing, lest you be seized therewith.

34 He that receiveth of God, let him account it of God; and let him rejoice

that he is accounted of God worthy to receive.

35 And by giving heed and doing these things which ye have received, and

which ye shall hereafter receive—and the kingdom is given you of the Father,

and power to overcome all things which are not ordained of him—

36 And behold, verily I say unto you, blessed are you who are now hearing

these words of mine from the mouth of my servant, for your sins are forgiven

you.

37 Let my servant Joseph Wakefield, in whom I am well pleased, and my

servant Parley P. Pratt go forth among the churches and strengthen them by

the word of exhortation;

38 And also my servant John Corrill, or as many of my servants as are ordained

unto this office, and let them labor in the vineyard; and let no man hinder

them doing that which I have appointed unto them—

39 Wherefore, in this thing my servant Edward Partridge is not justified;

nevertheless let him repent and he shall be forgiven.

40 Behold, ye are little children and ye cannot bear all things now; ye must

grow in grace and in the knowledge of the truth.

41 Fear not, little children, for you are mine, and I have overcome the world,

and you are of them that my Father hath given me;

42 And none of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost.

43 And the Father and I are one. I am in the Father and the Father in me; and

inasmuch as ye have received me, ye are in me and I in you.

44 Wherefore, I am in your midst, and I am the good shepherd, and the stone

of Israel. He that buildeth upon this rock shall never fall.

45 And the day cometh that you shall hear my voice and see me, and know

that I am.

46 Watch, therefore, that ye may be ready. Even so. Amen.

Section 51

1 Hearken unto me, saith the Lord your God, and I will speak unto my servant

Edward Partridge, and give unto him directions; for it must needs be that he

receive directions how to organize this people.

2 For it must needs be that they be organized according to my laws; if

otherwise, they will be cut off.

3 Wherefore, let my servant Edward Partridge, and those whom he has

chosen, in whom I am well pleased, appoint unto this people their portions,

every man equal according to his family, according to his circumstances and

his wants and needs.

4 And let my servant Edward Partridge, when he shall appoint a man his

portion, give unto him a writing that shall secure unto him his portion, that he

shall hold it, even this right and this inheritance in the church, until he

section 51

63

to the laws and covenants of the church, to belong to the church.

5 And if he shall transgress and is not accounted worthy to belong to the

church, he shall not have power to claim that portion which he has

consecrated unto the bishop for the poor and needy of my church; therefore,

he shall not retain the gift, but shall only have claim on that portion that is

deeded unto him.

6 And thus all things shall be made sure, according to the laws of the land. 7 And let that which belongs to this people be appointed unto this people. 8 And the money which is left unto this people—let there be an agent

appointed unto this people, to take the money to provide food and raiment,

according to the wants of this people.

9 And let every man deal honestly, and be alike among this people, and

receive alike, that ye may be one, even as I have commanded you.

10 And let that which belongeth to this people not be taken and given unto

that of another church.

11 Wherefore, if another church would receive money of this church, let them

pay unto this church again according as they shall agree;

12 And this shall be done through the bishop or the agent, which shall be

appointed by the voice of the church.

13 And again, let the bishop appoint a storehouse unto this church; and let all

things both in money and in meat, which are more than is needful for the

wants of this people, be kept in the hands of the bishop.

14 And let him also reserve unto himself for his own wants, and for the wants

of his family, as he shall be employed in doing this business.

15 And thus I grant unto this people a privilege of organizing themselves

according to my laws.

16 And I consecrate unto them this land for a little season, until I, the Lord,

shall provide for them otherwise, and command them to go hence;

17 And the hour and the day is not given unto them, wherefore let them act

upon this land as for years, and this shall turn unto them for their good. 18 Behold, this shall be an example unto my servant Edward Partridge, in

other places, in all churches.

19 And whoso is found a faithful, a just, and a wise steward shall enter into the

joy of his Lord, and shall inherit eternal life.

20 Verily, I say unto you, I am Jesus Christ, who cometh quickly, in an hour

you think not. Even so. Amen.

Section 52

1 Behold, thus saith the Lord unto the elders whom he hath called and chosen in

these last days, by the voice of his Spirit—

2 Saying: I, the Lord, will make known unto you what I will that ye shall do

from this time until the next conference, which shall be held in Missouri, upon

the land which I will consecrate unto my people, which are a remnant of Jacob,

and those who are heirs according to the covenant.

3 Wherefore, verily I say unto you, let my servants Joseph Smith, Jun., and

64

section 52

their homes, and journey to the land of Missouri.

4 And inasmuch as they are faithful unto me, it shall be made known unto

them what they shall do;

5 And it shall also, inasmuch as they are faithful, be made known unto them

the land of your inheritance.

6 And inasmuch as they are not faithful, they shall be cut off, even as I will, as

seemeth me good.

7 And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Lyman Wight and my

servant John Corrill take their journey speedily;

8 And also my servant John Murdock, and my servant Hyrum Smith, take

their journey unto the same place by the way of Detroit.

9 And let them journey from thence preaching the word by the way, saying

none other things than that which the prophets and apostles have written, and

that which is taught them by the Comforter through the prayer of faith. 10 Let them go two by two, and thus let them preach by the way in every

congregation, baptizing by water, and the laying on of the hands by the water’s

side.

11 For thus saith the Lord, I will cut my work short in righteousness, for the

days come that I will send forth judgment unto victory.

12 And let my servant Lyman Wight beware, for Satan desireth to sift him as

chaff.

13 And behold, he that is faithful shall be made ruler over many things. 14 And again, I will give unto you a pattern in all things, that ye may not be

deceived; for Satan is abroad in the land, and he goeth forth deceiving the

nations—

15 Wherefore he that prayeth, whose spirit is contrite, the same is accepted of

me if he obey mine ordinances.

16 He that speaketh, whose spirit is contrite, whose language is meek and

edifieth, the same is of God if he obey mine ordinances.

17 And again, he that trembleth under my power shall be made strong, and

shall bring forth fruits of praise and wisdom, according to the revelations and

truths which I have given you.

18 And again, he that is overcome and bringeth not forth fruits, even

according to this pattern, is not of me.

19 Wherefore, by this pattern ye shall know the spirits in all cases under the

whole heavens.

20 And the days have come; according to men’s faith it shall be done unto

them.

21 Behold, this commandment is given unto all the elders whom I have chosen. 22 And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Thomas B. Marsh and my

servant Ezra Thayre take their journey also, preaching the word by the way

unto this same land.

23 And again, let my servant Isaac Morley and my servant Ezra Booth take

their journey, also preaching the word by the way unto this same land. 24 And again, let my servants Edward Partridge and Martin Harris take their

journey with my servants Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith, Jun.

section 52

65

journey, and preach by the way unto this same land.

26 And let my servants Parley P. Pratt and Orson Pratt take their journey, and

preach by the way, even unto this same land.

27 And let my servants Solomon Hancock and Simeon Carter also take their

journey unto this same land, and preach by the way.

28 Let my servants Edson Fuller and Jacob Scott also take their journey. 29 Let my servants Levi W. Hancock and Zebedee Coltrin also take their

journey.

30 Let my servants Reynolds Cahoon and Samuel H. Smith also take their

journey.

31 Let my servants Wheeler Baldwin and William Carter also take their

journey.

32 And let my servants Newel Knight and Selah J. Griffin both be ordained,

and also take their journey.

33 Yea, verily I say, let all these take their journey unto one place, in their

several courses, and one man shall not build upon another’s foundation,

neither journey in another’s track.

34 He that is faithful, the same shall be kept and blessed with much fruit. 35 And again, I say unto you, let my servants Joseph Wakefield and Solomon

Humphrey take their journey into the eastern lands;

36 Let them labor with their families, declaring none other things than the

prophets and apostles, that which they have seen and heard and most assuredly

believe, that the prophecies may be fulfilled.

37 In consequence of transgression, let that which was bestowed upon Heman

Basset be taken from him, and placed upon the head of Simonds Ryder. 38 And again, verily I say unto you, let Jared Carter be ordained a priest, and

also George James be ordained a priest.

39 Let the residue of the elders watch over the churches, and declare the word

in the regions round about them; and let them labor with their own hands that

there be no idolatry nor wickedness practiced.

40 And remember in all things the poor and the needy, the sick and the

afflicted, for he that doeth not these things, the same is not my disciple. 41 And again, let my servants Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon and

Edward Partridge take with them a recommend from the church. And let

there be one obtained for my servant Oliver Cowdery also.

42 And thus, even as I have said, if ye are faithful ye shall assemble yourselves

together to rejoice upon the land of Missouri, which is the land of your

inheritance, which is now the land of your enemies.

43 But, behold, I, the Lord, will hasten the city in its time, and will crown the

faithful with joy and with rejoicing.

44 Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and I will lift them up at the last

day. Even so. Amen.

66

section 52

1 Behold, I say unto you, my servant Sidney Gilbert, that I have heard your

prayers; and you have called upon me that it should be made known unto you,

of the Lord your God, concerning your calling and election in the church,

which I, the Lord, have raised up in these last days.

2 Behold, I, the Lord, who was crucified for the sins of the world, give unto

you a commandment that you shall forsake the world.

3 Take upon you mine ordination, even that of an elder, to preach faith and

repentance and remission of sins, according to my word, and the reception of

the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands;

4 And also to be an agent unto this church in the place which shall be

appointed by the bishop, according to commandments which shall be given

hereafter.

5 And again, verily I say unto you, you shall take your journey with my

servants Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon.

6 Behold, these are the first ordinances which you shall receive; and the

residue shall be made known in a time to come, according to your labor in my

vineyard.

7 And again, I would that ye should learn that he only is saved who endureth

unto the end. Even so. Amen.

Section 54

1 Behold, thus saith the Lord, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the

end, even he who was crucified for the sins of the world—

2 Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, my servant Newel Knight, you shall

stand fast in the office whereunto I have appointed you.

3 And if your brethren desire to escape their enemies, let them repent of all

their sins, and become truly humble before me and contrite.

4 And as the covenant which they made unto me has been broken, even so it

has become void and of none effect.

5 And wo to him by whom this offense cometh, for it had been better for him

that he had been drowned in the depth of the sea.

6 But blessed are they who have kept the covenant and observed the

commandment, for they shall obtain mercy.

7 Wherefore, go to now and flee the land, lest your enemies come upon you;

and take your journey, and appoint whom you will to be your leader, and to

pay moneys for you.

8 And thus you shall take your journey into the regions westward, unto the

land of Missouri, unto the borders of the Lamanites.

9 And after you have done journeying, behold, I say unto you, seek ye a living

like unto men, until I prepare a place for you.

10 And again, be patient in tribulation until I come; and, behold, I come

quickly, and my reward is with me, and they who have sought me early shall

find rest to their souls. Even so. Amen.

section 53

67

1 Behold, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant William, yea, even the Lord

of the whole earth, thou art called and chosen; and after thou hast been

baptized by water, which if you do with an eye single to my glory, you shall

have a remission of your sins and a reception of the Holy Spirit by the laying

on of hands;

2 And then thou shalt be ordained by the hand of my servant Joseph Smith,

Jun., to be an elder unto this church, to preach repentance and remission of

sins by way of baptism in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God. 3 And on whomsoever you shall lay your hands, if they are contrite before

me, you shall have power to give the Holy Spirit.

4 And again, you shall be ordained to assist my servant Oliver Cowdery to do

the work of printing, and of selecting and writing books for schools in this

church, that little children also may receive instruction before me as is pleasing

unto me.

5 And again, verily I say unto you, for this cause you shall take your journey

with my servants Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon, that you may be

planted in the land of your inheritance to do this work.

6 And again, let my servant Joseph Coe also take his journey with them. The

residue shall be made known hereafter, even as I will. Amen.

Section 56

1 Hearken, O ye people who profess my name, saith the Lord your God; for

behold, mine anger is kindled against the rebellious, and they shall know mine

arm and mine indignation, in the day of visitation and of wrath upon the

nations.

2 And he that will not take up his cross and follow me, and keep my

commandments, the same shall not be saved.

3 Behold, I, the Lord, command; and he that will not obey shall be cut off in

mine own due time, after I have commanded and the commandment is broken. 4 Wherefore I, the Lord, command and revoke, as it seemeth me good; and

all this to be answered upon the heads of the rebellious, saith the Lord. 5 Wherefore, I revoke the commandment which was given unto my servants

Thomas B. Marsh and Ezra Thayre, and give a new commandment unto my

servant Thomas, that he shall take up his journey speedily to the land of

Missouri, and my servant Selah J. Griffin shall also go with him.

6 For behold, I revoke the commandment which was given unto my servants

Selah J. Griffin and Newel Knight, in consequence of the stiffneckedness of my

people which are in Thompson, and their rebellions.

7 Wherefore, let my servant Newel Knight remain with them; and as many as

will go may go, that are contrite before me, and be led by him to the land

which I have appointed.

8 And again, verily I say unto you, that my servant Ezra Thayre must repent of

his pride, and of his selfishness, and obey the former commandment which I

have given him concerning the place upon which he lives.

68

section 56

shall be appointed still to go to the land of Missouri;

10 Otherwise he shall receive the money which he has paid, and shall leave the

place, and shall be cut off out of my church, saith the Lord God of hosts; 11 And though the heaven and the earth pass away, these words shall not pass

away, but shall be fulfilled.

12 And if my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., must needs pay the money, behold, I,

the Lord, will pay it unto him again in the land of Missouri, that those of

whom he shall receive may be rewarded again according to that which they do; 13 For according to that which they do they shall receive, even in lands for

their inheritance.

14 Behold, thus saith the Lord unto my people—you have many things to do

and to repent of; for behold, your sins have come up unto me, and are not

pardoned, because you seek to counsel in your own ways.

15 And your hearts are not satisfied. And ye obey not the truth, but have

pleasure in unrighteousness.

16 Wo unto you rich men, that will not give your substance to the poor, for

your riches will canker your souls; and this shall be your lamentation in the day

of visitation, and of judgment, and of indignation: The harvest is past, the

summer is ended, and my soul is not saved!

17 Wo unto you poor men, whose hearts are not broken, whose spirits are not

contrite, and whose bellies are not satisfied, and whose hands are not stayed

from laying hold upon other men’s goods, whose eyes are full of greediness,

and who will not labor with your own hands!

18 But blessed are the poor who are pure in heart, whose hearts are broken,

and whose spirits are contrite, for they shall see the kingdom of God coming in

power and great glory unto their deliverance; for the fatness of the earth shall

be theirs.

19 For behold, the Lord shall come, and his recompense shall be with him, and

he shall reward every man, and the poor shall rejoice;

20 And their generations shall inherit the earth from generation to generation,

forever and ever. And now I make an end of speaking unto you. Even so.

Amen.

Section 57

1 Hearken, O ye elders of my church, saith the Lord your God, who have

assembled yourselves together, according to my commandments, in this land,

which is the land of Missouri, which is the land which I have appointed and

consecrated for the gathering of the saints.

2 Wherefore, this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. 3 And thus saith the Lord your God, if you will receive wisdom here is

wisdom. Behold, the place which is now called Independence is the center

place; and a spot for the temple is lying westward, upon a lot which is not far

from the courthouse.

4 Wherefore, it is wisdom that the land should be purchased by the saints,

and also every tract lying westward, even unto the line running directly

section 57

69

5 And also every tract bordering by the prairies, inasmuch as my disciples are

enabled to buy lands. Behold, this is wisdom, that they may obtain it for an

everlasting inheritance.

6 And let my servant Sidney Gilbert stand in the office to which I have

appointed him, to receive moneys, to be an agent unto the church, to buy land

in all the regions round about, inasmuch as can be done in righteousness, and

as wisdom shall direct.

7 And let my servant Edward Partridge stand in the office to which I have

appointed him, and divide unto the saints their inheritance, even as I have

commanded; and also those whom he has appointed to assist him.

8 And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Sidney Gilbert plant himself

in this place, and establish a store, that he may sell goods without fraud, that he

may obtain money to buy lands for the good of the saints, and that he may

obtain whatsoever things the disciples may need to plant them in their

inheritance.

9 And also let my servant Sidney Gilbert obtain a license—behold here is

wisdom, and whoso readeth let him understand—that he may send goods also

unto the people, even by whom he will as clerks employed in his service; 10 And thus provide for my saints, that my gospel may be preached unto those

who sit in darkness and in the region and shadow of death.

11 And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant William W. Phelps be

planted in this place, and be established as a printer unto the church. 12 And lo, if the world receive his writings—behold here is wisdom—let him

obtain whatsoever he can obtain in righteousness, for the good of the saints. 13 And let my servant Oliver Cowdery assist him, even as I have commanded,

in whatsoever place I shall appoint unto him, to copy, and to correct, and

select, that all things may be right before me, as it shall be proved by the Spirit

through him.

14 And thus let those of whom I have spoken be planted in the land of Zion, as

speedily as can be, with their families, to do those things even as I have spoken. 15 And now concerning the gathering—Let the bishop and the agent make

preparations for those families which have been commanded to come to this

land, as soon as possible, and plant them in their inheritance.

16 And unto the residue of both elders and members further directions shall

be given hereafter. Even so. Amen.

Section 58

1 Hearken, O ye elders of my church, and give ear to my word, and learn of me

what I will concerning you, and also concerning this land unto which I have

sent you.

2 For verily I say unto you, blessed is he that keepeth my commandments,

whether in life or in death; and he that is faithful in tribulation, the reward of

the same is greater in the kingdom of heaven.

3 Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of

your God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory

70

section 58

4 For after much tribulation come the blessings. Wherefore the day cometh

that ye shall be crowned with much glory; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at

hand.

5 Remember this, which I tell you before, that you may lay it to heart, and

receive that which is to follow.

6 Behold, verily I say unto you, for this cause I have sent you—that you

might be obedient, and that your hearts might be prepared to bear testimony

of the things which are to come;

7 And also that you might be honored in laying the foundation, and in

bearing record of the land upon which the Zion of God shall stand;

8 And also that a feast of fat things might be prepared for the poor; yea, a

feast of fat things, of wine on the lees well refined, that the earth may know

that the mouths of the prophets shall not fail;

9 Yea, a supper of the house of the Lord, well prepared, unto which all

nations shall be invited.

10 First, the rich and the learned, the wise and the noble;

11 And after that cometh the day of my power; then shall the poor, the lame,

and the blind, and the deaf, come in unto the marriage of the Lamb, and

partake of the supper of the Lord, prepared for the great day to come. 12 Behold, I, the Lord, have spoken it.

13 And that the testimony might go forth from Zion, yea, from the mouth of

the city of the heritage of God—

14 Yea, for this cause I have sent you hither, and have selected my servant

Edward Partridge, and have appointed unto him his mission in this land. 15 But if he repent not of his sins, which are unbelief and blindness of heart,

let him take heed lest he fall.

16 Behold his mission is given unto him, and it shall not be given again. 17 And whoso standeth in this mission is appointed to be a judge in Israel, like

as it was in ancient days, to divide the lands of the heritage of God unto his

children;

18 And to judge his people by the testimony of the just, and by the assistance

of his counselors, according to the laws of the kingdom which are given by the

prophets of God.

19 For verily I say unto you, my law shall be kept on this land.

20 Let no man think he is ruler; but let God rule him that judgeth, according

to the counsel of his own will, or, in other words, him that counseleth or

sitteth upon the judgment seat.

21 Let no man break the laws of the land, for he that keepeth the laws of God

hath no need to break the laws of the land.

22 Wherefore, be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is

to reign, and subdues all enemies under his feet.

23 Behold, the laws which ye have received from my hand are the laws of the

church, and in this light ye shall hold them forth. Behold, here is wisdom. 24 And now, as I spake concerning my servant Edward Partridge, this land is

the land of his residence, and those whom he has appointed for his counselors;

and also the land of the residence of him whom I have appointed to keep my

section 58

71

25 Wherefore, let them bring their families to this land, as they shall counsel

between themselves and me.

26 For behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is

compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore

he receiveth no reward.

27 Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many

things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness;

28 For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And

inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward.

29 But he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a

commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same

is damned.

30 Who am I that made man, saith the Lord, that will hold him guiltless that

obeys not my commandments?

31 Who am I, saith the Lord, that have promised and have not fulfilled? 32 I command and men obey not; I revoke and they receive not the blessing. 33 Then they say in their hearts: This is not the work of the Lord, for his

promises are not fulfilled. But wo unto such, for their reward lurketh beneath,

and not from above.

34 And now I give unto you further directions concerning this land.

35 It is wisdom in me that my servant Martin Harris should be an example

unto the church, in laying his moneys before the bishop of the church. 36 And also, this is a law unto every man that cometh unto this land to receive

an inheritance; and he shall do with his moneys according as the law directs. 37 And it is wisdom also that there should be lands purchased in

Independence, for the place of the storehouse, and also for the house of the

printing.

38 And other directions concerning my servant Martin Harris shall be given

him of the Spirit, that he may receive his inheritance as seemeth him good; 39 And let him repent of his sins, for he seeketh the praise of the world. 40 And also let my servant William W. Phelps stand in the office to which I

have appointed him, and receive his inheritance in the land;

41 And also he hath need to repent, for I, the Lord, am not well pleased with

him, for he seeketh to excel, and he is not sufficiently meek before me. 42 Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the

Lord, remember them no more.

43 By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess

them and forsake them.

44 And now, verily, I say concerning the residue of the elders of my church, the

time has not yet come, for many years, for them to receive their inheritance in

this land, except they desire it through the prayer of faith, only as it shall be

appointed unto them of the Lord.

45 For, behold, they shall push the people together from the ends of the earth. 46 Wherefore, assemble yourselves together; and they who are not appointed

to stay in this land, let them preach the gospel in the regions round about; and

after that let them return to their homes.

72

section 58

and call upon the rich, the high and the low, and the poor to repent. 48 And let them build up churches, inasmuch as the inhabitants of the earth

will repent.

49 And let there be an agent appointed by the voice of the church, unto the

church in Ohio, to receive moneys to purchase lands in Zion.

50 And I give unto my servant Sidney Rigdon a commandment, that he shall

write a description of the land of Zion, and a statement of the will of God, as it

shall be made known by the Spirit unto him;

51 And an epistle and subscription, to be presented unto all the churches to

obtain moneys, to be put into the hands of the bishop, of himself or the agent,

as seemeth him good or as he shall direct, to purchase lands for an inheritance

for the children of God.

52 For, behold, verily I say unto you, the Lord willeth that the disciples and the

children of men should open their hearts, even to purchase this whole region

of country, as soon as time will permit.

53 Behold, here is wisdom. Let them do this lest they receive none inheritance,

save it be by the shedding of blood.

54 And again, inasmuch as there is land obtained, let there be workmen sent

forth of all kinds unto this land, to labor for the saints of God.

55 Let all these things be done in order; and let the privileges of the lands be

made known from time to time, by the bishop or the agent of the church. 56 And let the work of the gathering be not in haste, nor by flight; but let it be

done as it shall be counseled by the elders of the church at the conferences,

according to the knowledge which they receive from time to time.

57 And let my servant Sidney Rigdon consecrate and dedicate this land, and

the spot for the temple, unto the Lord.

58 And let a conference meeting be called; and after that let my servants

Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith, Jun., return, and also Oliver Cowdery with

them, to accomplish the residue of the work which I have appointed unto

them in their own land, and the residue as shall be ruled by the conferences. 59 And let no man return from this land except he bear record by the way, of

that which he knows and most assuredly believes.

60 Let that which has been bestowed upon Ziba Peterson be taken from him;

and let him stand as a member in the church, and labor with his own hands,

with the brethren, until he is sufficiently chastened for all his sins; for he

confesseth them not, and he thinketh to hide them.

61 Let the residue of the elders of this church, who are coming to this land,

some of whom are exceedingly blessed even above measure, also hold a

conference upon this land.

62 And let my servant Edward Partridge direct the conference which shall be

held by them.

63 And let them also return, preaching the gospel by the way, bearing record of

the things which are revealed unto them.

64 For, verily, the sound must go forth from this place into all the world, and

unto the uttermost parts of the earth—the gospel must be preached unto

every creature, with signs following them that believe.

section 58

73

Section 59

1 Behold, blessed, saith the Lord, are they who have come up unto this land with

an eye single to my glory, according to my commandments.

2 For those that live shall inherit the earth, and those that die shall rest from

all their labors, and their works shall follow them; and they shall receive a

crown in the mansions of my Father, which I have prepared for them. 3 Yea, blessed are they whose feet stand upon the land of Zion, who have

obeyed my gospel; for they shall receive for their reward the good things of the

earth, and it shall bring forth in its strength.

4 And they shall also be crowned with blessings from above, yea, and with

commandments not a few, and with revelations in their time—they that are

faithful and diligent before me.

5 Wherefore, I give unto them a commandment, saying thus: Thou shalt love

the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy might, mind, and strength;

and in the name of Jesus Christ thou shalt serve him.

6 Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. Thou shalt not steal; neither

commit adultery, nor kill, nor do anything like unto it.

7 Thou shalt thank the Lord thy God in all things.

8 Thou shalt offer a sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in righteousness, even

that of a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

9 And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world,

thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy

day;

10 For verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to

pay thy devotions unto the Most High;

11 Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at

all times;

12 But remember that on this, the Lord’s day, thou shalt offer thine oblations

and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren,

and before the Lord.

13 And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be

prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other

words, that thy joy may be full.

14 Verily, this is fasting and prayer, or in other words, rejoicing and prayer. 15 And inasmuch as ye do these things with thanksgiving, with cheerful hearts

and countenances, not with much laughter, for this is sin, but with a glad heart

and a cheerful countenance—

16 Verily I say, that inasmuch as ye do this, the fulness of the earth is yours, the

beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the

trees and walketh upon the earth;

17 Yea, and the herb, and the good things which come of the earth, whether

for food or for raiment, or for houses, or for barns, or for orchards, or for

gardens, or for vineyards;

18 Yea, all things which come of the earth, in the season thereof, are made for

74

section 59

19 Yea, for food and for raiment, for taste and for smell, to strengthen the

body and to enliven the soul.

20 And it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man; for unto

this end were they made to be used, with judgment, not to excess, neither by

extortion.

21 And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled,

save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his

commandments.

22 Behold, this is according to the law and the prophets; wherefore, trouble

me no more concerning this matter.

23 But learn that he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his

reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come. 24 I, the Lord, have spoken it, and the Spirit beareth record. Amen.

Section 60

1 Behold, thus saith the Lord unto the elders of his church, who are to return

speedily to the land from whence they came: Behold, it pleaseth me, that you

have come up hither;

2 But with some I am not well pleased, for they will not open their mouths,

but they hide the talent which I have given unto them, because of the fear of

man. Wo unto such, for mine anger is kindled against them.

3 And it shall come to pass, if they are not more faithful unto me, it shall be

taken away, even that which they have.

4 For I, the Lord, rule in the heavens above, and among the armies of the

earth; and in the day when I shall make up my jewels, all men shall know what

it is that bespeaketh the power of God.

5 But, verily, I will speak unto you concerning your journey unto the land

from whence you came. Let there be a craft made, or bought, as seemeth you

good, it mattereth not unto me, and take your journey speedily for the place

which is called St. Louis.

6 And from thence let my servants, Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith, Jun., and

Oliver Cowdery, take their journey for Cincinnati;

7 And in this place let them lift up their voice and declare my word with loud

voices, without wrath or doubting, lifting up holy hands upon them. For I am

able to make you holy, and your sins are forgiven you.

8 And let the residue take their journey from St. Louis, two by two, and

preach the word, not in haste, among the congregations of the wicked, until

they return to the churches from whence they came.

9 And all this for the good of the churches; for this intent have I sent them. 10 And let my servant Edward Partridge impart of the money which I have

given him, a portion unto mine elders who are commanded to return; 11 And he that is able, let him return it by the way of the agent; and he that is

not, of him it is not required.

12 And now I speak of the residue who are to come unto this land.

13 Behold, they have been sent to preach my gospel among the congregations

section 60

75

not idle away thy time, neither shalt thou bury thy talent that it may not be

known.

14 And after thou hast come up unto the land of Zion, and hast proclaimed

my word, thou shalt speedily return, proclaiming my word among the

congregations of the wicked, not in haste, neither in wrath nor with strife. 15 And shake off the dust of thy feet against those who receive thee not, not in

their presence, lest thou provoke them, but in secret; and wash thy feet, as a

testimony against them in the day of judgment.

16 Behold, this is sufficient for you, and the will of him who hath sent you. 17 And by the mouth of my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., it shall be made

known concerning Sidney Rigdon and Oliver Cowdery. The residue hereafter.

Even so. Amen.

Section 61

1 Behold, and hearken unto the voice of him who has all power, who is from

everlasting to everlasting, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. 2 Behold, verily thus saith the Lord unto you, O ye elders of my church, who

are assembled upon this spot, whose sins are now forgiven you, for I, the Lord,

forgive sins, and am merciful unto those who confess their sins with humble

hearts;

3 But verily I say unto you, that it is not needful for this whole company of

mine elders to be moving swiftly upon the waters, whilst the inhabitants on

either side are perishing in unbelief.

4 Nevertheless, I suffered it that ye might bear record; behold, there are many

dangers upon the waters, and more especially hereafter;

5 For I, the Lord, have decreed in mine anger many destructions upon the

waters; yea, and especially upon these waters.

6 Nevertheless, all flesh is in mine hand, and he that is faithful among you

shall not perish by the waters.

7 Wherefore, it is expedient that my servant Sidney Gilbert and my servant

William W. Phelps be in haste upon their errand and mission.

8 Nevertheless, I would not suffer that ye should part until you were

chastened for all your sins, that you might be one, that you might not perish in

wickedness;

9 But now, verily I say, it behooveth me that ye should part. Wherefore let my

servants Sidney Gilbert and William W. Phelps take their former company,

and let them take their journey in haste that they may fill their mission, and

through faith they shall overcome;

10 And inasmuch as they are faithful they shall be preserved, and I, the Lord,

will be with them.

11 And let the residue take that which is needful for clothing.

12 Let my servant Sidney Gilbert take that which is not needful with him, as

you shall agree.

13 And now, behold, for your good I gave unto you a commandment

concerning these things; and I, the Lord, will reason with you as with men in

76

section 61

14 Behold, I, the Lord, in the beginning blessed the waters; but in the last days,

by the mouth of my servant John, I cursed the waters.

15 Wherefore, the days will come that no flesh shall be safe upon the waters. 16 And it shall be said in days to come that none is able to go up to the land of

Zion upon the waters, but he that is upright in heart.

17 And, as I, the Lord, in the beginning cursed the land, even so in the last

days have I blessed it, in its time, for the use of my saints, that they may partake

the fatness thereof.

18 And now I give unto you a commandment that what I say unto one I say

unto all, that you shall forewarn your brethren concerning these waters, that

they come not in journeying upon them, lest their faith fail and they are

caught in snares;

19 I, the Lord, have decreed, and the destroyer rideth upon the face thereof,

and I revoke not the decree.

20 I, the Lord, was angry with you yesterday, but today mine anger is turned

away.

21 Wherefore, let those concerning whom I have spoken, that should take their

journey in haste—again I say unto you, let them take their journey in haste. 22 And it mattereth not unto me, after a little, if it so be that they fill their

mission, whether they go by water or by land; let this be as it is made known

unto them according to their judgments hereafter.

23 And now, concerning my servants, Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith, Jun., and

Oliver Cowdery, let them come not again upon the waters, save it be upon the

canal, while journeying unto their homes; or in other words they shall not

come upon the waters to journey, save upon the canal.

24 Behold, I, the Lord, have appointed a way for the journeying of my saints;

and behold, this is the way—that after they leave the canal they shall journey

by land, inasmuch as they are commanded to journey and go up unto the land

of Zion;

25 And they shall do like unto the children of Israel, pitching their tents by the

way.

26 And, behold, this commandment you shall give unto all your brethren. 27 Nevertheless, unto whom is given power to command the waters, unto him

it is given by the Spirit to know all his ways;

28 Wherefore, let him do as the Spirit of the living God commandeth him,

whether upon the land or upon the waters, as it remaineth with me to do

hereafter.

29 And unto you is given the course for the saints, or the way for the saints of

the camp of the Lord, to journey.

30 And again, verily I say unto you, my servants, Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith,

Jun., and Oliver Cowdery, shall not open their mouths in the congregations of

the wicked until they arrive at Cincinnati;

31 And in that place they shall lift up their voices unto God against that

people, yea, unto him whose anger is kindled against their wickedness, a

people who are well-nigh ripened for destruction.

32 And from thence let them journey for the congregations of their brethren,

section 61

77

among the congregations of the wicked.

33 And now, concerning the residue, let them journey and declare the word

among the congregations of the wicked, inasmuch as it is given;

34 And inasmuch as they do this they shall rid their garments, and they shall

be spotless before me.

35 And let them journey together, or two by two, as seemeth them good, only

let my servant Reynolds Cahoon, and my servant Samuel H. Smith, with

whom I am well pleased, be not separated until they return to their homes, and

this for a wise purpose in me.

36 And now, verily I say unto you, and what I say unto one I say unto all, be of

good cheer, little children; for I am in your midst, and I have not forsaken you; 37 And inasmuch as you have humbled yourselves before me, the blessings of

the kingdom are yours.

38 Gird up your loins and be watchful and be sober, looking forth for the

coming of the Son of Man, for he cometh in an hour you think not.

39 Pray always that you enter not into temptation, that you may abide the day

of his coming, whether in life or in death. Even so. Amen.

Section 62

1 Behold, and hearken, O ye elders of my church, saith the Lord your God, even

Jesus Christ, your advocate, who knoweth the weakness of man and how to

succor them who are tempted.

2 And verily mine eyes are upon those who have not as yet gone up unto the

land of Zion; wherefore your mission is not yet full.

3 Nevertheless, ye are blessed, for the testimony which ye have borne is

recorded in heaven for the angels to look upon; and they rejoice over you, and

your sins are forgiven you.

4 And now continue your journey. Assemble yourselves upon the land of

Zion; and hold a meeting and rejoice together, and offer a sacrament unto the

Most High.

5 And then you may return to bear record, yea, even altogether, or two by

two, as seemeth you good, it mattereth not unto me; only be faithful, and

declare glad tidings unto the inhabitants of the earth, or among the

congregations of the wicked.

6 Behold, I, the Lord, have brought you together that the promise might be

fulfilled, that the faithful among you should be preserved and rejoice together

in the land of Missouri. I, the Lord, promise the faithful and cannot lie. 7 I, the Lord, am willing, if any among you desire to ride upon horses, or

upon mules, or in chariots, he shall receive this blessing, if he receive it from

the hand of the Lord, with a thankful heart in all things.

8 These things remain with you to do according to judgment and the

directions of the Spirit.

9 Behold, the kingdom is yours. And behold, and lo, I am with the faithful

always. Even so. Amen.

78

section 62

1 Hearken, O ye people, and open your hearts and give ear from afar; and listen,

you that call yourselves the people of the Lord, and hear the word of the Lord

and his will concerning you.

2 Yea, verily, I say, hear the word of him whose anger is kindled against the

wicked and rebellious;

3 Who willeth to take even them whom he will take, and preserveth in life

them whom he will preserve;

4 Who buildeth up at his own will and pleasure; and destroyeth when he

pleases, and is able to cast the soul down to hell.

5 Behold, I, the Lord, utter my voice, and it shall be obeyed.

6 Wherefore, verily I say, let the wicked take heed, and let the rebellious fear

and tremble; and let the unbelieving hold their lips, for the day of wrath shall

come upon them as a whirlwind, and all flesh shall know that I am God. 7 And he that seeketh signs shall see signs, but not unto salvation.

8 Verily, I say unto you, there are those among you who seek signs, and there

have been such even from the beginning;

9 But, behold, faith cometh not by signs, but signs follow those that believe. 10 Yea, signs come by faith, not by the will of men, nor as they please, but by

the will of God.

11 Yea, signs come by faith, unto mighty works, for without faith no man

pleaseth God; and with whom God is angry he is not well pleased; wherefore,

unto such he showeth no signs, only in wrath unto their condemnation. 12 Wherefore, I, the Lord, am not pleased with those among you who have

sought after signs and wonders for faith, and not for the good of men unto my

glory.

13 Nevertheless, I give commandments, and many have turned away from my

commandments and have not kept them.

14 There were among you adulterers and adulteresses; some of whom have

turned away from you, and others remain with you that hereafter shall be

revealed.

15 Let such beware and repent speedily, lest judgment shall come upon them

as a snare, and their folly shall be made manifest, and their works shall follow

them in the eyes of the people.

16 And verily I say unto you, as I have said before, he that looketh on a woman

to lust after her, or if any shall commit adultery in their hearts, they shall not

have the Spirit, but shall deny the faith and shall fear.

17 Wherefore, I, the Lord, have said that the fearful, and the unbelieving, and

all liars, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie, and the whoremonger, and the

sorcerer, shall have their part in that lake which burneth with fire and

brimstone, which is the second death.

18 Verily I say, that they shall not have part in the first resurrection.

19 And now behold, I, the Lord, say unto you that ye are not justified, because

these things are among you.

20 Nevertheless, he that endureth in faith and doeth my will, the same shall

overcome, and shall receive an inheritance upon the earth when the day of

transfiguration shall come;

section 63

79

was shown unto mine apostles upon the mount; of which account the fulness

ye have not yet received.

22 And now, verily I say unto you, that as I said that I would make known my

will unto you, behold I will make it known unto you, not by the way of

commandment, for there are many who observe not to keep my

commandments.

23 But unto him that keepeth my commandments I will give the mysteries of

my kingdom, and the same shall be in him a well of living water, springing up

unto everlasting life.

24 And now, behold, this is the will of the Lord your God concerning his

saints, that they should assemble themselves together unto the land of Zion,

not in haste, lest there should be confusion, which bringeth pestilence. 25 Behold, the land of Zion—I, the Lord, hold it in mine own hands; 26 Nevertheless, I, the Lord, render unto Cæsar the things which are Cæsar’s. 27 Wherefore, I the Lord will that you should purchase the lands, that you

may have advantage of the world, that you may have claim on the world, that

they may not be stirred up unto anger.

28 For Satan putteth it into their hearts to anger against you, and to the

shedding of blood.

29 Wherefore, the land of Zion shall not be obtained but by purchase or by

blood, otherwise there is none inheritance for you.

30 And if by purchase, behold you are blessed;

31 And if by blood, as you are forbidden to shed blood, lo, your enemies are

upon you, and ye shall be scourged from city to city, and from synagogue to

synagogue, and but few shall stand to receive an inheritance.

32 I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked; I am holding my Spirit from the

inhabitants of the earth.

33 I have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and

the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man; 34 And the saints also shall hardly escape; nevertheless, I, the Lord, am with

them, and will come down in heaven from the presence of my Father and

consume the wicked with unquenchable fire.

35 And behold, this is not yet, but by and by.

36 Wherefore, seeing that I, the Lord, have decreed all these things upon the

face of the earth, I will that my saints should be assembled upon the land of

Zion;

37 And that every man should take righteousness in his hands and faithfulness

upon his loins, and lift a warning voice unto the inhabitants of the earth; and

declare both by word and by flight that desolation shall come upon the wicked. 38 Wherefore, let my disciples in Kirtland arrange their temporal concerns,

who dwell upon this farm.

39 Let my servant Titus Billings, who has the care thereof, dispose of the land,

that he may be prepared in the coming spring to take his journey up unto the

land of Zion, with those that dwell upon the face thereof, excepting those

whom I shall reserve unto myself, that shall not go until I shall command them. 40 And let all the moneys which can be spared, it mattereth not unto me

80

section 63

whom I have appointed to receive.

41 Behold, I, the Lord, will give unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., power

that he shall be enabled to discern by the Spirit those who shall go up unto the

land of Zion, and those of my disciples who shall tarry.

42 Let my servant Newel K. Whitney retain his store, or in other words, the

store, yet for a little season.

43 Nevertheless, let him impart all the money which he can impart, to be sent

up unto the land of Zion.

44 Behold, these things are in his own hands, let him do according to wisdom. 45 Verily I say, let him be ordained as an agent unto the disciples that shall

tarry, and let him be ordained unto this power;

46 And now speedily visit the churches, expounding these things unto them,

with my servant Oliver Cowdery. Behold, this is my will, obtaining moneys

even as I have directed.

47 He that is faithful and endureth shall overcome the world.

48 He that sendeth up treasures unto the land of Zion shall receive an

inheritance in this world, and his works shall follow him, and also a reward in

the world to come.

49 Yea, and blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth, when

the Lord shall come, and old things shall pass away, and all things become new,

they shall rise from the dead and shall not die after, and shall receive an

inheritance before the Lord, in the holy city.

50 And he that liveth when the Lord shall come, and hath kept the faith,

blessed is he; nevertheless, it is appointed to him to die at the age of man. 51 Wherefore, children shall grow up until they become old; old men shall

die; but they shall not sleep in the dust, but they shall be changed in the

twinkling of an eye.

52 Wherefore, for this cause preached the apostles unto the world the

resurrection of the dead.

53 These things are the things that ye must look for; and, speaking after the

manner of the Lord, they are now nigh at hand, and in a time to come, even in

the day of the coming of the Son of Man.

54 And until that hour there will be foolish virgins among the wise; and at that

hour cometh an entire separation of the righteous and the wicked; and in that

day will I send mine angels to pluck out the wicked and cast them into

unquenchable fire.

55 And now behold, verily I say unto you, I, the Lord, am not pleased with my

servant Sidney Rigdon; he exalted himself in his heart, and received not

counsel, but grieved the Spirit;

56 Wherefore his writing is not acceptable unto the Lord, and he shall make

another; and if the Lord receive it not, behold he standeth no longer in the

office to which I have appointed him.

57 And again, verily I say unto you, those who desire in their hearts, in

meekness, to warn sinners to repentance, let them be ordained unto this power. 58 For this is a day of warning, and not a day of many words. For I, the Lord,

am not to be mocked in the last days.

section 63

81

all, and through all, and search all things, and the day cometh that all things

shall be subject unto me.

60 Behold, I am Alpha and Omega, even Jesus Christ.

61 Wherefore, let all men beware how they take my name in their lips— 62 For behold, verily I say, that many there be who are under this

condemnation, who use the name of the Lord, and use it in vain, having not

authority.

63 Wherefore, let the church repent of their sins, and I, the Lord, will own

them; otherwise they shall be cut off.

64 Remember that that which cometh from above is sacred, and must be

spoken with care, and by constraint of the Spirit; and in this there is no

condemnation, and ye receive the Spirit through prayer; wherefore, without

this there remaineth condemnation.

65 Let my servants, Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon, seek them a home,

as they are taught through prayer by the Spirit.

66 These things remain to overcome through patience, that such may receive a

more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, otherwise, a greater

condemnation. Amen.

Section 64

1 Behold, thus saith the Lord your God unto you, O ye elders of my church,

hearken ye and hear, and receive my will concerning you.

2 For verily I say unto you, I will that ye should overcome the world;

wherefore I will have compassion upon you.

3 There are those among you who have sinned; but verily I say, for this once,

for mine own glory, and for the salvation of souls, I have forgiven you your sins. 4 I will be merciful unto you, for I have given unto you the kingdom. 5 And the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom shall not be taken from my

servant Joseph Smith, Jun., through the means I have appointed, while he

liveth, inasmuch as he obeyeth mine ordinances.

6 There are those who have sought occasion against him without cause; 7 Nevertheless, he has sinned; but verily I say unto you, I, the Lord, forgive

sins unto those who confess their sins before me and ask forgiveness, who have

not sinned unto death.

8 My disciples, in days of old, sought occasion against one another and

forgave not one another in their hearts; and for this evil they were afflicted and

sorely chastened.

9 Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that

forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord;

for there remaineth in him the greater sin.

10 I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to

forgive all men.

11 And ye ought to say in your hearts—let God judge between me and thee,

and reward thee according to thy deeds.

12 And him that repenteth not of his sins, and confesseth them not, ye shall

82

section 64

by commandment or by revelation.

13 And this ye shall do that God may be glorified—not because ye forgive not,

having not compassion, but that ye may be justified in the eyes of the law, that

ye may not offend him who is your lawgiver—

14 Verily I say, for this cause ye shall do these things.

15 Behold, I, the Lord, was angry with him who was my servant Ezra Booth,

and also my servant Isaac Morley, for they kept not the law, neither the

commandment;

16 They sought evil in their hearts, and I, the Lord, withheld my Spirit. They

condemned for evil that thing in which there was no evil; nevertheless I have

forgiven my servant Isaac Morley.

17 And also my servant Edward Partridge, behold, he hath sinned, and Satan

seeketh to destroy his soul; but when these things are made known unto them,

and they repent of the evil, they shall be forgiven.

18 And now, verily I say that it is expedient in me that my servant Sidney

Gilbert, after a few weeks, shall return upon his business, and to his agency in

the land of Zion;

19 And that which he hath seen and heard may be made known unto my

disciples, that they perish not. And for this cause have I spoken these things. 20 And again, I say unto you, that my servant Isaac Morley may not be

tempted above that which he is able to bear, and counsel wrongfully to your

hurt, I gave commandment that his farm should be sold.

21 I will not that my servant Frederick G. Williams should sell his farm, for I,

the Lord, will to retain a strong hold in the land of Kirtland, for the space of

five years, in the which I will not overthrow the wicked, that thereby I may save

some.

22 And after that day, I, the Lord, will not hold any guilty that shall go with an

open heart up to the land of Zion; for I, the Lord, require the hearts of the

children of men.

23 Behold, now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man, and

verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he that is

tithed shall not be burned at his coming.

24 For after today cometh the burning—this is speaking after the manner of

the Lord—for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly

shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I

will not spare any that remain in Babylon.

25 Wherefore, if ye believe me, ye will labor while it is called today.

26 And it is not meet that my servants, Newel K. Whitney and Sidney Gilbert,

should sell their store and their possessions here; for this is not wisdom until

the residue of the church, which remaineth in this place, shall go up unto the

land of Zion.

27 Behold, it is said in my laws, or forbidden, to get in debt to thine enemies; 28 But behold, it is not said at any time that the Lord should not take when he

please, and pay as seemeth him good.

29 Wherefore, as ye are agents, ye are on the Lord’s errand; and whatever ye do

according to the will of the Lord is the Lord’s business.

section 64

83

may obtain an inheritance in the land of Zion.

31 And behold, I, the Lord, declare unto you, and my words are sure and shall

not fail, that they shall obtain it.

32 But all things must come to pass in their time.

33 Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a

great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great.

34 Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing

and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days. 35 And the rebellious shall be cut off out of the land of Zion, and shall be sent

away, and shall not inherit the land.

36 For, verily I say that the rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim,

wherefore they shall be plucked out.

37 Behold, I, the Lord, have made my church in these last days like unto a

judge sitting on a hill, or in a high place, to judge the nations.

38 For it shall come to pass that the inhabitants of Zion shall judge all things

pertaining to Zion.

39 And liars and hypocrites shall be proved by them, and they who are not

apostles and prophets shall be known.

40 And even the bishop, who is a judge, and his counselors, if they are not

faithful in their stewardships shall be condemned, and others shall be planted

in their stead.

41 For, behold, I say unto you that Zion shall flourish, and the glory of the

Lord shall be upon her;

42 And she shall be an ensign unto the people, and there shall come unto her

out of every nation under heaven.

43 And the day shall come when the nations of the earth shall tremble because

of her, and shall fear because of her terrible ones. The Lord hath spoken it.

Amen.

Section 65

1 Hearken, and lo, a voice as of one sent down from on high, who is mighty and

powerful, whose going forth is unto the ends of the earth, yea, whose voice is

unto men—Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. 2 The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and

from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone

which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has

filled the whole earth.

3 Yea, a voice crying—Prepare ye the way of the Lord, prepare ye the supper

of the Lamb, make ready for the Bridegroom.

4 Pray unto the Lord, call upon his holy name, make known his wonderful

works among the people.

5 Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the

inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the

which the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of

his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth.

84

section 65

may come, that thou, O God, mayest be glorified in heaven so on earth, that

thine enemies may be subdued; for thine is the honor, power and glory, forever

and ever. Amen.

Section 66

1 Behold, thus saith the Lord unto my servant William E. McLellin—Blessed

are you, inasmuch as you have turned away from your iniquities, and have

received my truths, saith the Lord your Redeemer, the Savior of the world,

even of as many as believe on my name.

2 Verily I say unto you, blessed are you for receiving mine everlasting

covenant, even the fulness of my gospel, sent forth unto the children of men,

that they might have life and be made partakers of the glories which are to be

revealed in the last days, as it was written by the prophets and apostles in days

of old.

3 Verily I say unto you, my servant William, that you are clean, but not all;

repent, therefore, of those things which are not pleasing in my sight, saith the

Lord, for the Lord will show them unto you.

4 And now, verily, I, the Lord, will show unto you what I will concerning you,

or what is my will concerning you.

5 Behold, verily I say unto you, that it is my will that you should proclaim my

gospel from land to land, and from city to city, yea, in those regions round

about where it has not been proclaimed.

6 Tarry not many days in this place; go not up unto the land of Zion as yet;

but inasmuch as you can send, send; otherwise, think not of thy property. 7 Go unto the eastern lands, bear testimony in every place, unto every people

and in their synagogues, reasoning with the people.

8 Let my servant Samuel H. Smith go with you, and forsake him not, and

give him thine instructions; and he that is faithful shall be made strong in

every place; and I, the Lord, will go with you.

9 Lay your hands upon the sick, and they shall recover. Return not till I, the

Lord, shall send you. Be patient in affliction. Ask, and ye shall receive; knock,

and it shall be opened unto you.

10 Seek not to be cumbered. Forsake all unrighteousness. Commit not

adultery—a temptation with which thou hast been troubled.

11 Keep these sayings, for they are true and faithful; and thou shalt magnify

thine office, and push many people to Zion with songs of everlasting joy upon

their heads.

12 Continue in these things even unto the end, and you shall have a crown of

eternal life at the right hand of my Father, who is full of grace and truth. 13 Verily, thus saith the Lord your God, your Redeemer, even Jesus Christ.

Amen.

section 66

85

1 Behold and hearken, O ye elders of my church, who have assembled yourselves

together, whose prayers I have heard, and whose hearts I know, and whose

desires have come up before me.

2 Behold and lo, mine eyes are upon you, and the heavens and the earth are in

mine hands, and the riches of eternity are mine to give.

3 Ye endeavored to believe that ye should receive the blessing which was

offered unto you; but behold, verily I say unto you there were fears in your

hearts, and verily this is the reason that ye did not receive.

4 And now I, the Lord, give unto you a testimony of the truth of these

commandments which are lying before you.

5 Your eyes have been upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and his language

you have known, and his imperfections you have known; and you have sought

in your hearts knowledge that you might express beyond his language; this you

also know.

6 Now, seek ye out of the Book of Commandments, even the least that is

among them, and appoint him that is the most wise among you;

7 Or, if there be any among you that shall make one like unto it, then ye are

justified in saying that ye do not know that they are true;

8 But if ye cannot make one like unto it, ye are under condemnation if ye do

not bear record that they are true.

9 For ye know that there is no unrighteousness in them, and that which is

righteous cometh down from above, from the Father of lights.

10 And again, verily I say unto you that it is your privilege, and a promise I give

unto you that have been ordained unto this ministry, that inasmuch as you

strip yourselves from jealousies and fears, and humble yourselves before me, for

ye are not sufficiently humble, the veil shall be rent and you shall see me and

know that I am—not with the carnal neither natural mind, but with the

spiritual.

11 For no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the

Spirit of God.

12 Neither can any natural man abide the presence of God, neither after the

carnal mind.

13 Ye are not able to abide the presence of God now, neither the ministering of

angels; wherefore, continue in patience until ye are perfected.

14 Let not your minds turn back; and when ye are worthy, in mine own due

time, ye shall see and know that which was conferred upon you by the hands of

my servant Joseph Smith, Jun. Amen.

Section 68

1 My servant, Orson Hyde, was called by his ordination to proclaim the

everlasting gospel, by the Spirit of the living God, from people to people, and

from land to land, in the congregations of the wicked, in their synagogues,

reasoning with and expounding all scriptures unto them.

2 And, behold, and lo, this is an ensample unto all those who were ordained

86

section 68

3 And this is the ensample unto them, that they shall speak as they are moved

upon by the Holy Ghost.

4 And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost

shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord,

shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of

God unto salvation.

5 Behold, this is the promise of the Lord unto you, O ye my servants. 6 Wherefore, be of good cheer, and do not fear, for I the Lord am with you,

and will stand by you; and ye shall bear record of me, even Jesus Christ, that I

am the Son of the living God, that I was, that I am, and that I am to come. 7 This is the word of the Lord unto you, my servant Orson Hyde, and also

unto my servant Luke Johnson, and unto my servant Lyman Johnson, and

unto my servant William E. McLellin, and unto all the faithful elders of my

church—

8 Go ye into all the world, preach the gospel to every creature, acting in the

authority which I have given you, baptizing in the name of the Father, and of

the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

9 And he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believeth

not shall be damned.

10 And he that believeth shall be blest with signs following, even as it is

written.

11 And unto you it shall be given to know the signs of the times, and the signs

of the coming of the Son of Man;

12 And of as many as the Father shall bear record, to you shall be given power

to seal them up unto eternal life. Amen.

13 And now, concerning the items in addition to the covenants and

commandments, they are these—

14 There remain hereafter, in the due time of the Lord, other bishops to be set

apart unto the church, to minister even according to the first;

15 Wherefore they shall be high priests who are worthy, and they shall be

appointed by the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood, except they

be literal descendants of Aaron.

16 And if they be literal descendants of Aaron they have a legal right to the

bishopric, if they are the firstborn among the sons of Aaron;

17 For the firstborn holds the right of the presidency over this priesthood, and

the keys or authority of the same.

18 No man has a legal right to this office, to hold the keys of this priesthood,

except he be a literal descendant and the firstborn of Aaron.

19 But, as a high priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood has authority to

officiate in all the lesser offices he may officiate in the office of bishop when no

literal descendant of Aaron can be found, provided he is called and set apart

and ordained unto this power, under the hands of the First Presidency of the

Melchizedek Priesthood.

20 And a literal descendant of Aaron, also, must be designated by this

Presidency, and found worthy, and anointed, and ordained under the hands of

this Presidency, otherwise they are not legally authorized to officiate in their

section 68

87

21 But, by virtue of the decree concerning their right of the priesthood

descending from father to son, they may claim their anointing if at any time

they can prove their lineage, or do ascertain it by revelation from the Lord

under the hands of the above named Presidency.

22 And again, no bishop or high priest who shall be set apart for this ministry

shall be tried or condemned for any crime, save it be before the First

Presidency of the church;

23 And inasmuch as he is found guilty before this Presidency, by testimony

that cannot be impeached, he shall be condemned;

24 And if he repent he shall be forgiven, according to the covenants and

commandments of the church.

25 And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her

stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of

repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the

gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the

sin be upon the heads of the parents.

26 For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes

which are organized.

27 And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when

eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands.

28 And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly

before the Lord.

29 And the inhabitants of Zion shall also observe the Sabbath day to keep it

holy.

30 And the inhabitants of Zion also shall remember their labors, inasmuch as

they are appointed to labor, in all faithfulness; for the idler shall be had in

remembrance before the Lord.

31 Now, I, the Lord, am not well pleased with the inhabitants of Zion, for

there are idlers among them; and their children are also growing up in

wickedness; they also seek not earnestly the riches of eternity, but their eyes are

full of greediness.

32 These things ought not to be, and must be done away from among them;

wherefore, let my servant Oliver Cowdery carry these sayings unto the land of

Zion.

33 And a commandment I give unto them—that he that observeth not his

prayers before the Lord in the season thereof, let him be had in remembrance

before the judge of my people.

34 These sayings are true and faithful; wherefore, transgress them not, neither

take therefrom.

35 Behold, I am Alpha and Omega, and I come quickly. Amen.

Section 69

1 Hearken unto me, saith the Lord your God, for my servant Oliver Cowdery’s

sake. It is not wisdom in me that he should be entrusted with the

commandments and the moneys which he shall carry unto the land of Zion,

88

section 69

2 Wherefore, I, the Lord, will that my servant, John Whitmer, should go with

my servant Oliver Cowdery;

3 And also that he shall continue in writing and making a history of all the

important things which he shall observe and know concerning my church; 4 And also that he receive counsel and assistance from my servant Oliver

Cowdery and others.

5 And also, my servants who are abroad in the earth should send forth the

accounts of their stewardships to the land of Zion;

6 For the land of Zion shall be a seat and a place to receive and do all these

things.

7 Nevertheless, let my servant John Whitmer travel many times from place to

place, and from church to church, that he may the more easily obtain

knowledge—

8 Preaching and expounding, writing, copying, selecting, and obtaining all

things which shall be for the good of the church, and for the rising generations

that shall grow up on the land of Zion, to possess it from generation to

generation, forever and ever. Amen.

Section 70

1 Behold, and hearken, O ye inhabitants of Zion, and all ye people of my church

who are afar off, and hear the word of the Lord which I give unto my servant

Joseph Smith, Jun., and also unto my servant Martin Harris, and also unto my

servant Oliver Cowdery, and also unto my servant John Whitmer, and also

unto my servant Sidney Rigdon, and also unto my servant William W. Phelps,

by the way of commandment unto them.

2 For I give unto them a commandment; wherefore hearken and hear, for

thus saith the Lord unto them—

3 I, the Lord, have appointed them, and ordained them to be stewards over

the revelations and commandments which I have given unto them, and which

I shall hereafter give unto them;

4 And an account of this stewardship will I require of them in the day of

judgment.

5 Wherefore, I have appointed unto them, and this is their business in the

church of God, to manage them and the concerns thereof, yea, the benefits

thereof.

6 Wherefore, a commandment I give unto them, that they shall not give these

things unto the church, neither unto the world;

7 Nevertheless, inasmuch as they receive more than is needful for their

necessities and their wants, it shall be given into my storehouse;

8 And the benefits shall be consecrated unto the inhabitants of Zion, and

unto their generations, inasmuch as they become heirs according to the laws of

the kingdom.

9 Behold, this is what the Lord requires of every man in his stewardship, even

as I, the Lord, have appointed or shall hereafter appoint unto any man. 10 And behold, none are exempt from this law who belong to the church of

section 70

89

11 Yea, neither the bishop, neither the agent who keepeth the Lord’s

storehouse, neither he who is appointed in a stewardship over temporal things. 12 He who is appointed to administer spiritual things, the same is worthy of

his hire, even as those who are appointed to a stewardship to administer in

temporal things;

13 Yea, even more abundantly, which abundance is multiplied unto them

through the manifestations of the Spirit.

14 Nevertheless, in your temporal things you shall be equal, and this not

grudgingly, otherwise the abundance of the manifestations of the Spirit shall

be withheld.

15 Now, this commandment I give unto my servants for their benefit while

they remain, for a manifestation of my blessings upon their heads, and for a

reward of their diligence and for their security;

16 For food and for raiment; for an inheritance; for houses and for lands, in

whatsoever circumstances I, the Lord, shall place them, and whithersoever I,

the Lord, shall send them.

17 For they have been faithful over many things, and have done well inasmuch

as they have not sinned.

18 Behold, I, the Lord, am merciful and will bless them, and they shall enter

into the joy of these things. Even so. Amen.

Section 71

1 Behold, thus saith the Lord unto you my servants Joseph Smith, Jun., and

Sidney Rigdon, that the time has verily come that it is necessary and expedient

in me that you should open your mouths in proclaiming my gospel, the things

of the kingdom, expounding the mysteries thereof out of the scriptures,

according to that portion of Spirit and power which shall be given unto you,

even as I will.

2 Verily I say unto you, proclaim unto the world in the regions round about,

and in the church also, for the space of a season, even until it shall be made

known unto you.

3 Verily this is a mission for a season, which I give unto you.

4 Wherefore, labor ye in my vineyard. Call upon the inhabitants of the earth,

and bear record, and prepare the way for the commandments and revelations

which are to come.

5 Now, behold this is wisdom; whoso readeth, let him understand and receive

also;

6 For unto him that receiveth it shall be given more abundantly, even power. 7 Wherefore, confound your enemies; call upon them to meet you both in

public and in private; and inasmuch as ye are faithful their shame shall be

made manifest.

8 Wherefore, let them bring forth their strong reasons against the Lord. 9 Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you—there is no weapon that is formed

against you shall prosper;

10 And if any man lift his voice against you he shall be confounded in mine

90

section 71

11 Wherefore, keep my commandments; they are true and faithful. Even so.

Amen.

Section 72

1 Hearken, and listen to the voice of the Lord, O ye who have assembled

yourselves together, who are the high priests of my church, to whom the

kingdom and power have been given.

2 For verily thus saith the Lord, it is expedient in me for a bishop to be

appointed unto you, or of you, unto the church in this part of the Lord’s

vineyard.

3 And verily in this thing ye have done wisely, for it is required of the Lord, at

the hand of every steward, to render an account of his stewardship, both in

time and in eternity.

4 For he who is faithful and wise in time is accounted worthy to inherit the

mansions prepared for him of my Father.

5 Verily I say unto you, the elders of the church in this part of my vineyard

shall render an account of their stewardship unto the bishop, who shall be

appointed of me in this part of my vineyard.

6 These things shall be had on record, to be handed over unto the bishop in

Zion.

7 And the duty of the bishop shall be made known by the commandments

which have been given, and the voice of the conference.

8 And now, verily I say unto you, my servant Newel K. Whitney is the man

who shall be appointed and ordained unto this power. This is the will of the

Lord your God, your Redeemer. Even so. Amen.

9 The word of the Lord, in addition to the law which has been given, making

known the duty of the bishop who has been ordained unto the church in this

part of the vineyard, which is verily this—

10 To keep the Lord’s storehouse; to receive the funds of the church in this

part of the vineyard;

11 To take an account of the elders as before has been commanded; and to

administer to their wants, who shall pay for that which they receive, inasmuch

as they have wherewith to pay;

12 That this also may be consecrated to the good of the church, to the poor

and needy.

13 And he who hath not wherewith to pay, an account shall be taken and

handed over to the bishop of Zion, who shall pay the debt out of that which

the Lord shall put into his hands.

14 And the labors of the faithful who labor in spiritual things, in

administering the gospel and the things of the kingdom unto the church, and

unto the world, shall answer the debt unto the bishop in Zion;

15 Thus it cometh out of the church, for according to the law every man that

cometh up to Zion must lay all things before the bishop in Zion.

16 And now, verily I say unto you, that as every elder in this part of the

vineyard must give an account of his stewardship unto the bishop in this part

section 72

91

17 A certificate from the judge or bishop in this part of the vineyard, unto the

bishop in Zion, rendereth every man acceptable, and answereth all things, for

an inheritance, and to be received as a wise steward and as a faithful laborer; 18 Otherwise he shall not be accepted of the bishop of Zion.

19 And now, verily I say unto you, let every elder who shall give an account

unto the bishop of the church in this part of the vineyard be recommended by

the church or churches, in which he labors, that he may render himself and his

accounts approved in all things.

20 And again, let my servants who are appointed as stewards over the literary

concerns of my church have claim for assistance upon the bishop or bishops in

all things—

21 That the revelations may be published, and go forth unto the ends of the

earth; that they also may obtain funds which shall benefit the church in all

things;

22 That they also may render themselves approved in all things, and be

accounted as wise stewards.

23 And now, behold, this shall be an ensample for all the extensive branches of

my church, in whatsoever land they shall be established. And now I make an

end of my sayings. Amen.

24 A few words in addition to the laws of the kingdom, respecting the

members of the church—they that are appointed by the Holy Spirit to go up

unto Zion, and they who are privileged to go up unto Zion—

25 Let them carry up unto the bishop a certificate from three elders of the

church, or a certificate from the bishop;

26 Otherwise he who shall go up unto the land of Zion shall not be accounted

as a wise steward. This is also an ensample. Amen.

Section 73

1 For verily, thus saith the Lord, it is expedient in me that they should continue

preaching the gospel, and in exhortation to the churches in the regions round

about, until conference;

2 And then, behold, it shall be made known unto them, by the voice of the

conference, their several missions.

3 Now, verily I say unto you my servants, Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney

Rigdon, saith the Lord, it is expedient to translate again;

4 And, inasmuch as it is practicable, to preach in the regions round about

until conference; and after that it is expedient to continue the work of

translation until it be finished.

5 And let this be a pattern unto the elders until further knowledge, even as it

is written.

6 Now I give no more unto you at this time. Gird up your loins and be sober.

Even so. Amen.

92

section 73

1 For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife

is sanctified by the husband; else were your children unclean, but now are they

holy.

2 Now, in the days of the apostles the law of circumcision was had among all

the Jews who believed not the gospel of Jesus Christ.

3 And it came to pass that there arose a great contention among the people

concerning the law of circumcision, for the unbelieving husband was desirous

that his children should be circumcised and become subject to the law of

Moses, which law was fulfilled.

4 And it came to pass that the children, being brought up in subjection to the

law of Moses, gave heed to the traditions of their fathers and believed not the

gospel of Christ, wherein they became unholy.

5 Wherefore, for this cause the apostle wrote unto the church, giving unto

them a commandment, not of the Lord, but of himself, that a believer should

not be united to an unbeliever; except the law of Moses should be done away

among them,

6 That their children might remain without circumcision; and that the

tradition might be done away, which saith that little children are unholy; for it

was had among the Jews;

7 But little children are holy, being sanctified through the atonement of Jesus

Christ; and this is what the scriptures mean.

Section 75

1 Verily, verily, I say unto you, I who speak even by the voice of my Spirit, even

Alpha and Omega, your Lord and your God—

2 Hearken, O ye who have given your names to go forth to proclaim my

gospel, and to prune my vineyard.

3 Behold, I say unto you that it is my will that you should go forth and not

tarry, neither be idle but labor with your might—

4 Lifting up your voices as with the sound of a trump, proclaiming the truth

according to the revelations and commandments which I have given you. 5 And thus, if ye are faithful ye shall be laden with many sheaves, and

crowned with honor, and glory, and immortality, and eternal life.

6 Therefore, verily I say unto my servant William E. McLellin, I revoke the

commission which I gave unto him to go unto the eastern countries; 7 And I give unto him a new commission and a new commandment, in the

which I, the Lord, chasten him for the murmurings of his heart;

8 And he sinned; nevertheless, I forgive him and say unto him again, Go ye

into the south countries.

9 And let my servant Luke Johnson go with him, and proclaim the things

which I have commanded them—

10 Calling on the name of the Lord for the Comforter, which shall teach them

all things that are expedient for them—

11 Praying always that they faint not; and inasmuch as they do this, I will be

section 74

93

12 Behold, this is the will of the Lord your God concerning you. Even so.

Amen.

13 And again, verily thus saith the Lord, let my servant Orson Hyde and my

servant Samuel H. Smith take their journey into the eastern countries, and

proclaim the things which I have commanded them; and inasmuch as they are

faithful, lo, I will be with them even unto the end.

14 And again, verily I say unto my servant Lyman Johnson, and unto my

servant Orson Pratt, they shall also take their journey into the eastern

countries; and behold, and lo, I am with them also, even unto the end. 15 And again, I say unto my servant Asa Dodds, and unto my servant Calves

Wilson, that they also shall take their journey unto the western countries, and

proclaim my gospel, even as I have commanded them.

16 And he who is faithful shall overcome all things, and shall be lifted up at

the last day.

17 And again, I say unto my servant Major N. Ashley, and my servant Burr

Riggs, let them take their journey also into the south country.

18 Yea, let all those take their journey, as I have commanded them, going from

house to house, and from village to village, and from city to city.

19 And in whatsoever house ye enter, and they receive you, leave your blessing

upon that house.

20 And in whatsoever house ye enter, and they receive you not, ye shall depart

speedily from that house, and shake off the dust of your feet as a testimony

against them.

21 And you shall be filled with joy and gladness; and know this, that in the day

of judgment you shall be judges of that house, and condemn them;

22 And it shall be more tolerable for the heathen in the day of judgment, than

for that house; therefore, gird up your loins and be faithful, and ye shall

overcome all things, and be lifted up at the last day. Even so. Amen.

23 And again, thus saith the Lord unto you, O ye elders of my church, who

have given your names that you might know his will concerning you— 24 Behold, I say unto you, that it is the duty of the church to assist in

supporting the families of those, and also to support the families of those who

are called and must needs be sent unto the world to proclaim the gospel unto

the world.

25 Wherefore, I, the Lord, give unto you this commandment, that ye obtain

places for your families, inasmuch as your brethren are willing to open their

hearts.

26 And let all such as can obtain places for their families, and support of the

church for them, not fail to go into the world, whether to the east or to the

west, or to the north, or to the south.

27 Let them ask and they shall receive, knock and it shall be opened unto

them, and be made known from on high, even by the Comforter, whither they

shall go.

28 And again, verily I say unto you, that every man who is obliged to provide

for his own family, let him provide, and he shall in nowise lose his crown; and

let him labor in the church.

94

section 75

the church, except he repent and mend his ways.

30 Wherefore, let my servant Simeon Carter and my servant Emer Harris be

united in the ministry;

31 And also my servant Ezra Thayre and my servant Thomas B. Marsh; 32 Also my servant Hyrum Smith and my servant Reynolds Cahoon; 33 And also my servant Daniel Stanton and my servant Seymour Brunson; 34 And also my servant Sylvester Smith and my servant Gideon Carter; 35 And also my servant Ruggles Eames and my servant Stephen Burnett; 36 And also my servant Micah B. Welton and also my servant Eden Smith.

Even so. Amen.

Section 76

1 Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof,

for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior.

2 Great is his wisdom, marvelous are his ways, and the extent of his doings

none can find out.

3 His purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand.

4 From eternity to eternity he is the same, and his years never fail.

5 For thus saith the Lord—I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those

who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in

truth unto the end.

6 Great shall be their reward and eternal shall be their glory.

7 And to them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my

kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them

the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom. 8 Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I

show them, even the things of many generations.

9 And their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven;

and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of

the prudent shall come to naught.

10 For by my Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known

unto them the secrets of my will—yea, even those things which eye has not

seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man.

11 We, Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon, being in the Spirit on the

sixteenth day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred

and thirty-two—

12 By the power of the Spirit our eyes were opened and our understandings

were enlightened, so as to see and understand the things of God—

13 Even those things which were from the beginning before the world was,

which were ordained of the Father, through his Only Begotten Son, who was

in the bosom of the Father, even from the beginning;

14 Of whom we bear record; and the record which we bear is the fulness of the

gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the Son, whom we saw and with whom we

conversed in the heavenly vision.

15 For while we were doing the work of translation, which the Lord had

section 76

95

John, which was given unto us as follows—

16 Speaking of the resurrection of the dead, concerning those who shall hear

the voice of the Son of Man:

17 And shall come forth; they who have done good, in the resurrection of the

just; and they who have done evil, in the resurrection of the unjust.

18 Now this caused us to marvel, for it was given unto us of the Spirit. 19 And while we meditated upon these things, the Lord touched the eyes of

our understandings and they were opened, and the glory of the Lord shone

round about.

20 And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and

received of his fulness;

21 And saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne,

worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever.

22 And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is

the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

23 For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice

bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

24 That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created,

and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. 25 And this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in

authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the Only Begotten Son

whom the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father, was thrust

down from the presence of God and the Son,

26 And was called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him—he was Lucifer, a

son of the morning.

27 And we beheld, and lo, he is fallen! is fallen, even a son of the morning! 28 And while we were yet in the Spirit, the Lord commanded us that we

should write the vision; for we beheld Satan, that old serpent, even the devil,

who rebelled against God, and sought to take the kingdom of our God and his

Christ—

29 Wherefore, he maketh war with the saints of God, and encompasseth them

round about.

30 And we saw a vision of the sufferings of those with whom he made war and

overcame, for thus came the voice of the Lord unto us:

31 Thus saith the Lord concerning all those who know my power, and have

been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves through the power of

the devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy my power— 32 They are they who are the sons of perdition, of whom I say that it had been

better for them never to have been born;

33 For they are vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the

devil and his angels in eternity;

34 Concerning whom I have said there is no forgiveness in this world nor in

the world to come—

35 Having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied

the Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves

and put him to an open shame.

96

section 76

the devil and his angels—

37 And the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power; 38 Yea, verily, the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the

Lord, after the sufferings of his wrath.

39 For all the rest shall be brought forth by the resurrection of the dead,

through the triumph and the glory of the Lamb, who was slain, who was in the

bosom of the Father before the worlds were made.

40 And this is the gospel, the glad tidings, which the voice out of the heavens

bore record unto us—

41 That he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and

to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from

all unrighteousness;

42 That through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his

power and made by him;

43 Who glorifies the Father, and saves all the works of his hands, except those

sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him. 44 Wherefore, he saves all except them—they shall go away into everlasting

punishment, which is endless punishment, which is eternal punishment, to

reign with the devil and his angels in eternity, where their worm dieth not, and

the fire is not quenched, which is their torment—

45 And the end thereof, neither the place thereof, nor their torment, no man

knows;

46 Neither was it revealed, neither is, neither will be revealed unto man, except

to them who are made partakers thereof;

47 Nevertheless, I, the Lord, show it by vision unto many, but straightway shut

it up again;

48 Wherefore, the end, the width, the height, the depth, and the misery

thereof, they understand not, neither any man except those who are ordained

unto this condemnation.

49 And we heard the voice, saying: Write the vision, for lo, this is the end of

the vision of the sufferings of the ungodly.

50 And again we bear record—for we saw and heard, and this is the testimony

of the gospel of Christ concerning them who shall come forth in the

resurrection of the just—

51 They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name

and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in

his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given— 52 That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed

from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of

him who is ordained and sealed unto this power;

53 And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise,

which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true.

54 They are they who are the church of the Firstborn.

55 They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—

56 They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness,

and of his glory;

section 76

97

after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son. 58 Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—

59 Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or

things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s. 60 And they shall overcome all things.

61 Wherefore, let no man glory in man, but rather let him glory in God, who

shall subdue all enemies under his feet.

62 These shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever. 63 These are they whom he shall bring with him, when he shall come in the

clouds of heaven to reign on the earth over his people.

64 These are they who shall have part in the first resurrection.

65 These are they who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just. 66 These are they who are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the

living God, the heavenly place, the holiest of all.

67 These are they who have come to an innumerable company of angels, to the

general assembly and church of Enoch, and of the Firstborn.

68 These are they whose names are written in heaven, where God and Christ

are the judge of all.

69 These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of

the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the

shedding of his own blood.

70 These are they whose bodies are celestial, whose glory is that of the sun,

even the glory of God, the highest of all, whose glory the sun of the firmament

is written of as being typical.

71 And again, we saw the terrestrial world, and behold and lo, these are they

who are of the terrestrial, whose glory differs from that of the church of the

Firstborn who have received the fulness of the Father, even as that of the moon

differs from the sun in the firmament.

72 Behold, these are they who died without law;

73 And also they who are the spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son

visited, and preached the gospel unto them, that they might be judged

according to men in the flesh;

74 Who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards

received it.

75 These are they who are honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by

the craftiness of men.

76 These are they who receive of his glory, but not of his fulness.

77 These are they who receive of the presence of the Son, but not of the fulness

of the Father.

78 Wherefore, they are bodies terrestrial, and not bodies celestial, and differ in

glory as the moon differs from the sun.

79 These are they who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore,

they obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God.

80 And now this is the end of the vision which we saw of the terrestrial, that

the Lord commanded us to write while we were yet in the Spirit.

81 And again, we saw the glory of the telestial, which glory is that of the lesser,

98

section 76

firmament.

82 These are they who received not the gospel of Christ, neither the testimony

of Jesus.

83 These are they who deny not the Holy Spirit.

84 These are they who are thrust down to hell.

85 These are they who shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last

resurrection, until the Lord, even Christ the Lamb, shall have finished his

work.

86 These are they who receive not of his fulness in the eternal world, but of the

Holy Spirit through the ministration of the terrestrial;

87 And the terrestrial through the ministration of the celestial.

88 And also the telestial receive it of the administering of angels who are

appointed to minister for them, or who are appointed to be ministering spirits

for them; for they shall be heirs of salvation.

89 And thus we saw, in the heavenly vision, the glory of the telestial, which

surpasses all understanding;

90 And no man knows it except him to whom God has revealed it.

91 And thus we saw the glory of the terrestrial which excels in all things the

glory of the telestial, even in glory, and in power, and in might, and in

dominion.

92 And thus we saw the glory of the celestial, which excels in all

things—where God, even the Father, reigns upon his throne forever and ever; 93 Before whose throne all things bow in humble reverence, and give him

glory forever and ever.

94 They who dwell in his presence are the church of the Firstborn; and they

see as they are seen, and know as they are known, having received of his fulness

and of his grace;

95 And he makes them equal in power, and in might, and in dominion. 96 And the glory of the celestial is one, even as the glory of the sun is one. 97 And the glory of the terrestrial is one, even as the glory of the moon is one. 98 And the glory of the telestial is one, even as the glory of the stars is one; for

as one star differs from another star in glory, even so differs one from another

in glory in the telestial world;

99 For these are they who are of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas. 100 These are they who say they are some of one and some of another—some of

Christ and some of John, and some of Moses, and some of Elias, and some of

Esaias, and some of Isaiah, and some of Enoch;

101 But received not the gospel, neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the

prophets, neither the everlasting covenant.

102 Last of all, these all are they who will not be gathered with the saints, to be

caught up unto the church of the Firstborn, and received into the cloud. 103 These are they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and

whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

104 These are they who suffer the wrath of God on earth.

105 These are they who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.

106 These are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty

section 76

99

under his feet, and shall have perfected his work;

107 When he shall deliver up the kingdom, and present it unto the Father,

spotless, saying: I have overcome and have trodden the wine-press alone, even

the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God.

108 Then shall he be crowned with the crown of his glory, to sit on the throne

of his power to reign forever and ever.

109 But behold, and lo, we saw the glory and the inhabitants of the telestial

world, that they were as innumerable as the stars in the firmament of heaven,

or as the sand upon the seashore;

110 And heard the voice of the Lord saying: These all shall bow the knee, and

every tongue shall confess to him who sits upon the throne forever and ever; 111 For they shall be judged according to their works, and every man shall

receive according to his own works, his own dominion, in the mansions which

are prepared;

112 And they shall be servants of the Most High; but where God and Christ

dwell they cannot come, worlds without end.

113 This is the end of the vision which we saw, which we were commanded to

write while we were yet in the Spirit.

114 But great and marvelous are the works of the Lord, and the mysteries of his

kingdom which he showed unto us, which surpass all understanding in glory,

and in might, and in dominion;

115 Which he commanded us we should not write while we were yet in the

Spirit, and are not lawful for man to utter;

116 Neither is man capable to make them known, for they are only to be seen

and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those

who love him, and purify themselves before him;

117 To whom he grants this privilege of seeing and knowing for themselves; 118 That through the power and manifestation of the Spirit, while in the flesh,

they may be able to bear his presence in the world of glory.

119 And to God and the Lamb be glory, and honor, and dominion forever and

ever. Amen.

Section 77

1 Q. What is the sea of glass spoken of by John, 4th chapter, and 6th verse of the

Revelation? A. It is the earth, in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state. 2 Q. What are we to understand by the four beasts, spoken of in the same verse?

A. They are figurative expressions, used by the Revelator, John, in describing

heaven, the paradise of God, the happiness of man, and of beasts, and of

creeping things, and of the fowls of the air; that which is spiritual being in the

likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness

of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also

the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created. 3 Q. Are the four beasts limited to individual beasts, or do they represent classes

or orders? A. They are limited to four individual beasts, which were shown to

John, to represent the glory of the classes of beings in their destined order or

100

section 77

4 Q. What are we to understand by the eyes and wings, which the beasts had?

A. Their eyes are a representation of light and knowledge, that is, they are full

of knowledge; and their wings are a representation of power, to move, to act,

etc.

5 Q. What are we to understand by the four and twenty elders, spoken of by

John? A. We are to understand that these elders whom John saw, were elders

who had been faithful in the work of the ministry and were dead; who

belonged to the seven churches, and were then in the paradise of God. 6 Q. What are we to understand by the book which John saw, which was sealed

on the back with seven seals? A. We are to understand that it contains the

revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God; the hidden things of his

economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its

continuance, or its temporal existence.

7 Q. What are we to understand by the seven seals with which it was sealed? A.

We are to understand that the first seal contains the things of the first

thousand years, and the second also of the second thousand years, and so on

until the seventh.

8 Q. What are we to understand by the four angels, spoken of in the 7th chapter

and 1st verse of Revelation? A. We are to understand that they are four angels

sent forth from God, to whom is given power over the four parts of the earth,

to save life and to destroy; these are they who have the everlasting gospel to

commit to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people; having power to shut up

the heavens, to seal up unto life, or to cast down to the regions of darkness. 9 Q. What are we to understand by the angel ascending from the east,

Revelation 7th chapter and 2nd verse? A. We are to understand that the angel

ascending from the east is he to whom is given the seal of the living God over

the twelve tribes of Israel; wherefore, he crieth unto the four angels having the

everlasting gospel, saying: Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till

we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. And, if you will

receive it, this is Elias which was to come to gather together the tribes of Israel

and restore all things.

10 Q. What time are the things spoken of in this chapter to be accomplished? A.

They are to be accomplished in the sixth thousand years, or the opening of the

sixth seal.

11 Q. What are we to understand by sealing the one hundred and forty-four

thousand, out of all the tribes of Israel—twelve thousand out of every tribe? A.

We are to understand that those who are sealed are high priests, ordained unto

the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel; for they are they

who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the

angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many

as will come to the church of the Firstborn.

12 Q. What are we to understand by the sounding of the trumpets, mentioned in

the 8th chapter of Revelation? A. We are to understand that as God made the

world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it,

and also formed man out of the dust of the earth, even so, in the beginning of

the seventh thousand years will the Lord God sanctify the earth, and complete

section 77

101

that which he hath not put into his power, when he shall have sealed all things,

unto the end of all things; and the sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels

are the preparing and finishing of his work, in the beginning of the seventh

thousand years—the preparing of the way before the time of his coming. 13 Q. When are the things to be accomplished, which are written in the 9th
