seventh seal, before the coming of Christ.

14 Q. What are we to understand by the little book which was eaten by John, as

mentioned in the 10th chapter of Revelation? A. We are to understand that it

was a mission, and an ordinance, for him to gather the tribes of Israel; behold,

this is Elias, who, as it is written, must come and restore all things.

15 Q. What is to be understood by the two witnesses, in the eleventh chapter of

Revelation? A. They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish

nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the

Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of

their fathers.

Section 78

1 The Lord spake unto Joseph Smith, Jun., saying: Hearken unto me, saith the

Lord your God, who are ordained unto the high priesthood of my church,

who have assembled yourselves together;

2 And listen to the counsel of him who has ordained you from on high, who

shall speak in your ears the words of wisdom, that salvation may be unto you in

that thing which you have presented before me, saith the Lord God. 3 For verily I say unto you, the time has come, and is now at hand; and

behold, and lo, it must needs be that there be an organization of my people, in

regulating and establishing the affairs of the storehouse for the poor of my

people, both in this place and in the land of Zion—

4 For a permanent and everlasting establishment and order unto my church,

to advance the cause, which ye have espoused, to the salvation of man, and to

the glory of your Father who is in heaven;

5 That you may be equal in the bonds of heavenly things, yea, and earthly

things also, for the obtaining of heavenly things.

6 For if ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining

heavenly things;

7 For if you will that I give unto you a place in the celestial world, you must

prepare yourselves by doing the things which I have commanded you and

required of you.

8 And now, verily thus saith the Lord, it is expedient that all things be done

unto my glory, by you who are joined together in this order;

9 Or, in other words, let my servant Newel K. Whitney and my servant

Joseph Smith, Jun., and my servant Sidney Rigdon sit in council with the

saints which are in Zion;

10 Otherwise Satan seeketh to turn their hearts away from the truth, that they

become blinded and understand not the things which are prepared for them.

102

section 78

yourselves by a bond or everlasting covenant that cannot be broken.

12 And he who breaketh it shall lose his office and standing in the church, and

shall be delivered over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. 13 Behold, this is the preparation wherewith I prepare you, and the

foundation, and the ensample which I give unto you, whereby you may

accomplish the commandments which are given you;

14 That through my providence, notwithstanding the tribulation which shall

descend upon you, that the church may stand independent above all other

creatures beneath the celestial world;

15 That you may come up unto the crown prepared for you, and be made

rulers over many kingdoms, saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Zion, who

hath established the foundations of Adam-ondi-Ahman;

16 Who hath appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set

him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel

and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life. 17 Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye are little children, and ye have not as yet

understood how great blessings the Father hath in his own hands and prepared

for you;

18 And ye cannot bear all things now; nevertheless, be of good cheer, for I will

lead you along. The kingdom is yours and the blessings thereof are yours, and

the riches of eternity are yours.

19 And he who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious;

and the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold,

yea, more.

20 Wherefore, do the things which I have commanded you, saith your

Redeemer, even the Son Ahman, who prepareth all things before he taketh

you;

21 For ye are the church of the Firstborn, and he will take you up in a cloud,

and appoint every man his portion.

22 And he that is a faithful and wise steward shall inherit all things. Amen.

Section 79

1 Verily I say unto you, that it is my will that my servant Jared Carter should go

again into the eastern countries, from place to place, and from city to city, in

the power of the ordination wherewith he has been ordained, proclaiming glad

tidings of great joy, even the everlasting gospel.

2 And I will send upon him the Comforter, which shall teach him the truth

and the way whither he shall go;

3 And inasmuch as he is faithful, I will crown him again with sheaves. 4 Wherefore, let your heart be glad, my servant Jared Carter, and fear not,

saith your Lord, even Jesus Christ. Amen.

section 79

103

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you my servant Stephen Burnett: Go ye, go ye

into the world and preach the gospel to every creature that cometh under the

sound of your voice.

2 And inasmuch as you desire a companion, I will give unto you my servant

Eden Smith.

3 Wherefore, go ye and preach my gospel, whether to the north or to the

south, to the east or to the west, it mattereth not, for ye cannot go amiss. 4 Therefore, declare the things which ye have heard, and verily believe, and

know to be true.

5 Behold, this is the will of him who hath called you, your Redeemer, even

Jesus Christ. Amen.

Section 81

1 Verily, verily, I say unto you my servant Frederick G. Williams: Listen to the

voice of him who speaketh, to the word of the Lord your God, and hearken to

the calling wherewith you are called, even to be a high priest in my church, and

a counselor unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun.;

2 Unto whom I have given the keys of the kingdom, which belong always

unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood:

3 Therefore, verily I acknowledge him and will bless him, and also thee,

inasmuch as thou art faithful in counsel, in the office which I have appointed

unto you, in prayer always, vocally and in thy heart, in public and in private,

also in thy ministry in proclaiming the gospel in the land of the living, and

among thy brethren.

4 And in doing these things thou wilt do the greatest good unto thy fellow

beings, and wilt promote the glory of him who is your Lord.

5 Wherefore, be faithful; stand in the office which I have appointed unto

you; succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the

feeble knees.

6 And if thou art faithful unto the end thou shalt have a crown of

immortality, and eternal life in the mansions which I have prepared in the

house of my Father.

7 Behold, and lo, these are the words of Alpha and Omega, even Jesus Christ.

Amen.

Section 82

1 Verily, verily, I say unto you, my servants, that inasmuch as you have forgiven

one another your trespasses, even so I, the Lord, forgive you.

2 Nevertheless, there are those among you who have sinned exceedingly; yea,

even all of you have sinned; but verily I say unto you, beware from henceforth,

and refrain from sin, lest sore judgments fall upon your heads.

3 For of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins

against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation.

104

section 82

inasmuch as ye keep not my sayings, which I give unto you, ye become

transgressors; and justice and judgment are the penalty which is affixed unto

my law.

5 Therefore, what I say unto one I say unto all: Watch, for the adversary

spreadeth his dominions, and darkness reigneth;

6 And the anger of God kindleth against the inhabitants of the earth; and

none doeth good, for all have gone out of the way.

7 And now, verily I say unto you, I, the Lord, will not lay any sin to your

charge; go your ways and sin no more; but unto that soul who sinneth shall the

former sins return, saith the Lord your God.

8 And again, I say unto you, I give unto you a new commandment, that you

may understand my will concerning you;

9 Or, in other words, I give unto you directions how you may act before me,

that it may turn to you for your salvation.

10 I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I

say, ye have no promise.

11 Therefore, verily I say unto you, that it is expedient for my servants Edward

Partridge and Newel K. Whitney, A. Sidney Gilbert and Sidney Rigdon, and

my servant Joseph Smith, and John Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery, and W. W.

Phelps and Martin Harris to be bound together by a bond and covenant that

cannot be broken by transgression, except judgment shall immediately follow,

in your several stewardships—

12 To manage the affairs of the poor, and all things pertaining to the bishopric

both in the land of Zion and in the land of Kirtland;

13 For I have consecrated the land of Kirtland in mine own due time for the

benefit of the saints of the Most High, and for a stake to Zion.

14 For Zion must increase in beauty, and in holiness; her borders must be

enlarged; her stakes must be strengthened; yea, verily I say unto you, Zion

must arise and put on her beautiful garments.

15 Therefore, I give unto you this commandment, that ye bind yourselves by

this covenant, and it shall be done according to the laws of the Lord. 16 Behold, here is wisdom also in me for your good.

17 And you are to be equal, or in other words, you are to have equal claims on

the properties, for the benefit of managing the concerns of your stewardships,

every man according to his wants and his needs, inasmuch as his wants are

just—

18 And all this for the benefit of the church of the living God, that every man

may improve upon his talent, that every man may gain other talents, yea, even

an hundred fold, to be cast into the Lord’s storehouse, to become the common

property of the whole church—

19 Every man seeking the interest of his neighbor, and doing all things with an

eye single to the glory of God.

20 This order I have appointed to be an everlasting order unto you, and unto

your successors, inasmuch as you sin not.

21 And the soul that sins against this covenant, and hardeneth his heart

against it, shall be dealt with according to the laws of my church, and shall be

section 82

105

22 And now, verily I say unto you, and this is wisdom, make unto yourselves

friends with the mammon of unrighteousness, and they will not destroy you. 23 Leave judgment alone with me, for it is mine and I will repay. Peace be with

you; my blessings continue with you.

24 For even yet the kingdom is yours, and shall be forever, if you fall not from

your steadfastness. Even so. Amen.

Section 83

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord, in addition to the laws of the church concerning

women and children, those who belong to the church, who have lost their

husbands or fathers:

2 Women have claim on their husbands for their maintenance, until their

husbands are taken; and if they are not found transgressors they shall have

fellowship in the church.

3 And if they are not faithful they shall not have fellowship in the church; yet

they may remain upon their inheritances according to the laws of the land. 4 All children have claim upon their parents for their maintenance until they

are of age.

5 And after that, they have claim upon the church, or in other words upon

the Lord’s storehouse, if their parents have not wherewith to give them

inheritances.

6 And the storehouse shall be kept by the consecrations of the church; and

widows and orphans shall be provided for, as also the poor. Amen.

Section 84

1 A revelation of Jesus Christ unto his servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and six elders,

as they united their hearts and lifted their voices on high.

2 Yea, the word of the Lord concerning his church, established in the last days

for the restoration of his people, as he has spoken by the mouth of his

prophets, and for the gathering of his saints to stand upon Mount Zion, which

shall be the city of New Jerusalem.

3 Which city shall be built, beginning at the temple lot, which is appointed

by the finger of the Lord, in the western boundaries of the State of Missouri,

and dedicated by the hand of Joseph Smith, Jun., and others with whom the

Lord was well pleased.

4 Verily this is the word of the Lord, that the city New Jerusalem shall be

built by the gathering of the saints, beginning at this place, even the place of

the temple, which temple shall be reared in this generation.

5 For verily this generation shall not all pass away until an house shall be built

unto the Lord, and a cloud shall rest upon it, which cloud shall be even the

glory of the Lord, which shall fill the house.

6 And the sons of Moses, according to the Holy Priesthood which he

received under the hand of his father-in-law, Jethro;

7 And Jethro received it under the hand of Caleb;

106

section 84

9 And Elihu under the hand of Jeremy;

10 And Jeremy under the hand of Gad;

11 And Gad under the hand of Esaias;

12 And Esaias received it under the hand of God.

13 Esaias also lived in the days of Abraham, and was blessed of him— 14 Which Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek, who received

it through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah;

15 And from Noah till Enoch, through the lineage of their fathers;

16 And from Enoch to Abel, who was slain by the conspiracy of his brother,

who received the priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his

father Adam, who was the first man—

17 Which priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations, and

is without beginning of days or end of years.

18 And the Lord confirmed a priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed,

throughout all their generations, which priesthood also continueth and

abideth forever with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God. 19 And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key

of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. 20 Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest. 21 And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood,

the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

22 For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live. 23 Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness,

and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of

God;

24 But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence;

therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore

that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is

the fulness of his glory.

25 Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also; 26 And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of

the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

27 Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission

of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath

caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until

John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his

mother’s womb.

28 For he was baptized while he was yet in his childhood, and was ordained by

the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to

overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord

before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in

whose hand is given all power.

29 And again, the offices of elder and bishop are necessary appendages

belonging unto the high priesthood.

30 And again, the offices of teacher and deacon are necessary appendages

belonging to the lesser priesthood, which priesthood was confirmed upon

section 84

107

31 Therefore, as I said concerning the sons of Moses—for the sons of Moses

and also the sons of Aaron shall offer an acceptable offering and sacrifice in the

house of the Lord, which house shall be built unto the Lord in this generation,

upon the consecrated spot as I have appointed—

32 And the sons of Moses and of Aaron shall be filled with the glory of the

Lord, upon Mount Zion in the Lord’s house, whose sons are ye; and also many

whom I have called and sent forth to build up my church.

33 For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I

have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto

the renewing of their bodies.

34 They become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham,

and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God.

35 And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord; 36 For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me;

37 And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father;

38 And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father’s kingdom; therefore

all that my Father hath shall be given unto him.

39 And this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the

priesthood.

40 Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and

covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved. 41 But whoso breaketh this covenant after he hath received it, and altogether

turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the

world to come.

42 And wo unto all those who come not unto this priesthood which ye have

received, which I now confirm upon you who are present this day, by mine

own voice out of the heavens; and even I have given the heavenly hosts and

mine angels charge concerning you.

43 And I now give unto you a commandment to beware concerning

yourselves, to give diligent heed to the words of eternal life.

44 For you shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of

God.

45 For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and

whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

46 And the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and

the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the

voice of the Spirit.

47 And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God,

even the Father.

48 And the Father teacheth him of the covenant which he has renewed and

confirmed upon you, which is confirmed upon you for your sakes, and not for

your sakes only, but for the sake of the whole world.

49 And the whole world lieth in sin, and groaneth under darkness and under

the bondage of sin.

50 And by this you may know they are under the bondage of sin, because they

come not unto me.

108

section 84

52 And whoso receiveth not my voice is not acquainted with my voice, and is

not of me.

53 And by this you may know the righteous from the wicked, and that the

whole world groaneth under sin and darkness even now.

54 And your minds in times past have been darkened because of unbelief, and

because you have treated lightly the things you have received—

55 Which vanity and unbelief have brought the whole church under

condemnation.

56 And this condemnation resteth upon the children of Zion, even all. 57 And they shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and

remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former

commandments which I have given them, not only to say, but to do according

to that which I have written—

58 That they may bring forth fruit meet for their Father’s kingdom; otherwise

there remaineth a scourge and judgment to be poured out upon the children

of Zion.

59 For shall the children of the kingdom pollute my holy land? Verily, I say

unto you, Nay.

60 Verily, verily, I say unto you who now hear my words, which are my voice,

blessed are ye inasmuch as you receive these things;

61 For I will forgive you of your sins with this commandment—that you

remain steadfast in your minds in solemnity and the spirit of prayer, in bearing

testimony to all the world of those things which are communicated unto you. 62 Therefore, go ye into all the world; and unto whatsoever place ye cannot go

ye shall send, that the testimony may go from you into all the world unto every

creature.

63 And as I said unto mine apostles, even so I say unto you, for you are mine

apostles, even God’s high priests; ye are they whom my Father hath given me;

ye are my friends;

64 Therefore, as I said unto mine apostles I say unto you again, that every soul

who believeth on your words, and is baptized by water for the remission of

sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost.

65 And these signs shall follow them that believe—

66 In my name they shall do many wonderful works;

67 In my name they shall cast out devils;

68 In my name they shall heal the sick;

69 In my name they shall open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the

deaf;

70 And the tongue of the dumb shall speak;

71 And if any man shall administer poison unto them it shall not hurt them; 72 And the poison of a serpent shall not have power to harm them.

73 But a commandment I give unto them, that they shall not boast themselves

of these things, neither speak them before the world; for these things are given

unto you for your profit and for salvation.

74 Verily, verily, I say unto you, they who believe not on your words, and are

not baptized in water in my name, for the remission of their sins, that they may

section 84

109

kingdom where my Father and I am.

75 And this revelation unto you, and commandment, is in force from this very

hour upon all the world, and the gospel is unto all who have not received it. 76 But, verily I say unto all those to whom the kingdom has been given—from

you it must be preached unto them, that they shall repent of their former evil

works; for they are to be upbraided for their evil hearts of unbelief, and your

brethren in Zion for their rebellion against you at the time I sent you. 77 And again I say unto you, my friends, for from henceforth I shall call you

friends, it is expedient that I give unto you this commandment, that ye become

even as my friends in days when I was with them, traveling to preach the gospel

in my power;

78 For I suffered them not to have purse or scrip, neither two coats.

79 Behold, I send you out to prove the world, and the laborer is worthy of his

hire.

80 And any man that shall go and preach this gospel of the kingdom, and fail

not to continue faithful in all things, shall not be weary in mind, neither

darkened, neither in body, limb, nor joint; and a hair of his head shall not fall

to the ground unnoticed. And they shall not go hungry, neither athirst. 81 Therefore, take ye no thought for the morrow, for what ye shall eat, or what

ye shall drink, or wherewithal ye shall be clothed.

82 For, consider the lilies of the field, how they grow, they toil not, neither do

they spin; and the kingdoms of the world, in all their glory, are not arrayed like

one of these.

83 For your Father, who is in heaven, knoweth that you have need of all these

things.

84 Therefore, let the morrow take thought for the things of itself.

85 Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say; but treasure up in

your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very

hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man.

86 Therefore, let no man among you, for this commandment is unto all the

faithful who are called of God in the church unto the ministry, from this hour

take purse or scrip, that goeth forth to proclaim this gospel of the kingdom. 87 Behold, I send you out to reprove the world of all their unrighteous deeds,

and to teach them of a judgment which is to come.

88 And whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face.

I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your

hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up.

89 Whoso receiveth you receiveth me; and the same will feed you, and clothe

you, and give you money.

90 And he who feeds you, or clothes you, or gives you money, shall in nowise

lose his reward.

91 And he that doeth not these things is not my disciple; by this you may

know my disciples.

92 He that receiveth you not, go away from him alone by yourselves, and

cleanse your feet even with water, pure water, whether in heat or in cold, and

bear testimony of it unto your Father which is in heaven, and return not again

110

section 84

93 And in whatsoever village or city ye enter, do likewise.

94 Nevertheless, search diligently and spare not; and wo unto that house, or

that village or city that rejecteth you, or your words, or your testimony

concerning me.

95 Wo, I say again, unto that house, or that village or city that rejecteth you, or

your words, or your testimony of me;

96 For I, the Almighty, have laid my hands upon the nations, to scourge them

for their wickedness.

97 And plagues shall go forth, and they shall not be taken from the earth until

I have completed my work, which shall be cut short in righteousness— 98 Until all shall know me, who remain, even from the least unto the greatest,

and shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, and shall see eye to eye, and

shall lift up their voice, and with the voice together sing this new song, saying: 99 The Lord hath brought again Zion;

The Lord hath redeemed his people, Israel,

According to the election of grace,

Which was brought to pass by the faith

And covenant of their fathers.

100 The Lord hath redeemed his people;

And Satan is bound and time is no longer.

The Lord hath gathered all things in one.

The Lord hath brought down Zion from above.

The Lord hath brought up Zion from beneath.

101 The earth hath travailed and brought forth her strength;

And truth is established in her bowels;

And the heavens have smiled upon her;

And she is clothed with the glory of her God;

For he stands in the midst of his people.

102 Glory, and honor, and power, and might,

Be ascribed to our God; for he is full of mercy,

Justice, grace and truth, and peace,

Forever and ever, Amen.

103 And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, it is expedient that every man who

goes forth to proclaim mine everlasting gospel, that inasmuch as they have

families, and receive money by gift, that they should send it unto them or

make use of it for their benefit, as the Lord shall direct them, for thus it

seemeth me good.

104 And let all those who have not families, who receive money, send it up unto

the bishop in Zion, or unto the bishop in Ohio, that it may be consecrated for

the bringing forth of the revelations and the printing thereof, and for

establishing Zion.

105 And if any man shall give unto any of you a coat, or a suit, take the old and

cast it unto the poor, and go on your way rejoicing.

106 And if any man among you be strong in the Spirit, let him take with him

him that is weak, that he may be edified in all meekness, that he may become

strong also.

section 84

111

and send them before you to make appointments, and to prepare the way, and

to fill appointments that you yourselves are not able to fill.

108 Behold, this is the way that mine apostles, in ancient days, built up my

church unto me.

109 Therefore, let every man stand in his own office, and labor in his own

calling; and let not the head say unto the feet it hath no need of the feet; for

without the feet how shall the body be able to stand?

110 Also the body hath need of every member, that all may be edified together,

that the system may be kept perfect.

111 And behold, the high priests should travel, and also the elders, and also the

lesser priests; but the deacons and teachers should be appointed to watch over

the church, to be standing ministers unto the church.

112 And the bishop, Newel K. Whitney, also should travel round about and

among all the churches, searching after the poor to administer to their wants

by humbling the rich and the proud.

113 He should also employ an agent to take charge and to do his secular

business as he shall direct.

114 Nevertheless, let the bishop go unto the city of New York, also to the city of

Albany, and also to the city of Boston, and warn the people of those cities with

the sound of the gospel, with a loud voice, of the desolation and utter

abolishment which await them if they do reject these things.

115 For if they do reject these things the hour of their judgment is nigh, and

their house shall be left unto them desolate.

116 Let him trust in me and he shall not be confounded; and a hair of his head

shall not fall to the ground unnoticed.

117 And verily I say unto you, the rest of my servants, go ye forth as your

circumstances shall permit, in your several callings, unto the great and notable

cities and villages, reproving the world in righteousness of all their unrighteous

and ungodly deeds, setting forth clearly and understandingly the desolation of

abomination in the last days.

118 For, with you saith the Lord Almighty, I will rend their kingdoms; I will

not only shake the earth, but the starry heavens shall tremble.

119 For I, the Lord, have put forth my hand to exert the powers of heaven; ye

cannot see it now, yet a little while and ye shall see it, and know that I am, and

that I will come and reign with my people.

120 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. Amen.

Section 85

1 It is the duty of the Lord’s clerk, whom he has appointed, to keep a history, and

a general church record of all things that transpire in Zion, and of all those

who consecrate properties, and receive inheritances legally from the bishop; 2 And also their manner of life, their faith, and works; and also of the

apostates who apostatize after receiving their inheritances.

3 It is contrary to the will and commandment of God that those who receive

not their inheritance by consecration, agreeable to his law, which he has given,

112

section 85

burning, should have their names enrolled with the people of God.

4 Neither is their genealogy to be kept, or to be had where it may be found on

any of the records or history of the church.

5 Their names shall not be found, neither the names of the fathers, nor the

names of the children written in the book of the law of God, saith the Lord of

Hosts.

6 Yea, thus saith the still small voice, which whispereth through and pierceth

all things, and often times it maketh my bones to quake while it maketh

manifest, saying:

7 And it shall come to pass that I, the Lord God, will send one mighty and

strong, holding the scepter of power in his hand, clothed with light for a

covering, whose mouth shall utter words, eternal words; while his bowels shall

be a fountain of truth, to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot

the inheritances of the saints whose names are found, and the names of their

fathers, and of their children, enrolled in the book of the law of God; 8 While that man, who was called of God and appointed, that putteth forth

his hand to steady the ark of God, shall fall by the shaft of death, like as a tree

that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning.

9 And all they who are not found written in the book of remembrance shall

find none inheritance in that day, but they shall be cut asunder, and their

portion shall be appointed them among unbelievers, where are wailing and

gnashing of teeth.

10 These things I say not of myself; therefore, as the Lord speaketh, he will also

fulfil.

11 And they who are of the High Priesthood, whose names are not found

written in the book of the law, or that are found to have apostatized, or to have

been cut off from the church, as well as the lesser priesthood, or the members,

in that day shall not find an inheritance among the saints of the Most High; 12 Therefore, it shall be done unto them as unto the children of the priest, as

will be found recorded in the second chapter and sixty-first and second verses

of Ezra.

Section 86

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you my servants, concerning the parable of the

wheat and of the tares:

2 Behold, verily I say, the field was the world, and the apostles were the sowers

of the seed;

3 And after they have fallen asleep the great persecutor of the church, the

apostate, the whore, even Babylon, that maketh all nations to drink of her cup,

in whose hearts the enemy, even Satan, sitteth to reign—behold he soweth the

tares; wherefore, the tares choke the wheat and drive the church into the

wilderness.

4 But behold, in the last days, even now while the Lord is beginning to bring

forth the word, and the blade is springing up and is yet tender—

5 Behold, verily I say unto you, the angels are crying unto the Lord day and

section 86

113

6 But the Lord saith unto them, pluck not up the tares while the blade is yet

tender (for verily your faith is weak), lest you destroy the wheat also. 7 Therefore, let the wheat and the tares grow together until the harvest is

fully ripe; then ye shall first gather out the wheat from among the tares, and

after the gathering of the wheat, behold and lo, the tares are bound in bundles,

and the field remaineth to be burned.

8 Therefore, thus saith the Lord unto you, with whom the priesthood hath

continued through the lineage of your fathers—

9 For ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the

world with Christ in God—

10 Therefore your life and the priesthood have remained, and must needs

remain through you and your lineage until the restoration of all things spoken

by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began.

11 Therefore, blessed are ye if ye continue in my goodness, a light unto the

Gentiles, and through this priesthood, a savior unto my people Israel. The

Lord hath said it. Amen.

Section 87

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass,

beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate

in the death and misery of many souls;

2 And the time will come that war will be poured out upon all nations,

beginning at this place.

3 For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the Northern

States, and the Southern States will call on other nations, even the nation of

Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also call upon other nations, in

order to defend themselves against other nations; and then war shall be poured

out upon all nations.

4 And it shall come to pass, after many days, slaves shall rise up against their

masters, who shall be marshaled and disciplined for war.

5 And it shall come to pass also that the remnants who are left of the land will

marshal themselves, and shall become exceedingly angry, and shall vex the

Gentiles with a sore vexation.

6 And thus, with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth

shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of

heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the

earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an

Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all

nations;

7 That the cry of the saints, and of the blood of the saints, shall cease to come

up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, from the earth, to be avenged of their

enemies.

8 Wherefore, stand ye in holy places, and be not moved, until the day of the

Lord come; for behold, it cometh quickly, saith the Lord. Amen.

114

section 87

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you who have assembled yourselves together to

receive his will concerning you:

2 Behold, this is pleasing unto your Lord, and the angels rejoice over you; the

alms of your prayers have come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, and are

recorded in the book of the names of the sanctified, even them of the celestial

world.

3 Wherefore, I now send upon you another Comforter, even upon you my

friends, that it may abide in your hearts, even the Holy Spirit of promise;

which other Comforter is the same that I promised unto my disciples, as is

recorded in the testimony of John.

4 This Comforter is the promise which I give unto you of eternal life, even

the glory of the celestial kingdom;

5 Which glory is that of the church of the Firstborn, even of God, the holiest

of all, through Jesus Christ his Son—

6 He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that

he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the

light of truth;

7 Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun,

and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made. 8 As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power

thereof by which it was made;

9 As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were

made;

10 And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you

stand.

11 And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who

enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your

understandings;

12 Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the

immensity of space—

13 The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the

law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon

his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. 14 Now, verily I say unto you, that through the redemption which is made for

you is brought to pass the resurrection from the dead.

15 And the spirit and the body are the soul of man.

16 And the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul. 17 And the redemption of the soul is through him that quickeneth all things,

in whose bosom it is decreed that the poor and the meek of the earth shall

inherit it.

18 Therefore, it must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may

be prepared for the celestial glory;

19 For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with

glory, even with the presence of God the Father;

20 That bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and

ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they

section 88

115

21 And they who are not sanctified through the law which I have given unto

you, even the law of Christ, must inherit another kingdom, even that of a

terrestrial kingdom, or that of a telestial kingdom.

22 For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide

a celestial glory.

23 And he who cannot abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom cannot abide a

terrestrial glory.

24 And he who cannot abide the law of a telestial kingdom cannot abide a

telestial glory; therefore he is not meet for a kingdom of glory. Therefore he

must abide a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory.

25 And again, verily I say unto you, the earth abideth the law of a celestial

kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the

law—

26 Wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall

be quickened again, and shall abide the power by which it is quickened, and

the righteous shall inherit it.

27 For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again, a spiritual body. 28 They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body which was a

natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and your glory shall be that

glory by which your bodies are quickened.

29 Ye who are quickened by a portion of the celestial glory shall then receive of

the same, even a fulness.

30 And they who are quickened by a portion of the terrestrial glory shall then

receive of the same, even a fulness.

31 And also they who are quickened by a portion of the telestial glory shall

then receive of the same, even a fulness.

32 And they who remain shall also be quickened; nevertheless, they shall

return again to their own place, to enjoy that which they are willing to receive,

because they were not willing to enjoy that which they might have received. 33 For what doth it profit a man if a gift is bestowed upon him, and he receive

not the gift? Behold, he rejoices not in that which is given unto him, neither

rejoices in him who is the giver of the gift.

34 And again, verily I say unto you, that which is governed by law is also

preserved by law and perfected and sanctified by the same.

35 That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a

law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin,

cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore,

they must remain filthy still.

36 All kingdoms have a law given;

37 And there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no

kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater

or a lesser kingdom.

38 And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are

certain bounds also and conditions.

39 All beings who abide not in those conditions are not justified.

40 For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom;

116

section 88

hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own; justice continueth its course

and claimeth its own; judgment goeth before the face of him who sitteth upon

the throne and governeth and executeth all things.

41 He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things

are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is

through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and

of him, even God, forever and ever.

42 And again, verily I say unto you, he hath given a law unto all things, by

which they move in their times and their seasons;

43 And their courses are fixed, even the courses of the heavens and the earth,

which comprehend the earth and all the planets.

44 And they give light to each other in their times and in their seasons, in their

minutes, in their hours, in their days, in their weeks, in their months, in their

years—all these are one year with God, but not with man.

45 The earth rolls upon her wings, and the sun giveth his light by day, and the

moon giveth her light by night, and the stars also give their light, as they roll

upon their wings in their glory, in the midst of the power of God.

46 Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms, that ye may understand?

47 Behold, all these are kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any or the least

of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power.

48 I say unto you, he hath seen him; nevertheless, he who came unto his own

was not comprehended.

49 The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not;

nevertheless, the day shall come when you shall comprehend even God, being

quickened in him and by him.

50 Then shall ye know that ye have seen me, that I am, and that I am the true

light that is in you, and that you are in me; otherwise ye could not abound. 51 Behold, I will liken these kingdoms unto a man having a field, and he sent

forth his servants into the field to dig in the field.

52 And he said unto the first: Go ye and labor in the field, and in the first hour

I will come unto you, and ye shall behold the joy of my countenance. 53 And he said unto the second: Go ye also into the field, and in the second

hour I will visit you with the joy of my countenance.

54 And also unto the third, saying: I will visit you;

55 And unto the fourth, and so on unto the twelfth.

56 And the lord of the field went unto the first in the first hour, and tarried

with him all that hour, and he was made glad with the light of the countenance

of his lord.

57 And then he withdrew from the first that he might visit the second also,

and the third, and the fourth, and so on unto the twelfth.

58 And thus they all received the light of the countenance of their lord, every

man in his hour, and in his time, and in his season—

59 Beginning at the first, and so on unto the last, and from the last unto the

first, and from the first unto the last;

60 Every man in his own order, until his hour was finished, even according as

his lord had commanded him, that his lord might be glorified in him, and he

section 88

117

61 Therefore, unto this parable I will liken all these kingdoms, and the

inhabitants thereof—every kingdom in its hour, and in its time, and in its

season, even according to the decree which God hath made.

62 And again, verily I say unto you, my friends, I leave these sayings with you

to ponder in your hearts, with this commandment which I give unto you, that

ye shall call upon me while I am near—

63 Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye

shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. 64 Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be given unto you, that is

expedient for you;

65 And if ye ask anything that is not expedient for you, it shall turn unto your

condemnation.

66 Behold, that which you hear is as the voice of one crying in the

wilderness—in the wilderness, because you cannot see him—my voice,

because my voice is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth abideth and hath no end;

and if it be in you it shall abound.

67 And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with

light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with

light comprehendeth all things.

68 Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and

the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you,

and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own

will.

69 Remember the great and last promise which I have made unto you; cast

away your idle thoughts and your excess of laughter far from you.

70 Tarry ye, tarry ye in this place, and call a solemn assembly, even of those

who are the first laborers in this last kingdom.

71 And let those whom they have warned in their traveling call on the Lord,

and ponder the warning in their hearts which they have received, for a little

season.

72 Behold, and lo, I will take care of your flocks, and will raise up elders and

send unto them.

73 Behold, I will hasten my work in its time.

74 And I give unto you, who are the first laborers in this last kingdom, a

commandment that you assemble yourselves together, and organize yourselves,

and prepare yourselves, and sanctify yourselves; yea, purify your hearts, and

cleanse your hands and your feet before me, that I may make you clean; 75 That I may testify unto your Father, and your God, and my God, that you

are clean from the blood of this wicked generation; that I may fulfil this

promise, this great and last promise, which I have made unto you, when I will. 76 Also, I give unto you a commandment that ye shall continue in prayer and

fasting from this time forth.

77 And I give unto you a commandment that you shall teach one another the

doctrine of the kingdom.

78 Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be

instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the

118

section 88

for you to understand;

79 Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things

which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass;

things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the

perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a

knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—

80 That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to

magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I

have commissioned you.

81 Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people, and it becometh

every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor.

82 Therefore, they are left without excuse, and their sins are upon their own

heads.

83 He that seeketh me early shall find me, and shall not be forsaken.

84 Therefore, tarry ye, and labor diligently, that you may be perfected in your

ministry to go forth among the Gentiles for the last time, as many as the

mouth of the Lord shall name, to bind up the law and seal up the testimony,

and to prepare the saints for the hour of judgment which is to come; 85 That their souls may escape the wrath of God, the desolation of

abomination which awaits the wicked, both in this world and in the world to

come. Verily, I say unto you, let those who are not the first elders continue in

the vineyard until the mouth of the Lord shall call them, for their time is not

yet come; their garments are not clean from the blood of this generation. 86 Abide ye in the liberty wherewith ye are made free; entangle not yourselves

in sin, but let your hands be clean, until the Lord comes.

87 For not many days hence and the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a

drunken man; and the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light; and

the moon shall be bathed in blood; and the stars shall become exceedingly

angry, and shall cast themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig tree. 88 And after your testimony cometh wrath and indignation upon the people. 89 For after your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes, that shall

cause groanings in the midst of her, and men shall fall upon the ground and

shall not be able to stand.

90 And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice

of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea

heaving themselves beyond their bounds.

91 And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men’s hearts shall fail

them; for fear shall come upon all people.

92 And angels shall fly through the midst of heaven, crying with a loud voice,

sounding the trump of God, saying: Prepare ye, prepare ye, O inhabitants of

the earth; for the judgment of our God is come. Behold, and lo, the

Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.

93 And immediately there shall appear a great sign in heaven, and all people

shall see it together.

94 And another angel shall sound his trump, saying: That great church, the

mother of abominations, that made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath

section 88

119

blood—she who sitteth upon many waters, and upon the islands of the

sea—behold, she is the tares of the earth; she is bound in bundles; her bands

are made strong, no man can loose them; therefore, she is ready to be burned.

And he shall sound his trump both long and loud, and all nations shall hear it. 95 And there shall be silence in heaven for the space of half an hour; and

immediately after shall the curtain of heaven be unfolded, as a scroll is

unfolded after it is rolled up, and the face of the Lord shall be unveiled; 96 And the saints that are upon the earth, who are alive, shall be quickened

and be caught up to meet him.

97 And they who have slept in their graves shall come forth, for their graves

shall be opened; and they also shall be caught up to meet him in the midst of

the pillar of heaven—

98 They are Christ’s, the first fruits, they who shall descend with him first, and

they who are on the earth and in their graves, who are first caught up to meet

him; and all this by the voice of the sounding of the trump of the angel of God. 99 And after this another angel shall sound, which is the second trump; and

then cometh the redemption of those who are Christ’s at his coming; who

have received their part in that prison which is prepared for them, that they

might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the flesh. 100 And again, another trump shall sound, which is the third trump; and then

come the spirits of men who are to be judged, and are found under

condemnation;

101 And these are the rest of the dead; and they live not again until the

thousand years are ended, neither again, until the end of the earth.

102 And another trump shall sound, which is the fourth trump, saying: There

are found among those who are to remain until that great and last day, even the

end, who shall remain filthy still.

103 And another trump shall sound, which is the fifth trump, which is the fifth

angel who committeth the everlasting gospel—flying through the midst of

heaven, unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people;

104 And this shall be the sound of his trump, saying to all people, both in

heaven and in earth, and that are under the earth—for every ear shall hear it,

and every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, while they hear the

sound of the trump, saying: Fear God, and give glory to him who sitteth upon

the throne, forever and ever; for the hour of his judgment is come.

105 And again, another angel shall sound his trump, which is the sixth angel,

saying: She is fallen who made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her

fornication; she is fallen, is fallen!

106 And again, another angel shall sound his trump, which is the seventh angel,

saying: It is finished; it is finished! The Lamb of God hath overcome and

trodden the wine-press alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the

wrath of Almighty God.

107 And then shall the angels be crowned with the glory of his might, and the

saints shall be filled with his glory, and receive their inheritance and be made

equal with him.

108 And then shall the first angel again sound his trump in the ears of all living,

120

section 88

thousand years.

109 And then shall the second angel sound his trump, and reveal the secret acts

of men, and the thoughts and intents of their hearts, and the mighty works of

God in the second thousand years—

110 And so on, until the seventh angel shall sound his trump; and he shall stand

forth upon the land and upon the sea, and swear in the name of him who

sitteth upon the throne, that there shall be time no longer; and Satan shall be

bound, that old serpent, who is called the devil, and shall not be loosed for the

space of a thousand years.

111 And then he shall be loosed for a little season, that he may gather together

his armies.

112 And Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together

his armies, even the hosts of heaven.

113 And the devil shall gather together his armies; even the hosts of hell, and

shall come up to battle against Michael and his armies.

114 And then cometh the battle of the great God; and the devil and his armies

shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the

saints any more at all.

115 For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh

the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb.

116 This is the glory of God, and the sanctified; and they shall not any more see

death.

117 Therefore, verily I say unto you, my friends, call your solemn assembly, as I

have commanded you.

118 And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of

wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning,

even by study and also by faith.

119 Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house,

even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning,

a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God;

120 That your incomings may be in the name of the Lord; that your outgoings

may be in the name of the Lord; that all your salutations may be in the name of

the Lord, with uplifted hands unto the Most High.

121 Therefore, cease from all your light speeches, from all laughter, from all

your lustful desires, from all your pride and light-mindedness, and from all

your wicked doings.

122 Appoint among yourselves a teacher, and let not all be spokesmen at once;

but let one speak at a time and let all listen unto his sayings, that when all have

spoken that all may be edified of all, and that every man may have an equal

privilege.

123 See that ye love one another; cease to be covetous; learn to impart one to

another as the gospel requires.

124 Cease to be idle; cease to be unclean; cease to find fault one with another;

cease to sleep longer than is needful; retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be

weary; arise early, that your bodies and your minds may be invigorated. 125 And above all things, clothe yourselves with the bond of charity, as with a

section 88

121

126 Pray always, that ye may not faint, until I come. Behold, and lo, I will come

quickly, and receive you unto myself. Amen.

127 And again, the order of the house prepared for the presidency of the school

of the prophets, established for their instruction in all things that are

expedient for them, even for all the officers of the church, or in other words,

those who are called to the ministry in the church, beginning at the high

priests, even down to the deacons—

128 And this shall be the order of the house of the presidency of the school: He

that is appointed to be president, or teacher, shall be found standing in his

place, in the house which shall be prepared for him.

129 Therefore, he shall be first in the house of God, in a place that the

congregation in the house may hear his words carefully and distinctly, not with

loud speech.

130 And when he cometh into the house of God, for he should be first in the

house—behold, this is beautiful, that he may be an example—

131 Let him offer himself in prayer upon his knees before God, in token or

remembrance of the everlasting covenant.

132 And when any shall come in after him, let the teacher arise, and, with

uplifted hands to heaven, yea, even directly, salute his brother or brethren with

these words:

133 Art thou a brother or brethren? I salute you in the name of the Lord Jesus

Christ, in token or remembrance of the everlasting covenant, in which

covenant I receive you to fellowship, in a determination that is fixed,

immovable, and unchangeable, to be your friend and brother through the

grace of God in the bonds of love, to walk in all the commandments of God

blameless, in thanksgiving, forever and ever. Amen.

134 And he that is found unworthy of this salutation shall not have place

among you; for ye shall not suffer that mine house shall be polluted by him. 135 And he that cometh in and is faithful before me, and is a brother, or if they

be brethren, they shall salute the president or teacher with uplifted hands to

heaven, with this same prayer and covenant, or by saying Amen, in token of the

same.

136 Behold, verily, I say unto you, this is an ensample unto you for a salutation

to one another in the house of God, in the school of the prophets.

137 And ye are called to do this by prayer and thanksgiving, as the Spirit shall

give utterance in all your doings in the house of the Lord, in the school of the

prophets, that it may become a sanctuary, a tabernacle of the Holy Spirit to

your edification.

138 And ye shall not receive any among you into this school save he is clean

from the blood of this generation;

139 And he shall be received by the ordinance of the washing of feet, for unto

this end was the ordinance of the washing of feet instituted.

140 And again, the ordinance of washing feet is to be administered by the

president, or presiding elder of the church.

141 It is to be commenced with prayer; and after partaking of bread and wine,

he is to gird himself according to the pattern given in the thirteenth chapter of

122

section 88

Section 89

1 A Word of Wisdom, for the benefit of the council of high priests,

assembled in Kirtland, and the church, and also the saints in Zion— 2 To be sent greeting; not by commandment or constraint, but by revelation

and the word of wisdom, showing forth the order and will of God in the

temporal salvation of all saints in the last days—

3 Given for a principle with promise, adapted to the capacity of the weak and

the weakest of all saints, who are or can be called saints.

4 Behold, verily, thus saith the Lord unto you: In consequence of evils and

designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days,

I have warned you, and forewarn you, by giving unto you this word of wisdom

by revelation—

5 That inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink among you,

behold it is not good, neither meet in the sight of your Father, only in

assembling yourselves together to offer up your sacraments before him. 6 And, behold, this should be wine, yea, pure wine of the grape of the vine, of

your own make.

7 And, again, strong drinks are not for the belly, but for the washing of your

bodies.

8 And again, tobacco is not for the body, neither for the belly, and is not

good for man, but is an herb for bruises and all sick cattle, to be used with

judgment and skill.

9 And again, hot drinks are not for the body or belly.

10 And again, verily I say unto you, all wholesome herbs God hath ordained

for the constitution, nature, and use of man—

11 Every herb in the season thereof, and every fruit in the season thereof; all

these to be used with prudence and thanksgiving.

12 Yea, flesh also of beasts and of the fowls of the air, I, the Lord, have

ordained for the use of man with thanksgiving; nevertheless they are to be

used sparingly;

13 And it is pleasing unto me that they should not be used, only in times of

winter, or of cold, or famine.

14 All grain is ordained for the use of man and of beasts, to be the staff of life,

not only for man but for the beasts of the field, and the fowls of heaven, and all

wild animals that run or creep on the earth;

15 And these hath God made for the use of man only in times of famine and

excess of hunger.

16 All grain is good for the food of man; as also the fruit of the vine; that

which yieldeth fruit, whether in the ground or above the ground—

17 Nevertheless, wheat for man, and corn for the ox, and oats for the horse,

and rye for the fowls and for swine, and for all beasts of the field, and barley for

all useful animals, and for mild drinks, as also other grain.

18 And all saints who remember to keep and do these sayings, walking in

obedience to the commandments, shall receive health in their navel and

section 89

123

19 And shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden

treasures;

20 And shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint.

21 And I, the Lord, give unto them a promise, that the destroying angel shall

pass by them, as the children of Israel, and not slay them. Amen.

Section 90

1 Thus saith the Lord, verily, verily I say unto you my son, thy sins are forgiven

thee, according to thy petition, for thy prayers and the prayers of thy brethren

have come up into my ears.

2 Therefore, thou art blessed from henceforth that bear the keys of the

kingdom given unto you; which kingdom is coming forth for the last time. 3 Verily I say unto you, the keys of this kingdom shall never be taken from

you, while thou art in the world, neither in the world to come;

4 Nevertheless, through you shall the oracles be given to another, yea, even

unto the church.

5 And all they who receive the oracles of God, let them beware how they

hold them lest they are accounted as a light thing, and are brought under

condemnation thereby, and stumble and fall when the storms descend, and the

winds blow, and the rains descend, and beat upon their house.

6 And again, verily I say unto thy brethren, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G.

Williams, their sins are forgiven them also, and they are accounted as equal

with thee in holding the keys of this last kingdom;

7 As also through your administration the keys of the school of the prophets,

which I have commanded to be organized;

8 That thereby they may be perfected in their ministry for the salvation of

Zion, and of the nations of Israel, and of the Gentiles, as many as will believe; 9 That through your administration they may receive the word, and through

their administration the word may go forth unto the ends of the earth, unto

the Gentiles first, and then, behold, and lo, they shall turn unto the Jews. 10 And then cometh the day when the arm of the Lord shall be revealed in

power in convincing the nations, the heathen nations, the house of Joseph, of

the gospel of their salvation.

11 For it shall come to pass in that day, that every man shall hear the fulness of

the gospel in his own tongue, and in his own language, through those who are

ordained unto this power, by the administration of the Comforter, shed forth

upon them for the revelation of Jesus Christ.

12 And now, verily I say unto you, I give unto you a commandment that you

continue in the ministry and presidency.

13 And when you have finished the translation of the prophets, you shall from

thenceforth preside over the affairs of the church and the school;

14 And from time to time, as shall be manifested by the Comforter, receive

revelations to unfold the mysteries of the kingdom;

15 And set in order the churches, and study and learn, and become acquainted

with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people.

124

section 90

council, and set in order all the affairs of this church and kingdom.

17 Be not ashamed, neither confounded; but be admonished in all your

high-mindedness and pride, for it bringeth a snare upon your souls.

18 Set in order your houses; keep slothfulness and uncleanness far from you. 19 Now, verily I say unto you, let there be a place provided, as soon as it is

possible, for the family of thy counselor and scribe, even Frederick G.

Williams.

20 And let mine aged servant, Joseph Smith, Sen., continue with his family

upon the place where he now lives; and let it not be sold until the mouth of the

Lord shall name.

21 And let my counselor, even Sidney Rigdon, remain where he now resides

until the mouth of the Lord shall name.

22 And let the bishop search diligently to obtain an agent, and let him be a

man who has got riches in store—a man of God, and of strong faith— 23 That thereby he may be enabled to discharge every debt; that the storehouse

of the Lord may not be brought into disrepute before the eyes of the people. 24 Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work

together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant

wherewith ye have covenanted one with another.

25 Let your families be small, especially mine aged servant Joseph Smith’s,

Sen., as pertaining to those who do not belong to your families;

26 That those things that are provided for you, to bring to pass my work, be

not taken from you and given to those that are not worthy—

27 And thereby you be hindered in accomplishing those things which I have

commanded you.

28 And again, verily I say unto you, it is my will that my handmaid Vienna

Jaques should receive money to bear her expenses, and go up unto the land of

Zion;

29 And the residue of the money may be consecrated unto me, and she be

rewarded in mine own due time.

30 Verily I say unto you, that it is meet in mine eyes that she should go up unto

the land of Zion, and receive an inheritance from the hand of the bishop; 31 That she may settle down in peace inasmuch as she is faithful, and not be

idle in her days from thenceforth.

32 And behold, verily I say unto you, that ye shall write this commandment,

and say unto your brethren in Zion, in love greeting, that I have called you also

to preside over Zion in mine own due time.

33 Therefore, let them cease wearying me concerning this matter.

34 Behold, I say unto you that your brethren in Zion begin to repent, and the

angels rejoice over them.

35 Nevertheless, I am not well pleased with many things; and I am not well

pleased with my servant William E. McLellin, neither with my servant Sidney

Gilbert; and the bishop also, and others have many things to repent of. 36 But verily I say unto you, that I, the Lord, will contend with Zion, and

plead with her strong ones, and chasten her until she overcomes and is clean

before me.

section 90

125

Amen.

Section 91

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you concerning the Apocrypha—There are

many things contained therein that are true, and it is mostly translated

correctly;

2 There are many things contained therein that are not true, which are

interpolations by the hands of men.

3 Verily, I say unto you, that it is not needful that the Apocrypha should be

translated.

4 Therefore, whoso readeth it, let him understand, for the Spirit manifesteth

truth;

5 And whoso is enlightened by the Spirit shall obtain benefit therefrom; 6 And whoso receiveth not by the Spirit, cannot be benefited. Therefore it is

not needful that it should be translated. Amen.

Section 92

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord, I give unto the united order, organized agreeable to

the commandment previously given, a revelation and commandment

concerning my servant Frederick G. Williams, that ye shall receive him into

the order. What I say unto one I say unto all.

2 And again, I say unto you my servant Frederick G. Williams, you shall be a

lively member in this order; and inasmuch as you are faithful in keeping all

former commandments you shall be blessed forever. Amen.

Section 93

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh

his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice,

and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am; 2 And that I am the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the

world;

3 And that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are

one—

4 The Father because he gave me of his fulness, and the Son because I was in

the world and made flesh my tabernacle, and dwelt among the sons of men. 5 I was in the world and received of my Father, and the works of him were

plainly manifest.

6 And John saw and bore record of the fulness of my glory, and the fulness of

John’s record is hereafter to be revealed.

7 And he bore record, saying: I saw his glory, that he was in the beginning,

before the world was;

8 Therefore, in the beginning the Word was, for he was the Word, even the

messenger of salvation—

126

section 93

the world, because the world was made by him, and in him was the life of men

and the light of men.

10 The worlds were made by him; men were made by him; all things were

made by him, and through him, and of him.

11 And I, John, bear record that I beheld his glory, as the glory of the Only

Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, even the Spirit of truth, which

came and dwelt in the flesh, and dwelt among us.

12 And I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness at the first, but received

grace for grace;

13 And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to

grace, until he received a fulness;

14 And thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the

fulness at the first.

15 And I, John, bear record, and lo, the heavens were opened, and the Holy

Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove, and sat upon him, and there

came a voice out of heaven saying: This is my beloved Son.

16 And I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father; 17 And he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of

the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him.

18 And it shall come to pass, that if you are faithful you shall receive the

fulness of the record of John.

19 I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to

worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in

my name, and in due time receive of his fulness.

20 For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be

glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive

grace for grace.

21 And now, verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and

am the Firstborn;

22 And all those who are begotten through me are partakers of the glory of the

same, and are the church of the Firstborn.

23 Ye were also in the beginning with the Father; that which is Spirit, even the

Spirit of truth;

24 And truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they

are to come;

25 And whatsoever is more or less than this is the spirit of that wicked one

who was a liar from the beginning.

26 The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record

of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth;

27 And no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments. 28 He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is

glorified in truth and knoweth all things.

29 Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth,

was not created or made, neither indeed can be.

30 All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act

for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence.

section 93

127

because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and

they receive not the light.

32 And every man whose spirit receiveth not the light is under condemnation. 33 For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element,

inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy;

34 And when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy.

35 The elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God,

even temples; and whatsoever temple is defiled, God shall destroy that temple. 36 The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth. 37 Light and truth forsake that evil one.

38 Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having

redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent

before God.

39 And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through

disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their

fathers.

40 But I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth. 41 But verily I say unto you, my servant Frederick G. Williams, you have

continued under this condemnation;

42 You have not taught your children light and truth, according to the

commandments; and that wicked one hath power, as yet, over you, and this is

the cause of your affliction.

43 And now a commandment I give unto you—if you will be delivered you

shall set in order your own house, for there are many things that are not right

in your house.

44 Verily, I say unto my servant Sidney Rigdon, that in some things he hath

not kept the commandments concerning his children; therefore, first set in

order thy house.

45 Verily, I say unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., or in other words, I will call

you friends, for you are my friends, and ye shall have an inheritance with me— 46 I called you servants for the world’s sake, and ye are their servants for my

sake—

47 And now, verily I say unto Joseph Smith, Jun.—You have not kept the

commandments, and must needs stand rebuked before the Lord;

48 Your family must needs repent and forsake some things, and give more

earnest heed unto your sayings, or be removed out of their place.

49 What I say unto one I say unto all; pray always lest that wicked one have

power in you, and remove you out of your place.

50 My servant Newel K. Whitney also, a bishop of my church, hath need to be

chastened, and set in order his family, and see that they are more diligent and

concerned at home, and pray always, or they shall be removed out of their

place.

51 Now, I say unto you, my friends, let my servant Sidney Rigdon go on his

journey, and make haste, and also proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord,

and the gospel of salvation, as I shall give him utterance; and by your prayer of

faith with one consent I will uphold him.

128

section 93

haste also, and it shall be given them even according to the prayer of faith; and

inasmuch as you keep my sayings you shall not be confounded in this world,

nor in the world to come.

53 And, verily I say unto you, that it is my will that you should hasten to

translate my scriptures, and to obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries,

and of kingdoms, of laws of God and man, and all this for the salvation of

Zion. Amen.

Section 94

1 And again, verily I say unto you, my friends, a commandment I give unto you,

that ye shall commence a work of laying out and preparing a beginning and

foundation of the city of the stake of Zion, here in the land of Kirtland,

beginning at my house.

2 And behold, it must be done according to the pattern which I have given

unto you.

3 And let the first lot on the south be consecrated unto me for the building of

a house for the presidency, for the work of the presidency, in obtaining

revelations; and for the work of the ministry of the presidency, in all things

pertaining to the church and kingdom.

4 Verily I say unto you, that it shall be built fifty-five by sixty-five feet in the

width thereof and in the length thereof, in the inner court.

5 And there shall be a lower court and a higher court, according to the

pattern which shall be given unto you hereafter.

6 And it shall be dedicated unto the Lord from the foundation thereof,

according to the order of the priesthood, according to the pattern which shall

be given unto you hereafter.

7 And it shall be wholly dedicated unto the Lord for the work of the

presidency.

8 And ye shall not suffer any unclean thing to come in unto it; and my glory

shall be there, and my presence shall be there.

9 But if there shall come into it any unclean thing, my glory shall not be

there; and my presence shall not come into it.

10 And again, verily I say unto you, the second lot on the south shall be

dedicated unto me for the building of a house unto me, for the work of the

printing of the translation of my scriptures, and all things whatsoever I shall

command you.

11 And it shall be fifty-five by sixty-five feet in the width thereof and the length

thereof, in the inner court; and there shall be a lower and a higher court. 12 And this house shall be wholly dedicated unto the Lord from the

foundation thereof, for the work of the printing, in all things whatsoever I

shall command you, to be holy, undefiled, according to the pattern in all things

as it shall be given unto you.

13 And on the third lot shall my servant Hyrum Smith receive his inheritance. 14 And on the first and second lots on the north shall my servants Reynolds

Cahoon and Jared Carter receive their inheritances—

section 94

129

committee to build mine houses, according to the commandment, which I,

the Lord God, have given unto you.

16 These two houses are not to be built until I give unto you a commandment

concerning them.

17 And now I give unto you no more at this time. Amen.

Section 95

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you whom I love, and whom I love I also

chasten that their sins may be forgiven, for with the chastisement I prepare a

way for their deliverance in all things out of temptation, and I have loved

you—

2 Wherefore, ye must needs be chastened and stand rebuked before my face; 3 For ye have sinned against me a very grievous sin, in that ye have not

considered the great commandment in all things, that I have given unto you

concerning the building of mine house;

4 For the preparation wherewith I design to prepare mine apostles to prune

my vineyard for the last time, that I may bring to pass my strange act, that I

may pour out my Spirit upon all flesh—

5 But behold, verily I say unto you, that there are many who have been

ordained among you, whom I have called but few of them are chosen. 6 They who are not chosen have sinned a very grievous sin, in that they are

walking in darkness at noon-day.

7 And for this cause I gave unto you a commandment that you should call

your solemn assembly, that your fastings and your mourning might come up

into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, which is by interpretation, the creator of

the first day, the beginning and the end.

8 Yea, verily I say unto you, I gave unto you a commandment that you should

build a house, in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen

with power from on high;

9 For this is the promise of the Father unto you; therefore I command you to

tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem.

10 Nevertheless, my servants sinned a very grievous sin; and contentions arose

in the school of the prophets; which was very grievous unto me, saith your

Lord; therefore I sent them forth to be chastened.

11 Verily I say unto you, it is my will that you should build a house. If you keep

my commandments you shall have power to build it.

12 If you keep not my commandments, the love of the Father shall not

continue with you, therefore you shall walk in darkness.

13 Now here is wisdom, and the mind of the Lord—let the house be built, not

after the manner of the world, for I give not unto you that ye shall live after the

manner of the world;

14 Therefore, let it be built after the manner which I shall show unto three of

you, whom ye shall appoint and ordain unto this power.

15 And the size thereof shall be fifty and five feet in width, and let it be

sixty-five feet in length, in the inner court thereof.

130

section 95

sacrament offering, and for your preaching, and your fasting, and your praying,

and the offering up of your most holy desires unto me, saith your Lord. 17 And let the higher part of the inner court be dedicated unto me for the

school of mine apostles, saith Son Ahman; or, in other words, Alphus; or, in

other words, Omegus; even Jesus Christ your Lord. Amen.

Section 96

1 Behold, I say unto you, here is wisdom, whereby ye may know how to act

concerning this matter, for it is expedient in me that this stake that I have set

for the strength of Zion should be made strong.

2 Therefore, let my servant Newel K. Whitney take charge of the place which

is named among you, upon which I design to build mine holy house. 3 And again, let it be divided into lots, according to wisdom, for the benefit

of those who seek inheritances, as it shall be determined in council among you. 4 Therefore, take heed that ye see to this matter, and that portion that is

necessary to benefit mine order, for the purpose of bringing forth my word to

the children of men.

5 For behold, verily I say unto you, this is the most expedient in me, that my

word should go forth unto the children of men, for the purpose of subduing

the hearts of the children of men for your good. Even so. Amen.

6 And again, verily I say unto you, it is wisdom and expedient in me, that my

servant John Johnson whose offering I have accepted, and whose prayers I have

heard, unto whom I give a promise of eternal life inasmuch as he keepeth my

commandments from henceforth—

7 For he is a descendant of Joseph and a partaker of the blessings of the

promise made unto his fathers—

8 Verily I say unto you, it is expedient in me that he should become a member

of the order, that he may assist in bringing forth my word unto the children of

men.

9 Therefore ye shall ordain him unto this blessing, and he shall seek diligently

to take away incumbrances that are upon the house named among you, that he

may dwell therein. Even so. Amen.

Section 97

1 Verily I say unto you my friends, I speak unto you with my voice, even the

voice of my Spirit, that I may show unto you my will concerning your brethren

in the land of Zion, many of whom are truly humble and are seeking diligently

to learn wisdom and to find truth.

2 Verily, verily I say unto you, blessed are such, for they shall obtain; for I, the

Lord, show mercy unto all the meek, and upon all whomsoever I will, that I

may be justified when I shall bring them unto judgment.

3 Behold, I say unto you, concerning the school in Zion, I, the Lord, am well

pleased that there should be a school in Zion, and also with my servant

Parley P. Pratt, for he abideth in me.

section 96

131

over the school in the land of Zion until I shall give unto him other

commandments.

5 And I will bless him with a multiplicity of blessings, in expounding all

scriptures and mysteries to the edification of the school, and of the church in

Zion.

6 And to the residue of the school, I, the Lord, am willing to show mercy;

nevertheless, there are those that must needs be chastened, and their works

shall be made known.

7 The ax is laid at the root of the trees; and every tree that bringeth not forth

good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. I, the Lord, have spoken

it.

8 Verily I say unto you, all among them who know their hearts are honest,

and are broken, and their spirits contrite, and are willing to observe their

covenants by sacrifice—yea, every sacrifice which I, the Lord, shall

command—they are accepted of me.

9 For I, the Lord, will cause them to bring forth as a very fruitful tree which is

planted in a goodly land, by a pure stream, that yieldeth much precious fruit. 10 Verily I say unto you, that it is my will that a house should be built unto me

in the land of Zion, like unto the pattern which I have given you.

11 Yea, let it be built speedily, by the tithing of my people.

12 Behold, this is the tithing and the sacrifice which I, the Lord, require at their

hands, that there may be a house built unto me for the salvation of Zion— 13 For a place of thanksgiving for all saints, and for a place of instruction for

all those who are called to the work of the ministry in all their several callings

and offices;

14 That they may be perfected in the understanding of their ministry, in

theory, in principle, and in doctrine, in all things pertaining to the kingdom of

God on the earth, the keys of which kingdom have been conferred upon you. 15 And inasmuch as my people build a house unto me in the name of the

Lord, and do not suffer any unclean thing to come into it, that it be not

defiled, my glory shall rest upon it;

16 Yea, and my presence shall be there, for I will come into it, and all the pure

in heart that shall come into it shall see God.

17 But if it be defiled I will not come into it, and my glory shall not be there;

for I will not come into unholy temples.

18 And, now, behold, if Zion do these things she shall prosper, and spread

herself and become very glorious, very great, and very terrible.

19 And the nations of the earth shall honor her, and shall say: Surely Zion is

the city of our God, and surely Zion cannot fall, neither be moved out of her

place, for God is there, and the hand of the Lord is there;

20 And he hath sworn by the power of his might to be her salvation and her

high tower.

21 Therefore, verily, thus saith the Lord, let Zion rejoice, for this is

Zion—the pure in heart; therefore, let Zion rejoice, while all the wicked

shall mourn.

22 For behold, and lo, vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the

132

section 97

23 The Lord’s scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report

thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall not be stayed until the Lord come; 24 For the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and

all their wicked works.

25 Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I

have commanded her.

26 But if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit

her according to all her works, with sore affliction, with pestilence, with

plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire.

27 Nevertheless, let it be read this once to her ears, that I, the Lord, have

accepted of her offering; and if she sin no more none of these things shall

come upon her;

28 And I will bless her with blessings, and multiply a multiplicity of blessings

upon her, and upon her generations forever and ever, saith the Lord your God.

Amen.

Section 98

1 Verily I say unto you my friends, fear not, let your hearts be comforted; yea,

rejoice evermore, and in everything give thanks;

2 Waiting patiently on the Lord, for your prayers have entered into the ears of

the Lord of Sabaoth, and are recorded with this seal and testament—the Lord

hath sworn and decreed that they shall be granted.

3 Therefore, he giveth this promise unto you, with an immutable covenant

that they shall be fulfilled; and all things wherewith you have been afflicted

shall work together for your good, and to my name’s glory, saith the Lord. 4 And now, verily I say unto you concerning the laws of the land, it is my will

that my people should observe to do all things whatsoever I command them. 5 And that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle

of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind, and is

justifiable before me.

6 Therefore, I, the Lord, justify you, and your brethren of my church, in

befriending that law which is the constitutional law of the land;

7 And as pertaining to law of man, whatsoever is more or less than this,

cometh of evil.

8 I, the Lord God, make you free, therefore ye are free indeed; and the law

also maketh you free.

9 Nevertheless, when the wicked rule the people mourn.

10 Wherefore, honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and

good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise whatsoever is

less than these cometh of evil.

11 And I give unto you a commandment, that ye shall forsake all evil and

cleave unto all good, that ye shall live by every word which proceedeth forth

out of the mouth of God.

12 For he will give unto the faithful line upon line, precept upon precept; and

I will try you and prove you herewith.

section 98

133

again, even life eternal.

14 Therefore, be not afraid of your enemies, for I have decreed in my heart,

saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my

covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy.

15 For if ye will not abide in my covenant ye are not worthy of me.

16 Therefore, renounce war and proclaim peace, and seek diligently to turn the

hearts of the children to their fathers, and the hearts of the fathers to the

children;

17 And again, the hearts of the Jews unto the prophets, and the prophets unto

the Jews; lest I come and smite the whole earth with a curse, and all flesh be

consumed before me.

18 Let not your hearts be troubled; for in my Father’s house are many

mansions, and I have prepared a place for you; and where my Father and I am,

there ye shall be also.

19 Behold, I, the Lord, am not well pleased with many who are in the church

at Kirtland;

20 For they do not forsake their sins, and their wicked ways, the pride of their

hearts, and their covetousness, and all their detestable things, and observe the

words of wisdom and eternal life which I have given unto them.

21 Verily I say unto you, that I, the Lord, will chasten them and will do

whatsoever I list, if they do not repent and observe all things whatsoever I have

said unto them.

22 And again I say unto you, if ye observe to do whatsoever I command you, I,

the Lord, will turn away all wrath and indignation from you, and the gates of

hell shall not prevail against you.

23 Now, I speak unto you concerning your families—if men will smite you, or

your families, once, and ye bear it patiently and revile not against them,

neither seek revenge, ye shall be rewarded;

24 But if ye bear it not patiently, it shall be accounted unto you as being meted

out as a just measure unto you.

25 And again, if your enemy shall smite you the second time, and you revile

not against your enemy, and bear it patiently, your reward shall be an

hundred-fold.

26 And again, if he shall smite you the third time, and ye bear it patiently, your

reward shall be doubled unto you four-fold;

27 And these three testimonies shall stand against your enemy if he repent not,

and shall not be blotted out.

28 And now, verily I say unto you, if that enemy shall escape my vengeance,

that he be not brought into judgment before me, then ye shall see to it that ye

warn him in my name, that he come no more upon you, neither upon your

family, even your children’s children unto the third and fourth generation. 29 And then, if he shall come upon you or your children, or your children’s

children unto the third and fourth generation, I have delivered thine enemy

into thine hands;

30 And then if thou wilt spare him, thou shalt be rewarded for thy

righteousness; and also thy children and thy children’s children unto the third

134

section 98

31 Nevertheless, thine enemy is in thine hands; and if thou rewardest him

according to his works thou art justified; if he has sought thy life, and thy life is

endangered by him, thine enemy is in thine hands and thou art justified. 32 Behold, this is the law I gave unto my servant Nephi, and thy fathers,

Joseph, and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, and all mine ancient prophets and

apostles.

33 And again, this is the law that I gave unto mine ancients, that they should

not go out unto battle against any nation, kindred, tongue, or people, save I,

the Lord, commanded them.

34 And if any nation, tongue, or people should proclaim war against them,

they should first lift a standard of peace unto that people, nation, or tongue; 35 And if that people did not accept the offering of peace, neither the second

nor the third time, they should bring these testimonies before the Lord; 36 Then I, the Lord, would give unto them a commandment, and justify them

in going out to battle against that nation, tongue, or people.

37 And I, the Lord, would fight their battles, and their children’s battles, and

their children’s children’s, until they had avenged themselves on all their

enemies, to the third and fourth generation.

38 Behold, this is an ensample unto all people, saith the Lord your God, for

justification before me.

39 And again, verily I say unto you, if after thine enemy has come upon thee

the first time, he repent and come unto thee praying thy forgiveness, thou shalt

forgive him, and shalt hold it no more as a testimony against thine enemy— 40 And so on unto the second and third time; and as oft as thine enemy

repenteth of the trespass wherewith he has trespassed against thee, thou shalt

forgive him, until seventy times seven.

41 And if he trespass against thee and repent not the first time, nevertheless

thou shalt forgive him.

42 And if he trespass against thee the second time, and repent not,

nevertheless thou shalt forgive him.

43 And if he trespass against thee the third time, and repent not, thou shalt

also forgive him.

44 But if he trespass against thee the fourth time thou shalt not forgive him,

but shalt bring these testimonies before the Lord; and they shall not be blotted

out until he repent and reward thee four-fold in all things wherewith he has

trespassed against thee.

45 And if he do this, thou shalt forgive him with all thine heart; and if he do

not this, I, the Lord, will avenge thee of thine enemy an hundred-fold; 46 And upon his children, and upon his children’s children of all them that

hate me, unto the third and fourth generation.

47 But if the children shall repent, or the children’s children, and turn to the

Lord their God, with all their hearts and with all their might, mind, and

strength, and restore four-fold for all their trespasses wherewith they have

trespassed, or wherewith their fathers have trespassed, or their fathers’ fathers,

then thine indignation shall be turned away;

48 And vengeance shall no more come upon them, saith the Lord thy God,

section 98

135

Lord against them. Amen.

Section 99

1 Behold, thus saith the Lord unto my servant John Murdock—thou art called

to go into the eastern countries from house to house, from village to village,

and from city to city, to proclaim mine everlasting gospel unto the inhabitants

thereof, in the midst of persecution and wickedness.

2 And who receiveth you receiveth me; and you shall have power to declare

my word in the demonstration of my Holy Spirit.

3 And who receiveth you as a little child, receiveth my kingdom; and blessed

are they, for they shall obtain mercy.

4 And whoso rejecteth you shall be rejected of my Father and his house; and

you shall cleanse your feet in the secret places by the way for a testimony

against them.

5 And behold, and lo, I come quickly to judgment, to convince all of their

ungodly deeds which they have committed against me, as it is written of me in

the volume of the book.

6 And now, verily I say unto you, that it is not expedient that you should go

until your children are provided for, and sent up kindly unto the bishop of

Zion.

7 And after a few years, if thou desirest of me, thou mayest go up also unto

the goodly land, to possess thine inheritance;

8 Otherwise thou shalt continue proclaiming my gospel until thou be taken.

Amen.

Section 100

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my friends Sidney and Joseph, your

families are well; they are in mine hands, and I will do with them as seemeth

me good; for in me there is all power.

2 Therefore, follow me, and listen to the counsel which I shall give unto you. 3 Behold, and lo, I have much people in this place, in the regions round

about; and an effectual door shall be opened in the regions round about in this

eastern land.

4 Therefore, I, the Lord, have suffered you to come unto this place; for thus it

was expedient in me for the salvation of souls.

5 Therefore, verily I say unto you, lift up your voices unto this people; speak

the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts, and you shall not be confounded

before men;

6 For it shall be given you in the very hour, yea, in the very moment, what ye

shall say.

7 But a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall declare whatsoever thing

ye declare in my name, in solemnity of heart, in the spirit of meekness, in all

things.

136

section 100

Ghost shall be shed forth in bearing record unto all things whatsoever ye shall

say.

9 And it is expedient in me that you, my servant Sidney, should be a

spokesman unto this people; yea, verily, I will ordain you unto this calling,

even to be a spokesman unto my servant Joseph.

10 And I will give unto him power to be mighty in testimony.

11 And I will give unto thee power to be mighty in expounding all scriptures,

that thou mayest be a spokesman unto him, and he shall be a revelator unto

thee, that thou mayest know the certainty of all things pertaining to the things

of my kingdom on the earth.

12 Therefore, continue your journey and let your hearts rejoice; for behold,

and lo, I am with you even unto the end.

13 And now I give unto you a word concerning Zion. Zion shall be redeemed,

although she is chastened for a little season.

14 Thy brethren, my servants Orson Hyde and John Gould, are in my hands;

and inasmuch as they keep my commandments they shall be saved.

15 Therefore, let your hearts be comforted; for all things shall work together

for good to them that walk uprightly, and to the sanctification of the church. 16 For I will raise up unto myself a pure people, that will serve me in

righteousness;

17 And all that call upon the name of the Lord, and keep his commandments,

shall be saved. Even so. Amen.

Section 101

1 Verily I say unto you, concerning your brethren who have been afflicted, and

persecuted, and cast out from the land of their inheritance—

2 I, the Lord, have suffered the affliction to come upon them, wherewith they

have been afflicted, in consequence of their transgressions;

3 Yet I will own them, and they shall be mine in that day when I shall come to

make up my jewels.

4 Therefore, they must needs be chastened and tried, even as Abraham, who

was commanded to offer up his only son.

5 For all those who will not endure chastening, but deny me, cannot be

sanctified.

6 Behold, I say unto you, there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings,

and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these

things they polluted their inheritances.

7 They were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; therefore,

the Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the

day of their trouble.

8 In the day of their peace they esteemed lightly my counsel; but, in the day

of their trouble, of necessity they feel after me.

9 Verily I say unto you, notwithstanding their sins, my bowels are filled with

compassion towards them. I will not utterly cast them off; and in the day of

wrath I will remember mercy.

section 101

137

which I have given unto you, that I would let fall the sword of mine

indignation in behalf of my people; and even as I have said, it shall come to

pass.

11 Mine indignation is soon to be poured out without measure upon all

nations; and this will I do when the cup of their iniquity is full.

12 And in that day all who are found upon the watch-tower, or in other words,

all mine Israel, shall be saved.

13 And they that have been scattered shall be gathered.

14 And all they who have mourned shall be comforted.

15 And all they who have given their lives for my name shall be crowned. 16 Therefore, let your hearts be comforted concerning Zion; for all flesh is in

mine hands; be still and know that I am God.

17 Zion shall not be moved out of her place, notwithstanding her children are

scattered.

18 They that remain, and are pure in heart, shall return, and come to their

inheritances, they and their children, with songs of everlasting joy, to build up

the waste places of Zion—

19 And all these things that the prophets might be fulfilled.

20 And, behold, there is none other place appointed than that which I have

appointed; neither shall there be any other place appointed than that which I

have appointed, for the work of the gathering of my saints—

21 Until the day cometh when there is found no more room for them; and

then I have other places which I will appoint unto them, and they shall be

called stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion.

22 Behold, it is my will, that all they who call on my name, and worship me

according to mine everlasting gospel, should gather together, and stand in holy

places;

23 And prepare for the revelation which is to come, when the veil of the

covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the earth, shall be taken

off, and all flesh shall see me together.

24 And every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of

the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face

of the earth, shall be consumed;

25 And also that of element shall melt with fervent heat; and all things shall

become new, that my knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth. 26 And in that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the

enmity of all flesh, shall cease from before my face.

27 And in that day whatsoever any man shall ask, it shall be given unto him. 28 And in that day Satan shall not have power to tempt any man.

29 And there shall be no sorrow because there is no death.

30 In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as the

age of a tree;

31 And when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall be

changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his rest shall be

glorious.

32 Yea, verily I say unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall

138

section 101

33 Things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things

of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof— 34 Things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath,

things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven.

35 And all they who suffer persecution for my name, and endure in faith,

though they are called to lay down their lives for my sake yet shall they partake

of all this glory.

36 Wherefore, fear not even unto death; for in this world your joy is not full,

but in me your joy is full.

37 Therefore, care not for the body, neither the life of the body; but care for

the soul, and for the life of the soul.

38 And seek the face of the Lord always, that in patience ye may possess your

souls, and ye shall have eternal life.

39 When men are called unto mine everlasting gospel, and covenant with an

everlasting covenant, they are accounted as the salt of the earth and the savor

of men;

40 They are called to be the savor of men; therefore, if that salt of the earth lose

its savor, behold, it is thenceforth good for nothing only to be cast out and

trodden under the feet of men.

41 Behold, here is wisdom concerning the children of Zion, even many, but

not all; they were found transgressors, therefore they must needs be

chastened—

42 He that exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that abaseth himself shall

be exalted.

43 And now, I will show unto you a parable, that you may know my will

concerning the redemption of Zion.

44 A certain nobleman had a spot of land, very choice; and he said unto his

servants: Go ye unto my vineyard, even upon this very choice piece of land,

and plant twelve olive trees;

45 And set watchmen round about them, and build a tower, that one may

overlook the land round about, to be a watchman upon the tower, that mine

olive trees may not be broken down when the enemy shall come to spoil and

take upon themselves the fruit of my vineyard.

46 Now, the servants of the nobleman went and did as their lord commanded

them, and planted the olive trees, and built a hedge round about, and set

watchmen, and began to build a tower.

47 And while they were yet laying the foundation thereof, they began to say

among themselves: And what need hath my lord of this tower?

48 And consulted for a long time, saying among themselves: What need hath

my lord of this tower, seeing this is a time of peace?

49 Might not this money be given to the exchangers? For there is no need of

these things.

50 And while they were at variance one with another they became very

slothful, and they hearkened not unto the commandments of their lord. 51 And the enemy came by night, and broke down the hedge; and the servants

of the nobleman arose and were affrighted, and fled; and the enemy destroyed

section 101

139

52 Now, behold, the nobleman, the lord of the vineyard, called upon his

servants, and said unto them, Why! what is the cause of this great evil? 53 Ought ye not to have done even as I commanded you, and—after ye had

planted the vineyard, and built the hedge round about, and set watchmen

upon the walls thereof—built the tower also, and set a watchman upon the

tower, and watched for my vineyard, and not have fallen asleep, lest the enemy

should come upon you?

54 And behold, the watchman upon the tower would have seen the enemy

while he was yet afar off; and then ye could have made ready and kept the

enemy from breaking down the hedge thereof, and saved my vineyard from the

hands of the destroyer.

55 And the lord of the vineyard said unto one of his servants: Go and gather

together the residue of my servants, and take all the strength of mine house,

which are my warriors, my young men, and they that are of middle age also

among all my servants, who are the strength of mine house, save those only

whom I have appointed to tarry;

56 And go ye straightway unto the land of my vineyard, and redeem my

vineyard; for it is mine; I have bought it with money.

57 Therefore, get ye straightway unto my land; break down the walls of mine

enemies; throw down their tower, and scatter their watchmen.

58 And inasmuch as they gather together against you, avenge me of mine

enemies, that by and by I may come with the residue of mine house and possess

the land.

59 And the servant said unto his lord: When shall these things be?

60 And he said unto his servant: When I will; go ye straightway, and do all

things whatsoever I have commanded you;

61 And this shall be my seal and blessing upon you—a faithful and wise

steward in the midst of mine house, a ruler in my kingdom.

62 And his servant went straightway, and did all things whatsoever his lord

commanded him; and after many days all things were fulfilled.

63 Again, verily I say unto you, I will show unto you wisdom in me concerning

all the churches, inasmuch as they are willing to be guided in a right and

proper way for their salvation—

64 That the work of the gathering together of my saints may continue, that I

may build them up unto my name upon holy places; for the time of harvest is

come, and my word must needs be fulfilled.

65 Therefore, I must gather together my people, according to the parable of

the wheat and the tares, that the wheat may be secured in the garners to possess

eternal life, and be crowned with celestial glory, when I shall come in the

kingdom of my Father to reward every man according as his work shall be; 66 While the tares shall be bound in bundles, and their bands made strong,

that they may be burned with unquenchable fire.

67 Therefore, a commandment I give unto all the churches, that they shall

continue to gather together unto the places which I have appointed. 68 Nevertheless, as I have said unto you in a former commandment, let not

your gathering be in haste, nor by flight; but let all things be prepared before

140

section 101

69 And in order that all things be prepared before you, observe the

commandment which I have given concerning these things—

70 Which saith, or teacheth, to purchase all the lands with money, which can

be purchased for money, in the region round about the land which I have

appointed to be the land of Zion, for the beginning of the gathering of my

saints;

71 All the land which can be purchased in Jackson county, and the counties

round about, and leave the residue in mine hand.

72 Now, verily I say unto you, let all the churches gather together all their

moneys; let these things be done in their time, but not in haste; and observe to

have all things prepared before you.

73 And let honorable men be appointed, even wise men, and send them to

purchase these lands.

74 And the churches in the eastern countries, when they are built up, if they

will hearken unto this counsel they may buy lands and gather together upon

them; and in this way they may establish Zion.

75 There is even now already in store sufficient, yea, even an abundance, to

redeem Zion, and establish her waste places, no more to be thrown down, were

the churches, who call themselves after my name, willing to hearken to my

voice.

76 And again I say unto you, those who have been scattered by their enemies, it

is my will that they should continue to importune for redress, and redemption,

by the hands of those who are placed as rulers and are in authority over you— 77 According to the laws and constitution of the people, which I have suffered

to be established, and should be maintained for the rights and protection of all

flesh, according to just and holy principles;

78 That every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity,

according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man

may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment.

79 Therefore, it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another. 80 And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the

hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the

land by the shedding of blood.

81 Now, unto what shall I liken the children of Zion? I will liken them unto

the parable of the woman and the unjust judge, for men ought always to pray

and not to faint, which saith—

82 There was in a city a judge which feared not God, neither regarded man. 83 And there was a widow in that city, and she came unto him, saying: Avenge

me of mine adversary.

84 And he would not for a while, but afterward he said within himself:

Though I fear not God, nor regard man, yet because this widow troubleth me I

will avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me.

85 Thus will I liken the children of Zion.

86 Let them importune at the feet of the judge;

87 And if he heed them not, let them importune at the feet of the governor; 88 And if the governor heed them not, let them importune at the feet of the

section 101

141

89 And if the president heed them not, then will the Lord arise and come

forth out of his hiding place, and in his fury vex the nation;

90 And in his hot displeasure, and in his fierce anger, in his time, will cut off

those wicked, unfaithful, and unjust stewards, and appoint them their portion

among hypocrites, and unbelievers;

91 Even in outer darkness, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing

of teeth.

92 Pray ye, therefore, that their ears may be opened unto your cries, that I may

be merciful unto them, that these things may not come upon them.

93 What I have said unto you must needs be, that all men may be left without

excuse;

94 That wise men and rulers may hear and know that which they have never

considered;

95 That I may proceed to bring to pass my act, my strange act, and perform my

work, my strange work, that men may discern between the righteous and the

wicked, saith your God.

96 And again, I say unto you, it is contrary to my commandment and my will

that my servant Sidney Gilbert should sell my storehouse, which I have

appointed unto my people, into the hands of mine enemies.

97 Let not that which I have appointed be polluted by mine enemies, by the

consent of those who call themselves after my name;

98 For this is a very sore and grievous sin against me, and against my people, in

consequence of those things which I have decreed and which are soon to befall

the nations.

99 Therefore, it is my will that my people should claim, and hold claim upon

that which I have appointed unto them, though they should not be permitted

to dwell thereon.

100 Nevertheless, I do not say they shall not dwell thereon; for inasmuch as they

bring forth fruit and works meet for my kingdom they shall dwell thereon. 101 They shall build, and another shall not inherit it; they shall plant vineyards,

and they shall eat the fruit thereof. Even so. Amen.

Section 102

1 This day a general council of twenty-four high priests assembled at the house

of Joseph Smith, Jun., by revelation, and proceeded to organize the high

council of the church of Christ, which was to consist of twelve high priests,

and one or three presidents as the case might require.

2 The high council was appointed by revelation for the purpose of settling

important difficulties which might arise in the church, which could not be

settled by the church or the bishop’s council to the satisfaction of the parties. 3 Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams were

acknowledged presidents by the voice of the council; and Joseph Smith, Sen.,

John Smith, Joseph Coe, John Johnson, Martin Harris, John S. Carter, Jared

Carter, Oliver Cowdery, Samuel H. Smith, Orson Hyde, Sylvester Smith, and

Luke Johnson, high priests, were chosen to be a standing council for the

142

section 102

4 The above-named councilors were then asked whether they accepted their

appointments, and whether they would act in that office according to the law

of heaven, to which they all answered that they accepted their appointments,

and would fill their offices according to the grace of God bestowed upon them. 5 The number composing the council, who voted in the name and for the

church in appointing the above-named councilors were forty-three, as follows:

nine high priests, seventeen elders, four priests, and thirteen members. 6 Voted: that the high council cannot have power to act without seven of the

above-named councilors, or their regularly appointed successors are present. 7 These seven shall have power to appoint other high priests, whom they may

consider worthy and capable to act in the place of absent councilors. 8 Voted: that whenever any vacancy shall occur by the death, removal from

office for transgression, or removal from the bounds of this church

government, of any one of the above-named councilors, it shall be filled by the

nomination of the president or presidents, and sanctioned by the voice of a

general council of high priests, convened for that purpose, to act in the name

of the church.

9 The president of the church, who is also the president of the council, is

appointed by revelation, and acknowledged in his administration by the voice

of the church.

10 And it is according to the dignity of his office that he should preside over

the council of the church; and it is his privilege to be assisted by two other

presidents, appointed after the same manner that he himself was appointed. 11 And in case of the absence of one or both of those who are appointed to

assist him, he has power to preside over the council without an assistant; and

in case he himself is absent, the other presidents have power to preside in his

stead, both or either of them.

12 Whenever a high council of the church of Christ is regularly organized,

according to the foregoing pattern, it shall be the duty of the twelve councilors

to cast lots by numbers, and thereby ascertain who of the twelve shall speak

first, commencing with number one and so in succession to number twelve. 13 Whenever this council convenes to act upon any case, the twelve councilors

shall consider whether it is a difficult one or not; if it is not, two only of the

councilors shall speak upon it, according to the form above written.

14 But if it is thought to be difficult, four shall be appointed; and if more

difficult, six; but in no case shall more than six be appointed to speak. 15 The accused, in all cases, has a right to one-half of the council, to prevent

insult or injustice.

16 And the councilors appointed to speak before the council are to present the

case, after the evidence is examined, in its true light before the council; and

every man is to speak according to equity and justice.

17 Those councilors who draw even numbers, that is, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12, are

the individuals who are to stand up in behalf of the accused, and prevent insult

and injustice.

18 In all cases the accuser and the accused shall have a privilege of speaking for

themselves before the council, after the evidences are heard and the councilors

section 102

143

19 After the evidences are heard, the councilors, accuser and accused have

spoken, the president shall give a decision according to the understanding

which he shall have of the case, and call upon the twelve councilors to sanction

the same by their vote.

20 But should the remaining councilors, who have not spoken, or any one of

them, after hearing the evidences and pleadings impartially, discover an error

in the decision of the president, they can manifest it, and the case shall have a

re-hearing.

21 And if, after a careful re-hearing, any additional light is shown upon the

case, the decision shall be altered accordingly.

22 But in case no additional light is given, the first decision shall stand, the

majority of the council having power to determine the same.

23 In case of difficulty respecting doctrine or principle, if there is not a

sufficiency written to make the case clear to the minds of the council, the

president may inquire and obtain the mind of the Lord by revelation. 24 The high priests, when abroad, have power to call and organize a council

after the manner of the foregoing, to settle difficulties, when the parties or

either of them shall request it.

25 And the said council of high priests shall have power to appoint one of

their own number to preside over such council for the time being.

26 It shall be the duty of said council to transmit, immediately, a copy of their

proceedings, with a full statement of the testimony accompanying their

decision, to the high council of the seat of the First Presidency of the Church. 27 Should the parties or either of them be dissatisfied with the decision of said

council, they may appeal to the high council of the seat of the First Presidency

of the Church, and have a re-hearing, which case shall there be conducted,

according to the former pattern written, as though no such decision had been

made.

28 This council of high priests abroad is only to be called on the most difficult

cases of church matters; and no common or ordinary case is to be sufficient to

call such council.

29 The traveling or located high priests abroad have power to say whether it is

necessary to call such a council or not.

30 There is a distinction between the high council or traveling high priests

abroad, and the traveling high council composed of the twelve apostles, in

their decisions.

31 From the decision of the former there can be an appeal; but from the

decision of the latter there cannot.

32 The latter can only be called in question by the general authorities of the

church in case of transgression.

33 Resolved: that the president or presidents of the seat of the First Presidency

of the Church shall have power to determine whether any such case, as may be

appealed, is justly entitled to a re-hearing, after examining the appeal and the

evidences and statements accompanying it.

34 The twelve councilors then proceeded to cast lots or ballot, to ascertain

who should speak first, and the following was the result, namely: 1, Oliver

144

section 102

Carter; 6, Sylvester Smith; 7, John Johnson; 8, Orson Hyde; 9, Jared Carter;

10, Joseph Smith, Sen.; 11, John Smith; 12, Martin Harris. After prayer the

conference adjourned.

Oliver Cowdery,

Orson Hyde,

Clerks

Section 103

1 Verily I say unto you, my friends, behold, I will give unto you a revelation and

commandment, that you may know how to act in the discharge of your duties

concerning the salvation and redemption of your brethren, who have been

scattered on the land of Zion;

2 Being driven and smitten by the hands of mine enemies, on whom I will

pour out my wrath without measure in mine own time.

3 For I have suffered them thus far, that they might fill up the measure of

their iniquities, that their cup might be full;

4 And that those who call themselves after my name might be chastened for a

little season with a sore and grievous chastisement, because they did not

hearken altogether unto the precepts and commandments which I gave unto

them.

5 But verily I say unto you, that I have decreed a decree which my people shall

realize, inasmuch as they hearken from this very hour unto the counsel which

I, the Lord their God, shall give unto them.

6 Behold they shall, for I have decreed it, begin to prevail against mine

enemies from this very hour.

7 And by hearkening to observe all the words which I, the Lord their God,

shall speak unto them, they shall never cease to prevail until the kingdoms of

the world are subdued under my feet, and the earth is given unto the saints, to

possess it forever and ever.

8 But inasmuch as they keep not my commandments, and hearken not to

observe all my words, the kingdoms of the world shall prevail against them. 9 For they were set to be a light unto the world, and to be the saviors of men; 10 And inasmuch as they are not the saviors of men, they are as salt that has

lost its savor, and is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and

trodden under foot of men.

11 But verily I say unto you, I have decreed that your brethren which have been

scattered shall return to the lands of their inheritances, and shall build up the

waste places of Zion.

12 For after much tribulation, as I have said unto you in a former

commandment, cometh the blessing.

13 Behold, this is the blessing which I have promised after your tribulations,

and the tribulations of your brethren—your redemption, and the redemption

of your brethren, even their restoration to the land of Zion, to be established,

no more to be thrown down.

section 103

145

for I will not spare them if they pollute their inheritances.

15 Behold, I say unto you, the redemption of Zion must needs come by power; 16 Therefore, I will raise up unto my people a man, who shall lead them like as

Moses led the children of Israel.

17 For ye are the children of Israel, and of the seed of Abraham, and ye must

needs be led out of bondage by power, and with a stretched-out arm. 18 And as your fathers were led at the first, even so shall the redemption of

Zion be.

19 Therefore, let not your hearts faint, for I say not unto you as I said unto

your fathers: Mine angel shall go up before you, but not my presence. 20 But I say unto you: Mine angels shall go up before you, and also my

presence, and in time ye shall possess the goodly land.

21 Verily, verily I say unto you, that my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., is the man

to whom I likened the servant to whom the Lord of the vineyard spake in the

parable which I have given unto you.

22 Therefore let my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., say unto the strength of my

house, my young men and the middle aged—Gather yourselves together unto

the land of Zion, upon the land which I have bought with money that has

been consecrated unto me.

23 And let all the churches send up wise men with their moneys, and purchase

lands even as I have commanded them.

24 And inasmuch as mine enemies come against you to drive you from my

goodly land, which I have consecrated to be the land of Zion, even from your

own lands after these testimonies, which ye have brought before me against

them, ye shall curse them;

25 And whomsoever ye curse, I will curse, and ye shall avenge me of mine

enemies.

26 And my presence shall be with you even in avenging me of mine enemies,

unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me.

27 Let no man be afraid to lay down his life for my sake; for whoso layeth

down his life for my sake shall find it again.

28 And whoso is not willing to lay down his life for my sake is not my disciple. 29 It is my will that my servant Sidney Rigdon shall lift up his voice in the

congregations in the eastern countries, in preparing the churches to keep the

commandments which I have given unto them concerning the restoration and

redemption of Zion.

30 It is my will that my servant Parley P. Pratt and my servant Lyman Wight

should not return to the land of their brethren, until they have obtained

companies to go up unto the land of Zion, by tens, or by twenties, or by fifties,

or by an hundred, until they have obtained to the number of five hundred of

the strength of my house.

31 Behold this is my will; ask and ye shall receive; but men do not always do

my will.

32 Therefore, if you cannot obtain five hundred, seek diligently that

peradventure you may obtain three hundred.

33 And if ye cannot obtain three hundred, seek diligently that peradventure ye

146

section 103

34 But verily I say unto you, a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall not

go up unto the land of Zion until you have obtained a hundred of the strength

of my house, to go up with you unto the land of Zion.

35 Therefore, as I said unto you, ask and ye shall receive; pray earnestly that

peradventure my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., may go with you, and preside in

the midst of my people, and organize my kingdom upon the consecrated land,

and establish the children of Zion upon the laws and commandments which

have been and which shall be given unto you.

36 All victory and glory is brought to pass unto you through your diligence,

faithfulness, and prayers of faith.

37 Let my servant Parley P. Pratt journey with my servant Joseph Smith, Jun. 38 Let my servant Lyman Wight journey with my servant Sidney Rigdon. 39 Let my servant Hyrum Smith journey with my servant Frederick G.

Williams.

40 Let my servant Orson Hyde journey with my servant Orson Pratt,

whithersoever my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., shall counsel them, in obtaining

the fulfilment of these commandments which I have given unto you, and leave

the residue in my hands. Even so. Amen.

Section 104

1 Verily I say unto you, my friends, I give unto you counsel, and a commandment,

concerning all the properties which belong to the order which I commanded

to be organized and established, to be a united order, and an everlasting order

for the benefit of my church, and for the salvation of men until I come— 2 With promise immutable and unchangeable, that inasmuch as those whom

I commanded were faithful they should be blessed with a multiplicity of

blessings;

3 But inasmuch as they were not faithful they were nigh unto cursing. 4 Therefore, inasmuch as some of my servants have not kept the

commandment, but have broken the covenant through covetousness, and with

feigned words, I have cursed them with a very sore and grievous curse. 5 For I, the Lord, have decreed in my heart, that inasmuch as any man

belonging to the order shall be found a transgressor, or, in other words, shall

break the covenant with which ye are bound, he shall be cursed in his life, and

shall be trodden down by whom I will;

6 For I, the Lord, am not to be mocked in these things—

7 And all this that the innocent among you may not be condemned with the

unjust; and that the guilty among you may not escape; because I, the Lord,

have promised unto you a crown of glory at my right hand.

8 Therefore, inasmuch as you are found transgressors, you cannot escape my

wrath in your lives.

9 Inasmuch as ye are cut off for transgression, ye cannot escape the buffetings

of Satan until the day of redemption.

10 And I now give unto you power from this very hour, that if any man among

you, of the order, is found a transgressor and repenteth not of the evil, that ye

section 104

147

power to bring evil upon you.

11 It is wisdom in me; therefore, a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall

organize yourselves and appoint every man his stewardship;

12 That every man may give an account unto me of the stewardship which is

appointed unto him.

13 For it is expedient that I, the Lord, should make every man accountable, as

a steward over earthly blessings, which I have made and prepared for my

creatures.

14 I, the Lord, stretched out the heavens, and built the earth, my very

handiwork; and all things therein are mine.

15 And it is my purpose to provide for my saints, for all things are mine. 16 But it must needs be done in mine own way; and behold this is the way that

I, the Lord, have decreed to provide for my saints, that the poor shall be

exalted, in that the rich are made low.

17 For the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare; yea, I prepared all

things, and have given unto the children of men to be agents unto themselves. 18 Therefore, if any man shall take of the abundance which I have made, and

impart not his portion, according to the law of my gospel, unto the poor and

the needy, he shall, with the wicked, lift up his eyes in hell, being in torment. 19 And now, verily I say unto you, concerning the properties of the order— 20 Let my servant Sidney Rigdon have appointed unto him the place where he

now resides, and the lot of the tannery for his stewardship, for his support

while he is laboring in my vineyard, even as I will, when I shall command him. 21 And let all things be done according to the counsel of the order, and united

consent or voice of the order, which dwell in the land of Kirtland.

22 And this stewardship and blessing, I, the Lord, confer upon my servant

Sidney Rigdon for a blessing upon him, and his seed after him;

23 And I will multiply blessings upon him, inasmuch as he will be humble

before me.

24 And again, let my servant Martin Harris have appointed unto him, for his

stewardship, the lot of land which my servant John Johnson obtained in

exchange for his former inheritance, for him and his seed after him;

25 And inasmuch as he is faithful, I will multiply blessings upon him and his

seed after him.

26 And let my servant Martin Harris devote his moneys for the proclaiming of

my words, according as my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., shall direct.

27 And again, let my servant Frederick G. Williams have the place upon which

he now dwells.

28 And let my servant Oliver Cowdery have the lot which is set off joining the

house, which is to be for the printing office, which is lot number one, and also

the lot upon which his father resides.

29 And let my servants Frederick G. Williams and Oliver Cowdery have the

printing office and all things that pertain unto it.

30 And this shall be their stewardship which shall be appointed unto them. 31 And inasmuch as they are faithful, behold I will bless, and multiply

blessings upon them.

148

section 104

for them and their seed after them.

33 And, inasmuch as they are faithful, I will multiply blessings upon them and

their seed after them, even a multiplicity of blessings.

34 And again, let my servant John Johnson have the house in which he lives,

and the inheritance, all save the ground which has been reserved for the

building of my houses, which pertains to that inheritance, and those lots

which have been named for my servant Oliver Cowdery.

35 And inasmuch as he is faithful, I will multiply blessings upon him. 36 And it is my will that he should sell the lots that are laid off for the building

up of the city of my saints, inasmuch as it shall be made known to him by the

voice of the Spirit, and according to the counsel of the order, and by the voice

of the order.

37 And this is the beginning of the stewardship which I have appointed unto

him, for a blessing unto him and his seed after him.

38 And inasmuch as he is faithful, I will multiply a multiplicity of blessings

upon him.

39 And again, let my servant Newel K. Whitney have appointed unto him the

houses and lot where he now resides, and the lot and building on which the

mercantile establishment stands, and also the lot which is on the corner south

of the mercantile establishment, and also the lot on which the ashery is

situated.

40 And all this I have appointed unto my servant Newel K. Whitney for his

stewardship, for a blessing upon him and his seed after him, for the benefit of

the mercantile establishment of my order which I have established for my stake

in the land of Kirtland.

41 Yea, verily, this is the stewardship which I have appointed unto my servant

N. K. Whitney, even this whole mercantile establishment, him and his agent,

and his seed after him.

42 And inasmuch as he is faithful in keeping my commandments, which I have

given unto him, I will multiply blessings upon him and his seed after him, even

a multiplicity of blessings.

43 And again, let my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., have appointed unto him the

lot which is laid off for the building of my house, which is forty rods long and

twelve wide, and also the inheritance upon which his father now resides; 44 And this is the beginning of the stewardship which I have appointed unto

him, for a blessing upon him, and upon his father.

45 For behold, I have reserved an inheritance for his father, for his support;

therefore he shall be reckoned in the house of my servant Joseph Smith, Jun. 46 And I will multiply blessings upon the house of my servant Joseph Smith,

Jun., inasmuch as he is faithful, even a multiplicity of blessings.

47 And now, a commandment I give unto you concerning Zion, that you shall

no longer be bound as a united order to your brethren of Zion, only on this

wise—

48 After you are organized, you shall be called the United Order of the Stake

of Zion, the City of Kirtland. And your brethren, after they are organized,

shall be called the United Order of the City of Zion.

section 104

149

and they shall do their business in their own name, and in their own names; 50 And you shall do your business in your own name, and in your own names. 51 And this I have commanded to be done for your salvation, and also for their

salvation, in consequence of their being driven out and that which is to come. 52 The covenants being broken through transgression, by covetousness and

feigned words—

53 Therefore, you are dissolved as a united order with your brethren, that you

are not bound only up to this hour unto them, only on this wise, as I said, by

loan as shall be agreed by this order in council, as your circumstances will

admit and the voice of the council direct.

54 And again, a commandment I give unto you concerning your stewardship

which I have appointed unto you.

55 Behold, all these properties are mine, or else your faith is vain, and ye are

found hypocrites, and the covenants which ye have made unto me are broken; 56 And if the properties are mine, then ye are stewards; otherwise ye are no

stewards.

57 But, verily I say unto you, I have appointed unto you to be stewards over

mine house, even stewards indeed.

58 And for this purpose I have commanded you to organize yourselves, even to

print my words, the fulness of my scriptures, the revelations which I have given

unto you, and which I shall, hereafter, from time to time give unto you— 59 For the purpose of building up my church and kingdom on the earth, and

to prepare my people for the time when I shall dwell with them, which is nigh

at hand.

60 And ye shall prepare for yourselves a place for a treasury, and consecrate it

unto my name.

61 And ye shall appoint one among you to keep the treasury, and he shall be

ordained unto this blessing.

62 And there shall be a seal upon the treasury, and all the sacred things shall be

delivered into the treasury; and no man among you shall call it his own, or any

part of it, for it shall belong to you all with one accord.

63 And I give it unto you from this very hour; and now see to it, that ye go to

and make use of the stewardship which I have appointed unto you, exclusive of

the sacred things, for the purpose of printing these sacred things as I have said. 64 And the avails of the sacred things shall be had in the treasury, and a seal

shall be upon it; and it shall not be used or taken out of the treasury by any

one, neither shall the seal be loosed which shall be placed upon it, only by the

voice of the order, or by commandment.

65 And thus shall ye preserve the avails of the sacred things in the treasury, for

sacred and holy purposes.

66 And this shall be called the sacred treasury of the Lord; and a seal shall be

kept upon it that it may be holy and consecrated unto the Lord.

67 And again, there shall be another treasury prepared, and a treasurer

appointed to keep the treasury, and a seal shall be placed upon it;

68 And all moneys that you receive in your stewardships, by improving upon

the properties which I have appointed unto you, in houses, or in lands, or in

150

section 104

reserved unto myself for holy and sacred purposes, shall be cast into the

treasury as fast as you receive moneys, by hundreds, or by fifties, or by twenties,

or by tens, or by fives.

69 Or in other words, if any man among you obtain five dollars let him cast

them into the treasury; or if he obtain ten, or twenty, or fifty, or an hundred,

let him do likewise;

70 And let not any among you say that it is his own; for it shall not be called

his, nor any part of it.

71 And there shall not any part of it be used, or taken out of the treasury, only

by the voice and common consent of the order.

72 And this shall be the voice and common consent of the order—that any

man among you say to the treasurer: I have need of this to help me in my

stewardship—

73 If it be five dollars, or if it be ten dollars, or twenty, or fifty, or a hundred,

the treasurer shall give unto him the sum which he requires to help him in his

stewardship—

74 Until he be found a transgressor, and it is manifest before the council of the

order plainly that he is an unfaithful and an unwise steward.

75 But so long as he is in full fellowship, and is faithful and wise in his

stewardship, this shall be his token unto the treasurer that the treasurer shall

not withhold.

76 But in case of transgression, the treasurer shall be subject unto the council

and voice of the order.

77 And in case the treasurer is found an unfaithful and an unwise steward, he

shall be subject to the council and voice of the order, and shall be removed out

of his place, and another shall be appointed in his stead.

78 And again, verily I say unto you, concerning your debts—behold it is my

will that you shall pay all your debts.

79 And it is my will that you shall humble yourselves before me, and obtain

this blessing by your diligence and humility and the prayer of faith.

80 And inasmuch as you are diligent and humble, and exercise the prayer of

faith, behold, I will soften the hearts of those to whom you are in debt, until I

shall send means unto you for your deliverance.

81 Therefore write speedily to New York and write according to that which

shall be dictated by my Spirit; and I will soften the hearts of those to whom

you are in debt, that it shall be taken away out of their minds to bring affliction

upon you.

82 And inasmuch as ye are humble and faithful and call upon my name,

behold, I will give you the victory.

83 I give unto you a promise, that you shall be delivered this once out of your

bondage.

84 Inasmuch as you obtain a chance to loan money by hundreds, or thousands,

even until you shall loan enough to deliver yourself from bondage, it is your

privilege.

85 And pledge the properties which I have put into your hands, this once, by

giving your names by common consent or otherwise, as it shall seem good

section 104

151

86 I give unto you this privilege, this once; and behold, if you proceed to do

the things which I have laid before you, according to my commandments, all

these things are mine, and ye are my stewards, and the master will not suffer his

house to be broken up. Even so. Amen.

Section 105

1 Verily I say unto you who have assembled yourselves together that you may

learn my will concerning the redemption of mine afflicted people— 2 Behold, I say unto you, were it not for the transgressions of my people,

speaking concerning the church and not individuals, they might have been

redeemed even now.

3 But behold, they have not learned to be obedient to the things which I

required at their hands, but are full of all manner of evil, and do not impart of

their substance, as becometh saints, to the poor and afflicted among them; 4 And are not united according to the union required by the law of the

celestial kingdom;

5 And Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the

celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself.

6 And my people must needs be chastened until they learn obedience, if it

must needs be, by the things which they suffer.

7 I speak not concerning those who are appointed to lead my people, who are

the first elders of my church, for they are not all under this condemnation; 8 But I speak concerning my churches abroad—there are many who will say:

Where is their God? Behold, he will deliver them in time of trouble, otherwise

we will not go up unto Zion, and will keep our moneys.

9 Therefore, in consequence of the transgressions of my people, it is

expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little season for the

redemption of Zion—

10 That they themselves may be prepared, and that my people may be taught

more perfectly, and have experience, and know more perfectly concerning

their duty, and the things which I require at their hands.

11 And this cannot be brought to pass until mine elders are endowed with

power from on high.

12 For behold, I have prepared a great endowment and blessing to be poured

out upon them, inasmuch as they are faithful and continue in humility before

me.

13 Therefore it is expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little

season, for the redemption of Zion.

14 For behold, I do not require at their hands to fight the battles of Zion; for,

as I said in a former commandment, even so will I fulfil—I will fight your

battles.

15 Behold, the destroyer I have sent forth to destroy and lay waste mine

enemies; and not many years hence they shall not be left to pollute mine

heritage, and to blaspheme my name upon the lands which I have consecrated

for the gathering together of my saints.

152

section 105

strength of my house, even my warriors, my young men, and middle-aged, to

gather together for the redemption of my people, and throw down the towers

of mine enemies, and scatter their watchmen;

17 But the strength of mine house have not hearkened unto my words. 18 But inasmuch as there are those who have hearkened unto my words, I have

prepared a blessing and an endowment for them, if they continue faithful. 19 I have heard their prayers, and will accept their offering; and it is expedient

in me that they should be brought thus far for a trial of their faith.

20 And now, verily I say unto you, a commandment I give unto you, that as

many as have come up hither, that can stay in the region round about, let them

stay;

21 And those that cannot stay, who have families in the east, let them tarry for

a little season, inasmuch as my servant Joseph shall appoint unto them; 22 For I will counsel him concerning this matter, and all things whatsoever he

shall appoint unto them shall be fulfilled.

23 And let all my people who dwell in the regions round about be very faithful,

and prayerful, and humble before me, and reveal not the things which I have

revealed unto them, until it is wisdom in me that they should be revealed. 24 Talk not of judgments, neither boast of faith nor of mighty works, but

carefully gather together, as much in one region as can be, consistently with

the feelings of the people;

25 And behold, I will give unto you favor and grace in their eyes, that you may

rest in peace and safety, while you are saying unto the people: Execute

judgment and justice for us according to law, and redress us of our wrongs. 26 Now, behold, I say unto you, my friends, in this way you may find favor in

the eyes of the people, until the army of Israel becomes very great.

27 And I will soften the hearts of the people, as I did the heart of Pharaoh,

from time to time, until my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and mine elders, whom

I have appointed, shall have time to gather up the strength of my house, 28 And to have sent wise men, to fulfil that which I have commanded

concerning the purchasing of all the lands in Jackson county that can be

purchased, and in the adjoining counties round about.

29 For it is my will that these lands should be purchased; and after they are

purchased that my saints should possess them according to the laws of

consecration which I have given.

30 And after these lands are purchased, I will hold the armies of Israel guiltless

in taking possession of their own lands, which they have previously purchased

with their moneys, and of throwing down the towers of mine enemies that

may be upon them, and scattering their watchmen, and avenging me of mine

enemies unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me.

31 But first let my army become very great, and let it be sanctified before me,

that it may become fair as the sun, and clear as the moon, and that her banners

may be terrible unto all nations;

32 That the kingdoms of this world may be constrained to acknowledge that

the kingdom of Zion is in very deed the kingdom of our God and his Christ;

therefore, let us become subject unto her laws.

section 105

153

should receive their endowment from on high in my house, which I have

commanded to be built unto my name in the land of Kirtland.

34 And let those commandments which I have given concerning Zion and her

law be executed and fulfilled, after her redemption.

35 There has been a day of calling, but the time has come for a day of choosing;

and let those be chosen that are worthy.

36 And it shall be manifest unto my servant, by the voice of the Spirit, those

that are chosen; and they shall be sanctified;

37 And inasmuch as they follow the counsel which they receive, they shall

have power after many days to accomplish all things pertaining to Zion. 38 And again I say unto you, sue for peace, not only to the people that have

smitten you, but also to all people;

39 And lift up an ensign of peace, and make a proclamation of peace unto the

ends of the earth;

40 And make proposals for peace unto those who have smitten you, according

to the voice of the Spirit which is in you, and all things shall work together for

your good.

41 Therefore, be faithful; and behold, and lo, I am with you even unto the end.

Even so. Amen.

Section 106

1 It is my will that my servant Warren A. Cowdery should be appointed and

ordained a presiding high priest over my church, in the land of Freedom and

the regions round about;

2 And should preach my everlasting gospel, and lift up his voice and warn the

people, not only in his own place, but in the adjoining counties;

3 And devote his whole time to this high and holy calling, which I now give

unto him, seeking diligently the kingdom of heaven and its righteousness, and

all things necessary shall be added thereunto; for the laborer is worthy of his

hire.

4 And again, verily I say unto you, the coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and

it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night—

5 Therefore, gird up your loins, that you may be the children of light, and that

day shall not overtake you as a thief.

6 And again, verily I say unto you, there was joy in heaven when my servant

Warren bowed to my scepter, and separated himself from the crafts of men; 7 Therefore, blessed is my servant Warren, for I will have mercy on him; and,

notwithstanding the vanity of his heart, I will lift him up inasmuch as he will

humble himself before me.

8 And I will give him grace and assurance wherewith he may stand; and if he

continue to be a faithful witness and a light unto the church I have prepared a

crown for him in the mansions of my Father. Even so. Amen.

154

section 106

1 There are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and

Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.

2 Why the first is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek

was such a great high priest.

3 Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of

God.

4 But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid

the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days,

called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood. 5 All other authorities or offices in the church are appendages to this

priesthood.

6 But there are two divisions or grand heads—one is the Melchizedek

Priesthood, and the other is the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood.

7 The office of an elder comes under the priesthood of Melchizedek.

8 The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power

and authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world, to

administer in spiritual things.

9 The Presidency of the High Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek,

have a right to officiate in all the offices in the church.

10 High priests after the order of the Melchizedek Priesthood have a right to

officiate in their own standing, under the direction of the presidency, in

administering spiritual things, and also in the office of an elder, priest (of the

Levitical order), teacher, deacon, and member.

11 An elder has a right to officiate in his stead when the high priest is not

present.

12 The high priest and elder are to administer in spiritual things, agreeable to

the covenants and commandments of the church; and they have a right to

officiate in all these offices of the church when there are no higher authorities

present.

13 The second priesthood is called the Priesthood of Aaron, because it was

conferred upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations. 14 Why it is called the lesser priesthood is because it is an appendage to the

greater, or the Melchizedek Priesthood, and has power in administering

outward ordinances.

15 The bishopric is the presidency of this priesthood, and holds the keys or

authority of the same.

16 No man has a legal right to this office, to hold the keys of this priesthood,

except he be a literal descendant of Aaron.

17 But as a high priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood has authority to officiate

in all the lesser offices, he may officiate in the office of bishop when no literal

descendant of Aaron can be found, provided he is called and set apart and

ordained unto this power by the hands of the Presidency of the Melchizedek

Priesthood.

18 The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to

hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church—

19 To have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven,

section 107

155

and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of

God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant.

20 The power and authority of the lesser, or Aaronic Priesthood, is to hold the

keys of the ministering of angels, and to administer in outward ordinances, the

letter of the gospel, the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins,

agreeable to the covenants and commandments.

21 Of necessity there are presidents, or presiding officers growing out of, or

appointed of or from among those who are ordained to the several offices in

these two priesthoods.

22 Of the Melchizedek Priesthood, three Presiding High Priests, chosen by the

body, appointed and ordained to that office, and upheld by the confidence,

faith, and prayer of the church, form a quorum of the Presidency of the

Church.

23 The twelve traveling councilors are called to be the Twelve Apostles, or

special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world—thus differing from

other officers in the church in the duties of their calling.

24 And they form a quorum, equal in authority and power to the three

presidents previously mentioned.

25 The Seventy are also called to preach the gospel, and to be especial

witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world—thus differing from other

officers in the church in the duties of their calling.

26 And they form a quorum, equal in authority to that of the Twelve special

witnesses or Apostles just named.

27 And every decision made by either of these quorums must be by the

unanimous voice of the same; that is, every member in each quorum must be

agreed to its decisions, in order to make their decisions of the same power or

validity one with the other—

28 A majority may form a quorum when circumstances render it impossible to

be otherwise—

29 Unless this is the case, their decisions are not entitled to the same blessings

which the decisions of a quorum of three presidents were anciently, who were

ordained after the order of Melchizedek, and were righteous and holy men. 30 The decisions of these quorums, or either of them, are to be made in all

righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long-suffering,

and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness,

brotherly kindness and charity;

31 Because the promise is, if these things abound in them they shall not be

unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord.

32 And in case that any decision of these quorums is made in unrighteousness,

it may be brought before a general assembly of the several quorums, which

constitute the spiritual authorities of the church; otherwise there can be no

appeal from their decision.

33 The Twelve are a Traveling Presiding High Council, to officiate in the name

of the Lord, under the direction of the Presidency of the Church, agreeable to

the institution of heaven; to build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of

the same in all nations, first unto the Gentiles and secondly unto the Jews.

156

section 107

Twelve or the traveling high council, in building up the church and regulating

all the affairs of the same in all nations, first unto the Gentiles and then to the

Jews—

35 The Twelve being sent out, holding the keys, to open the door by the

proclamation of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and first unto the Gentiles and then

unto the Jews.

36 The standing high councils, at the stakes of Zion, form a quorum equal in

authority in the affairs of the church, in all their decisions, to the quorum of

the presidency, or to the traveling high council.

37 The high council in Zion form a quorum equal in authority in the affairs of

the church, in all their decisions, to the councils of the Twelve at the stakes of

Zion.

38 It is the duty of the traveling high council to call upon the Seventy, when

they need assistance, to fill the several calls for preaching and administering

the gospel, instead of any others.

39 It is the duty of the Twelve, in all large branches of the church, to ordain

evangelical ministers, as they shall be designated unto them by revelation— 40 The order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father

to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to

whom the promises were made.

41 This order was instituted in the days of Adam, and came down by lineage in

the following manner:

42 From Adam to Seth, who was ordained by Adam at the age of sixty-nine

years, and was blessed by him three years previous to his (Adam’s) death, and

received the promise of God by his father, that his posterity should be the

chosen of the Lord, and that they should be preserved unto the end of the

earth;

43 Because he (Seth) was a perfect man, and his likeness was the express

likeness of his father, insomuch that he seemed to be like unto his father in all

things, and could be distinguished from him only by his age.

44 Enos was ordained at the age of one hundred and thirty-four years and four

months, by the hand of Adam.

45 God called upon Cainan in the wilderness in the fortieth year of his age;

and he met Adam in journeying to the place Shedolamak. He was eighty-seven

years old when he received his ordination.

46 Mahalaleel was four hundred and ninety-six years and seven days old when

he was ordained by the hand of Adam, who also blessed him.

47 Jared was two hundred years old when he was ordained under the hand of

Adam, who also blessed him.

48 Enoch was twenty-five years old when he was ordained under the hand of

Adam; and he was sixty-five and Adam blessed him.

49 And he saw the Lord, and he walked with him, and was before his face

continually; and he walked with God three hundred and sixty-five years,

making him four hundred and thirty years old when he was translated. 50 Methuselah was one hundred years old when he was ordained under the

hand of Adam.

section 107

157

Seth.

52 Noah was ten years old when he was ordained under the hand of

Methuselah.

53 Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan,

Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the

residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of

Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. 54 And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam,

and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel.

55 And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have

set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou

art a prince over them forever.

56 And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and,

notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost,

predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation. 57 These things were all written in the book of Enoch, and are to be testified of

in due time.

58 It is the duty of the Twelve, also, to ordain and set in order all the other

officers of the church, agreeable to the revelation which says:

59 To the church of Christ in the land of Zion, in addition to the church laws

respecting church business—

60 Verily, I say unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts, there must needs be

presiding elders to preside over those who are of the office of an elder; 61 And also priests to preside over those who are of the office of a priest; 62 And also teachers to preside over those who are of the office of a teacher, in

like manner, and also the deacons—

63 Wherefore, from deacon to teacher, and from teacher to priest, and from

priest to elder, severally as they are appointed, according to the covenants and

commandments of the church.

64 Then comes the High Priesthood, which is the greatest of all.

65 Wherefore, it must needs be that one be appointed of the High Priesthood

to preside over the priesthood, and he shall be called President of the High

Priesthood of the Church;

66 Or, in other words, the Presiding High Priest over the High Priesthood of

the Church.

67 From the same comes the administering of ordinances and blessings upon
