the church, by the laying on of the hands.

68 Wherefore, the office of a bishop is not equal unto it; for the office of a

bishop is in administering all temporal things;

69 Nevertheless a bishop must be chosen from the High Priesthood, unless he

is a literal descendant of Aaron;

70 For unless he is a literal descendant of Aaron he cannot hold the keys of

that priesthood.

71 Nevertheless, a high priest, that is, after the order of Melchizedek, may be

set apart unto the ministering of temporal things, having a knowledge of them

by the Spirit of truth;

158

section 107

judgment upon transgressors upon testimony as it shall be laid before him

according to the laws, by the assistance of his counselors, whom he has chosen

or will choose among the elders of the church.

73 This is the duty of a bishop who is not a literal descendant of Aaron, but has

been ordained to the High Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek. 74 Thus shall he be a judge, even a common judge among the inhabitants of

Zion, or in a stake of Zion, or in any branch of the church where he shall be set

apart unto this ministry, until the borders of Zion are enlarged and it becomes

necessary to have other bishops or judges in Zion or elsewhere.

75 And inasmuch as there are other bishops appointed they shall act in the

same office.

76 But a literal descendant of Aaron has a legal right to the presidency of this

priesthood, to the keys of this ministry, to act in the office of bishop

independently, without counselors, except in a case where a President of the

High Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, is tried, to sit as a judge in

Israel.

77 And the decision of either of these councils, agreeable to the

commandment which says:

78 Again, verily, I say unto you, the most important business of the church,

and the most difficult cases of the church, inasmuch as there is not satisfaction

upon the decision of the bishop or judges, it shall be handed over and carried

up unto the council of the church, before the Presidency of the High

Priesthood.

79 And the Presidency of the council of the High Priesthood shall have power

to call other high priests, even twelve, to assist as counselors; and thus the

Presidency of the High Priesthood and its counselors shall have power to

decide upon testimony according to the laws of the church.

80 And after this decision it shall be had in remembrance no more before the

Lord; for this is the highest council of the church of God, and a final decision

upon controversies in spiritual matters.

81 There is not any person belonging to the church who is exempt from this

council of the church.

82 And inasmuch as a President of the High Priesthood shall transgress, he

shall be had in remembrance before the common council of the church, who

shall be assisted by twelve counselors of the High Priesthood;

83 And their decision upon his head shall be an end of controversy concerning

him.

84 Thus, none shall be exempted from the justice and the laws of God, that all

things may be done in order and in solemnity before him, according to truth

and righteousness.

85 And again, verily I say unto you, the duty of a president over the office of a

deacon is to preside over twelve deacons, to sit in council with them, and to

teach them their duty, edifying one another, as it is given according to the

covenants.

86 And also the duty of the president over the office of the teachers is to

preside over twenty-four of the teachers, and to sit in council with them,

section 107

159

87 Also the duty of the president over the Priesthood of Aaron is to preside

over forty-eight priests, and sit in council with them, to teach them the duties

of their office, as is given in the covenants—

88 This president is to be a bishop; for this is one of the duties of this

priesthood.

89 Again, the duty of the president over the office of elders is to preside over

ninety-six elders, and to sit in council with them, and to teach them according

to the covenants.

90 This presidency is a distinct one from that of the seventy, and is designed

for those who do not travel into all the world.

91 And again, the duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is

to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses—

92 Behold, here is wisdom; yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a

prophet, having all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of the

church.

93 And it is according to the vision showing the order of the Seventy, that they

should have seven presidents to preside over them, chosen out of the number

of the seventy;

94 And the seventh president of these presidents is to preside over the six; 95 And these seven presidents are to choose other seventy besides the first

seventy to whom they belong, and are to preside over them;

96 And also other seventy, until seven times seventy, if the labor in the

vineyard of necessity requires it.

97 And these seventy are to be traveling ministers, unto the Gentiles first and

also unto the Jews.

98 Whereas other officers of the church, who belong not unto the Twelve,

neither to the Seventy, are not under the responsibility to travel among all

nations, but are to travel as their circumstances shall allow, notwithstanding

they may hold as high and responsible offices in the church.

99 Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in

which he is appointed, in all diligence.

100 He that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand, and he that learns

not his duty and shows himself not approved shall not be counted worthy to

stand. Even so. Amen.

Section 108

1 Verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Lyman: Your sins are forgiven

you, because you have obeyed my voice in coming up hither this morning to

receive counsel of him whom I have appointed.

2 Therefore, let your soul be at rest concerning your spiritual standing, and

resist no more my voice.

3 And arise up and be more careful henceforth in observing your vows, which

you have made and do make, and you shall be blessed with exceeding great

blessings.

4 Wait patiently until the solemn assembly shall be called of my servants, then

160

section 108

ordination with the rest of mine elders whom I have chosen.

5 Behold, this is the promise of the Father unto you if you continue faithful. 6 And it shall be fulfilled upon you in that day that you shall have right to

preach my gospel wheresoever I shall send you, from henceforth from that

time.

7 Therefore, strengthen your brethren in all your conversation, in all your

prayers, in all your exhortations, and in all your doings.

8 And behold, and lo, I am with you to bless you and deliver you forever.

Amen.

Section 109

1 Thanks be to thy name, O Lord God of Israel, who keepest covenant and

showest mercy unto thy servants who walk uprightly before thee, with all their

hearts—

2 Thou who hast commanded thy servants to build a house to thy name in

this place [Kirtland].

3 And now thou beholdest, O Lord, that thy servants have done according to

thy commandment.

4 And now we ask thee, Holy Father, in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of

thy bosom, in whose name alone salvation can be administered to the children

of men, we ask thee, O Lord, to accept of this house, the workmanship of the

hands of us, thy servants, which thou didst command us to build.

5 For thou knowest that we have done this work through great tribulation;

and out of our poverty we have given of our substance to build a house to thy

name, that the Son of Man might have a place to manifest himself to his

people.

6 And as thou hast said in a revelation, given to us, calling us thy friends,

saying—Call your solemn assembly, as I have commanded you;

7 And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of

wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom, seek learning

even by study and also by faith;

8 Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing, and establish a house,

even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning,

a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God;

9 That your incomings may be in the name of the Lord, that your outgoings

may be in the name of the Lord, that all your salutations may be in the name of

the Lord, with uplifted hands unto the Most High—

10 And now, Holy Father, we ask thee to assist us, thy people, with thy grace,

in calling our solemn assembly, that it may be done to thine honor and to thy

divine acceptance;

11 And in a manner that we may be found worthy, in thy sight, to secure a

fulfilment of the promises which thou hast made unto us, thy people, in the

revelations given unto us;

12 That thy glory may rest down upon thy people, and upon this thy house,

which we now dedicate to thee, that it may be sanctified and consecrated to be

section 109

161

13 And that all people who shall enter upon the threshold of the Lord’s house

may feel thy power, and feel constrained to acknowledge that thou hast

sanctified it, and that it is thy house, a place of thy holiness.

14 And do thou grant, Holy Father, that all those who shall worship in this

house may be taught words of wisdom out of the best books, and that they

may seek learning even by study, and also by faith, as thou hast said;

15 And that they may grow up in thee, and receive a fulness of the Holy

Ghost, and be organized according to thy laws, and be prepared to obtain

every needful thing;

16 And that this house may be a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of

faith, a house of glory and of God, even thy house;

17 That all the incomings of thy people, into this house, may be in the name of

the Lord;

18 That all their outgoings from this house may be in the name of the Lord; 19 And that all their salutations may be in the name of the Lord, with holy

hands, uplifted to the Most High;

20 And that no unclean thing shall be permitted to come into thy house to

pollute it;

21 And when thy people transgress, any of them, they may speedily repent and

return unto thee, and find favor in thy sight, and be restored to the blessings

which thou hast ordained to be poured out upon those who shall reverence

thee in thy house.

22 And we ask thee, Holy Father, that thy servants may go forth from this

house armed with thy power, and that thy name may be upon them, and thy

glory be round about them, and thine angels have charge over them; 23 And from this place they may bear exceedingly great and glorious tidings,

in truth, unto the ends of the earth, that they may know that this is thy work,

and that thou hast put forth thy hand, to fulfil that which thou hast spoken by

the mouths of the prophets, concerning the last days.

24 We ask thee, Holy Father, to establish the people that shall worship, and

honorably hold a name and standing in this thy house, to all generations and

for eternity;

25 That no weapon formed against them shall prosper; that he who diggeth a

pit for them shall fall into the same himself;

26 That no combination of wickedness shall have power to rise up and prevail

over thy people upon whom thy name shall be put in this house;

27 And if any people shall rise against this people, that thine anger be kindled

against them;

28 And if they shall smite this people thou wilt smite them; thou wilt fight for

thy people as thou didst in the day of battle, that they may be delivered from

the hands of all their enemies.

29 We ask thee, Holy Father, to confound, and astonish, and to bring to shame

and confusion, all those who have spread lying reports abroad, over the world,

against thy servant or servants, if they will not repent, when the everlasting

gospel shall be proclaimed in their ears;

30 And that all their works may be brought to naught, and be swept away by

162

section 109

that there may be an end to lyings and slanders against thy people.

31 For thou knowest, O Lord, that thy servants have been innocent before

thee in bearing record of thy name, for which they have suffered these things. 32 Therefore we plead before thee for a full and complete deliverance from

under this yoke;

33 Break it off, O Lord; break it off from the necks of thy servants, by thy

power, that we may rise up in the midst of this generation and do thy work. 34 O Jehovah, have mercy upon this people, and as all men sin, forgive the

transgressions of thy people, and let them be blotted out forever.

35 Let the anointing of thy ministers be sealed upon them with power from on

high.

36 Let it be fulfilled upon them, as upon those on the day of Pentecost; let the

gift of tongues be poured out upon thy people, even cloven tongues as of fire,

and the interpretation thereof.

37 And let thy house be filled, as with a rushing mighty wind, with thy glory. 38 Put upon thy servants the testimony of the covenant, that when they go out

and proclaim thy word they may seal up the law, and prepare the hearts of thy

saints for all those judgments thou art about to send, in thy wrath, upon the

inhabitants of the earth, because of their transgressions, that thy people may

not faint in the day of trouble.

39 And whatsoever city thy servants shall enter, and the people of that city

receive their testimony, let thy peace and thy salvation be upon that city; that

they may gather out of that city the righteous, that they may come forth to

Zion, or to her stakes, the places of thine appointment, with songs of

everlasting joy;

40 And until this be accomplished, let not thy judgments fall upon that city. 41 And whatsoever city thy servants shall enter, and the people of that city

receive not the testimony of thy servants, and thy servants warn them to save

themselves from this untoward generation, let it be upon that city according to

that which thou hast spoken by the mouths of thy prophets.

42 But deliver thou, O Jehovah, we beseech thee, thy servants from their

hands, and cleanse them from their blood.

43 O Lord, we delight not in the destruction of our fellow men; their souls are

precious before thee;

44 But thy word must be fulfilled. Help thy servants to say, with thy grace

assisting them: Thy will be done, O Lord, and not ours.

45 We know that thou hast spoken by the mouth of thy prophets terrible

things concerning the wicked, in the last days—that thou wilt pour out thy

judgments, without measure;

46 Therefore, O Lord, deliver thy people from the calamity of the wicked;

enable thy servants to seal up the law, and bind up the testimony, that they may

be prepared against the day of burning.

47 We ask thee, Holy Father, to remember those who have been driven by the

inhabitants of Jackson county, Missouri, from the lands of their inheritance,

and break off, O Lord, this yoke of affliction that has been put upon them. 48 Thou knowest, O Lord, that they have been greatly oppressed and afflicted

section 109

163

burdens.

49 O Lord, how long wilt thou suffer this people to bear this affliction, and the

cries of their innocent ones to ascend up in thine ears, and their blood come

up in testimony before thee, and not make a display of thy testimony in their

behalf ?

50 Have mercy, O Lord, upon the wicked mob, who have driven thy people,

that they may cease to spoil, that they may repent of their sins if repentance is

to be found;

51 But if they will not, make bare thine arm, O Lord, and redeem that which

thou didst appoint a Zion unto thy people.

52 And if it cannot be otherwise, that the cause of thy people may not fail

before thee may thine anger be kindled, and thine indignation fall upon them,

that they may be wasted away, both root and branch, from under heaven; 53 But inasmuch as they will repent, thou art gracious and merciful, and wilt

turn away thy wrath when thou lookest upon the face of thine Anointed. 54 Have mercy, O Lord, upon all the nations of the earth; have mercy upon

the rulers of our land; may those principles, which were so honorably and

nobly defended, namely, the Constitution of our land, by our fathers, be

established forever.

55 Remember the kings, the princes, the nobles, and the great ones of the

earth, and all people, and the churches, all the poor, the needy, and afflicted

ones of the earth;

56 That their hearts may be softened when thy servants shall go out from thy

house, O Jehovah, to bear testimony of thy name; that their prejudices may

give way before the truth, and thy people may obtain favor in the sight of all; 57 That all the ends of the earth may know that we, thy servants, have heard

thy voice, and that thou hast sent us;

58 That from among all these, thy servants, the sons of Jacob, may gather out

the righteous to build a holy city to thy name, as thou hast commanded them. 59 We ask thee to appoint unto Zion other stakes besides this one which thou

hast appointed, that the gathering of thy people may roll on in great power and

majesty, that thy work may be cut short in righteousness.

60 Now these words, O Lord, we have spoken before thee, concerning the

revelations and commandments which thou hast given unto us, who are

identified with the Gentiles.

61 But thou knowest that thou hast a great love for the children of Jacob, who

have been scattered upon the mountains for a long time, in a cloudy and dark

day.

62 We therefore ask thee to have mercy upon the children of Jacob, that

Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed;

63 And the yoke of bondage may begin to be broken off from the house of

David;

64 And the children of Judah may begin to return to the lands which thou

didst give to Abraham, their father.

65 And cause that the remnants of Jacob, who have been cursed and smitten

because of their transgression, be converted from their wild and savage

164

section 109

66 That they may lay down their weapons of bloodshed, and cease their

rebellions.

67 And may all the scattered remnants of Israel, who have been driven to the

ends of the earth, come to a knowledge of the truth, believe in the Messiah,

and be redeemed from oppression, and rejoice before thee.

68 O Lord, remember thy servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., and all his afflictions

and persecutions—how he has covenanted with Jehovah, and vowed to thee,

O Mighty God of Jacob—and the commandments which thou hast given

unto him, and that he hath sincerely striven to do thy will.

69 Have mercy, O Lord, upon his wife and children, that they may be exalted

in thy presence, and preserved by thy fostering hand.

70 Have mercy upon all their immediate connections, that their prejudices

may be broken up and swept away as with a flood; that they may be converted

and redeemed with Israel, and know that thou art God.

71 Remember, O Lord, the presidents, even all the presidents of thy church,

that thy right hand may exalt them, with all their families, and their immediate

connections, that their names may be perpetuated and had in everlasting

remembrance from generation to generation.

72 Remember all thy church, O Lord, with all their families, and all their

immediate connections, with all their sick and afflicted ones, with all the poor

and meek of the earth; that the kingdom, which thou hast set up without

hands, may become a great mountain and fill the whole earth;

73 That thy church may come forth out of the wilderness of darkness, and

shine forth fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with

banners;

74 And be adorned as a bride for that day when thou shalt unveil the heavens,

and cause the mountains to flow down at thy presence, and the valleys to be

exalted, the rough places made smooth; that thy glory may fill the earth; 75 That when the trump shall sound for the dead, we shall be caught up in the

cloud to meet thee, that we may ever be with the Lord;

76 That our garments may be pure, that we may be clothed upon with robes of

righteousness, with palms in our hands, and crowns of glory upon our heads,

and reap eternal joy for all our sufferings.

77 O Lord God Almighty, hear us in these our petitions, and answer us from

heaven, thy holy habitation, where thou sittest enthroned, with glory, honor,

power, majesty, might, dominion, truth, justice, judgment, mercy, and an

infinity of fulness, from everlasting to everlasting.

78 O hear, O hear, O hear us, O Lord! And answer these petitions, and accept

the dedication of this house unto thee, the work of our hands, which we have

built unto thy name;

79 And also this church, to put upon it thy name. And help us by the power of

thy Spirit, that we may mingle our voices with those bright, shining seraphs

around thy throne, with acclamations of praise, singing Hosanna to God and

the Lamb!

80 And let these, thine anointed ones, be clothed with salvation, and thy saints

shout aloud for joy. Amen, and Amen.

section 109

165

1 The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were

opened.

2 We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us;

and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber. 3 His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure

snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was

as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying: 4 I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am

your advocate with the Father.

5 Behold, your sins are forgiven you; you are clean before me; therefore, lift

up your heads and rejoice.

6 Let the hearts of your brethren rejoice, and let the hearts of all my people

rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to my name.

7 For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here; and I

will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house.

8 Yea, I will appear unto my servants, and speak unto them with mine own

voice, if my people will keep my commandments, and do not pollute this holy

house.

9 Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in

consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment

with which my servants have been endowed in this house.

10 And the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands; and this is the

beginning of the blessing which shall be poured out upon the heads of my

people. Even so. Amen.

11 After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses

appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel

from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land

of the north.

12 After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of

Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be

blessed.

13 After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon

us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death,

stood before us, and said:

14 Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of

Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and

dreadful day of the Lord come—

15 To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the

fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—

16 Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and

by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at

the doors.

166

section 110

1 I, the Lord your God, am not displeased with your coming this journey,

notwithstanding your follies.

2 I have much treasure in this city for you, for the benefit of Zion, and many

people in this city, whom I will gather out in due time for the benefit of Zion,

through your instrumentality.

3 Therefore, it is expedient that you should form acquaintance with men in

this city, as you shall be led, and as it shall be given you.

4 And it shall come to pass in due time that I will give this city into your

hands, that you shall have power over it, insomuch that they shall not discover

your secret parts; and its wealth pertaining to gold and silver shall be yours. 5 Concern not yourselves about your debts, for I will give you power to pay

them.

6 Concern not yourselves about Zion, for I will deal mercifully with her. 7 Tarry in this place, and in the regions round about;

8 And the place where it is my will that you should tarry, for the main, shall

be signalized unto you by the peace and power of my Spirit, that shall flow

unto you.

9 This place you may obtain by hire. And inquire diligently concerning the

more ancient inhabitants and founders of this city;

10 For there are more treasures than one for you in this city.

11 Therefore, be ye as wise as serpents and yet without sin; and I will order all

things for your good, as fast as ye are able to receive them. Amen.

Section 112

1 Verily thus saith the Lord unto you my servant Thomas: I have heard thy

prayers; and thine alms have come up as a memorial before me, in behalf of

those, thy brethren, who were chosen to bear testimony of my name and to

send it abroad among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, and ordained

through the instrumentality of my servants.

2 Verily I say unto you, there have been some few things in thine heart and

with thee with which I, the Lord, was not well pleased.

3 Nevertheless, inasmuch as thou hast abased thyself thou shalt be exalted;

therefore, all thy sins are forgiven thee.

4 Let thy heart be of good cheer before my face; and thou shalt bear record of

my name, not only unto the Gentiles, but also unto the Jews; and thou shalt

send forth my word unto the ends of the earth.

5 Contend thou, therefore, morning by morning; and day after day let thy

warning voice go forth; and when the night cometh let not the inhabitants of

the earth slumber, because of thy speech.

6 Let thy habitation be known in Zion, and remove not thy house; for I, the

Lord, have a great work for thee to do, in publishing my name among the

children of men.

7 Therefore, gird up thy loins for the work. Let thy feet be shod also, for thou

art chosen, and thy path lieth among the mountains, and among many nations.

section 111

167

many low ones shall be exalted.

9 Thy voice shall be a rebuke unto the transgressor; and at thy rebuke let the

tongue of the slanderer cease its perverseness.

10 Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and

give thee answer to thy prayers.

11 I know thy heart, and have heard thy prayers concerning thy brethren. Be

not partial towards them in love above many others, but let thy love be for

them as for thyself; and let thy love abound unto all men, and unto all who

love my name.

12 And pray for thy brethren of the Twelve. Admonish them sharply for my

name’s sake, and let them be admonished for all their sins, and be ye faithful

before me unto my name.

13 And after their temptations, and much tribulation, behold, I, the Lord, will

feel after them, and if they harden not their hearts, and stiffen not their necks

against me, they shall be converted, and I will heal them.

14 Now, I say unto you, and what I say unto you, I say unto all the Twelve:

Arise and gird up your loins, take up your cross, follow me, and feed my sheep. 15 Exalt not yourselves; rebel not against my servant Joseph; for verily I say

unto you, I am with him, and my hand shall be over him; and the keys which I

have given unto him, and also to youward, shall not be taken from him till I

come.

16 Verily I say unto you, my servant Thomas, thou art the man whom I have

chosen to hold the keys of my kingdom, as pertaining to the Twelve, abroad

among all nations—

17 That thou mayest be my servant to unlock the door of the kingdom in all

places where my servant Joseph, and my servant Sidney, and my servant

Hyrum, cannot come;

18 For on them have I laid the burden of all the churches for a little season. 19 Wherefore, whithersoever they shall send you, go ye, and I will be with you;

and in whatsoever place ye shall proclaim my name an effectual door shall be

opened unto you, that they may receive my word.

20 Whosoever receiveth my word receiveth me, and whosoever receiveth me,

receiveth those, the First Presidency, whom I have sent, whom I have made

counselors for my name’s sake unto you.

21 And again, I say unto you, that whosoever ye shall send in my name, by the

voice of your brethren, the Twelve, duly recommended and authorized by you,

shall have power to open the door of my kingdom unto any nation

whithersoever ye shall send them—

22 Inasmuch as they shall humble themselves before me, and abide in my

word, and hearken to the voice of my Spirit.

23 Verily, verily, I say unto you, darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness

the minds of the people, and all flesh has become corrupt before my face. 24 Behold, vengeance cometh speedily upon the inhabitants of the earth, a day

of wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning, and

of lamentation; and as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face of the earth,

saith the Lord.

168

section 112

saith the Lord;

26 First among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know

my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the

midst of my house, saith the Lord.

27 Therefore, see to it that ye trouble not yourselves concerning the affairs of

my church in this place, saith the Lord.

28 But purify your hearts before me; and then go ye into all the world, and

preach my gospel unto every creature who has not received it;

29 And he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believeth

not, and is not baptized, shall be damned.

30 For unto you, the Twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who are

appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this

priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the

dispensation of the fulness of times,

31 Which power you hold, in connection with all those who have received a

dispensation at any time from the beginning of the creation;

32 For verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have

received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent down

from heaven unto you.

33 Verily I say unto you, behold how great is your calling. Cleanse your hearts

and your garments, lest the blood of this generation be required at your hands. 34 Be faithful until I come, for I come quickly; and my reward is with me to

recompense every man according as his work shall be. I am Alpha and Omega.

Amen.

Section 113

1 Who is the Stem of Jesse spoken of in the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, and 5th verses of the

11th chapter of Isaiah?

2 Verily thus saith the Lord: It is Christ.

3 What is the rod spoken of in the first verse of the 11th chapter of Isaiah, that

should come of the Stem of Jesse?

4 Behold, thus saith the Lord: It is a servant in the hands of Christ, who is

partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim, or of the house of Joseph, on

whom there is laid much power.

5 What is the root of Jesse spoken of in the 10th verse of the 11th chapter? 6 Behold, thus saith the Lord, it is a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph,

unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for

an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days.

7 Questions by Elias Higbee: What is meant by the command in Isaiah, 52d

chapter, 1st verse, which saith: Put on thy strength, O Zion—and what people

had Isaiah reference to?

8 He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who

should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption

of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the

priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that

section 113

169

9 What are we to understand by Zion loosing herself from the bands of her

neck; 2d verse?

10 We are to understand that the scattered remnants are exhorted to return to

the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the

Lord is that he will speak to them, or give them revelation. See the 6th, 7th,

and 8th verses. The bands of her neck are the curses of God upon her, or the

remnants of Israel in their scattered condition among the Gentiles.

Section 114

1 Verily thus saith the Lord: It is wisdom in my servant David W. Patten, that he

settle up all his business as soon as he possibly can, and make a disposition of

his merchandise, that he may perform a mission unto me next spring, in

company with others, even twelve including himself, to testify of my name and

bear glad tidings unto all the world.

2 For verily thus saith the Lord, that inasmuch as there are those among you

who deny my name, others shall be planted in their stead and receive their

bishopric. Amen.

Section 115

1 Verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and also

my servant Sidney Rigdon, and also my servant Hyrum Smith, and your

counselors who are and shall be appointed hereafter;

2 And also unto you, my servant Edward Partridge, and his counselors; 3 And also unto my faithful servants who are of the high council of my

church in Zion, for thus it shall be called, and unto all the elders and people of

my Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, scattered abroad in all the

world;

4 For thus shall my church be called in the last days, even The Church of Jesus

Christ of Latter-day Saints.

5 Verily I say unto you all: Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a

standard for the nations;

6 And that the gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her

stakes, may be for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath

when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth.

7 Let the city, Far West, be a holy and consecrated land unto me; and it shall

be called most holy, for the ground upon which thou standest is holy. 8 Therefore, I command you to build a house unto me, for the gathering

together of my saints, that they may worship me.

9 And let there be a beginning of this work, and a foundation, and a

preparatory work, this following summer;

10 And let the beginning be made on the fourth day of July next; and from

that time forth let my people labor diligently to build a house unto my name; 11 And in one year from this day let them re-commence laying the foundation

of my house.

170

section 115

from the cornerstone thereof unto the top thereof, until there shall not

anything remain that is not finished.

13 Verily I say unto you, let not my servant Joseph, neither my servant Sidney,

neither my servant Hyrum, get in debt any more for the building of a house

unto my name;

14 But let a house be built unto my name according to the pattern which I will

show unto them.

15 And if my people build it not according to the pattern which I shall show

unto their presidency, I will not accept it at their hands.

16 But if my people do build it according to the pattern which I shall show

unto their presidency, even my servant Joseph and his counselors, then I will

accept it at the hands of my people.

17 And again, verily I say unto you, it is my will that the city of Far West

should be built up speedily by the gathering of my saints;

18 And also that other places should be appointed for stakes in the regions

round about, as they shall be manifested unto my servant Joseph, from time to

time.

19 For behold, I will be with him, and I will sanctify him before the people; for

unto him have I given the keys of this kingdom and ministry. Even so. Amen.

Section 116

1 Spring Hill is named by the Lord Adam-ondi-Ahman, because, said he, it is the

place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall

sit, as spoken of by Daniel the prophet.

Section 117

1 Verily thus saith the Lord unto my servant William Marks, and also unto my

servant Newel K. Whitney, let them settle up their business speedily and

journey from the land of Kirtland, before I, the Lord, send again the snows

upon the earth.

2 Let them awake, and arise, and come forth, and not tarry, for I, the Lord,

command it.

3 Therefore, if they tarry it shall not be well with them.

4 Let them repent of all their sins, and of all their covetous desires, before me,

saith the Lord; for what is property unto me? saith the Lord.

5 Let the properties of Kirtland be turned out for debts, saith the Lord. Let

them go, saith the Lord, and whatsoever remaineth, let it remain in your

hands, saith the Lord.

6 For have I not the fowls of heaven, and also the fish of the sea, and the

beasts of the mountains? Have I not made the earth? Do I not hold the

destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth?

7 Therefore, will I not make solitary places to bud and to blossom, and to

bring forth in abundance? saith the Lord.

section 116

171

the plains of Olaha Shinehah, or the land where Adam dwelt, that you should

covet that which is but the drop, and neglect the more weighty matters? 9 Therefore, come up hither unto the land of my people, even Zion.

10 Let my servant William Marks be faithful over a few things, and he shall be

a ruler over many. Let him preside in the midst of my people in the city of Far

West, and let him be blessed with the blessings of my people.

11 Let my servant Newel K. Whitney be ashamed of the Nicolaitane band and

of all their secret abominations, and of all his littleness of soul before me, saith

the Lord, and come up to the land of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and be a bishop

unto my people, saith the Lord, not in name but in deed, saith the Lord. 12 And again, I say unto you, I remember my servant Oliver Granger; behold,

verily I say unto him that his name shall be had in sacred remembrance from

generation to generation, forever and ever, saith the Lord.

13 Therefore, let him contend earnestly for the redemption of the First

Presidency of my Church, saith the Lord; and when he falls he shall rise again,

for his sacrifice shall be more sacred unto me than his increase, saith the Lord. 14 Therefore, let him come up hither speedily, unto the land of Zion; and in

the due time he shall be made a merchant unto my name, saith the Lord, for

the benefit of my people.

15 Therefore let no man despise my servant Oliver Granger, but let the

blessings of my people be on him forever and ever.

16 And again, verily I say unto you, let all my servants in the land of Kirtland

remember the Lord their God, and mine house also, to keep and preserve it

holy, and to overthrow the moneychangers in mine own due time, saith the

Lord. Even so. Amen.

Section 118

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord: Let a conference be held immediately; let the

Twelve be organized; and let men be appointed to supply the place of those

who are fallen.

2 Let my servant Thomas remain for a season in the land of Zion, to publish

my word.

3 Let the residue continue to preach from that hour, and if they will do this

in all lowliness of heart, in meekness and humility, and long-suffering, I, the

Lord, give unto them a promise that I will provide for their families; and an

effectual door shall be opened for them, from henceforth.

4 And next spring let them depart to go over the great waters, and there

promulgate my gospel, the fulness thereof, and bear record of my name. 5 Let them take leave of my saints in the city of Far West, on the twenty-sixth

day of April next, on the building-spot of my house, saith the Lord.

6 Let my servant John Taylor, and also my servant John E. Page, and also my

servant Wilford Woodruff, and also my servant Willard Richards, be

appointed to fill the places of those who have fallen, and be officially notified

of their appointment.

172

section 118

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord, I require all their surplus property to be put into

the hands of the bishop of my church in Zion,

2 For the building of mine house, and for the laying of the foundation of Zion

and for the priesthood, and for the debts of the Presidency of my Church. 3 And this shall be the beginning of the tithing of my people.

4 And after that, those who have thus been tithed shall pay one-tenth of all

their interest annually; and this shall be a standing law unto them forever, for

my holy priesthood, saith the Lord.

5 Verily I say unto you, it shall come to pass that all those who gather unto the

land of Zion shall be tithed of their surplus properties, and shall observe this

law, or they shall not be found worthy to abide among you.

6 And I say unto you, if my people observe not this law, to keep it holy, and

by this law sanctify the land of Zion unto me, that my statutes and my

judgments may be kept thereon, that it may be most holy, behold, verily I say

unto you, it shall not be a land of Zion unto you.

7 And this shall be an ensample unto all the stakes of Zion. Even so. Amen.

Section 120

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord, the time is now come, that it shall be disposed of by

a council, composed of the First Presidency of my Church, and of the bishop

and his council, and by my high council; and by mine own voice unto them,

saith the Lord. Even so. Amen.

Section 121

1 O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding

place?

2 How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold

from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and

thine ear be penetrated with their cries?

3 Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful

oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels

be moved with compassion toward them?

4 O Lord God Almighty, maker of heaven, earth, and seas, and of all things

that in them are, and who controllest and subjectest the devil, and the dark

and benighted dominion of Sheol—stretch forth thy hand; let thine eye

pierce; let thy pavilion be taken up; let thy hiding place no longer be covered;

let thine ear be inclined; let thine heart be softened, and thy bowels moved

with compassion toward us.

5 Let thine anger be kindled against our enemies; and, in the fury of thine

heart, with thy sword avenge us of our wrongs.

6 Remember thy suffering saints, O our God; and thy servants will rejoice in

thy name forever.

section 119

173

but a small moment;

8 And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt

triumph over all thy foes.

9 Thy friends do stand by thee, and they shall hail thee again with warm

hearts and friendly hands.

10 Thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither

charge thee with transgression, as they did Job.

11 And they who do charge thee with transgression, their hope shall be

blasted, and their prospects shall melt away as the hoar frost melteth before the

burning rays of the rising sun;

12 And also that God hath set his hand and seal to change the times and

seasons, and to blind their minds, that they may not understand his marvelous

workings; that he may prove them also and take them in their own craftiness; 13 Also because their hearts are corrupted, and the things which they are

willing to bring upon others, and love to have others suffer, may come upon

themselves to the very uttermost;

14 That they may be disappointed also, and their hopes may be cut off; 15 And not many years hence, that they and their posterity shall be swept from

under heaven, saith God, that not one of them is left to stand by the wall. 16 Cursed are all those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed, saith

the Lord, and cry they have sinned when they have not sinned before me, saith

the Lord, but have done that which was meet in mine eyes, and which I

commanded them.

17 But those who cry transgression do it because they are the servants of sin,

and are the children of disobedience themselves.

18 And those who swear falsely against my servants, that they might bring

them into bondage and death—

19 Wo unto them; because they have offended my little ones they shall be

severed from the ordinances of mine house.

20 Their basket shall not be full, their houses and their barns shall perish, and

they themselves shall be despised by those that flattered them.

21 They shall not have right to the priesthood, nor their posterity after them

from generation to generation.

22 It had been better for them that a millstone had been hanged about their

necks, and they drowned in the depth of the sea.

23 Wo unto all those that discomfort my people, and drive, and murder, and

testify against them, saith the Lord of Hosts; a generation of vipers shall not

escape the damnation of hell.

24 Behold, mine eyes see and know all their works, and I have in reserve a swift

judgment in the season thereof, for them all;

25 For there is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall be. 26 God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit, yea, by the

unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, that has not been revealed since the world

was until now;

27 Which our forefathers have awaited with anxious expectation to be

revealed in the last times, which their minds were pointed to by the angels, as

174

section 121

28 A time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be

one God or many gods, they shall be manifest.

29 All thrones and dominions, principalities and powers, shall be revealed and

set forth upon all who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus Christ. 30 And also, if there be bounds set to the heavens or to the seas, or to the dry

land, or to the sun, moon, or stars—

31 All the times of their revolutions, all the appointed days, months, and years,

and all the days of their days, months, and years, and all their glories, laws, and

set times, shall be revealed in the days of the dispensation of the fulness of

times—

32 According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the

Eternal God of all other gods before this world was, that should be reserved

unto the finishing and the end thereof, when every man shall enter into his

eternal presence and into his immortal rest.

33 How long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the

heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri

river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty

from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day

Saints.

34 Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not

chosen?

35 Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and

aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson— 36 That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers

of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled

only upon the principles of righteousness.

37 That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to

cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control

or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any

degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the

Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the

priesthood or the authority of that man.

38 Behold, ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks, to

persecute the saints, and to fight against God.

39 We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of

almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will

immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion.

40 Hence many are called, but few are chosen.

41 No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the

priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness,

and by love unfeigned;

42 By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul

without hypocrisy, and without guile—

43 Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost;

and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou

hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

section 121

175

45 Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household

of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy

confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the

priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

46 The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an

unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an

everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee

forever and ever.

Section 122

1 The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in

derision, and hell shall rage against thee;

2 While the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall

seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand. 3 And thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of

traitors.

4 And although their influence shall cast thee into trouble, and into bars and

walls, thou shalt be had in honor; and but for a small moment and thy voice

shall be more terrible in the midst of thine enemies than the fierce lion,

because of thy righteousness; and thy God shall stand by thee forever and ever. 5 If thou art called to pass through tribulation; if thou art in perils among

false brethren; if thou art in perils among robbers; if thou art in perils by land

or by sea;

6 If thou art accused with all manner of false accusations; if thine enemies fall

upon thee; if they tear thee from the society of thy father and mother and

brethren and sisters; and if with a drawn sword thine enemies tear thee from

the bosom of thy wife, and of thine offspring, and thine elder son, although

but six years of age, shall cling to thy garments, and shall say, My father, my

father, why can’t you stay with us? O, my father, what are the men going to do

with you? and if then he shall be thrust from thee by the sword, and thou be

dragged to prison, and thine enemies prowl around thee like wolves for the

blood of the lamb;

7 And if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers,

and the sentence of death passed upon thee; if thou be cast into the deep; if

the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy;

if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the

way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after

thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and

shall be for thy good.

8 The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he? 9 Therefore, hold on thy way, and the priesthood shall remain with thee; for

their bounds are set, they cannot pass. Thy days are known, and thy years shall

not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be

with you forever and ever.

176

section 122

1 And again, we would suggest for your consideration the propriety of all the

saints gathering up a knowledge of all the facts, and sufferings and abuses put

upon them by the people of this State;

2 And also of all the property and amount of damages which they have

sustained, both of character and personal injuries, as well as real property; 3 And also the names of all persons that have had a hand in their oppressions,

as far as they can get hold of them and find them out.

4 And perhaps a committee can be appointed to find out these things, and to

take statements and affidavits; and also to gather up the libelous publications

that are afloat;

5 And all that are in the magazines, and in the encyclopedias, and all the

libelous histories that are published, and are writing, and by whom, and

present the whole concatenation of diabolical rascality and nefarious and

murderous impositions that have been practiced upon this people— 6 That we may not only publish to all the world, but present them to the

heads of government in all their dark and hellish hue, as the last effort which is

enjoined on us by our Heavenly Father, before we can fully and completely

claim that promise which shall call him forth from his hiding place; and also

that the whole nation may be left without excuse before he can send forth the

power of his mighty arm.

7 It is an imperative duty that we owe to God, to angels, with whom we shall

be brought to stand, and also to ourselves, to our wives and children, who have

been made to bow down with grief, sorrow, and care, under the most damning

hand of murder, tyranny, and oppression, supported and urged on and upheld

by the influence of that spirit which hath so strongly riveted the creeds of the

fathers, who have inherited lies, upon the hearts of the children, and filled the

world with confusion, and has been growing stronger and stronger, and is now

the very mainspring of all corruption, and the whole earth groans under the

weight of its iniquity.

8 It is an iron yoke, it is a strong band; they are the very handcuffs, and

chains, and shackles, and fetters of hell.

9 Therefore it is an imperative duty that we owe, not only to our own wives

and children, but to the widows and fatherless, whose husbands and fathers

have been murdered under its iron hand;

10 Which dark and blackening deeds are enough to make hell itself shudder,

and to stand aghast and pale, and the hands of the very devil to tremble and

palsy.

11 And also it is an imperative duty that we owe to all the rising generation,

and to all the pure in heart—

12 For there are many yet on the earth among all sects, parties, and

denominations, who are blinded by the subtle craftiness of men, whereby they

lie in wait to deceive, and who are only kept from the truth because they know

not where to find it—

13 Therefore, that we should waste and wear out our lives in bringing to light

all the hidden things of darkness, wherein we know them; and they are truly

manifest from heaven—

section 123

177

15 Let no man count them as small things; for there is much which lieth in

futurity, pertaining to the saints, which depends upon these things.

16 You know, brethren, that a very large ship is benefited very much by a very

small helm in the time of a storm, by being kept workways with the wind and

the waves.

17 Therefore, dearly beloved brethren, let us cheerfully do all things that lie in

our power; and then may we stand still, with the utmost assurance, to see the

salvation of God, and for his arm to be revealed.

Section 124

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph Smith, I am well

pleased with your offering and acknowledgments, which you have made; for

unto this end have I raised you up, that I might show forth my wisdom

through the weak things of the earth.

2 Your prayers are acceptable before me; and in answer to them I say unto

you, that you are now called immediately to make a solemn proclamation of

my gospel, and of this stake which I have planted to be a cornerstone of Zion,

which shall be polished with the refinement which is after the similitude of a

palace.

3 This proclamation shall be made to all the kings of the world, to the four

corners thereof, to the honorable president-elect, and the high-minded

governors of the nation in which you live, and to all the nations of the earth

scattered abroad.

4 Let it be written in the spirit of meekness and by the power of the Holy

Ghost, which shall be in you at the time of the writing of the same;

5 For it shall be given you by the Holy Ghost to know my will concerning

those kings and authorities, even what shall befall them in a time to come. 6 For, behold, I am about to call upon them to give heed to the light and

glory of Zion, for the set time has come to favor her.

7 Call ye, therefore, upon them with loud proclamation, and with your

testimony, fearing them not, for they are as grass, and all their glory as the

flower thereof which soon falleth, that they may be left also without excuse— 8 And that I may visit them in the day of visitation, when I shall unveil the

face of my covering, to appoint the portion of the oppressor among hypocrites,

where there is gnashing of teeth, if they reject my servants and my testimony

which I have revealed unto them.

9 And again, I will visit and soften their hearts, many of them for your good,

that ye may find grace in their eyes, that they may come to the light of truth,

and the Gentiles to the exaltation or lifting up of Zion.

10 For the day of my visitation cometh speedily, in an hour when ye think not

of; and where shall be the safety of my people, and refuge for those who shall

be left of them?

11 Awake, O kings of the earth! Come ye, O, come ye, with your gold and

your silver, to the help of my people, to the house of the daughters of Zion. 12 And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Robert B. Thompson help

178

section 124

should be with you;

13 Let him, therefore, hearken to your counsel, and I will bless him with a

multiplicity of blessings; let him be faithful and true in all things from

henceforth, and he shall be great in mine eyes;

14 But let him remember that his stewardship will I require at his hands. 15 And again, verily I say unto you, blessed is my servant Hyrum Smith; for I,

the Lord, love him because of the integrity of his heart, and because he loveth

that which is right before me, saith the Lord.

16 Again, let my servant John C. Bennett help you in your labor in sending my

word to the kings and people of the earth, and stand by you, even you my

servant Joseph Smith, in the hour of affliction; and his reward shall not fail if

he receive counsel.

17 And for his love he shall be great, for he shall be mine if he do this, saith the

Lord. I have seen the work which he hath done, which I accept if he continue,

and will crown him with blessings and great glory.

18 And again, I say unto you that it is my will that my servant Lyman Wight

should continue in preaching for Zion, in the spirit of meekness, confessing

me before the world; and I will bear him up as on eagles’ wings; and he shall

beget glory and honor to himself and unto my name.

19 That when he shall finish his work I may receive him unto myself, even as I

did my servant David Patten, who is with me at this time, and also my servant

Edward Partridge, and also my aged servant Joseph Smith, Sen., who sitteth

with Abraham at his right hand, and blessed and holy is he, for he is mine. 20 And again, verily I say unto you, my servant George Miller is without guile;

he may be trusted because of the integrity of his heart; and for the love which

he has to my testimony I, the Lord, love him.

21 I therefore say unto you, I seal upon his head the office of a bishopric, like

unto my servant Edward Partridge, that he may receive the consecrations of

mine house, that he may administer blessings upon the heads of the poor of

my people, saith the Lord. Let no man despise my servant George, for he shall

honor me.

22 Let my servant George, and my servant Lyman, and my servant John Snider,

and others, build a house unto my name, such a one as my servant Joseph shall

show unto them, upon the place which he shall show unto them also. 23 And it shall be for a house for boarding, a house that strangers may come

from afar to lodge therein; therefore let it be a good house, worthy of all

acceptation, that the weary traveler may find health and safety while he shall

contemplate the word of the Lord; and the cornerstone I have appointed for

Zion.

24 This house shall be a healthful habitation if it be built unto my name, and if

the governor which shall be appointed unto it shall not suffer any pollution to

come upon it. It shall be holy, or the Lord your God will not dwell therein. 25 And again, verily I say unto you, let all my saints come from afar.

26 And send ye swift messengers, yea, chosen messengers, and say unto them:

Come ye, with all your gold, and your silver, and your precious stones, and

with all your antiquities; and with all who have knowledge of antiquities, that

section 124

179

together with all the precious trees of the earth;

27 And with iron, with copper, and with brass, and with zinc, and with all

your precious things of the earth; and build a house to my name, for the Most

High to dwell therein.

28 For there is not a place found on earth that he may come to and restore

again that which was lost unto you, or which he hath taken away, even the

fulness of the priesthood.

29 For a baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that they, my saints, may

be baptized for those who are dead—

30 For this ordinance belongeth to my house, and cannot be acceptable to me,

only in the days of your poverty, wherein ye are not able to build a house unto

me.

31 But I command you, all ye my saints, to build a house unto me; and I grant

unto you a sufficient time to build a house unto me; and during this time your

baptisms shall be acceptable unto me.

32 But behold, at the end of this appointment your baptisms for your dead

shall not be acceptable unto me; and if you do not these things at the end of

the appointment ye shall be rejected as a church, with your dead, saith the

Lord your God.

33 For verily I say unto you, that after you have had sufficient time to build a

house to me, wherein the ordinance of baptizing for the dead belongeth, and

for which the same was instituted from before the foundation of the world,

your baptisms for your dead cannot be acceptable unto me;

34 For therein are the keys of the holy priesthood ordained, that you may

receive honor and glory.

35 And after this time, your baptisms for the dead, by those who are scattered

abroad, are not acceptable unto me, saith the Lord.

36 For it is ordained that in Zion, and in her stakes, and in Jerusalem, those

places which I have appointed for refuge, shall be the places for your baptisms

for your dead.

37 And again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be acceptable

unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name? 38 For, for this cause I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle,

that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in

the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been

hid from before the world was.

39 Therefore, verily I say unto you, that your anointings, and your washings,

and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn assemblies, and your

memorials for your sacrifices by the sons of Levi, and for your oracles in your

most holy places wherein you receive conversations, and your statutes and

judgments, for the beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and

for the glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals, are ordained by the

ordinance of my holy house, which my people are always commanded to build

unto my holy name.

40 And verily I say unto you, let this house be built unto my name, that I may

reveal mine ordinances therein unto my people;

180

section 124

before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of

the fulness of times.

42 And I will show unto my servant Joseph all things pertaining to this house,

and the priesthood thereof, and the place whereon it shall be built.

43 And ye shall build it on the place where you have contemplated building it,

for that is the spot which I have chosen for you to build it.

44 If ye labor with all your might, I will consecrate that spot that it shall be

made holy.

45 And if my people will hearken unto my voice, and unto the voice of my

servants whom I have appointed to lead my people, behold, verily I say unto

you, they shall not be moved out of their place.

46 But if they will not hearken to my voice, nor unto the voice of these men

whom I have appointed, they shall not be blest, because they pollute mine holy

grounds, and mine holy ordinances, and charters, and my holy words which I

give unto them.

47 And it shall come to pass that if you build a house unto my name, and do

not do the things that I say, I will not perform the oath which I make unto

you, neither fulfil the promises which ye expect at my hands, saith the Lord. 48 For instead of blessings, ye, by your own works, bring cursings, wrath,

indignation, and judgments upon your own heads, by your follies, and by all

your abominations, which you practice before me, saith the Lord.

49 Verily, verily, I say unto you, that when I give a commandment to any of the

sons of men to do a work unto my name, and those sons of men go with all

their might and with all they have to perform that work, and cease not their

diligence, and their enemies come upon them and hinder them from

performing that work, behold, it behooveth me to require that work no more

at the hands of those sons of men, but to accept of their offerings.

50 And the iniquity and transgression of my holy laws and commandments I

will visit upon the heads of those who hindered my work, unto the third and

fourth generation, so long as they repent not, and hate me, saith the Lord God. 51 Therefore, for this cause have I accepted the offerings of those whom I

commanded to build up a city and a house unto my name, in Jackson county,

Missouri, and were hindered by their enemies, saith the Lord your God. 52 And I will answer judgment, wrath, and indignation, wailing, and anguish,

and gnashing of teeth upon their heads, unto the third and fourth generation,

so long as they repent not, and hate me, saith the Lord your God.

53 And this I make an example unto you, for your consolation concerning all

those who have been commanded to do a work and have been hindered by the

hands of their enemies, and by oppression, saith the Lord your God. 54 For I am the Lord your God, and will save all those of your brethren who

have been pure in heart, and have been slain in the land of Missouri, saith the

Lord.

55 And again, verily I say unto you, I command you again to build a house to

my name, even in this place, that you may prove yourselves unto me that ye are

faithful in all things whatsoever I command you, that I may bless you, and

crown you with honor, immortality, and eternal life.

section 124

181

commanded you to build for the boarding of strangers, let it be built unto my

name, and let my name be named upon it, and let my servant Joseph and his

house have place therein, from generation to generation.

57 For this anointing have I put upon his head, that his blessing shall also be

put upon the head of his posterity after him.

58 And as I said unto Abraham concerning the kindreds of the earth, even so I

say unto my servant Joseph: In thee and in thy seed shall the kindred of the

earth be blessed.

59 Therefore, let my servant Joseph and his seed after him have place in that

house, from generation to generation, forever and ever, saith the Lord. 60 And let the name of that house be called Nauvoo House; and let it be a

delightful habitation for man, and a resting-place for the weary traveler, that

he may contemplate the glory of Zion, and the glory of this, the cornerstone

thereof;

61 That he may receive also the counsel from those whom I have set to be as

plants of renown, and as watchmen upon her walls.

62 Behold, verily I say unto you, let my servant George Miller, and my servant

Lyman Wight, and my servant John Snider, and my servant Peter Haws,

organize themselves, and appoint one of them to be a president over their

quorum for the purpose of building that house.

63 And they shall form a constitution, whereby they may receive stock for the

building of that house.

64 And they shall not receive less than fifty dollars for a share of stock in that

house, and they shall be permitted to receive fifteen thousand dollars from any

one man for stock in that house.

65 But they shall not be permitted to receive over fifteen thousand dollars

stock from any one man.

66 And they shall not be permitted to receive under fifty dollars for a share of

stock from any one man in that house.

67 And they shall not be permitted to receive any man, as a stockholder in this

house, except the same shall pay his stock into their hands at the time he

receives stock;

68 And in proportion to the amount of stock he pays into their hands he shall

receive stock in that house; but if he pays nothing into their hands he shall not

receive any stock in that house.

69 And if any pay stock into their hands it shall be for stock in that house, for

himself, and for his generation after him, from generation to generation, so

long as he and his heirs shall hold that stock, and do not sell or convey the

stock away out of their hands by their own free will and act, if you will do my

will, saith the Lord your God.

70 And again, verily I say unto you, if my servant George Miller, and my

servant Lyman Wight, and my servant John Snider, and my servant Peter

Haws, receive any stock into their hands, in moneys, or in properties wherein

they receive the real value of moneys, they shall not appropriate any portion of

that stock to any other purpose, only in that house.

71 And if they do appropriate any portion of that stock anywhere else, only in

182

section 124

for the stock which they appropriate anywhere else, only in that house, they

shall be accursed, and shall be moved out of their place, saith the Lord God;

for I, the Lord, am God, and cannot be mocked in any of these things. 72 Verily I say unto you, let my servant Joseph pay stock into their hands for

the building of that house, as seemeth him good; but my servant Joseph

cannot pay over fifteen thousand dollars stock in that house, nor under fifty

dollars; neither can any other man, saith the Lord.

73 And there are others also who wish to know my will concerning them, for

they have asked it at my hands.

74 Therefore, I say unto you concerning my servant Vinson Knight, if he will

do my will let him put stock into that house for himself, and for his generation

after him, from generation to generation.

75 And let him lift up his voice long and loud, in the midst of the people, to

plead the cause of the poor and the needy; and let him not fail, neither let his

heart faint; and I will accept of his offerings, for they shall not be unto me as

the offerings of Cain, for he shall be mine, saith the Lord.

76 Let his family rejoice and turn away their hearts from affliction; for I have

chosen him and anointed him, and he shall be honored in the midst of his

house, for I will forgive all his sins, saith the Lord. Amen.

77 Verily I say unto you, let my servant Hyrum put stock into that house as

seemeth him good, for himself and his generation after him, from generation

to generation.

78 Let my servant Isaac Galland put stock into that house; for I, the Lord, love

him for the work he hath done, and will forgive all his sins; therefore, let him

be remembered for an interest in that house from generation to generation. 79 Let my servant Isaac Galland be appointed among you, and be ordained by

my servant William Marks, and be blessed of him, to go with my servant

Hyrum to accomplish the work that my servant Joseph shall point out to

them, and they shall be greatly blessed.

80 Let my servant William Marks pay stock into that house, as seemeth him

good, for himself and his generation, from generation to generation. 81 Let my servant Henry G. Sherwood pay stock into that house, as seemeth

him good, for himself and his seed after him, from generation to generation. 82 Let my servant William Law pay stock into that house, for himself and his

seed after him, from generation to generation.

83 If he will do my will let him not take his family unto the eastern lands, even

unto Kirtland; nevertheless, I, the Lord, will build up Kirtland, but I, the

Lord, have a scourge prepared for the inhabitants thereof.

84 And with my servant Almon Babbitt, there are many things with which I

am not pleased; behold, he aspireth to establish his counsel instead of the

counsel which I have ordained, even that of the Presidency of my Church; and

he setteth up a golden calf for the worship of my people.

85 Let no man go from this place who has come here essaying to keep my

commandments.

86 If they live here let them live unto me; and if they die let them die unto me;

for they shall rest from all their labors here, and shall continue their works.

section 124

183

concerning his family, because of the sickness of the land. If ye love me, keep

my commandments; and the sickness of the land shall redound to your glory. 88 Let my servant William go and proclaim my everlasting gospel with a loud

voice, and with great joy, as he shall be moved upon by my Spirit, unto the

inhabitants of Warsaw, and also unto the inhabitants of Carthage, and also

unto the inhabitants of Burlington, and also unto the inhabitants of Madison,

and await patiently and diligently for further instructions at my general

conference, saith the Lord.

89 If he will do my will let him from henceforth hearken to the counsel of my

servant Joseph, and with his interest support the cause of the poor, and publish

the new translation of my holy word unto the inhabitants of the earth. 90 And if he will do this I will bless him with a multiplicity of blessings, that

he shall not be forsaken, nor his seed be found begging bread.

91 And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant William be appointed,

ordained, and anointed, as counselor unto my servant Joseph, in the room of

my servant Hyrum, that my servant Hyrum may take the office of Priesthood

and Patriarch, which was appointed unto him by his father, by blessing and

also by right;

92 That from henceforth he shall hold the keys of the patriarchal blessings

upon the heads of all my people,

93 That whoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whoever he curses shall be

cursed; that whatsoever he shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and

whatsoever he shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

94 And from this time forth I appoint unto him that he may be a prophet, and

a seer, and a revelator unto my church, as well as my servant Joseph;

95 That he may act in concert also with my servant Joseph; and that he shall

receive counsel from my servant Joseph, who shall show unto him the keys

whereby he may ask and receive, and be crowned with the same blessing, and

glory, and honor, and priesthood, and gifts of the priesthood, that once were

put upon him that was my servant Oliver Cowdery;

96 That my servant Hyrum may bear record of the things which I shall show

unto him, that his name may be had in honorable remembrance from

generation to generation, forever and ever.

97 Let my servant William Law also receive the keys by which he may ask and

receive blessings; let him be humble before me, and be without guile, and he

shall receive of my Spirit, even the Comforter, which shall manifest unto him

the truth of all things, and shall give him, in the very hour, what he shall say. 98 And these signs shall follow him—he shall heal the sick, he shall cast out

devils, and shall be delivered from those who would administer unto him

deadly poison;

99 And he shall be led in paths where the poisonous serpent cannot lay hold

upon his heel, and he shall mount up in the imagination of his thoughts as

upon eagles’ wings.

100 And what if I will that he should raise the dead, let him not withhold his

voice.

101 Therefore, let my servant William cry aloud and spare not, with joy and

184

section 124

ever, saith the Lord your God.

102 Behold, I say unto you, I have a mission in store for my servant William,

and my servant Hyrum, and for them alone; and let my servant Joseph tarry at

home, for he is needed. The remainder I will show unto you hereafter. Even so.

Amen.

103 And again, verily I say unto you, if my servant Sidney will serve me and be

counselor unto my servant Joseph, let him arise and come up and stand in the

office of his calling, and humble himself before me.

104 And if he will offer unto me an acceptable offering, and acknowledgments,

and remain with my people, behold, I, the Lord your God, will heal him that

he shall be healed; and he shall lift up his voice again on the mountains, and be

a spokesman before my face.

105 Let him come and locate his family in the neighborhood in which my

servant Joseph resides.

106 And in all his journeyings let him lift up his voice as with the sound of a

trump, and warn the inhabitants of the earth to flee the wrath to come. 107 Let him assist my servant Joseph, and also let my servant William Law assist

my servant Joseph, in making a solemn proclamation unto the kings of the

earth, even as I have before said unto you.

108 If my servant Sidney will do my will, let him not remove his family unto the

eastern lands, but let him change their habitation, even as I have said. 109 Behold, it is not my will that he shall seek to find safety and refuge out of

the city which I have appointed unto you, even the city of Nauvoo.

110 Verily I say unto you, even now, if he will hearken unto my voice, it shall be

well with him. Even so. Amen.

111 And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Amos Davies pay stock into

the hands of those whom I have appointed to build a house for boarding, even

the Nauvoo House.

112 This let him do if he will have an interest; and let him hearken unto the

counsel of my servant Joseph, and labor with his own hands that he may

obtain the confidence of men.

113 And when he shall prove himself faithful in all things that shall be entrusted

unto his care, yea, even a few things, he shall be made ruler over many; 114 Let him therefore abase himself that he may be exalted. Even so. Amen. 115 And again, verily I say unto you, if my servant Robert D. Foster will obey

my voice, let him build a house for my servant Joseph, according to the

contract which he has made with him, as the door shall be open to him from

time to time.

116 And let him repent of all his folly, and clothe himself with charity; and

cease to do evil, and lay aside all his hard speeches;

117 And pay stock also into the hands of the quorum of the Nauvoo House, for

himself and for his generation after him, from generation to generation; 118 And hearken unto the counsel of my servants Joseph, and Hyrum, and

William Law, and unto the authorities which I have called to lay the

foundation of Zion; and it shall be well with him forever and ever. Even so.

Amen.

section 124

185

Nauvoo House unless he shall be a believer in the Book of Mormon, and the

revelations I have given unto you, saith the Lord your God;

120 For that which is more or less than this cometh of evil, and shall be attended

with cursings and not blessings, saith the Lord your God. Even so. Amen. 121 And again, verily I say unto you, let the quorum of the Nauvoo House have

a just recompense of wages for all their labors which they do in building the

Nauvoo House; and let their wages be as shall be agreed among themselves, as

pertaining to the price thereof.

122 And let every man who pays stock bear his proportion of their wages, if it

must needs be, for their support, saith the Lord; otherwise, their labors shall

be accounted unto them for stock in that house. Even so. Amen.

123 Verily I say unto you, I now give unto you the officers belonging to my

Priesthood, that ye may hold the keys thereof, even the Priesthood which is

after the order of Melchizedek, which is after the order of mine Only Begotten

Son.

124 First, I give unto you Hyrum Smith to be a patriarch unto you, to hold the

sealing blessings of my church, even the Holy Spirit of promise, whereby ye are

sealed up unto the day of redemption, that ye may not fall notwithstanding the

hour of temptation that may come upon you.

125 I give unto you my servant Joseph to be a presiding elder over all my church,

to be a translator, a revelator, a seer, and prophet.

126 I give unto him for counselors my servant Sidney Rigdon and my servant

William Law, that these may constitute a quorum and First Presidency, to

receive the oracles for the whole church.

127 I give unto you my servant Brigham Young to be a president over the

Twelve traveling council;

128 Which Twelve hold the keys to open up the authority of my kingdom upon

the four corners of the earth, and after that to send my word to every creature. 129 They are Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Orson Hyde,

William Smith, John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, Willard

Richards, George A. Smith;

130 David Patten I have taken unto myself; behold, his priesthood no man

taketh from him; but, verily I say unto you, another may be appointed unto the

same calling.

131 And again, I say unto you, I give unto you a high council, for the

cornerstone of Zion—

132 Namely, Samuel Bent, Henry G. Sherwood, George W. Harris, Charles C.

Rich, Thomas Grover, Newel Knight, David Dort, Dunbar Wilson—Seymour

Brunson I have taken unto myself; no man taketh his priesthood, but another

may be appointed unto the same priesthood in his stead; and verily I say unto

you, let my servant Aaron Johnson be ordained unto this calling in his

stead—David Fullmer, Alpheus Cutler, William Huntington.

133 And again, I give unto you Don C. Smith to be a president over a quorum

of high priests;

134 Which ordinance is instituted for the purpose of qualifying those who shall

be appointed standing presidents or servants over different stakes scattered

186

section 124

135 And they may travel also if they choose, but rather be ordained for standing

presidents; this is the office of their calling, saith the Lord your God. 136 I give unto him Amasa Lyman and Noah Packard for counselors, that they

may preside over the quorum of high priests of my church, saith the Lord. 137 And again, I say unto you, I give unto you John A. Hicks, Samuel Williams,

and Jesse Baker, which priesthood is to preside over the quorum of elders,

which quorum is instituted for standing ministers; nevertheless they may

travel, yet they are ordained to be standing ministers to my church, saith the

Lord.

138 And again, I give unto you Joseph Young, Josiah Butterfield, Daniel Miles,

Henry Herriman, Zera Pulsipher, Levi Hancock, James Foster, to preside over

the quorum of seventies;

139 Which quorum is instituted for traveling elders to bear record of my name

in all the world, wherever the traveling high council, mine apostles, shall send

them to prepare a way before my face.

140 The difference between this quorum and the quorum of elders is that one is

to travel continually, and the other is to preside over the churches from time to

time; the one has the responsibility of presiding from time to time, and the

other has no responsibility of presiding, saith the Lord your God.

141 And again, I say unto you, I give unto you Vinson Knight, Samuel H.

Smith, and Shadrach Roundy, if he will receive it, to preside over the

bishopric; a knowledge of said bishopric is given unto you in the book of

Doctrine and Covenants.

142 And again, I say unto you, Samuel Rolfe and his counselors for priests, and

the president of the teachers and his counselors, and also the president of the

deacons and his counselors, and also the president of the stake and his

counselors.

143 The above offices I have given unto you, and the keys thereof, for helps and

for governments, for the work of the ministry and the perfecting of my saints. 144 And a commandment I give unto you, that you should fill all these offices

and approve of those names which I have mentioned, or else disapprove of

them at my general conference;

145 And that ye should prepare rooms for all these offices in my house when

you build it unto my name, saith the Lord your God. Even so. Amen.

Section 125

1 What is the will of the Lord concerning the saints in the Territory of Iowa? 2 Verily, thus saith the Lord, I say unto you, if those who call themselves by

my name and are essaying to be my saints, if they will do my will and keep my

commandments concerning them, let them gather themselves together unto

the places which I shall appoint unto them by my servant Joseph, and build up

cities unto my name, that they may be prepared for that which is in store for a

time to come.

3 Let them build up a city unto my name upon the land opposite the city of

Nauvoo, and let the name of Zarahemla be named upon it.

section 125

187

the south, that have desires to dwell therein, take up their inheritance in the

same, as well as in the city of Nashville, or in the city of Nauvoo, and in all the

stakes which I have appointed, saith the Lord.

Section 126

1 Dear and well-beloved brother, Brigham Young, verily thus saith the Lord

unto you: My servant Brigham, it is no more required at your hand to leave

your family as in times past, for your offering is acceptable to me.

2 I have seen your labor and toil in journeyings for my name.

3 I therefore command you to send my word abroad, and take especial care of

your family from this time, henceforth and forever. Amen.

Section 127

1 Forasmuch as the Lord has revealed unto me that my enemies, both in

Missouri and this State, were again in the pursuit of me; and inasmuch as they

pursue me without a cause, and have not the least shadow or coloring of justice

or right on their side in the getting up of their prosecutions against me; and

inasmuch as their pretensions are all founded in falsehood of the blackest dye,

I have thought it expedient and wisdom in me to leave the place for a short

season, for my own safety and the safety of this people. I would say to all those

with whom I have business, that I have left my affairs with agents and clerks

who will transact all business in a prompt and proper manner, and will see that

all my debts are canceled in due time, by turning out property, or otherwise, as

the case may require, or as the circumstances may admit of. When I learn that

the storm is fully blown over, then I will return to you again.

2 And as for the perils which I am called to pass through, they seem but a

small thing to me, as the envy and wrath of man have been my common lot all

the days of my life; and for what cause it seems mysterious, unless I was

ordained from before the foundation of the world for some good end, or bad,

as you may choose to call it. Judge ye for yourselves. God knoweth all these

things, whether it be good or bad. But nevertheless, deep water is what I am

wont to swim in. It all has become a second nature to me; and I feel, like Paul,

to glory in tribulation; for to this day has the God of my fathers delivered me

out of them all, and will deliver me from henceforth; for behold, and lo, I shall

triumph over all my enemies, for the Lord God hath spoken it.

3 Let all the saints rejoice, therefore, and be exceedingly glad; for Israel’s God

is their God, and he will mete out a just recompense of reward upon the heads

of all their oppressors.

4 And again, verily thus saith the Lord: Let the work of my temple, and all

the works which I have appointed unto you, be continued on and not cease;

and let your diligence, and your perseverance, and patience, and your works be

redoubled, and you shall in nowise lose your reward, saith the Lord of Hosts.

And if they persecute you, so persecuted they the prophets and righteous men

that were before you. For all this there is a reward in heaven.

188

section 127

6 Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you concerning your dead: When any of

you are baptized for your dead, let there be a recorder, and let him be

eye-witness of your baptisms; let him hear with his ears, that he may testify of a

truth, saith the Lord;

7 That in all your recordings it may be recorded in heaven; whatsoever you

bind on earth, may be bound in heaven; whatsoever you loose on earth, may be

loosed in heaven;

8 For I am about to restore many things to the earth, pertaining to the

priesthood, saith the Lord of Hosts.

9 And again, let all the records be had in order, that they may be put in the

archives of my holy temple, to be held in remembrance from generation to

generation, saith the Lord of Hosts.

10 I will say to all the saints, that I desired, with exceedingly great desire, to

have addressed them from the stand on the subject of baptism for the dead, on

the following Sabbath. But inasmuch as it is out of my power to do so, I will

write the word of the Lord from time to time, on that subject, and send it to

you by mail, as well as many other things.

11 I now close my letter for the present, for the want of more time; for the

enemy is on the alert, and as the Savior said, the prince of this world cometh,

but he hath nothing in me.

12 Behold, my prayer to God is that you all may be saved. And I subscribe

myself your servant in the Lord, prophet and seer of The Church of Jesus

Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Joseph Smith.

Section 128

1 As I stated to you in my letter before I left my place, that I would write to you

from time to time and give you information in relation to many subjects, I now

resume the subject of the baptism for the dead, as that subject seems to occupy

my mind, and press itself upon my feelings the strongest, since I have been

pursued by my enemies.

2 I wrote a few words of revelation to you concerning a recorder. I have had a

few additional views in relation to this matter, which I now certify. That is, it

was declared in my former letter that there should be a recorder, who should

be eye-witness, and also to hear with his ears, that he might make a record of a

truth before the Lord.

3 Now, in relation to this matter, it would be very difficult for one recorder to

be present at all times, and to do all the business. To obviate this difficulty,

there can be a recorder appointed in each ward of the city, who is well qualified

for taking accurate minutes; and let him be very particular and precise in

taking the whole proceedings, certifying in his record that he saw with his

eyes, and heard with his ears, giving the date, and names, and so forth, and the

history of the whole transaction; naming also some three individuals that are

present, if there be any present, who can at any time when called upon certify

section 128

189

established.

4 Then, let there be a general recorder, to whom these other records can be

handed, being attended with certificates over their own signatures, certifying

that the record they have made is true. Then the general church recorder can

enter the record on the general church book, with the certificates and all the

attending witnesses, with his own statement that he verily believes the above

statement and records to be true, from his knowledge of the general character

and appointment of those men by the church. And when this is done on the

general church book, the record shall be just as holy, and shall answer the

ordinance just the same as if he had seen with his eyes and heard with his ears,

and made a record of the same on the general church book.

5 You may think this order of things to be very particular; but let me tell you

that it is only to answer the will of God, by conforming to the ordinance and

preparation that the Lord ordained and prepared before the foundation of the

world, for the salvation of the dead who should die without a knowledge of

the gospel.

6 And further, I want you to remember that John the Revelator was

contemplating this very subject in relation to the dead, when he declared, as

you will find recorded in Revelation 20:12—And I saw the dead, small and

great, stand before God; and the books were opened; and another book was

opened, which is the book of life; and the dead were judged out of those things

which were written in the books, according to their works.

7 You will discover in this quotation that the books were opened; and

another book was opened, which was the book of life; but the dead were

judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their

works; consequently, the books spoken of must be the books which contained

the record of their works, and refer to the records which are kept on the earth.

And the book which was the book of life is the record which is kept in heaven;

the principle agreeing precisely with the doctrine which is commanded you in

the revelation contained in the letter which I wrote to you previous to my

leaving my place—that in all your recordings it may be recorded in heaven. 8 Now, the nature of this ordinance consists in the power of the priesthood,

by the revelation of Jesus Christ, wherein it is granted that whatsoever you

bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you loose on earth

shall be loosed in heaven. Or, in other words, taking a different view of the

translation, whatsoever you record on earth shall be recorded in heaven, and

whatsoever you do not record on earth shall not be recorded in heaven; for out

of the books shall your dead be judged, according to their own works, whether

they themselves have attended to the ordinances in their own propria persona,

or by the means of their own agents, according to the ordinance which God

has prepared for their salvation from before the foundation of the world,

according to the records which they have kept concerning their dead. 9 It may seem to some to be a very bold doctrine that we talk of—a power

which records or binds on earth and binds in heaven. Nevertheless, in all ages

of the world, whenever the Lord has given a dispensation of the priesthood to

any man by actual revelation, or any set of men, this power has always been

190

section 128

and did it truly and faithfully, and kept a proper and faithful record of the

same, it became a law on earth and in heaven, and could not be annulled,

according to the decrees of the great Jehovah. This is a faithful saying. Who

can hear it?

10 And again, for the precedent, Matthew 16:18, 19: And I say also unto thee,

That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of

hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom

of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven;

and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

11 Now the great and grand secret of the whole matter, and thesummum

bonumof the whole subject that is lying before us, consists in obtaining the

powers of the Holy Priesthood. For him to whom these keys are given there is

no difficulty in obtaining a knowledge of facts in relation to the salvation of

the children of men, both as well for the dead as for the living.

12 Herein is glory and honor, and immortality and eternal life—The

ordinance of baptism by water, to be immersed therein in order to answer to

the likeness of the dead, that one principle might accord with the other; to be

immersed in the water and come forth out of the water is in the likeness of the

resurrection of the dead in coming forth out of their graves; hence, this

ordinance was instituted to form a relationship with the ordinance of baptism

for the dead, being in likeness of the dead.

13 Consequently, the baptismal font was instituted as a similitude of the grave,

and was commanded to be in a place underneath where the living are wont to

assemble, to show forth the living and the dead, and that all things may have

their likeness, and that they may accord one with another—that which is

earthly conforming to that which is heavenly, as Paul hath declared,

1 Corinthians 15:46, 47, and 48:

14 Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and

afterward that which is spiritual. The first man is of the earth, earthy; the second

man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy;

and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And as are the

records on the earth in relation to your dead, which are truly made out, so also

are the records in heaven. This, therefore, is the sealing and binding power,

and, in one sense of the word, the keys of the kingdom, which consist in the

key of knowledge.

15 And now, my dearly beloved brethren and sisters, let me assure you that

these are principles in relation to the dead and the living that cannot be lightly

passed over, as pertaining to our salvation. For their salvation is necessary and

essential to our salvation, as Paul says concerning the fathers—that they

without us cannot be made perfect—neither can we without our dead be

made perfect.

16 And now, in relation to the baptism for the dead, I will give you another

quotation of Paul, 1 Corinthians 15:29: Else what shall they do which are

baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for

the dead?

17 And again, in connection with this quotation I will give you a quotation

section 128

191

priesthood, the glories to be revealed in the last days, and in an especial

manner this most glorious of all subjects belonging to the everlasting gospel,

namely, the baptism for the dead; for Malachi says, last chapter, verses 5th and

6th: Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and

dreadful day of the Lord: And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the

children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the

earth with a curse.

18 I might have rendered a plainer translation to this, but it is sufficiently plain

to suit my purpose as it stands. It is sufficient to know, in this case, that the

earth will be smitten with a curse unless there is a welding link of some kind or

other between the fathers and the children, upon some subject or other—and

behold what is that subject? It is the baptism for the dead. For we without

them cannot be made perfect; neither can they without us be made perfect.

Neither can they nor we be made perfect without those who have died in the

gospel also; for it is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the

fulness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole

and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and

keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days

of Adam even to the present time. And not only this, but those things which

never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept

hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in

this, the dispensation of the fulness of times.

19 Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of

gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth;

glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad

tidings of great joy. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those

that bring glad tidings of good things, and that say unto Zion: Behold, thy

God reigneth! As the dews of Carmel, so shall the knowledge of God descend

upon them!

20 And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an

angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets—the book to be

revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette, Seneca county,

declaring the three witnesses to bear record of the book! The voice of Michael

on the banks of the Susquehanna, detecting the devil when he appeared as an

angel of light! The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between

Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the

Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom,

and of the dispensation of the fulness of times!

21 And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in

Fayette, Seneca county, and at sundry times, and in divers places through all

the travels and tribulations of this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints!

And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael,

and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all

declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty

and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept

upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding

192

section 128

22 Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not

backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! Let your hearts

rejoice, and be exceedingly glad. Let the earth break forth into singing. Let the

dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath

ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them

out of their prison; for the prisoners shall go free.

23 Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; and all ye seas

and dry lands tell the wonders of your Eternal King! And ye rivers, and

brooks, and rills, flow down with gladness. Let the woods and all the trees of

the field praise the Lord; and ye solid rocks weep for joy! And let the sun,

moon, and the morning stars sing together, and let all the sons of God shout

for joy! And let the eternal creations declare his name forever and ever! And

again I say, how glorious is the voice we hear from heaven, proclaiming in our

ears, glory, and salvation, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life;

kingdoms, principalities, and powers!

24 Behold, the great day of the Lord is at hand; and who can abide the day of

his coming, and who can stand when he appeareth? For he is like a refiner’s fire,

and like fuller’s soap; and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he

shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may

offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. Let us, therefore, as a church

and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in

righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple, when it is finished, a book

containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation. 25 Brethren, I have many things to say to you on the subject; but shall now

close for the present, and continue the subject another time. I am, as ever, your

humble servant and never deviating friend,

Joseph Smith.

Section 129

1 There are two kinds of beings in heaven, namely: Angels, who are resurrected

personages, having bodies of flesh and bones—

2 For instance, Jesus said: Handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and

bones, as ye see me have.

3 Secondly: the spirits of just men made perfect, they who are not

resurrected, but inherit the same glory.

4 When a messenger comes saying he has a message from God, offer him your

hand and request him to shake hands with you.

5 If he be an angel he will do so, and you will feel his hand.

6 If he be the spirit of a just man made perfect he will come in his glory; for

that is the only way he can appear—

7 Ask him to shake hands with you, but he will not move, because it is

contrary to the order of heaven for a just man to deceive; but he will still

deliver his message.

8 If it be the devil as an angel of light, when you ask him to shake hands he

section 129

193

detect him.

9 These are three grand keys whereby you may know whether any

administration is from God.

Section 130

1 When the Savior shall appear we shall see him as he is. We shall see that he is a

man like ourselves.

2 And that same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us

there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now

enjoy.

3 John 14:23—The appearing of the Father and the Son, in that verse, is a

personal appearance; and the idea that the Father and the Son dwell in a man’s

heart is an old sectarian notion, and is false.

4 In answer to the question—Is not the reckoning of God’s time, angel’s time,

prophet’s time, and man’s time, according to the planet on which they reside? 5 I answer, Yes. But there are no angels who minister to this earth but those

who do belong or have belonged to it.

6 The angels do not reside on a planet like this earth;

7 But they reside in the presence of God, on a globe like a sea of glass and fire,

where all things for their glory are manifest, past, present, and future, and are

continually before the Lord.

8 The place where God resides is a great Urim and Thummim.

9 This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto

crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell

thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms

of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will

be Christ’s.

10 Then the white stone mentioned in Revelation 2:17, will become a Urim

and Thummim to each individual who receives one, whereby things pertaining

to a higher order of kingdoms will be made known;

11 And a white stone is given to each of those who come into the celestial

kingdom, whereon is a new name written, which no man knoweth save he that

receiveth it. The new name is the key word.

12 I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God, that the commencement of the

difficulties which will cause much bloodshed previous to the coming of the

Son of Man will be in South Carolina.

13 It may probably arise through the slave question. This a voice declared to

me, while I was praying earnestly on the subject, December 25th, 1832. 14 I was once praying very earnestly to know the time of the coming of the Son

of Man, when I heard a voice repeat the following:

15 Joseph, my son, if thou livest until thou art eighty-five years old, thou shalt

see the face of the Son of Man; therefore let this suffice, and trouble me no

more on this matter.

16 I was left thus, without being able to decide whether this coming referred to

the beginning of the millennium or to some previous appearing, or whether I

194

section 130

17 I believe the coming of the Son of Man will not be any sooner than that

time.

18 Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise

with us in the resurrection.

19 And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through

his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage

in the world to come.

20 There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this

world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

21 And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law

upon which it is predicated.

22 The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man’s; the Son also;

but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of

Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us.

23 A man may receive the Holy Ghost, and it may descend upon him and not

tarry with him.

Section 131

1 In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees;

2 And in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the

priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; 3 And if he does not, he cannot obtain it.

4 He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot

have an increase.

5 (May 17th, 1843.) The more sure word of prophecy means a man’s knowing

that he is sealed up unto eternal life, by revelation and the spirit of prophecy,

through the power of the Holy Priesthood.

6 It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance.

7 There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is

more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes;

8 We cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that it is all

matter.

Section 132

1 Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you my servant Joseph, that inasmuch as you

have inquired of my hand to know and understand wherein I, the Lord,

justified my servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as also Moses, David and

Solomon, my servants, as touching the principle and doctrine of their having

many wives and concubines—

2 Behold, and lo, I am the Lord thy God, and will answer thee as touching

this matter.

3 Therefore, prepare thy heart to receive and obey the instructions which I

am about to give unto you; for all those who have this law revealed unto them

must obey the same.

section 131

195

abide not that covenant, then are ye damned; for no one can reject this

covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory.

5 For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was

appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted

from before the foundation of the world.

6 And as pertaining to the new and everlasting covenant, it was instituted for

the fulness of my glory; and he that receiveth a fulness thereof must and shall

abide the law, or he shall be damned, saith the Lord God.

7 And verily I say unto you, that the conditions of this law are these: All

covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances,

connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into

and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, of him who is anointed, both as well

for time and for all eternity, and that too most holy, by revelation and

commandment through the medium of mine anointed, whom I have

appointed on the earth to hold this power (and I have appointed unto my

servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but one on

the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are

conferred), are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from

the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when

men are dead.

8 Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a

house of confusion.

9 Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name? 10 Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?

11 And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I

and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

12 I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no

man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law,

saith the Lord.

13 And everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by

thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may

be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down,

and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection,

saith the Lord your God.

14 For whatsoever things remain are by me; and whatsoever things are not by

me shall be shaken and destroyed.

15 Therefore, if a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by

me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and

she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead,

and when they are out of the world; therefore, they are not bound by any law

when they are out of the world.

16 Therefore, when they are out of the world they neither marry nor are given

in marriage; but are appointed angels in heaven, which angels are ministering

servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding,

and an eternal weight of glory.

17 For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged,

196

section 132

to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever

and ever.

18 And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife, and make a covenant

with her for time and for all eternity, if that covenant is not by me or by my

word, which is my law, and is not sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, through

him whom I have anointed and appointed unto this power, then it is not valid

neither of force when they are out of the world, because they are not joined by

me, saith the Lord, neither by my word; when they are out of the world it

cannot be received there, because the angels and the gods are appointed there,

by whom they cannot pass; they cannot, therefore, inherit my glory; for my

house is a house of order, saith the Lord God.

19 And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife by my word, which is

my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by

the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have

appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood; and it shall be said unto

them—Ye shall come forth in the first resurrection; and if it be after the first

resurrection, in the next resurrection; and shall inherit thrones, kingdoms,

principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths—then shall it be

written in the Lamb’s Book of Life, that he shall commit no murder whereby

to shed innocent blood, and if ye abide in my covenant, and commit no

murder whereby to shed innocent blood, it shall be done unto them in all

things whatsoever my servant hath put upon them, in time, and through all

eternity; and shall be of full force when they are out of the world; and they

shall pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there, to their exaltation

and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall

be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever.

20 Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be

from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above

all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because

they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them.

21 Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye abide my law ye cannot attain to this

glory.

22 For strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation

and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because ye receive

me not in the world neither do ye know me.

23 But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive

your exaltation; that where I am ye shall be also.

24 This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ,

whom he hath sent. I am he. Receive ye, therefore, my law.

25 Broad is the gate, and wide the way that leadeth to the deaths; and many

there are that go in thereat, because they receive me not, neither do they abide

in my law.

26 Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man marry a wife according to my word,

and they are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, according to mine

appointment, and he or she shall commit any sin or transgression of the new

and everlasting covenant whatever, and all manner of blasphemies, and if they

section 132

197

forth in the first resurrection, and enter into their exaltation; but they shall be

destroyed in the flesh, and shall be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan unto

the day of redemption, saith the Lord God.

27 The blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which shall not be forgiven in the

world nor out of the world, is in that ye commit murder wherein ye shed

innocent blood, and assent unto my death, after ye have received my new and

everlasting covenant, saith the Lord God; and he that abideth not this law can

in nowise enter into my glory, but shall be damned, saith the Lord.

28 I am the Lord thy God, and will give unto thee the law of my Holy

Priesthood, as was ordained by me and my Father before the world was. 29 Abraham received all things, whatsoever he received, by revelation and

commandment, by my word, saith the Lord, and hath entered into his

exaltation and sitteth upon his throne.

30 Abraham received promises concerning his seed, and of the fruit of his

loins—from whose loins ye are, namely, my servant Joseph—which were to

continue so long as they were in the world; and as touching Abraham and his

seed, out of the world they should continue; both in the world and out of the

world should they continue as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count

the sand upon the seashore ye could not number them.

31 This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham, and the promise was

made unto Abraham; and by this law is the continuation of the works of my

Father, wherein he glorifieth himself.

32 Go ye, therefore, and do the works of Abraham; enter ye into my law and ye

shall be saved.

33 But if ye enter not into my law ye cannot receive the promise of my Father,

which he made unto Abraham.

34 God commanded Abraham, and Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham to wife.

And why did she do it? Because this was the law; and from Hagar sprang many

people. This, therefore, was fulfilling, among other things, the promises. 35 Was Abraham, therefore, under condemnation? Verily I say unto you, Nay;

for I, the Lord, commanded it.

36 Abraham was commanded to offer his son Isaac; nevertheless, it was

written: Thou shalt not kill. Abraham, however, did not refuse, and it was

accounted unto him for righteousness.

37 Abraham received concubines, and they bore him children; and it was

accounted unto him for righteousness, because they were given unto him, and

he abode in my law; as Isaac also and Jacob did none other things than that

which they were commanded; and because they did none other things than

that which they were commanded, they have entered into their exaltation,

according to the promises, and sit upon thrones, and are not angels but are

gods.

38 David also received many wives and concubines, and also Solomon and

Moses my servants, as also many others of my servants, from the beginning of

creation until this time; and in nothing did they sin save in those things which

they received not of me.

39 David’s wives and concubines were given unto him of me, by the hand of

198

section 132

power; and in none of these things did he sin against me save in the case of

Uriah and his wife; and, therefore he hath fallen from his exaltation, and

received his portion; and he shall not inherit them out of the world, for I gave

them unto another, saith the Lord.

40 I am the Lord thy God, and I gave unto thee, my servant Joseph, an

appointment, and restore all things. Ask what ye will, and it shall be given

unto you according to my word.

41 And as ye have asked concerning adultery, verily, verily, I say unto you, if a

man receiveth a wife in the new and everlasting covenant, and if she be with

another man, and I have not appointed unto her by the holy anointing, she

hath committed adultery and shall be destroyed.

42 If she be not in the new and everlasting covenant, and she be with another

man, she has committed adultery.

43 And if her husband be with another woman, and he was under a vow, he

hath broken his vow and hath committed adultery.

44 And if she hath not committed adultery, but is innocent and hath not

broken her vow, and she knoweth it, and I reveal it unto you, my servant

Joseph, then shall you have power, by the power of my Holy Priesthood, to

take her and give her unto him that hath not committed adultery but hath

been faithful; for he shall be made ruler over many.

45 For I have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood,

wherein I restore all things, and make known unto you all things in due time. 46 And verily, verily, I say unto you, that whatsoever you seal on earth shall be

sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by my

word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens; and

whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the heavens;

and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in heaven. 47 And again, verily I say, whomsoever you bless I will bless, and whomsoever

you curse I will curse, saith the Lord; for I, the Lord, am thy God.

48 And again, verily I say unto you, my servant Joseph, that whatsoever you

give on earth, and to whomsoever you give any one on earth, by my word and

according to my law, it shall be visited with blessings and not cursings, and

with my power, saith the Lord, and shall be without condemnation on earth

and in heaven.

49 For I am the Lord thy God, and will be with thee even unto the end of the

world, and through all eternity; for verily I seal upon you your exaltation, and

prepare a throne for you in the kingdom of my Father, with Abraham your

father.

50 Behold, I have seen your sacrifices, and will forgive all your sins; I have seen

your sacrifices in obedience to that which I have told you. Go, therefore, and I

make a way for your escape, as I accepted the offering of Abraham of his son

Isaac.

51 Verily, I say unto you: A commandment I give unto mine handmaid, Emma

Smith, your wife, whom I have given unto you, that she stay herself and

partake not of that which I commanded you to offer unto her; for I did it,

saith the Lord, to prove you all, as I did Abraham, and that I might require an

section 132

199

52 And let mine handmaid, Emma Smith, receive all those that have been

given unto my servant Joseph, and who are virtuous and pure before me; and

those who are not pure, and have said they were pure, shall be destroyed, saith

the Lord God.

53 For I am the Lord thy God, and ye shall obey my voice; and I give unto my

servant Joseph that he shall be made ruler over many things; for he hath been

faithful over a few things, and from henceforth I will strengthen him. 54 And I command mine handmaid, Emma Smith, to abide and cleave unto

my servant Joseph, and to none else. But if she will not abide this

commandment she shall be destroyed, saith the Lord; for I am the Lord thy

God, and will destroy her if she abide not in my law.

55 But if she will not abide this commandment, then shall my servant Joseph

do all things for her, even as he hath said; and I will bless him and multiply

him and give unto him an hundred-fold in this world, of fathers and mothers,

brothers and sisters, houses and lands, wives and children, and crowns of

eternal lives in the eternal worlds.

56 And again, verily I say, let mine handmaid forgive my servant Joseph his

trespasses; and then shall she be forgiven her trespasses, wherein she has

trespassed against me; and I, the Lord thy God, will bless her, and multiply her,

and make her heart to rejoice.

57 And again, I say, let not my servant Joseph put his property out of his

hands, lest an enemy come and destroy him; for Satan seeketh to destroy; for I

am the Lord thy God, and he is my servant; and behold, and lo, I am with him,

as I was with Abraham, thy father, even unto his exaltation and glory. 58 Now, as touching the law of the priesthood, there are many things

pertaining thereunto.

59 Verily, if a man be called of my Father, as was Aaron, by mine own voice,

and by the voice of him that sent me, and I have endowed him with the keys of

the power of this priesthood, if he do anything in my name, and according to

my law and by my word, he will not commit sin, and I will justify him. 60 Let no one, therefore, set on my servant Joseph; for I will justify him; for he

shall do the sacrifice which I require at his hands for his transgressions, saith

the Lord your God.

61 And again, as pertaining to the law of the priesthood—if any man espouse

a virgin, and desire to espouse another, and the first give her consent, and if he

espouse the second, and they are virgins, and have vowed to no other man, then

is he justified; he cannot commit adultery for they are given unto him; for he

cannot commit adultery with that that belongeth unto him and to no one else. 62 And if he have ten virgins given unto him by this law, he cannot commit

adultery, for they belong to him, and they are given unto him; therefore is he

justified.

63 But if one or either of the ten virgins, after she is espoused, shall be with

another man, she has committed adultery, and shall be destroyed; for they are

given unto him to multiply and replenish the earth, according to my

commandment, and to fulfil the promise which was given by my Father before

the foundation of the world, and for their exaltation in the eternal worlds, that

200

section 132

that he may be glorified.

64 And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, if any man have a wife, who holds

the keys of this power, and he teaches unto her the law of my priesthood, as

pertaining to these things, then shall she believe and administer unto him, or

she shall be destroyed, saith the Lord your God; for I will destroy her; for I will

magnify my name upon all those who receive and abide in my law.

65 Therefore, it shall be lawful in me, if she receive not this law, for him to

receive all things whatsoever I, the Lord his God, will give unto him, because

she did not believe and administer unto him according to my word; and she

then becomes the transgressor; and he is exempt from the law of Sarah, who

administered unto Abraham according to the law when I commanded

Abraham to take Hagar to wife.

66 And now, as pertaining to this law, verily, verily, I say unto you, I will reveal

more unto you, hereafter; therefore, let this suffice for the present. Behold, I

am Alpha and Omega. Amen.

Section 133

1 Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the Lord your God, and hear the

word of the Lord concerning you—

2 The Lord who shall suddenly come to his temple; the Lord who shall come

down upon the world with a curse to judgment; yea, upon all the nations that

forget God, and upon all the ungodly among you.

3 For he shall make bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations, and all the

ends of the earth shall see the salvation of their God.

4 Wherefore, prepare ye, prepare ye, O my people; sanctify yourselves; gather

ye together, O ye people of my church, upon the land of Zion, all you that have

not been commanded to tarry.

5 Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. 6 Call your solemn assemblies, and speak often one to another. And let every

man call upon the name of the Lord.

7 Yea, verily I say unto you again, the time has come when the voice of the

Lord is unto you: Go ye out of Babylon; gather ye out from among the

nations, from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.

8 Send forth the elders of my church unto the nations which are afar off;

unto the islands of the sea; send forth unto foreign lands; call upon all nations,

first upon the Gentiles, and then upon the Jews.

9 And behold, and lo, this shall be their cry, and the voice of the Lord unto all

people: Go ye forth unto the land of Zion, that the borders of my people may

be enlarged, and that her stakes may be strengthened, and that Zion may go

forth unto the regions round about.

10 Yea, let the cry go forth among all people: Awake and arise and go forth to

meet the Bridegroom; behold and lo, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to

meet him. Prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord.

11 Watch, therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour.

12 Let them, therefore, who are among the Gentiles flee unto Zion.

section 133

201

the Lord’s house.

14 Go ye out from among the nations, even from Babylon, from the midst of

wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon.

15 But verily, thus saith the Lord, let not your flight be in haste, but let all

things be prepared before you; and he that goeth, let him not look back lest

sudden destruction shall come upon him.

16 Hearken and hear, O ye inhabitants of the earth. Listen, ye elders of my

church together, and hear the voice of the Lord; for he calleth upon all men,

and he commandeth all men everywhere to repent.

17 For behold, the Lord God hath sent forth the angel crying through the

midst of heaven, saying: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths

straight, for the hour of his coming is nigh—

18 When the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Zion, and with him a hundred

and forty-four thousand, having his Father’s name written on their foreheads. 19 Wherefore, prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom; go ye, go ye out

to meet him.

20 For behold, he shall stand upon the mount of Olivet, and upon the mighty

ocean, even the great deep, and upon the islands of the sea, and upon the land

of Zion.

21 And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem,

and his voice shall be heard among all people;

22 And it shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a

great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not

be found.

23 He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north

countries, and the islands shall become one land;

24 And the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into

their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was

divided.

25 And the Lord, even the Savior, shall stand in the midst of his people, and

shall reign over all flesh.

26 And they who are in the north countries shall come in remembrance before

the Lord; and their prophets shall hear his voice, and shall no longer stay

themselves; and they shall smite the rocks, and the ice shall flow down at their

presence.

27 And an highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep.

28 Their enemies shall become a prey unto them,

29 And in the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water; and

the parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land.

30 And they shall bring forth their rich treasures unto the children of

Ephraim, my servants.

31 And the boundaries of the everlasting hills shall tremble at their presence. 32 And there shall they fall down and be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by

the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim. 33 And they shall be filled with songs of everlasting joy.

34 Behold, this is the blessing of the everlasting God upon the tribes of Israel,

202

section 133

35 And they also of the tribe of Judah, after their pain, shall be sanctified in

holiness before the Lord, to dwell in his presence day and night, forever and

ever.

36 And now, verily saith the Lord, that these things might be known among

you, O inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through the

midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared unto some

and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many that dwell on

the earth.

37 And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and

tongue, and people.

38 And the servants of God shall go forth, saying with a loud voice: Fear God

and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come;

39 And worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the

fountains of waters—

40 Calling upon the name of the Lord day and night, saying: O that thou

wouldst rend the heavens, that thou wouldst come down, that the mountains

might flow down at thy presence.

41 And it shall be answered upon their heads; for the presence of the Lord

shall be as the melting fire that burneth, and as the fire which causeth the

waters to boil.

42 O Lord, thou shalt come down to make thy name known to thine

adversaries, and all nations shall tremble at thy presence—

43 When thou doest terrible things, things they look not for;

44 Yea, when thou comest down, and the mountains flow down at thy

presence, thou shalt meet him who rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, who

remembereth thee in thy ways.

45 For since the beginning of the world have not men heard nor perceived by

the ear, neither hath any eye seen, O God, besides thee, how great things thou

hast prepared for him that waiteth for thee.

46 And it shall be said: Who is this that cometh down from God in heaven

with dyed garments; yea, from the regions which are not known, clothed in his

glorious apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength?

47 And he shall say: I am he who spake in righteousness, mighty to save. 48 And the Lord shall be red in his apparel, and his garments like him that

treadeth in the wine-vat.

49 And so great shall be the glory of his presence that the sun shall hide his

face in shame, and the moon shall withhold its light, and the stars shall be

hurled from their places.

50 And his voice shall be heard: I have trodden the wine-press alone, and have

brought judgment upon all people; and none were with me;

51 And I have trampled them in my fury, and I did tread upon them in mine

anger, and their blood have I sprinkled upon my garments, and stained all my

raiment; for this was the day of vengeance which was in my heart.

52 And now the year of my redeemed is come; and they shall mention the

loving kindness of their Lord, and all that he has bestowed upon them

according to his goodness, and according to his loving kindness, forever and

section 133

203

53 In all their afflictions he was afflicted. And the angel of his presence saved

them; and in his love, and in his pity, he redeemed them, and bore them, and

carried them all the days of old;

54 Yea, and Enoch also, and they who were with him; the prophets who were

before him; and Noah also, and they who were before him; and Moses also,

and they who were before him;

55 And from Moses to Elijah, and from Elijah to John, who were with Christ

in his resurrection, and the holy apostles, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, shall

be in the presence of the Lamb.

56 And the graves of the saints shall be opened; and they shall come forth and

stand on the right hand of the Lamb, when he shall stand upon Mount Zion,

and upon the holy city, the New Jerusalem; and they shall sing the song of the

Lamb, day and night forever and ever.

57 And for this cause, that men might be made partakers of the glories which

were to be revealed, the Lord sent forth the fulness of his gospel, his everlasting

covenant, reasoning in plainness and simplicity—

58 To prepare the weak for those things which are coming on the earth, and

for the Lord’s errand in the day when the weak shall confound the wise, and

the little one become a strong nation, and two shall put their tens of thousands

to flight.

59 And by the weak things of the earth the Lord shall thresh the nations by the

power of his Spirit.

60 And for this cause these commandments were given; they were

commanded to be kept from the world in the day that they were given, but

now are to go forth unto all flesh—

61 And this according to the mind and will of the Lord, who ruleth over all

flesh.

62 And unto him that repenteth and sanctifieth himself before the Lord shall

be given eternal life.

63 And upon them that hearken not to the voice of the Lord shall be fulfilled

that which was written by the prophet Moses, that they should be cut off from

among the people.

64 And also that which was written by the prophet Malachi: For, behold, the

day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do

wickedly, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith

the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

65 Wherefore, this shall be the answer of the Lord unto them:

66 In that day when I came unto mine own, no man among you received me,

and you were driven out.

67 When I called again there was none of you to answer; yet my arm was not

shortened at all that I could not redeem, neither my power to deliver. 68 Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea. I make the rivers a wilderness; their

fish stink, and die for thirst.

69 I clothe the heavens with blackness, and make sackcloth their covering. 70 And this shall ye have of my hand—ye shall lie down in sorrow.

71 Behold, and lo, there are none to deliver you; for ye obeyed not my voice

204

section 133

they were sent unto you ye received them not.

72 Wherefore, they sealed up the testimony and bound up the law, and ye were

delivered over unto darkness.

73 These shall go away into outer darkness, where there is weeping, and

wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

74 Behold the Lord your God hath spoken it. Amen.

Section 134

1 We believe that governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man;

and that he holds men accountable for their acts in relation to them, both in

making laws and administering them, for the good and safety of society. 2 We believe that no government can exist in peace, except such laws are

framed and held inviolate as will secure to each individual the free exercise of

conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life. 3 We believe that all governments necessarily require civil officers and

magistrates to enforce the laws of the same; and that such as will administer

the law in equity and justice should be sought for and upheld by the voice of

the people if a republic, or the will of the sovereign.

4 We believe that religion is instituted of God; and that men are amenable to

him, and to him only, for the exercise of it, unless their religious opinions

prompt them to infringe upon the rights and liberties of others; but we do not

believe that human law has a right to interfere in prescribing rules of worship

to bind the consciences of men, nor dictate forms for public or private

devotion; that the civil magistrate should restrain crime, but never control

conscience; should punish guilt, but never suppress the freedom of the soul. 5 We believe that all men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective

governments in which they reside, while protected in their inherent and

inalienable rights by the laws of such governments; and that sedition and

rebellion are unbecoming every citizen thus protected, and should be

punished accordingly; and that all governments have a right to enact such laws

as in their own judgments are best calculated to secure the public interest; at

the same time, however, holding sacred the freedom of conscience.

6 We believe that every man should be honored in his station, rulers and

magistrates as such, being placed for the protection of the innocent and the

punishment of the guilty; and that to the laws all men owe respect and

deference, as without them peace and harmony would be supplanted by

anarchy and terror; human laws being instituted for the express purpose of

regulating our interests as individuals and nations, between man and man; and

divine laws given of heaven, prescribing rules on spiritual concerns, for faith

and worship, both to be answered by man to his Maker.

7 We believe that rulers, states, and governments have a right, and are bound

to enact laws for the protection of all citizens in the free exercise of their

religious belief; but we do not believe that they have a right in justice to

deprive citizens of this privilege, or proscribe them in their opinions, so long as

a regard and reverence are shown to the laws and such religious opinions do

section 134

205

8 We believe that the commission of crime should be punished according to

the nature of the offense; that murder, treason, robbery, theft, and the breach

of the general peace, in all respects, should be punished according to their

criminality and their tendency to evil among men, by the laws of that

government in which the offense is committed; and for the public peace and

tranquility all men should step forward and use their ability in bringing

offenders against good laws to punishment.

9 We do not believe it just to mingle religious influence with civil

government, whereby one religious society is fostered and another proscribed

in its spiritual privileges, and the individual rights of its members, as citizens,

denied.

10 We believe that all religious societies have a right to deal with their

members for disorderly conduct, according to the rules and regulations of such

societies; provided that such dealings be for fellowship and good standing; but

we do not believe that any religious society has authority to try men on the

right of property or life, to take from them this world’s goods, or to put them

in jeopardy of either life or limb, or to inflict any physical punishment upon

them. They can only excommunicate them from their society, and withdraw

from them their fellowship.

11 We believe that men should appeal to the civil law for redress of all wrongs

and grievances, where personal abuse is inflicted or the right of property or

character infringed, where such laws exist as will protect the same; but we

believe that all men are justified in defending themselves, their friends, and

property, and the government, from the unlawful assaults and encroachments

of all persons in times of exigency, where immediate appeal cannot be made to

the laws, and relief afforded.

12 We believe it just to preach the gospel to the nations of the earth, and warn

the righteous to save themselves from the corruption of the world; but we do

not believe it right to interfere with bond-servants, neither preach the gospel

to, nor baptize them contrary to the will and wish of their masters, nor to

meddle with or influence them in the least to cause them to be dissatisfied with

their situations in this life, thereby jeopardizing the lives of men; such

interference we believe to be unlawful and unjust, and dangerous to the peace

of every government allowing human beings to be held in servitude.

Section 135

1 To seal the testimony of this book and the Book of Mormon, we announce the

martyrdom of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Hyrum Smith the Patriarch.

They were shot in Carthage jail, on the 27th of June, 1844, about five o’clock

p.m., by an armed mob—painted black—of from 150 to 200 persons. Hyrum

was shot first and fell calmly, exclaiming: I am a dead man! Joseph leaped

from the window, and was shot dead in the attempt, exclaiming: O Lord my

God! They were both shot after they were dead, in a brutal manner, and both

received four balls.

2 John Taylor and Willard Richards, two of the Twelve, were the only

206

section 135

with four balls, but has since recovered; the latter, through the providence of

God, escaped, without even a hole in his robe.

3 Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus

only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived

in it. In the short space of twenty years, he has brought forth the Book of

Mormon, which he translated by the gift and power of God, and has been the

means of publishing it on two continents; has sent the fulness of the

everlasting gospel, which it contained, to the four quarters of the earth; has

brought forth the revelations and commandments which compose this book

of Doctrine and Covenants, and many other wise documents and instructions

for the benefit of the children of men; gathered many thousands of the

Latter-day Saints, founded a great city, and left a fame and name that cannot

be slain. He lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people;

and like most of the Lord’s anointed in ancient times, has sealed his mission

and his works with his own blood; and so has his brother Hyrum. In life they

were not divided, and in death they were not separated!

4 When Joseph went to Carthage to deliver himself up to the pretended

requirements of the law, two or three days previous to his assassination, he

said: “I am going like a lamb to the slaughter; but I am calm as a summer’s

morning; I have a conscience void of offense towards God, and towards all

men. I shall die innocent, and it shall yet be said of me—he was

murdered in cold blood.”—The same morning, after Hyrum had made

ready to go—shall it be said to the slaughter? yes, for so it was—he read the

following paragraph, near the close of the twelfth chapter of Ether, in the Book

of Mormon, and turned down the leaf upon it:

5 And it came to pass that I prayed unto the Lord that he would give unto the

Gentiles grace, that they might have charity. And it came to pass that the Lord

said unto me: If they have not charity it mattereth not unto thee, thou hast been

faithful; wherefore thy garments shall be made clean. And because thou hast seen

thy weakness, thou shalt be made strong, even unto the sitting down in the place

which I have prepared in the mansions of my Father. And now I … bid farewell

unto the Gentiles; yea, and also unto my brethren whom I love, until we shall

meet before the judgment-seat of Christ, where all men shall know that my

garments are not spotted with your blood. The testators are now dead, and their

testament is in force.

6 Hyrum Smith was forty-four years old in February, 1844, and Joseph Smith

was thirty-eight in December, 1843; and henceforward their names will be

classed among the martyrs of religion; and the reader in every nation will be

reminded that the Book of Mormon, and this book of Doctrine and

Covenants of the church, cost the best blood of the nineteenth century to

bring them forth for the salvation of a ruined world; and that if the fire can

scathe a green tree for the glory of God, how easy it will burn up the dry trees

to purify the vineyard of corruption. They lived for glory; they died for glory;

and glory is their eternal reward. From age to age shall their names go down to

posterity as gems for the sanctified.

7 They were innocent of any crime, as they had often been proved before, and

section 135

207

theirinnocent blood on the floor of Carthage jail is a broad seal affixed to

“Mormonism” that cannot be rejected by any court on earth, and their

innocent blood on the escutcheon of the State of Illinois, with the broken faith

of the State as pledged by the governor, is a witness to the truth of the

everlasting gospel that all the world cannot impeach; and their innocent blood

on the banner of liberty, and on the magna chartaof the United States, is an

ambassador for the religion of Jesus Christ, that will touch the hearts of honest

men among all nations; and theirinnocent blood,with the innocent blood of

all the martyrs under the altar that John saw, will cry unto the Lord of Hosts

till he avenges that blood on the earth. Amen.

Section 136

1 The Word and Will of the Lord concerning the Camp of Israel in their

journeyings to the West:

2 Let all the people of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and

those who journey with them, be organized into companies, with a covenant

and promise to keep all the commandments and statutes of the Lord our God. 3 Let the companies be organized with captains of hundreds, captains of

fifties, and captains of tens, with a president and his two counselors at their

head, under the direction of the Twelve Apostles.

4 And this shall be our covenant—that we will walk in all the ordinances of

the Lord.

5 Let each company provide themselves with all the teams, wagons,

provisions, clothing, and other necessaries for the journey, that they can. 6 When the companies are organized let them go to with their might, to

prepare for those who are to tarry.

7 Let each company, with their captains and presidents, decide how many can

go next spring; then choose out a sufficient number of able-bodied and expert

men, to take teams, seeds, and farming utensils, to go as pioneers to prepare for

putting in spring crops.

8 Let each company bear an equal proportion, according to the dividend of

their property, in taking the poor, the widows, the fatherless, and the families

of those who have gone into the army, that the cries of the widow and the

fatherless come not up into the ears of the Lord against this people.

9 Let each company prepare houses, and fields for raising grain, for those who

are to remain behind this season; and this is the will of the Lord concerning

his people.

10 Let every man use all his influence and property to remove this people to

the place where the Lord shall locate a stake of Zion.

11 And if ye do this with a pure heart, in all faithfulness, ye shall be blessed;

you shall be blessed in your flocks, and in your herds, and in your fields, and in

your houses, and in your families.

12 Let my servants Ezra T. Benson and Erastus Snow organize a company. 13 And let my servants Orson Pratt and Wilford Woodruff organize a

company.

208

section 136

company.

15 And appoint presidents, and captains of hundreds, and of fifties, and of tens. 16 And let my servants that have been appointed go and teach this, my will, to

the saints, that they may be ready to go to a land of peace.

17 Go thy way and do as I have told you, and fear not thine enemies; for they

shall not have power to stop my work.

18 Zion shall be redeemed in mine own due time.

19 And if any man shall seek to build up himself, and seeketh not my counsel,

he shall have no power, and his folly shall be made manifest.

20 Seek ye; and keep all your pledges one with another; and covet not that

which is thy brother’s.

21 Keep yourselves from evil to take the name of the Lord in vain, for I am the

Lord your God, even the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham and of

Isaac and of Jacob.

22 I am he who led the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; and my arm

is stretched out in the last days, to save my people Israel.

23 Cease to contend one with another; cease to speak evil one of another. 24 Cease drunkenness; and let your words tend to edifying one another. 25 If thou borrowest of thy neighbor, thou shalt restore that which thou hast

borrowed; and if thou canst not repay then go straightway and tell thy

neighbor, lest he condemn thee.

26 If thou shalt find that which thy neighbor has lost, thou shalt make diligent

search till thou shalt deliver it to him again.

27 Thou shalt be diligent in preserving what thou hast, that thou mayest be a

wise steward; for it is the free gift of the Lord thy God, and thou art his

steward.

28 If thou art merry, praise the Lord with singing, with music, with dancing,

and with a prayer of praise and thanksgiving.

29 If thou art sorrowful, call on the Lord thy God with supplication, that your

souls may be joyful.

30 Fear not thine enemies, for they are in mine hands and I will do my pleasure

with them.

31 My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive

the glory that I have for them, even the glory of Zion; and he that will not bear

chastisement is not worthy of my kingdom.

32 Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling

upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his

ears opened that he may hear;

33 For my Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and

contrite, and to the condemnation of the ungodly.

34 Thy brethren have rejected you and your testimony, even the nation that

has driven you out;

35 And now cometh the day of their calamity, even the days of sorrow, like a

woman that is taken in travail; and their sorrow shall be great unless they

speedily repent, yea, very speedily.

36 For they killed the prophets, and them that were sent unto them; and they

section 136

209

37 Therefore, marvel not at these things, for ye are not yet pure; ye can not yet

bear my glory; but ye shall behold it if ye are faithful in keeping all my words

that I have given you, from the days of Adam to Abraham, from Abraham to

Moses, from Moses to Jesus and his apostles, and from Jesus and his apostles to

Joseph Smith, whom I did call upon by mine angels, my ministering servants,

and by mine own voice out of the heavens, to bring forth my work;

38 Which foundation he did lay, and was faithful; and I took him to myself. 39 Many have marveled because of his death; but it was needful that he should

seal his testimony with his blood, that he might be honored and the wicked

might be condemned.

40 Have I not delivered you from your enemies, only in that I have left a

witness of my name?

41 Now, therefore, hearken, O ye people of my church; and ye elders listen

together; you have received my kingdom.

42 Be diligent in keeping all my commandments, lest judgments come upon

you, and your faith fail you, and your enemies triumph over you. So no more

at present. Amen and Amen.

Section 137

1 The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God,

and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell.

2 I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that

kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire;

3 Also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. 4 I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of

being paved with gold.

5 I saw Father Adam and Abraham; and my father and my mother; my

brother Alvin, that has long since slept;

6 And marveled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that

kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life before the Lord had set his hand

to gather Israel the second time, and had not been baptized for the remission

of sins.

7 Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me, saying: All who have died

without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had

been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; 8 Also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would

have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom;

9 For I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to

the desire of their hearts.

10 And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of

accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven.

210

section 137

1 On the third of October, in the year nineteen hundred and eighteen, I sat in

my room pondering over the scriptures;

2 And reflecting upon the great atoning sacrifice that was made by the Son of

God, for the redemption of the world;

3 And the great and wonderful love made manifest by the Father and the Son

in the coming of the Redeemer into the world;

4 That through his atonement, and by obedience to the principles of the

gospel, mankind might be saved.

5 While I was thus engaged, my mind reverted to the writings of the apostle

Peter, to the primitive saints scattered abroad throughout Pontus, Galatia,

Cappadocia, and other parts of Asia, where the gospel had been preached after

the crucifixion of the Lord.

6 I opened the Bible and read the third and fourth chapters of the first epistle

of Peter, and as I read I was greatly impressed, more than I had ever been

before, with the following passages:

7 “For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he

might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the

Spirit:

8 “By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison;

9 “Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God

waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is,

eight souls were saved by water.” (1 Peter 3:18–20.)

10 “For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that

they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God

in the spirit.” (1 Peter 4:6.)

11 As I pondered over these things which are written, the eyes of my

understanding were opened, and the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and I

saw the hosts of the dead, both small and great.

12 And there were gathered together in one place an innumerable company of

the spirits of the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while

they lived in mortality;

13 And who had offered sacrifice in the similitude of the great sacrifice of the

Son of God, and had suffered tribulation in their Redeemer’s name.

14 All these had departed the mortal life, firm in the hope of a glorious

resurrection, through the grace of God the Father and his Only Begotten Son,

Jesus Christ.

15 I beheld that they were filled with joy and gladness, and were rejoicing

together because the day of their deliverance was at hand.

16 They were assembled awaiting the advent of the Son of God into the spirit

world, to declare their redemption from the bands of death.

17 Their sleeping dust was to be restored unto its perfect frame, bone to his

bone, and the sinews and the flesh upon them, the spirit and the body to be

united never again to be divided, that they might receive a fulness of joy. 18 While this vast multitude waited and conversed, rejoicing in the hour of

their deliverance from the chains of death, the Son of God appeared, declaring

liberty to the captives who had been faithful;

section 138

211

resurrection and the redemption of mankind from the fall, and from

individual sins on conditions of repentance.

20 But unto the wicked he did not go, and among the ungodly and the

unrepentant who had defiled themselves while in the flesh, his voice was not

raised;

21 Neither did the rebellious who rejected the testimonies and the warnings of

the ancient prophets behold his presence, nor look upon his face.

22 Where these were, darkness reigned, but among the righteous there was

peace;

23 And the saints rejoiced in their redemption, and bowed the knee and

acknowledged the Son of God as their Redeemer and Deliverer from death

and the chains of hell.

24 Their countenances shone, and the radiance from the presence of the Lord

rested upon them, and they sang praises unto his holy name.

25 I marveled, for I understood that the Savior spent about three years in his

ministry among the Jews and those of the house of Israel, endeavoring to teach

them the everlasting gospel and call them unto repentance;

26 And yet, notwithstanding his mighty works, and miracles, and

proclamation of the truth, in great power and authority, there were but few

who hearkened to his voice, and rejoiced in his presence, and received

salvation at his hands.

27 But his ministry among those who were dead was limited to the brief time

intervening between the crucifixion and his resurrection;

28 And I wondered at the words of Peter—wherein he said that the Son of

God preached unto the spirits in prison, who sometime were disobedient,

when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah—and how it

was possible for him to preach to those spirits and perform the necessary labor

among them in so short a time.

29 And as I wondered, my eyes were opened, and my understanding

quickened, and I perceived that the Lord went not in person among the

wicked and the disobedient who had rejected the truth, to teach them; 30 But behold, from among the righteous, he organized his forces and

appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned

them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in

darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to

the dead.

31 And the chosen messengers went forth to declare the acceptable day of the

Lord and proclaim liberty to the captives who were bound, even unto all who

would repent of their sins and receive the gospel.

32 Thus was the gospel preached to those who had died in their sins, without a

knowledge of the truth, or in transgression, having rejected the prophets. 33 These were taught faith in God, repentance from sin, vicarious baptism for

the remission of sins, the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, 34 And all other principles of the gospel that were necessary for them to know

in order to qualify themselves that they might be judged according to men in

the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.

212

section 138

unrighteous as well as the faithful, that redemption had been wrought through

the sacrifice of the Son of God upon the cross.

36 Thus was it made known that our Redeemer spent his time during his

sojourn in the world of spirits, instructing and preparing the faithful spirits of

the prophets who had testified of him in the flesh;

37 That they might carry the message of redemption unto all the dead, unto

whom he could not go personally, because of their rebellion and transgression,

that they through the ministration of his servants might also hear his words. 38 Among the great and mighty ones who were assembled in this vast

congregation of the righteous were Father Adam, the Ancient of Days and

father of all,

39 And our glorious Mother Eve, with many of her faithful daughters who had

lived through the ages and worshiped the true and living God.

40 Abel, the first martyr, was there, and his brother Seth, one of the mighty

ones, who was in the express image of his father, Adam.

41 Noah, who gave warning of the flood; Shem, the great high priest;

Abraham, the father of the faithful; Isaac, Jacob, and Moses, the great

law-giver of Israel;

42 And Isaiah, who declared by prophecy that the Redeemer was anointed to

bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the

opening of the prison to them that were bound, were also there.

43 Moreover, Ezekiel, who was shown in vision the great valley of dry bones,

which were to be clothed upon with flesh, to come forth again in the

resurrection of the dead, living souls;

44 Daniel, who foresaw and foretold the establishment of the kingdom of God

in the latter days, never again to be destroyed nor given to other people; 45 Elias, who was with Moses on the Mount of Transfiguration;

46 And Malachi, the prophet who testified of the coming of Elijah—of whom

also Moroni spake to the Prophet Joseph Smith, declaring that he should come

before the ushering in of the great and dreadful day of the Lord—were also

there.

47 The Prophet Elijah was to plant in the hearts of the children the promises

made to their fathers,

48 Foreshadowing the great work to be done in the temples of the Lord in the

dispensation of the fulness of times, for the redemption of the dead, and the

sealing of the children to their parents, lest the whole earth be smitten with a

curse and utterly wasted at his coming.

49 All these and many more, even the prophets who dwelt among the

Nephites and testified of the coming of the Son of God, mingled in the vast

assembly and waited for their deliverance,

50 For the dead had looked upon the long absence of their spirits from their

bodies as a bondage.

51 These the Lord taught, and gave them power to come forth, after his

resurrection from the dead, to enter into his Father’s kingdom, there to be

crowned with immortality and eternal life,

52 And continue thenceforth their labor as had been promised by the Lord,

section 138

213

him.

53 The Prophet Joseph Smith, and my father, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young,

John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and other choice spirits who were reserved to

come forth in the fulness of times to take part in laying the foundations of the

great latter-day work,

54 Including the building of the temples and the performance of ordinances

therein for the redemption of the dead, were also in the spirit world. 55 I observed that they were also among the noble and great ones who were

chosen in the beginning to be rulers in the Church of God.

56 Even before they were born, they, with many others, received their first

lessons in the world of spirits and were prepared to come forth in the due time

of the Lord to labor in his vineyard for the salvation of the souls of men. 57 I beheld that the faithful elders of this dispensation, when they depart from

mortal life, continue their labors in the preaching of the gospel of repentance

and redemption, through the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of God,

among those who are in darkness and under the bondage of sin in the great

world of the spirits of the dead.

58 The dead who repent will be redeemed, through obedience to the

ordinances of the house of God,

59 And after they have paid the penalty of their transgressions, and are washed

clean, shall receive a reward according to their works, for they are heirs of

salvation.

60 Thus was the vision of the redemption of the dead revealed to me, and I

bear record, and I know that this record is true, through the blessing of our

Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, even so. Amen.

214

section 138
