The Apostle Peter reminds us that for disciples of Jesus Christ, His “divine power hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue:

“Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature” (2 Peter 1:3–4; emphasis added).

Heavenly Father’s plan describes the exceeding great and precious truths and promises that define our eternal identity and purpose.

As explained in “The Family: A Proclamation to the World”:

“All human beings—male and female—are created in the image of God. Each is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny. …

“In the premortal realm, spirit sons and daughters knew and worshipped God as their Eternal Father and accepted His plan by which His children could obtain a physical body and gain earthly experience to progress toward perfection and ultimately realize their divine destiny as heirs of eternal life.”

Heavenly Father promises His children that if they follow the precepts of His plan and the example of His Beloved Son, keep the commandments, and endure in faith to the end, they “shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God” (Doctrine and Covenants 14:7).

God’s work is focused upon the progression and exaltation of His children. Every facet of His plan is designed to bless His sons and daughters because “the worth of souls is great in [His] sight” (Doctrine and Covenants 18:10).

In the premortal council, Heavenly Father presented to His spirit children His plan for their eternal progression and happiness.

“We will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

“And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

“And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever.

“And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first.

“And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him” (Abraham 3:24–28).

Note that only one plan was presented in the premortal council—the Father’s plan. Our Heavenly Father did not pose the question, “What shall we do?” He did not seek input, solicit recommendations, or request proposals. Rather, He presented the basic elements of His plan and asked, “Whom shall I send?” The essence of His question focused upon who should be sent to execute the terms and conditions of His plan.

The consequences of the adversary’s insurrection also are described in the scriptures.

“Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I … had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power … , I caused that he should be cast down;

“And he became Satan, … the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice” (Moses 4:3–4; emphasis added).

Lucifer did not present a plan that was voted down by a majority of the participants in the premortal council. He is not a sympathetic figure who lost an election. He rebelled! Pride, arrogance, and selfishness motivated his revolt against the Father’s plan.

The plan describes the works of the Father and the Son that make available to all humankind the blessings of eternal life.

The gospel of Jesus Christ constitutes the way whereby we can receive the blessings promised in God’s plan, even the doctrine, principles, ordinances, and covenants men and women must believe and follow. “There is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ … whereby man can be saved” (2 Nephi 25:20). Truly, the Lord Jesus Christ is “the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by [Him]” (John 14:6; emphasis added).

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="169687643" id="p_pNmPa">The gospel of Jesus Christ constitutes the way whereby we can receive the blessings promised in God’s plan, even the doctrine, principles, ordinances, and covenants men and women must believe and follow.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

President Russell M. Nelson explained:

“The plan required the Creation, and that in turn required both the Fall and the Atonement. These are the three fundamental components of the plan. The creation of a paradisiacal planet came from God. Mortality and death came into the world through the Fall of Adam [see 2 Nephi 2:25; Moses 6:48]. Immortality and the possibility of eternal life were provided by the Atonement of Jesus Christ [see 2 Nephi 2:21–28]. …

“… We come to the earth for a brief period of time, endure our tests and trials, and prepare to move onward and upward to a glorious homecoming [see Psalm 116:15; Alma 42:8]. Our thoughts and deeds while [in mortality] will surely be more purposeful if we understand God’s plan and are thankful for and obedient to His commandments [see Doctrine and Covenants 59:20–21].”

We learn important truths by identifying and studying the many different titles for the Father’s plan in the Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ. For example, consider the following selected sample of titles:

“The merciful plan of the great Creator” (2 Nephi 9:6).

“The plan of our God” (2 Nephi 9:13).

“The plan of salvation” (Jarom 1:2; Alma 24:14).

“The plan of redemption” (Alma 12:25, 26, 30, 32, 33; 42:11, 13).

“The plan of restoration” (Alma 41:2).

“The plan of happiness” (Alma 42:16).

“The great plan of mercy” (Alma 42:31).

Each of these titles helps us understand more clearly the precious promises of the Father’s plan and enriches our perspective about the purposes and meaning of our mortal lives.

Significantly, the most frequently used title for God’s plan in the Book of Mormon focuses upon the redemption made possible through the Atonement of Jesus Christ.

Alma declared, “If it had not been for the plan of redemption, which was laid from the foundation of the world, there could have been no resurrection of the dead; but there was a plan of redemption laid, which shall bring to pass the resurrection of the dead” (Alma 12:25).

He also admonished, “Begin to believe in the Son of God, that he will come to redeem his people, and that he shall suffer and die to atone for their sins; and that he shall rise again from the dead, which shall bring to pass the resurrection, that all men shall stand before him, to be judged at the last and judgment day, according to their works” (Alma 33:22).

Our souls should swell with gratitude as we consider God’s great plan of salvation, redemption, restoration, mercy, and happiness. Knowledge of His plan provides precious perspective, enriches our joys, and strengthens us to overcome our challenges and adversities.

Heavenly Father yearns for us to return home to Him. He invites and promises blessings, but He will never compel, coerce, or constrain our exercise of the moral agency He gave to us. We must act and choose to return to Him by following the example of His Beloved Son.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="169687739" id="p_hHhx7">Heavenly Father yearns for us to return home to Him. He invites and promises blessings, but He will never compel, coerce, or constrain our exercise of the moral agency He gave to us. We must act and choose to return to Him by following the example of His Beloved Son.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

“The way is prepared, and if we will look we may live forever” (Alma 37:46; emphasis added).

I joyfully witness that Heavenly Father is the author of the divine plan for His children. Jesus Christ is our Redeemer and Savior. And as one of the Lord’s latter-day Apostles, I witness that He indeed is “the way, the truth, and the life” (John 14:6; emphasis added).
