In the fall of 2019, I arrived in Spain with my children, 8-year-old Aaron and 17-year-old Jorge, who has autism. With only my dreams packed in a suitcase, I clung to God and trusted Him completely.

A good Samaritan welcomed us into her home, where we stayed for two weeks. But removing Jorge from his known environment wasn’t easy. Because of his condition, he follows strict routines. The first few nights, he would bang on the walls, and I would quickly get up to prevent him from waking others. I knelt beside him and prayed, remembering Isaiah 41:10: “Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.”

During our second weekend in Spain, we arrived at church just as sacrament meeting was ending. I approached a young woman who was with the Primary children and explained that I was a member of the Church but didn’t know anyone. She introduced us to several other members.

The next day the city council of Zaragoza accepted us as refugees and took us to an apartment with no water or electricity. The bishopric, the Relief Society, and the elders quorum from the ward we attended came to our aid with blankets, food that didn’t need to be heated, winter clothing, and other necessities.

My children started school, and I started a training course. Mealtimes were a challenge for Jorge, who was used to eating at midday. His tutor informed me that regardless of who was teaching, when the clock struck noon, he would take out his food and begin eating.

Our four moves proved to be a titanic test. I prayed to stay strong but often found myself weeping alone. For weeks, I slept only two or three hours a night. After several days looking for a job, I was blessed to find work caring for a young woman with terminal brain cancer. After each work shift, I picked up my children, helped them with their studies, and then did my training homework.

I cared for this wonderful young woman for a year, until she passed away at age 48, leaving behind two small children. Her situation prompted me to ask myself, “How can I complain?” Caring for her provided for our needs and filled my soul with gratitude for my Heavenly Father.

Every day at home we read the scriptures, prayed, and established routines to give Jorge security. In early 2024, we began preparations to go to the Madrid Spain Temple. To get closer to Heavenly Father, I felt that we should fast as a family. Aaron agreed, and the next morning Jorge told me, “Mom, today I’m going to fast too.” It was a moment of indescribable joy.

Since our visit to the temple, Jorge has improved significantly. He is more flexible with his schedule. On Saturdays he prepares his clothes so he can be ready to pass the sacrament on Sunday. He has also made great progress academically.

Today we are providing for ourselves, supported by a loving Heavenly Father. Jesus Christ has raised us from the ashes (see Isaiah 61:3). By paying our tithing, we have received abundant blessings. We hold to the iron rod (see 1 Nephi 8:24, 30; 11:25; 15:23) with the certainty that we are moving toward a better future.
