I grew up singing and surrounded by music. My dream as a child was to become a professional singer. I even won several singing contests. But at some point in my life, I felt a void when I thought about the purpose God had for me beyond recognition and praise from others.

Having the gospel of Jesus Christ increasingly present in my life has helped me to have faith in times of uncertainty. It has also helped me understand that Heavenly Father wanted me to use the talent He gave me to get closer to Him and glorify Him.

Though I gave up my dream, I felt that I should continue singing and studying music.

By age 25, I had finished studying architecture and had also studied through BYU–Pathway Worldwide and Brigham Young University–Idaho, which helped me improve my ability to speak English.

Then something miraculous happened.

I received an invitation to be a musical missionary as part of the The Tabernacle Choir’s Global Participant Program. I didn’t know it, but everything I had been doing for several years had helped prepare me for this moment. The invitation was an answer to my prayers and desires. Heavenly Father knows the end from the beginning and allowed me to sing with the Tabernacle Choir at Temple Square during the October 2024 general conference.

Through this experience, I can testify of the power of being led by the Holy Spirit, being patient, and trusting that God has a purpose, though we may not understand that purpose. As we have been promised, “The immediate path may not always be clear, but we can follow the Savior with faith that our journey will end beautifully and triumphantly because He will guide us safely to where we need to be.”

For those seeking their path ahead, know that the Lord has something prepared for you greater than you can imagine. If we follow Him, we will receive what He has prepared for us. The path may not be clear, and life may be difficult, but the Lord still works miracles for His children.

I have learned that through faith, obedience, patience, and prayer, the Lord will guide me.
