Six hundred years before Christ, the prophet Jeremiah prophesied that in the days to come, the Lord would “make a new covenant with the house of Israel . . . [and] put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and [I] will be their God, and they shall be my people” (Jeremiah 31:31, 33; emphasis added).

The Restoration of the fulness of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith constitutes the new and everlasting covenant promised by Jeremiah (see Doctrine and Covenants 66:2). The covenant is new because it was restored in our day and is everlasting because it is the same covenant that God has offered to His children in every dispensation throughout earth’s history (see Guide to the Scriptures, “New and Everlasting Covenant,” Gospel Library).

God offers the new and everlasting covenant and its associated promises to all His children. However, He will never force any of them to enter a covenant with Him. Each must choose to accept the covenant and demonstrate it by participating in the ordinances prescribed by God. These ordinances include baptism, confirmation, priesthood ordination for men, and the temple endowment and sealing. We choose to write God’s covenants and laws into our hearts by willingly preparing for and worthily receiving every ordinance of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

All members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have entered into a covenant with God through the ordinances of baptism and confirmation. Each has entered the covenant path and begun the journey back to God’s presence. The cleansing power of the Atonement of Jesus Christ and the guidance of the Holy Ghost provide members with the covenant power and strength to keep God’s commandments and stay on the path that leads to the other covenants that are part of the new and everlasting covenant. We keep our baptismal covenants written in our hearts by partaking of the sacrament every week.

Once we have been baptized, we set our goals to deepen our discipleship by receiving the ordinances of the house of the Lord. On the front of each temple are written the words “Holiness to the Lord, the House of the Lord.” God invites each member of the Church to prepare for and worthily qualify to receive the special blessings available through the ordinances performed only in His holy house. Church members who are 18 years old and have been baptized for at least one year are eligible to receive their own temple ordinances. Those 11 years of age and older may enter the temple to perform ordinances for deceased ancestors.

All members can have God’s covenant written in their heart by:

1.  Obtaining and holding a valid temple recommend throughout their lives

Each member 11 years old or older, including recent converts, may obtain a recommend by scheduling an interview with their bishop or branch president. We are eligible to receive a recommend if we are living the laws of God that we learned and covenanted to obey at the time of our baptism. Holding a recommend is a physical reminder that we have promised to take upon us the name of Jesus Christ and live God’s commandments. Holding a valid temple recommend physically on our person is a constant reminder of our covenants with God.

1.  Learning about the temple and its ordinances

New and longtime members should make the study of the temple, its ordinances, and associated covenants a part of their gospel study, especially while preparing to make their own temple covenants. The Gospel Library app contains many helpful materials under the “Temple and Family History” tile. These materials help us understand the importance and sacredness of temples and the things we need to change in our lives as we prepare for our visit to the house of the Lord. Chapter 27 in the General Handbook (under “Handbooks and Callings” in the Gospel Library) can also provide us with greater understanding of commitments and covenants we will make. Meaningful and sincere efforts to study about the temple and its ordinances will help us understand the importance of the temple and the strength we can receive to endure life’s trials and return to God’s presence through temple ordinances. Study of the temple and its ordinances will help write God’s covenants deeply in our hearts.

1.  Finding the names of ancestors and helping them receive temple ordinances

One of the great truths revealed as part of the Restoration is that God has prepared a way for us to bless and help our deceased ancestors receive the full blessings of the restored gospel by performing essential ordinances for them in holy temples. As we identify deceased ancestors and organize information about their lives (birth, marriage, death dates, names of children, etc.) in the FamilySearch app, we will be constantly reminded of God’s covenants. When we attend the temple for the first time, we enter into covenants with God. Then we can act as proxy to help our ancestors receive their ordinances. There are many waiting in the spirit world for us to perform ordinances on their behalf. I promise that you will feel their joy as you perform ordinances for them in the house of the Lord. Serving them will keep the Lord’s covenants planted deep in our hearts.

1.  Attending the temple as often as circumstances permit

Every member of the Church may attend the temple at least once to receive their own ordinances. After saving and sacrificing that which one is able, the Church can provide assistance through the General Patron Temple Assistance Fund (GTPAF). The more one is able to sacrifice to attend the temple, the deeper one will feel the power of the covenants made with God. Every time one attends, the covenants will be written deeper and deeper in their heart. Each time one performs ordinances for others, one will draw nearer to God and feel a greater measure of His love and power.

My great-grandfather, Heinrich Friedrich Christian Pieper, was baptized as a single man in his early 20s in Germany in 1895. As a new convert, he learned about the temple and began preparations to receive his ordinances in the house of the Lord. Because there was no temple near him, it was seven years before he could realize his dream. By that time, he was married and was able to be endowed and sealed in 1902. He now lived within one hour of a temple and worked hard to prepare names of ancestors. He and his wife visited the house of the Lord as often as possible to perform vicarious ordinances for loved ones. By 1952 he and his wife had performed more than 20,000 ordinances for others.

As Jeremiah had prophesied, the restored covenant was written deeply in my great-grandfather’s and great-grandmother’s hearts and, as a result, in the lives of me and other descendants. Their temple service provided them strength to endure life’s many challenges and remain faithful to their God.

Our living prophet has taught that the temple is the very center of the spiritual power we need to confront the temptations and challenges of the world around us. I testify that as we make the House of the Lord and temple covenants our most important priority by holding a recommend, learning of the temple and its ordinances and receiving them for ourselves, then helping our ancestors to receive the ordinances through regular attendance, we will feel God’s covenant love for us and have the power needed to meet the challenges in our lives.
