Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith -- a Modern Witness for Christ ( 1963)

I

JOSEPH SMITH, A MODERN WITNESS FOR CHRIST

The Duty of a Prophet.—The chief function of a prophet of God is to give to the world a divine witness that Jesus is the Christ and that, as our great Redeemer, lawgiver and source of life, he is appointed by his Father to be the God of this earth. In modern times, the Lord has raised up such a witness in the person of Joseph Smith.

A scripture often quoted by the Prophet Joseph Smith is found in John's Revelation, chapter 19, verse 10, where an angel stated to the apostle on the Isle of Patmos: "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." Explained Joseph Smith:

If any person should ask if I were a prophet, I should not deny it, ... for according to John, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy; therefore, ... if I be a true teacher and witness, I must possess the spirit of prophecy, and that constitutes a prophet; and any man who says he is a teacher or preacher of righteousness, and denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and by this key false teachers and imposters may be detected. (Documentary History of the Church, 5:215-16; hereafter cited DHC.)

Here, then, is the fact of the matter: If a man has the testimony of Jesus—the true testimony from divine sources that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and the earth's great source of light and life—he must also possess the spirit of prophecy; and possession of that spirit constitutes him a prophet.

It was an essential function of the mission of ancient prophets to speak for God and testify of the coming of Christ. As the resurrected Lord walked along the road to Emmaus with two disciples, he made this point clear when he exclaimed: "O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken." The record then states: "And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself." (Luke 24:25, 7.)

So it must be in modern times. When a man is commissioned of God and given a mission to testify of Christ and establish His work in our day, that man must be a prophet of God.

Joseph Smith's First Vision.—Joseph Smith's prophetic mission commenced in the spring of 1820, when, as a lad in his fifteenth year, he pondered the question of which church he should join. To decide the matter, he went to God in simple, but superior, faith and there he received one of the greatest manifestations ever given of God to man. In his report of this incident, he later said:

... I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me....

... When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him! (Pearl of Great Price, Smith 2:16-17.)

Distinct and Personal Nature of Members of the Godhead.—From the Prophet's experience, we learn certain basic things about Deity. First, the Father and the Son are distinct and separate personages. In another report of this incident, the Prophet stated that he saw "two glorious personages, who exactly resembled each other in features and likeness." (DHC, 4:536.) Still again, Joseph Smith clarified: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit." (D&C 130:22.)

(It might be stated as a point of clarification that, as a Personage of Spirit, the Holy Ghost is an organized Being. But His body is composed of an element so pure and fine that it is not discernible by mortal eyes. Nevertheless, He is a material Being. There is no such thing as immaterial matter. See D&C 131:7-8.)

The Divine or Glorified Nature of God.—But in addition to the fact that they are tangible Beings, the Father and the Son are Beings of great glory and power. In his vision, Joseph Smith stated that the Father and the Son were in the midst of a pillar of light that was in brilliance and glory above the brightness of the sun. In another statement he said that they were "surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noon day." (DHC, 4:536.)

In a marvelous manifestation that he and others received in January, 1836, Joseph Smith also made reference to the great glory that is associated with Deity. Said he:

The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof.... I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. (DHC, 2:380; italics added.)

It was because the Prophet wanted to stress that God is a Being of glory that he said:

God Almighty Himself dwells in eternal fire; flesh and blood cannot go there, for all corruption is devoured by the fire. "Our God is a consuming fire." When our flesh is quickened by the Spirit, there will be no blood in this tabernacle. Some dwell in higher glory than others.... Immortality dwells in everlasting burnings.... All men who are immortal dwell in everlasting burnings. (DHC, 6:366.)

Christ's Relationship to Glory.—In a revelation through Joseph Smith, we are given John's testimony that Christ did not possess this divine element in its fulness at first, but he developed to where he was finally endowed with a fulness of the glory of his Father. Said John of Jesus:

And I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness at the first; but received grace for grace;

And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness. (D&C 93:12-13.)

I might add parenthetically that it is one thing to receive grace for grace and another to go from grace to grace. To receive grace for grace implies that one must give grace (which may be defined generally as unearned divine assistance—something given as a gift, for which the receiver does not pay an equivalent value) to receive. Thus, service is the key by which Christ was endowed with his Father's glory. To go from grace to grace is to receive one divine endowment after another. This Jesus did until he acquired all the divine attributes and powers of perfection.

John then gives us this testimony of Christ, saying:

And I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father;

And he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him. (D&C 93:16-17.)

It should be noted that when Christ received a fulness of his Father's glory, he received all power both in heaven and on earth. There is also an indwelling principle that then existed in the relationship of the Father and the Son. This we will discuss a little later.

The Importance of Understanding God's Glory.—To call attention to the importance of understanding these points, the revelation states:

I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness. [Here, then, is the intent and purpose of true worship. Continued the revelation:] For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his [the Father's] fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. (D&C 93:19-20; italics added.)

God's Glory Defined.—Having made these clarifications, the revelation explains how we are to acquire these divine endowments when it promises: "He that keepeth his [God's] commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things." (D&C 93:28.) To be glorified, man must acquire truth and light. The divine element which we call God's glory must therefore consist of truth and light. It is in view of these points of doctrine that this same revelation then declares: "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." (D&C 93:36.)

Think of it for a moment! While God is a tangible Being, with a body of flesh and bones, he is also a glorified Being in whom there is centered such divine intelligence and power that were it to be manifest it would eclipse the light of the sun at noon day. Can you imagine a Being in whom there is concentrated such a degree of pure intelligence? Can you comprehend the greatness of His intellect? Can you appreciate the great joy He must experience in the expression of such divine intelligence? Love is one of the greatest attributes of pure intelligence. Can mortal man comprehend the love of God? Jesus said, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) When, through the gospel, man has been endowed with the truth and light that the Father and the Son possess,—when man can think on the same plane and with the same depth and experience, the same joy that God experiences—he will then have acquired life eternal. Eternal life is to be endowed with immortal glory. (See D&C 88:4; Moses 6:59.) In the words of the Prophet:

Here, then, is eternal life—to know the only wise and true God, ... by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead, and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power. (DHC, 6:306.)

The key of understanding is found in the assumption that God is more than a tangible Being. He is a glorified Being in whom divine elements and powers of intelligence center, and from whom these powers of life and truth and light emanate to fill the immensity of space. To use a homely example, God is like a great magnet. While He is a tangible Being, there are powers and properties centered in Him by which He extends Himself beyond the limits of His corporeal Being; and His great magnetic field is the universe. But let us keep in mind that these divine properties that dwell in Him are not merely magnetic properties. Instead, they are properties of life and of intelligence. To partake of them in their fulness and use them to enhance and empower our existence is to attain unto eternal life.

The Indwelling Relationship of the Father and the Son.—When we view things from the level of this divine plane of existence, we see that there is a relationship of life existing between the Father and the Son that man knows very little about. The divine elements of truth and light that center in the Father and constitute His glory are extended without restriction to dwell in the Son, so that these great attributes and powers of eternal life were developed in Christ in their fulness. Consequently, there is an indwelling relationship that exists between the Father and the Son; and because all the attributes and powers of life that are in the Father are centered in the Son, the Father is in the Son and the Son is in the Father. If I may use another rough example, the Father and the Son are like two poles of electrical power in a great circuit, with the full power going from the primary pole to the secondary pole and back again. But instead of electricity, that which is extended from the Father to the Son is a divine element highly endowed with life, with truth, and with light. In this way, the full mind and power of the Father centers in Christ.

When John testified that Jesus was endowed with a fulness of the glory and power of the Father, he beheld of Christ that "the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him." (D&C 93:17.) It is this indwelling intelligence and power of the Father that dwells in the Son that we are seeking to understand. In his Lectures on Faith, Joseph Smith stressed that the full intelligence and power of the Father center in the Son, causing both divine Beings to possess

... the same mind, the same wisdom, glory, power, and fullness—filling all in all; the Son being filled with the fullness of the mind, glory, and power; or, in other words, the spirit, glory, and power of the Father, possessing all knowledge and glory, and the same kingdom, sitting at the right hand of power, in the express image and likeness of the Father, mediator for man, being filled with the fullness of the mind of the Father; or, in other words, the Spirit of the Father.... (Fifth Lecture; italics added.)

The word "mind" in the Prophet's statement is significantly equated with the word "Spirit," so that the "mind of the Father" is made synonymous with the "Spirit of the Father" and refers to the quickening intelligence that is extended from the Father and is developed fully within the Son. In this way, the full attributes and intelligence of the Father center in the Son; not merely that the Son knows all the principles of truth that the Father knows, but that there is a continual rapport—a continual union by powerful spiritual forces that transmit all knowledge and power from the Father to the Son, and vice versa.

The question may now be asked, What did Christ receive when he received the fulness of his Father's glory—when he was glorified in the Father and the Father in him? To answer this question, let us discuss briefly the omnipresence, omniscience, and omnipotence of God.

The Omnipresence of God.—An insight into the divine nature of God is the key to an understanding of how God is omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent. Because God is a glorified, tangible Being, there is a divine element and power associated with Him that is not presently associated with man to a significant degree. By means of this divine element, God has a different relationship to the universe than do we. Thereby He can extend the life and intelligence within himself into all things that He creates, to the degree they are capable of partaking of these spiritual elements. In this way, God is everywhere present—omnipresent.

By this I do not mean only that because God created all things his influence is everywhere manifest. I mean in addition that there is at all times an element of Deity within all organized life on earth. A revelation to the Prophet declared that God is "in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things." (D&C 88:41.) And having referred to the many kingdoms of organized life that God has created, it explained:

... any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power.

I say unto you, he hath seen him; nevertheless, he who came unto his own was not comprehended.

The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not; nevertheless, the day shall come when you shall comprehend even God, being quickened in him and by him.

Then shall ye know that ye have seen me, that I am, and that I am the true light that is in you, and that you are in me; otherwise ye could not abound. (D&C 88:47-50; italics added.)

Let me review and comment briefly. Any man who has seen the least form of organized life has seen God; that is, he has seen a manifestation of that pure intelligence that is a vital constituent of Deity. If you have seen life, you have seen God, for organized life is a manifestation of God. There is a portion of divinity within all men, otherwise they could not live and move and have a being. Someday we will be able to see that there is a portion of God's divine nature within us, and that we are in Him.

Charles W. Penrose made one of the best statements on this doctrine that I have ever read. Speaking of this divine element of intelligence with which a glorified Being is endowed, he said:

This spirit which pervades all things, which is the light and life of all things, by which our heavenly Father operates, by which He is omnipotent, never had a beginning and never will have an end. It is the light of truth; it is the spirit of intelligence.... We are told ... that this Spirit, when it is manifest, is God moving in His glory. When we look up to the heavens and behold the starry worlds, which are kingdoms, we behold God moving in His Majesty and in His power. Now, this Spirit always existed; it always operated, but it is not understood, and cannot be comprehended except through organisms. If you see a living blade of grass, you see a manifestation of that Spirit which is called God. If you see an animal of any kind on the face of the earth having life, there is a manifestation of that Spirit. If you see a man, you behold its most perfect earthly manifestation. And if you see a glorified man, a man who has passed through the various grades of being, who has overcome all things who has been raised from the dead, who has been quickened by this spirit in its fullness, there you see manifested, in its perfection, this eternal, beginningless, endless spirit of intelligence.

Such a Being is our Father and our God, and we are following in His footsteps. He has attained to perfection. He has arisen to kingdoms of power. He comprehends all things, because in Him dwelleth the fullness of the God-head, bodily. He is a perfect manifestation, expression and revelation of this eternal essence, this spirit of eternal, everlasting intelligence or light of truth. (Journal of Discourses, 26:23-24; italics added.)

Here, as I have said, is one of the best statements explaining how God, as a tangible Being, can be in and through all things. First, we must recognize that this divine intelligence which we call God's glory (also referred to as His Spirit) must center in something; and that center must be an organized Being sufficiently refined and capacitated to possess in their fulness these divine elements of life and intelligence. Unlike many of our Christian friends, we do not believe merely in an all-pervading essence as God. Instead, we believe in a personal glorified Being in whom divine elements of intelligence center and from whom these elements of life are manifest in space. This divine essence cannot be manifest except from and into organisms—organized forms of life. Thus, it must be centered somewhere.

Our Christian friends take the position that there is one great all-pervading essence as God, which has no particular center, but which manifests itself at times as three organized Personages—the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. These three Personages are therefore merely the product or manifestation of the divine all-pervading essence. And having been manifest, as Jesus was while on earth and in the resurrection, these three Personages might then recede in some way back into the all-pervading essence which is God. By contrast, Joseph Smith taught that God must ever be an organized Being; and that there are three distinct organized Beings who partake of the divine essence or Spirit which constitutes the glory of God and disseminate it to men on earth. While the Father is the ultimate center of this divine intelligence, by obedience to the Father's will Jesus refined and expanded his whole Being to where he received in their fulness all the attributes and powers of Deity. In Him dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily. (See Colossians 2:9.) Having received of the Father's fulness, Christ was ordained to be the center of these divine elements for all other forms of organized life, with the responsibility of redeeming and glorifying all who abide in His power. Consequently, the Holy Ghost, as an organized Personage, and as a member of the Godhead, is subordinate to Christ in the divine power which He possesses. Jesus therefore said of the Holy Ghost:

He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you.

All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you. (John 16:14-15.)

The Omniscience of God.—Joseph Smith taught that God is all-knowing: not merely that he knows all the facts upon which organized existence is based, but that all things within his vast domain are momentarily and simultaneously visible to him. Thus, a revelation said of God: "He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him." (D&C 88:41.) God resides on a glorified sphere where the elements of intelligence are so concentrated that that mighty planet is itself a huge Urim and Thummim, where all things past, present and future are visibly manifest to those who reside thereon.

Here is something that mortal man knows very little about. On one occasion Moses was caught up into an exceedingly high mountain and talked with God face to face. As Moses partook in some measure of God's glory, the record says:

... Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the spirit of God.

And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God; and their numbers were great, even numberless as the sand upon the sea shore.

And he beheld many lands; and each land was called earth, and there were inhabitants on the face thereof. (Moses 1:27-29.)

Here was a mortal man endowed to but a small degree with the powers of God's glory. But with such an endowment of intelligent power, he could see every particle of the earth and every soul who lived thereon. What, then, can God, who is the supreme glorified Being, behold? Little wonder that Jesus said that not so much as a sparrow falls without the Father being cognizant of it. Consider also this statement from the Prophet Joseph Smith:

The great Jehovah [who is Jesus Christ] contemplated the whole of the events connected with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it rolled into existence, or ever "the morning stars sang together" for joy; the past, the present, and the future were and are, with Him, one eternal "now"; He knew of the fall of Adam, the iniquities of the antediluvians, of the depth of iniquity that would be connected with the human family, their weakness and strength, their power and glory, apostasies, their crimes, their righteousness and iniquity; He comprehended the fall of man, and his redemption; He knew the plan of salvation and pointed it out; He was acquainted with the situation of all nations and with their destiny; He ordered all things according to the council of His own will; He knows the situation of both the living and the dead, and has made ample provision for their redemption, according to their several circumstances, and the laws of the kingdom of God, whether in this world, or in the world to come. (DHC, 4:597.)

Christ had glory with his Father before the world was (John 17:1-5.); and this was sufficient to create and sustain the earth and many other spheres. But He did not receive the fulness until after the resurrection. Only then could He redeem and glorify fully that which He had created. Having received these divine endowments in their fulness, our Lord was brought fully into union with all things in his Father's kingdom—past, present and future. For this reason it is said that Christ knows all things. (See D&C 38:1-2; 93:26.)

Omnipotence of God.—Because God is in and through all things and is the quickening life and intelligence in all organized matter, all things are dependent upon him for their organization and their orderly existence. Hence, He has all power, for the light of His glory which is in all things and is the law by which all things are governed constitutes the power of Him who sitteth upon His throne, who is in the midst of all things. (See D&C 88:12-13.) Thus, God has all power, subject to the restrictions of "wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment." (Moses 6:61.) These restrictions include such propositions as the fact that to exist all truth and intelligence must be independent in the sphere in which it is placed. This implies agency and freedom; it also implies that all organized life is subject to judgment.

When Jesus received a fulness of the glory of the Father, he received all power in heaven and earth. In other words, He was brought into full and perfect union with this divine intelligence by which all things are organized, sustained and governed; and for all that the Father has put into Christ's hands, he becomes the great center of life and power.

Christ as the God and Father of the Earth and Life thereon.—Because the full intelligence and power of the Father dwells in the Son, Christ can act in every way as though he is the Father. He represents the Father and reveals that divine Being unto men. To see Him is to see the Father, for as Paul wrote, Christ is in the brightness of his Father's glory and the express image of his person. (See Hebrews 1:3.) Because Christ first partook of the glory of the Father, he was appointed to be the center of life, of truth, and of light for men on earth. And by this appointment, Jesus is the God of this earth; and in certain respects, he is the Father of all life thereon.

Many holy prophets have spoken of Christ as the God and the Father of this earth and of all life thereon. Isaiah wrote prophetically of Him: "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: ... and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." (Isaiah 9:6; italics added.)

That Christ is the God of this earth is the central testimony of the Book of Mormon. This volume of scripture has been brought forth, according to the statement on its title page, to convince both "Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself unto all nations." As such, Christ was the God of ancient Israel. In this sense Nephi wrote of Him:

And the God of our fathers, who were led out of Egypt, out of bondage, and also were preserved in the wilderness by him, yea, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yieldeth himself, according to the words of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up, according to the words of Zenock, and to be crucified, according to the words of Neum, and to be buried in a sepulchre, according, to the words of Zenos.... (1 Nephi 19:10; italics added.)

Having fulfilled his mission in making the atonement, Christ visited the Nephites on this western hemisphere and invited them, saying:

Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world. (3 Nephi 11:14; italics added.)

It was with this view of Christ that Abinadi declared: "I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people." (Mosiah 15:1. See also Mosiah 13:33-34.) In a revelation to Joseph Smith, we find this declaration:

Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I AM, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made;

The same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes. (D&C 38:1-2; italics added.)

Many scriptural statements also refer to Christ in the role of Father. Let me refer to a few of them.

Said the pre-mortal Christ to the brother of Jared: "Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son." (Ether 3:14.)

Abinadi declared "that Christ was the God, the Father of all things, and said that he should take upon him the image of man.... (Mosiah 7:27.)

Said Moroni: "And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son." (Mormon 9:12.)

Amulek declared of Christ: "He is the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth, and all things which in them are; he is the beginning and the end, the first and the last; And he shall come into the world to redeem his people." (Alma 11:39-40.)

Let me clarify that Christ as the Son, is not God; but Christ, as the manifestation of the indwelling intelligence and power of the Father, is God. It is the indwelling intelligence and power within Christ that makes him God. For this reason, Christ declared in a revelation to Joseph Smith that He was the Father because His Father gave Him of His fulness. (See D&C 93:4.) Abinadi taught the same doctrine, declaring that Christ would be called the Son of God because He dwelt in the flesh, but that He would be the Father because He would be conceived by the power of God, so that the intelligence and power of his Father would dwell within him on earth.

Thus, he declared that Christ would become "the Father and the Son—and they [the Father and the Son manifest in Christ] are one God, yea, the very eternal Father of heaven and of earth." (See Mosiah 15:1-4.)

Jesus expressed this same doctrine to Philip, when Philip exclaimed:

Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us.

Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father?

Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works.

Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me for the very works' sake. (John 14:8-11; italics added.)

Christ as the Father by Divine Investiture of Authority.—There are several ways by which Christ's Fatherhood is expressed. Because the full intelligence and power of his Father—that Being whom we honor with the name-title Elohim—are centered in Jesus, he has power to speak and act as if he were the Father. Thus, by divine investiture of authority, Christ stands as the Father, expressing the intelligence, power and commandments of that Supreme Being to man. Jesus can do this because in him dwells all the intelligence and power of his Father; and he is in constant rapport, in continual union, with that primary Being.

Let me give you a scriptural example. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 49, verse 5, we find the following declaration:

Thus saith the Lord; for I am God, and have sent mine Only Begotten Son into the world for the redemption of the world, and have decreed that he that receiveth him shall be saved, and he that receiveth him not shall be damned.

It would appear that this is the Father, Elohim, speaking. Yet, when the person concludes speaking, He declares: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, and I come quickly. Even so. Amen." (verse 28.) So we see in this revelation Christ is speaking just as though he is the Father—this is his right.

To illustrate this doctrine further, let us refer to the vision of Enoch. Having seen in vision the coming of the Son of Man and His ascension again into heaven following His resurrection, Enoch exclaimed to God: "Forasmuch as thou art God, and I know thee, and thou hast sworn unto me, and commanded me that I should ask in the name of thine Only Begotten; ... wherefore, I ask thee [the Father] if thou [the Son] wilt not come again on the earth." And then the Personage that Enoch had addressed as the Father said: "As I live, even so will I [Christ] come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfil the oath which I have made unto you concerning the children of Noah." (Moses 7:59-60.)

From this revelation, given to us in modern times through Joseph Smith, we see that Enoch was speaking with one Personage. But he addressed that single Personage as both the Father and as the Son; and the Lord sanctioned this procedure, showing that He reveals himself as both the Father and as the Son and speaks to men in both capacities.

Christ the Father of Creative and Quickening Life.—There is another important way by which Christ is the Father. To understand this second point of doctrine, we should remember that for mortal man to live and move and have a being, three things are necessary. First, there must be an organized spirit within man's physical body. That spirit was organized long before it came into this mortal body; and in that pre-mortal organization it was begotten by heavenly parents. Hence, man has a Father of his organized spirit, who is our Father in Heaven—Elohim. The second thing mortal man possesses is a physical body; and in this relationship of life, man has another father: his earthly father. But there is a third factor of life within all created life on earth. That third factor is the organizing and quickening intelligence and life that is extended to all living creatures from Christ, without which life could not abound on earth. Here is another factor of life within man and all other forms of life, and because Christ is its source, he is the Father of creative and quickening life for the earth and all things therein.

To illustrate this doctrine scripturally, let me refer to the Book of Mormon which was revealed to us through Joseph Smith. In Alma chapter 11, we find the report of Alma and Amulek preaching to the people of Ammonihah, when they were accosted by a group of lawyers headed by Zeezrom. To Amulek, Zeezrom inquired: "Thou sayest there is a true and living God?"

And Amulek said: "Yea, there is a true and living God."

Now Zeezrom said: "Is there more than one God?"

And he [Amulek] answered. "No."

At this point, Zeezrom questioned his source of authority for this doctrine, inquiring: "How knowest thou these things?"

And he [Amulek] said: "An angel hath made them known unto me."

(Let me stress these points. For men in mortality there is but one God; an angel of the Lord revealed to Amulek that this doctrine is true.)

And Zeezrom said again: "Who is he that shall come? Is it the Son of God?"

And he [Amulek] said unto him, "Yea."

After some discussion on the nature of Christ's redemption, Zeezrom said again unto Amulek: "Is the Son of God the very Eternal Father?"

And Amulek said unto him: "Yea, he is the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth, and all things which in them are; he is the beginning and the end, the first and the last; And he shall come into the world to redeem his people." (See Alma 11:26-40; italics added.)

Christ the Father of Eternal Life.—In the above statement by Amulek, Christ is said to be the Eternal Father of heaven and of earth, and all things which in them are. This includes all men and all other forms of mortal life. But there is another more restricted relationship by which Christ is the Father; and this one pertains to those who in faith accept him as their Savior and Redeemer. To them, He is the Father of the regenerating truth and light that leads to eternal life. Thus, by obeying the gospel, men and women become the sons and daughters of Christ in the eternal relationships of life that lead to immortal glory. Explained King Benjamin, when his people made a covenant to take upon themselves the name of Christ:

And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters, for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters. (Mosiah 5:7.)

While commenting upon Isaiah's prophetic biography of Christ, recorded in Isaiah 53, Abinadi stressed that it is by accepting Christ's atonement that we become His sons and daughters. Isaiah had written: "When thou shalt make his [Christ's] soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed." (Isaiah 53:10.) To this statement, Abinadi commented:

... And now what say ye? And who shall be his seed?

Behold I say unto you, that whosoever has heard the words of the prophets, yea, all the holy prophets who have prophesied concerning the coming of the Lord—I say unto you, that all those who have hearkened unto their words, and believed that the Lord would redeem his people, and have looked forward to that day for a remission of their sins, I say unto you, that these are his seed, or they are the heirs of the kingdom of God.

For these are they whose sins he has borne; these are they for whom he has died, to redeem them from their transgressions. And now, are they not his seed? (Mosiah 15:10-12.)

Here are some of the great truths about Christ that were revealed and clarified through a modern prophet. Jesus is not merely an historic fact—a Being who lived some 2,000 years ago. He is more than this. He is today a living reality. Today, He is a divine and glorified Being who sustains all things by the word of his power. Having seen our resurrected Lord and God, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon gave us this testimony:

And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness;

And saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever.

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

For we saw him even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. (D&C 76:20-24.)

It is also my testimony that Christ lives today, that he is the light and the life of the world, that into his hands all things have been committed. And I bear to you this testimony in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
