Henry Eyring, Reflections of a Scientist ( 1983)

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT

Once, after World War II, I was teasing a Belgian a little bit. He said, "There has never been a good German, ever!" I said, "There must have been one by mistake sometime." He then asked me what nationalities I came from, and I replied, "I'm half German and half English." He said, "The worst two nations on earth!" Apparently, considering my hereditary background, you may want to take serious thought before continuing with this book.

It takes several ingredients to make a good scientist. One is being bright, in seeing and grasping ideas quickly. Another is a sense of self-worth that allows you to keep struggling along even when you might seem lost in the woods for the moment. It seems to me that both heredity and environment play a role in these attributes. Undoubtedly, the prospective scientist should arrange to be born with the right genes. Anyone who has examined the differences between individuals with presumably equal training cannot escape this conclusion. However, even a gifted person requires a stimulating environment.

Ideally, a stimulating environment also provides a sense of safety and well-being. It might even make you feel a little better about yourself than a completely unbiased evaluation would seem to warrant. Lowell Bennion, speaking from his wide experience in teaching in the LDS Institute at the University of Utah, said it this way: "At first I thought the big problem of university students would be questions in logic and philosophy, but I soon found out that when they were happy and socially accepted, their imagined difficulties melted away."

To illustrate this with my own life, let me tell you about a happy childhood that may seem long ago and far away to you, but seems yesterday and close to me.

I was born in 1901 and grew up on ranches and farms in Mexico and Arizona in a devoutly Mormon family. I don't remember my grandfather Henry Eyring, since he died the year after I was born. I grew up with the image (from what my parents had told me) of him giving me a name and a blessing when I was a baby. They said he was so pleased with his namesake that he cried. Likewise, I am delighted to bear his name.

Grandfather, who spoke seven languages and was well educated in his native Germany, came to America as an eighteen-year-old with his sister, after his father had lost the family fortune in a business venture. Grandfather said later that the loss was actually a blessing because he was more susceptible to the teachings of the Church as a clerk in a wholesale drug firm in St. Louis than he would have been as a prosperous apothecary in Germany.

In later life he ran a cooperative store in Colonia Juarez, one of the Mormon colonies in Mexico. It was said that he could have run it as his own business, for his own profit, but chose to continue as a cooperative because that benefited others. Porfirio Diaz, president of the Mexican republic for thirty years, stated in a letter that Henry Eyring was one of the most strictly honest men he had ever met. Such a grandfather, especially one with the same name, was and is a great comfort and strength to me.

I remember visiting Grandmother Eyring. Her maiden name was Mary Bommeli. She was from Canton Turgau in Switzerland, where she and other family members had joined the Church. She helped send her family to Utah and stayed behind to earn her own passage. She and Henry Eyring met as fellow pioneers in an 1860 wagon train west. Grandfather described the trip as follows: "On my journey across the plains I became acquainted with [Mary] . . . , and we had many pleasant and useful conversations with each other while walking to-gether in advance of the train. . . . I enjoyed myself excellently while crossing the plains, walking nearly the whole distance, and to me it was more like a pleasure trip, than a toilsome pilgrimage."

Grandmother was stake Relief Society president in Mexico well into her eighties. She would drive two hundred miles or more in her buggy to visit all the Relief Society organizations in the stake.

I would go often to see my Grandmother Eyring. She lived in a paradise, as far as she could make it. There were roses and flowers everywhere, and lots of grapes. She was always working in her garden—hauling manure in a wheel-barrow from the corral, putting it over her sandy soil, then watering it enough so that the garden was always beautiful. Nothing else in town was as nice, I don't think.

The first thing she'd do whenever she'd see me coming was to go down to the cellar and bring me two big, red apples. She was too busy with her own thoughts to spend much time hearing any of my wisdom. She had more interesting things to do, but she was awfully nice to me.

The Piedras Verde River ran along the west side of our property in the town of Colonia Juarez. Our ranch was about seven miles outside of town. When I was two years old, I was put up on my father's unsaddled horse while my mother and father led the horse to the river for a drink after a full day's work on the ranch. When the horse finished drinking, he shook himself, as horses do, and I fell into the river. As my father fished me out, I immediately asked to be put back on the horse. I never remember a time when I did not ride horses.

When I was four I had typhoid fever and nearly died. Two things came out of that incident that have made a lasting impression on me. The first was a visit from my Sunday School teacher. Miss Allred was an attractive young lady, and I was proud and happy that she cared enough to visit me. She spoke to me cheerfully and, after a brief visit with my mother and me, went her way. But something important had happened to me. I had been a vital part of a fine teacher-student relationship that I have never forgotten. I learned that day how important it is to care about people, even when they are small and may not seem very important.

The second event connected with my illness was the purchase by my father of two young goats to occupy my time as I recovered. I loved my goats, but they grew rapidly, and by the time I was better, they had discovered how to get into the neighbor's garden despite what appeared to be an adequate fence. They soon became a serious nuisance. My father's solution to the problem was not just to get rid of the goats, as most people would have done. One day he rode up to where I was playing, leading a young sorrel horse, and asked me if I would be willing to trade my two goats for the horse. I was delighted to make the trade, but named my new horse Chivo, which in Spanish means goat. What a wonderful thing, to give his four-year-old the extraordinary respect of bargaining with him as an equal. (Actually, Father was an excellent horse trader, so he gave me a considerably better bargain than a true equal would have enjoyed from him.)

My mother also bestowed constant and lavish praise on me and my brothers and sisters. From my earliest memories, Mother suffused the whole world with warmth and happiness. She was a strong, buoyant, wonderful person whom I took completely for granted.

To her the world and everything in it was beautiful and wonderful, and one couldn't help being swept along with her on a cloud of rosy optimism. Mother expected me to stand at the head of my class in school, and it never occurred to me to try for anything less. Very little was said about this directly, except that every small success was duly noted and appreciated. Mother and Father seldom scolded us, but never passed up a chance to commend us.

Mother was an inveterate worker. She never could rest. One of the things she did was to make woolen socks for me to wear in the winter. I think those socks were made from the kind of hair they used to make hair shirts to punish people with. The things would just stick into my legs like nothing else you ever saw, and I just hated those socks. I can remember one time trying to ease the pain by getting a bucket of water, pulling my sock out, and pouring water down it. This didn't seem to do much good. I was just as bad off after I wet them as I was before. Anyway, it was one of my early experiments. The happiest thing about spring was that we could take off our shoes and go barefoot. I liked that. In the summertime I always went barefoot.

In Mexico, my father was well-to-do and had accumulated a ten-thousand-acre fenced ranch for six hundred head of short-horn Durham cattle and a four-thousand-acre pasture and farmland where he kept from fifty to one hundred head of horses. On one occasion, when I was nine years old, the river through our ranch was at flood stage, and in order to get home, Father and I had to cross the dangerous river or go a long way out of our way to cross a bridge. I thought the river looked very risky, as trees were floating down it. If they were to hit our horses, it would be something of a nuisance. But Father said we could cross, and so we proceeded. He found a place where the river was running deep but slower, and then said, "You ride on the upstream side of me so I'll have a chance to grab you as you go by if your horse slips." We rode our horses across without incident, but I still remember with pleasure my father's confidence in me and my trust and confidence in him.

My father had a way of making everyone feel important. He was never patronizing and always treated people as individuals with rights that he respected. The result was that I would have tried to jump over the moon if I had thought he wanted me to do it.

It was fun to grow up with my father. Riding and working side by side with him everyday was one of the nice things that I had, that my sons haven't had, because we live in a different way. I liked that, except on those days when one of my cousins was having a birthday party and Father would still want me to go to the ranch with him. With over two hundred first cousins I missed a lot of parties.

I have a lot of fine brothers and sisters who I think are proof that there was something good about the combination of heredity and environment in that household, in spite of what you might think of me.
