Henry Eyring, Reflections of a Scientist ( 1983)

THE CHURCH

While living in Mexico, I often saw vivid proof of the importance of the Church as an institution. It was the center of everything. In the Church, we weren't allowed to round dance, but I wasn't old enough to care. But we could square dance. We were just a little bit behind the times.

Then the Mexican Revolution came to disrupt our happy lives. I remember riding with Father and meeting about two hundred soldiers under Don José de la Luce Blanco. That means "Sir Joseph of the White Light." He was blue-eyed, with red whiskers—a Spaniard, of course. Often three or four Americans, soldiers of fortune, would be riding with the revolutionaries. I remember being quite disturbed when I saw this general, riding at the head of his troops, coming toward us on the road halfway between our two ranches, that is, the one that was about a mile from town and the one that was seven miles. I wondered if we shouldn't turn back. But Father laughed, and we rode up and talked to General Don José de la Luce Blanco, and he was friendly. Father told him something about directions and which way he could go, and so on, and then we went on up to the ranch. Father got on very well with the Mexican people. He spoke the language like a native. He liked people and they liked him.

However, more than once my father was coerced into supplying beef for revolutionaries in return for receipts that would be made good if the revolution were successful. There were also numerous exchanges of poor horses for well-bred Eyring horses.

One day a Mexican rebel by the name of Toribio Lara, who had been convicted of theft against the people of Juarez on at least three occasions and had each time been released without punishment, came intoxicated from Casa Grande. He attempted to break in the door of my Grandmother Eyring's home. He threatened to kill her unless she gave him $ 100, a gun, and ammunition. Only the intervention of neighbors prevented a tragedy.

On another occasion, I remember hearing the shot on a warm July day in 1912 when a Mexican, Juan Sosa, was killed in Juarez. Sosa had been accused of a number of thefts, and his arrest was ordered by the acting presidente of Colonia Juarez, Charles E. McClellan. A committee of men were asked to aid the city marshal in arresting Sosa, but as one of the men was climbing through a barbed wire fence, Sosa hit him with the end of his shovel, causing a serious wound. In defense, shots were fired at Sosa by several members of the posse. When it was over, Sosa lay dead on the ground. It took several days of intense negotiation before Mexican officials released members of the posse who had been transported to Casa Grande for a hearing before rebel general José Inez Salazar.

In late July 1912, General Salazar told Mormon leaders that no more assurances or guarantees could be extended, and, in fact, demanded the guns of the colonists to aid the revolutionary forces. The colonists gathered old guns and ammunition and turned them over to Salazar's men. In anticipation of this kind of trouble, the Mormons had earlier secured several shipments of new Springfield rifles and ammunition and had stored them in the bishop's storehouse in Juarez. The revolutionaries didn't know the new rifles were there and would have considered them extremely valuable. Had they realized the deception, they would have been furious.

The townspeople needed to keep them from finding out. My father told me how he, Miles A. Romney, and others smuggled the guns out the back door of the storehouse with Mexican forces encamped in front and the main street patrolled. The guns were taken to caves nearby and eventually to a place called "the stairs" near our ranch. The whole undertaking was extremely dangerous, and had it been discovered, it seems certain that bloodshed could not have been prevented.

The Church leaders met and decided to evacuate the women and children to El Paso. The men would remain behind to protect their property; then when things settled down, they would bring all of their families back. Almost before the exodus was finished, the Mexican rebels began looting the Mormon colonies. The men who had remained could see that their presence would not stop the looting, so it was fight or leave. Within the next ten days the Mormon men were together and on their way to El Paso.

In all, nearly five thousand of the Mormon people were forced to leave behind everything they could not carry and to seek refuge in El Paso. So what I saw was the Church, where law had disappeared, with its organization of stake presidents and bishops, bring us out of Mexico in as orderly a fashion as anything you can imagine. It was done perfectly. Everyone looked to his bishop, and the bishops looked to the stake and its high council. And I thought then, as I think now, that this is the Lord's church and that he is interested in every aspect of our lives. This gospel is functional, it really works. It's the proof that the Savior spoke of when he said to try it and see if it works. (See John 7:17.)

As a youngster I got a picture of this great church in action. I was born in the Church and was taught its principles since infancy, but I saw it work, and I have never forgotten it.

The only error made in the exodus was shipping me out with the women and children. After all, I was eleven years old and thought I should have remained with the men. Well, one mistake is not too bad.
