Henry Eyring, Reflections of a Scientist ( 1983)

CHURCH LEADERS

I've known President Spencer W. Kimball for over sixty-five years. I've never seen or heard anything about him that didn't increase my admiration for him. Not everyone can say that about his brother-in-law. The Lord didn't make a mistake. Not that the Lord needs my endorsement. I don't think we've ever had a leader (and they've all been tremendous) with less ego to be administered to and who identifies himself more with everyone and likes everyone as well as Spencer W. Kimball does. Saying that is not self-serving, because I don't think he cares particularly what I think. But he likes me; at least I think so. That's a measure of how broadminded he is.

Just a thought about Camilla Kimball, my sister. I don't know anything she ever did that wasn't loving, except for the time she tried to put me into a dark closet. That's the only time I can remember her trying to correct me. I wasn't a bad boy, of course; I'm sure she just misunderstood me. She is six years older than I am, and just as she was about to push me into the dark closet and shut the door (I was struggling with everything I had and was filled with all the terror a small boy could have of being in that dark closet under the stairs) I called out, "You fool!" Camilla was devastated. She knew the scripture that says that a man who calls his brother a fool is in danger of hellfire. She was certain I was lost, and let me loose. I've struggled all my life to understand just how bad what I said was, but I still feel relieved that I didn't have to go into that closet. I'm sorry for what I said, and maybe that is repentance.

When I was nine years old and we were living in Mexico, my father was on the high council. High council meetings were held on Saturday, and a time or two Father forgot about his meeting until we had ridden most of the seven miles from our home in town to the ranch to do some chores. My father would say, "Oh my, it's high council today. I'll have to turn around and go back. You go ahead and see about the cattle we were talking about." I thought high council must be a pretty bad thing when it took him away and left me to do the work. But it isn't, it's a good thing. Of course, wives have that feeling also. They wonder why their husbands sit on the stand when they could be down in the congregation doing something useful like refereeing the children's squabbles.

Now I'm on the high council, and what I've noticed is that people of ability leave the high council to become bishops and mission presidents and other things, but if there isn't anything else you can do and you're not bad enough to be released, you just become more and more senior on the high council. So I'm now the senior high councilor in the Bonneville Stake. I think the president will want to keep me there since it's inconspicuous and I do very little harm.

I've had some wonderful opportunities to serve and observe the Brethren at work. I was put on the general board of the Sunday School before I even reached Salt Lake City in 1946. I was at a Sunday School convention in Idaho soon thereafter, and one of the good local brethren questioned me at some length about my family connections. Finally, I happened to mention that Adam S. Bennion, then a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, was my wife's cousin. "Ah ha!" he said. "That's why you're on the general board." Obviously, the quality of my presentations at the convention must have left him puzzled until he found my connection. I didn't have the heart to tell him about Spencer being my brother-in-law and Marion G. Romney being my cousin. Apparently, people are less perceptive in Salt Lake City than in Idaho, because it was twenty-five years before they realized I wasn't going to make a contribution and released me from the Sunday School board.

My day-to-day membership in various "best wards in the Church" have afforded me opportunity to observe our lay leadership. I have never seen a bishop I didn't admire. Maybe it's that I'm not very close in my observations. People have said of me that I think about the molecules to the point that I am confused. But I believe that you could not find a body of men anywhere in the world who are as high in their responsibility and their intention of doing good as the bishops of the Church. I know their salary. I served as a "small bishop," a branch president, in Princeton, New Jersey, for twelve years. Do you know what the salary was? Between about a minus 13 and 15 percent and half my time. When that kind of people preside over you, you can bet your life they believe in what they are doing. They either believe or they are kind of dumb to spend half their time and have their wives (not the good ones, of course) think they have gone off the deep end.

I've watched carefully what happens to that tithing that bishops and the rest of us pay. I've never seen any of it taken up into heaven. It is always used right here to help the people who are around us and to do the things that if we were thoughtful enough we would want to do ourselves. I'm convinced that the money I pay for tithing does more good than I do with the rest of it. I've never seen it misused.

The Church provides me with opportunities to work with other people. My home teaching families know quite accurately when I'm coming. I always get there by the end of the month, and generally there aren't too many guesses left. One can teach by a poor example as well as a good one, and I think I'm rather gifted in that respect.

Don't you enjoy the home teachers? I do. I've always had excellent home teachers. I believe the bishop has felt that I needed to be watched, and I appreciate having two wonderful people come to visit. We sometimes talk about history a little more than my wife thinks is necessary. She'd like to have just the meat of the gospel. I like that too, but I also like to hear about how things looked a long time ago to other brethren who are so prominent in our history.

I never miss a sacrament meeting. Sometimes, because of high council assignments and my own ward schedule, I attend more than one on a Sunday. I always get something useful out of them. Sometimes the talks being given from the pulpit are rather weak. Then I may have to listen awhile before I can figure out what the topic is, but once I have that, I start preparing in my mind a talk on the same subject. "What would I say if that were my theme?" I ask myself. Of course, I'd get more new ideas if I listened to the other fellow, but I enjoy my own thoughts, and I really do listen a lot of the time.

I believe in following counsel. I'd like to do all the things that the Brethren ask me to do. I'm convinced that the prophets are inspired and that I'll be inspired in guiding my family if I listen to them. When I don't follow the counsel of those who are placed over me, then I'm in very deep water. I'm enough of a coward and a poor enough swimmer that that's not where I want to be.

Still, I also like to see one of the Brethren make what appears to be a mistake now and then. I make them all the time. So, I think that if the Lord can use one of the Brethren and they're not perfect, then maybe he can find a way to use me. Some people get all worked up when someone important says something a little differently than they would say it. But I'm delighted. If I can see something less than perfection in our leaders, it gives me hope. I want to go to the celestial kingdom.

I sometimes fall asleep in the temple, but mostly I stay awake. I also doze in church occasionally, but that's because I trust my leaders. If I were worried about what they were doing, I'd stay wide awake.
