Henry Eyring, Reflections of a Scientist ( 1983)

NOSE TO THE GRINDSTONE

You have to be more than bright to be a good scientist. You also have to be interested in what you do. You need to get lost among your friends, the molecules, and rather be roaming around with them than doing almost anything else. If science or whatever else you have chosen to do is just an eight-hour day and then on to other things, you're probably not going to change the world.

I have many of my best ideas at night. I come to work each morning with new ideas. Most of them are wrong, and it is the responsibility of my graduate students to help find the logical errors or the reasons why the ideas are not workable. After examination, about 5 to 10 percent of the ideas are inherently interesting and provide some insight into certain phenomena. Each day is a winnowing and sifting of ideas. You have to develop the ability to distinguish blind alleys from the right track.

It helps not to be too self-critical. Some people are perfectionists and can't stand the messy way most good ideas start. It's better to be a happy muddler.

After you suffer through elementary school, high school, and college, then you get paid well for having fun—it's ridiculous! Still, scientific research isn't all fun. I've written over six hundred scientific publications and an awful lot of proposals for funding, and yet I think of writing as a necessary part of the job, but no great sport. Huxley said, "Perhaps the most valuable result of all education is the ability to make yourself do the thing you have to do when it is to be done, whether you like it or not." I'm not sure educated people have the corner on the stick-to-it-iveness market, but wherever persistence comes from, it makes a big difference.

We're here only once, and each of us likes to do things his own way. I am not a genius who has been driven by an overriding goal. I have no goal other than to do a good job with the task at hand, whatever that may be. Every job is routine. I don't spend much time trying to decide if I like it or not; I just try to do it. I would be just as content gathering garbage, but I'd try to figure out a better way to do it.

In my case, I trace my grindstone-calloused nose to my childhood. The large ranch in Mexico provided plenty to do, and I learned young how to work hard. In Chihuahua, one of the most unpleasant jobs came during dry season, June to mid-July. During this period I and my younger brother Edward were expected to herd fifty to one hundred of the lean cattle in the alfalfa fields. Our job was to keep the cattle from eating too much in order to prevent their bloating and eventually dying. The work was not physically difficult, but it was long and tiring, and we prayed regularly for the summer rains to come to our relief.

In 1912 the Mexican revolution drove us across the border to El Paso. The five thousand or so refugees strained the town's facilities, and we spent several weeks in an unfinished house down on the riverbottom. It didn't have any windows or screening, and the mosquitoes almost carried us off. As soon as she could, mother found my younger brother and me work. I don't remember being particularly enthusiastic about this at first, but mother was a great motivator.

When father arrived, he arranged to rent a better house. Then the younger children went to school, but my brother Ed and I continued to work to help support the family. We worked at Calisher's department store as "cash boys" at $2.00 for a sixty-three-hour week. But you can't keep a good man down. By the time we left El Paso a year later, I was up to $3.50 per week. If you divide $2.00 by sixty-three hours, you get just a little over three cents per hour. Still, in 1912, in El Paso, you could buy a loaf of bread or a quart of milk for a nickel, so it helped the family quite a lot. After a short time as errand boy, I obtained work as a delivery boy at a grocery store owned by the Vinghouse family.

Each morning I would put on my roller skates, pick up my lunch pail, and head down the hill from our house to the grocery store. The interesting thing about the trip was that the sidewalk was two feet above the street, and at the bottom of the hill one had to go down steps to cross the road. However, for me it was much more of a challenge to descend the hill, then jump, going full speed, from the sidewalk into the road. In nearly every case I would fall down, losing my lunch pail in the crash. After picking up my scattered lunch, I would continue on to work. During the entire year in El Paso, I can remember only a few times that I made a successful jump, but I kept trying.

After we had lived a year in El Paso we decided that things in Mexico weren't going to settle down. Father had two wives—Romney girls—and they didn't want to go back to Mexico. Like me, he always did what his wife told him. I'm not sure just how he decided which one to obey, but he obeyed one or the other all the time.

We moved to southeastern Arizona and, after brief stays in Solomonville and Safford, Father purchased a livery stable in Thatcher. During the summer of 1914 I was given the responsibility of taking care of it. One of my duties was to rent out buggies. My best customers were the young men of Thatcher who would take a buggy to go courting their girl friends.

Sometimes your business can get you into trouble. We lived in the old academy building next to the stable. The old academy grounds had a big lot which Father, during the first week we were there, rented to a Seventh-Day Adventist preacher, to put up a tent to hold a revival meeting in this Mormon town. When I went to Sunday School, the boys said, "Ah hah! Here comes the Seventh-Day Adventist." To a Mormon boy those were fighting words. So, I asked them if they wanted to fight. They said they did. I said, "All right, it's time for Sunday School right now, but afterward let's go down by the big irrigation ditch behind the high school and we'll settle it." (Spencer W. Kimball lived right across the street from the church at that time, so I could have been in good company, but I was not making the most of my opportunities.) My Sunday School teacher was my second cousin, Lela Lee. She gave a good lesson about the apostle Paul. It wasn't really the sort of thing I needed for the business at hand, but I enjoyed it.

After Sunday School was over we went down away from the church so we wouldn't be disturbed. There were about seven boys from Thatcher, and me. It was one against seven, but it was an honorable group. They sat down on a bench— about six of them in a row. I went to Tennison Wood first and asked him if he wanted to fight. He said no. I asked about four others and they each said no, too. The last fellow, a Clarson boy, said he wanted to fight. So we fought, but I was really a little better than he was, so I put him out of business (not very seriously, but I hit him so he was pretty sure that he'd had enough). So he withdrew.

One of the boys, Barney, was sixteen years old. He decided that was not the way that sort of thing ought to end; that the local people shouldn't have their champion disposed of in that fashion; and that he'd better uphold the honor of Thatcher. I was thirteen, so he was lots bigger— big as mountains. I knew I was in trouble, but I had to fight anyway. So I rushed him as fast as I could and hit him hard with my body when he didn't expect it. This knocked him over, and I fell on top of him. That gave me a momentary advantage. But he was bigger than I was and just rolled me over so that I was under him. He pummeled my face and just made a beauty of me. My eyes were swollen practically shut and my nose was bleeding and everything. That was fine. That was the way the battle went sometimes. He had decided to teach me a lesson, which he did, although I didn't learn anything, but I should have. After he'd pounded me what he thought was enough, he let me up and I wandered on home.

When I got there, the folks were eating dinner—they hadn't waited for me. They just thought it was hilarious to see me come in with the signs of battle on me. I don't remember that much was said. I'm sure they were against a fellow fighting on the Sabbath, but I think they thought I ought to have learned something. I don't think I had, except to hit the guy harder next time. So I went back to renting buggies and reading books when I could.

One day, however, a man came in and told a lurid story about how his grandmother was dying in Pima and how he needed to go see her before she died. I let the man take a horse and saddle on the promise that he would pay me when he returned. As it turned out, he had recently gotten out of jail, and he used our horse to rob a bank in the nearby town of Wilcox. The man was caught, however, and the horse and its saddle were returned to our livery stable.

On another occasion, I had to take a man to Eden, Arizona, in a buggy, and then return to Thatcher, a distance of ten miles. On the return trip, I became lost because of my unfamiliarity with the territory. Fortunately, I ran into a young couple who had rented one of our buggies, and I followed them back to Thatcher, arriving very late that night.

In the fall of 1914 Father sold the Thatcher livery stable and bought a ninety-eight-acre farm in Pima, Arizona. This was our last move. We made the six-mile journey to Pima with all our worldly possessions and the children on a hay wagon. The adults rode in a buggy, and a cow was led behind. We made quite a procession.

The farm had only a small two-room house on it when we arrived, a bit crowded for our large family, so part of the family lived in a tent, part in the house, and the other boys and I slept in the barn. We just made our beds on the straw and corncobs in the corncrib. I remember getting up one morning and taking up my trousers to put them on and seeing a great, long centipede inside. I must say, I shook him out before I put them on.

About forty acres of the ninety-eight-acre farm were already being worked. To get the rest under cultivation, we had to clear the land of brush and mesquite. The mesquite would first have to be cut with an ax. Then we'd take a shovel and dig around the roots, and then with a pick ax chop the roots out. After we got the trees out, we'd hook a team on each end of a long, steel rail, the kind the railroad uses, and drag this rail across the land to pull out the brush, which we would burn.

Then came the plowing. The ground was baked just as hard as it could be. It was like adobe. But we had to plow it the first time before we could water it. One time, my job was to plow three acres that had never been plowed before. I had a mule and a mare hooked together on the plow, and every time the plow would bounce out of the ground, the mule and mare would start trotting, since they preferred pulling without having to pull hard. I would cry, try to slow them down so I could get the plow back in the ground, and cuss a little.

In thinking back on it later, when I'd be struggling with a particularly difficult scientific problem, I'd remember grubbing mesquite. I'd know that I could fail as a scientist and still make a living back on that farm in Arizona. There was a sense of security in that. But the memories also provided a certain incentive to succeed at my studies.

I think that those good, hard old days have helped me with my science. I have sometimes been lazy about going to the bottom of some mathematical proposition needed in my research and have spent considerable time figuring out ways of getting along without the information. The inevitable outcome of such a course is that the particular miserable question keeps recurring until I finally dive in and clean the matter up once and for all. I then wake up surprised to discover myself on a peak with vast vistas in all directions, and I wonder why I didn't pay the honest price in the first place.

So I like to work most of the time. I don't take vacations—why should I? I give seventy-five lectures a year at many places all over the world.

To find truth, you have to try, and you have to persist in trying. Sometimes it's fun. Sometimes it's hard or boring. But it's always worth it.
