Henry Eyring, Reflections of a Scientist ( 1983)

FREEDOM THROUGH OBEDIENCE

Some people stumble on the notion of obedience, but I think that obedience is the price of freedom. That may sound paradoxical—if you are tied down by rules, how can you be free? Long ago I learned how to win freedom from my regular responsibilities as a schoolteacher: by fulfilling those duties over and beyond what is required. I've taught a full course load all four quarters every year since I arrived at the University of Utah in 1946. You see, I don't even have to know the requirements because I'm already doing way more.

I learned this trick early. One day I was late for my eighth-grade class. My teacher, Miss Ledwich, said, "For being late, before you go home tonight you must recite ten verses of Gray's `Elegy in a Country Churchyard.' I'll have you say it just when school is over." I decided that was fine; I would learn all of Gray's Elegy. So when we were just getting ready to go home, she said, "Henry, do you want to recite those ten verses?" I got up and recited the ten verses and then just kept going. Finally she said, "Sit down, sit down!" So, I went home with everyone else. Actually, I was just trying to indicate that I was not really rebellious— giving her full measure, and then some.

The same is true of the law of the land. If I live a higher standard than the law requires there is complete freedom from all legal strictures, and the law becomes a protecting shield against every illegal invasion of my rights by others. If I always obey the speed limits, then I don't have to own a "fuzzbuster" or keep an eye out for patrol cars. In fact, I'm glad to see them because they make me feel safer.

I don't think I ever was much impressed with the fun of being an outlaw. One incident during the same year I was in Miss Ledwich's class impressed this on me. I was a scout. I'm sure I made it all the way through Tenderfoot, and I believe I made Second Class, but I'm not quite sure. We had our regular meetings on Wednesday night. One Wednesday the scoutmaster was busy and we didn't have our scout meeting. Now, Father never thought that any of his boys should roam the streets at night, so I never did. I stayed home unless I had some specific place to go. I was allowed to go to scouting, but they didn't hold it this night.

Some of my scouting comrades wanted to climb up on Bishop Weech's movie theater. There were two buildings right together, and you could go up on one and cross over to the theater. If you lifted up some tin from the roof, you could see the movie. The theory was that Bishop Weech wouldn't care since we wouldn't have gone to the show anyway, and all we would do is just look at it, so he was just as well off as before. I knew better, but I had my image with my peers to protect.

The way they proposed getting up on the roof was to crawl up a long plank that they leaned against the twelve-foot top of the wall. It was steep. If we fell, we'd hit some very hard dirt at the bottom. I thought it was dangerous. They said, "You don't dare climb up that plank." And I didn't. I was afraid to climb it. I didn't want to see Bishop Weech's movie without paying for it. I was a physical coward, but I was even more of a moral coward. So when they dared me, I crawled up the plank on my knees, holding on for dear life.

I got up on the roof and was looking at the movie through the hole in the roof. You could hear the tin crack for half a mile when we pulled it back. There wasn't any question about whether we advertised ourselves. We hadn't been looking at the movie for more than five minutes— there was a big moon that night; I saw that moon like I'd never seen it before—when pretty soon I saw, coming up a ladder, Brother Grover Malloy—the town marshall—and Bishop Weech. Brother Malloy came over to where we were and shone a light in our faces so he knew who we were. (He was my priesthood teacher, too.)

He arrested us and took us over to the justice of the peace, who was also my Sunday School teacher, Brother Halladay. Brother Halladay was busy right then running the dance in the pavilion, so we had to wait until quite late before we could be taken before him. It was too late to try us that night so he bound us over to appear the next day at four o'clock at his house to be tried for this wickedness of climbing up on the theater.

I went home that night a very unhappy boy. I told my father what had happened. He said, "Eyrings don't do that sort of thing. I don't know of any of our people who have had that sort of an experience before. I'm ashamed of you, but I'll help you out this time. If you ever get into this kind of a mess again, you'll have to get yourself out of it." Well, I wasn't very proud.

When the half-dozen of us got to Brother Halladay's the next day, we were ushered into his office. He had a lot of shelves just full of law books. You ought to have seen it. He'd get one law book down and look at it to find the punishment for this crime, then get another one to see what to do for that crime. Finally, after about ten or fifteen minutes just looking to see what the law was, he finally talked to us. He said, "This is a very serious matter. You're young, just boys, and I think you don't understand the gravity of this thing, but just this time we're going to let you go. If you ever do it again, you'll be in real trouble." I never felt so relieved in my life to know that I wasn't to be known as a criminal. He didn't keep any record of the trial, so we were turned free on the promise that we wouldn't ever do it again. I've steered a careful course ever since.

Natural laws require obedience, too. If you fall off your moving bicycle, the laws of gravity, momentum, and friction take their toll. Swallow poison and, unless you take the antidote, you'll suffer the consequences. The aspiring scientist must comply strictly to every detail of natural law. In no other way can he probe the mysteries of the world around him. The launching of a space probe to land on the moon or to pass by Saturn or Jupiter and photograph their surfaces and afterward relay the pictures back to earth is a triumph of painstaking and detailed obedience to natural law.

When I was about eight years old, Father bought another home in Colonia Juarez on the west side of the Piedras Verde River, right next to the Academy. One day, my friend Viv Bentley, my brother Ed, and I decided it would be interesting to hitch my little black saddle horse to our buckboard. He was a gentle horse to ride, but he hadn't been broken to pull a rig, and it scared him to death. I got into the buckboard after I'd harnessed him and put him inside, and he took off like he'd been shot from a gun. I could keep him slowed down at first, so that we got out through the gate all right onto the main road, but then he started running. He was so scared I couldn't hold him. I hadn't gone very far when he went across a ditch. That threw me out of the seat against the end-gate in front of me, and, trying to catch myself, I lost the reins. So then he was just running free down the street as fast as he could go. As we went across the high school grounds my Uncle Thomas, mother's brother, says he yelled, "Jump! Jump!" But I didn't hear him. I was just watching the horse. I couldn't have jumped anyway. I was just trying to hang on. I didn't know how it was going to end, but I knew that hitting the ground at that speed would not be much fun.

A man by the name of Earl Header had his horse right there on the grounds where he and some friends were playing baseball. He got onto his horse and came riding after me. The horse had been running away for about four city blocks, about half a mile, and he turned a corner and went up a street, then turned another corner in about two blocks, then turned another corner and headed off for the fields. I was beginning to wonder where I would spend the night, if he went all the way to the ranch. I didn't have to worry, because Earl came riding up on his horse (he was an excellent horseman), reached over and got the reins, wrapped them around his saddlehorn, and slowed his own horse down, and that stopped my horse.

When we got back, the men decided they'd teach the horse not to run away, so they put a man in the buggy, let the horse start a little bit, and then pulled back on him and even threw him down. I told them not to do that. I liked that horse, and had no ill will against him. I had the feeling that he was just scared, and I thought he did just what he ought to under the circumstances. I was the one who didn't obey the rules of handling horses, and he was getting punished.

I thought no more about deserving punishment until in the morning, in devotional at school, when Aunt Ann, one of my mother's sisters who was the principal of the school, got up right after the opening song and prayer and, in a trembling voice, spoke of seeing her sweet little nephew— she hadn't realized until then how much she loved him— almost killed. It was awful. The embarrassment of that moment was punishment enough.

The summer after my junior year in mining engineering at the University of Arizona, I got work at the Inspiration Copper Company in Miami, Arizona. I found out that Newton was dead wrong. He said that apples fall on your head, but it turned out to be rocks. And that impressed me. Once I was working as a timberman, and a large rock fell on my left foot. My boot filled partially with blood, and I was on the disabled list for a time. During another shift I worked, three men were killed in three separate accidents. I was just smart enough to realize that that wasn't particularly the way I wanted to die, so I changed professions. Even though, as a mining engineer, I wouldn't have had to go down into the mines myself, I didn't want to send anyone else down there, either. I obeyed my own "natural law": If it scares you, don't do it.

In the spiritual realm, the attainment of any blessing is predicated upon obedience to the laws that govern that blessing. (See D&C 130:20-21.) The Prophet Joseph Smith was surpassed by some in secular learning, but he was unsurpassed by anyone in his humble willingness to learn. He was genuinely teachable and was always willing to yield obedience to the promptings of the Spirit. Obedience to gospel principles can make man master of himself, and thus of his own destiny. There is no greater freedom than this.

Obedience to the laws of health, including the Word of Wisdom, frees man from the restrictions that come from bodily ills. Tobacco is filthy. If I had to smoke to be a member of the Church, I suppose I'd make the sacrifice, but I'd surely feel imposed upon. Alcohol is much the same thing. A lot of people are so bright that they have to dull their senses with alcohol in order to be on a par with the rest of us. Well, I start at a low enough level that I don't have that problem. I'm dumb enough and make mistakes on my own.

Once I was in an informal discussion of longevity with some medical school faculty members. One of the doctors mentioned statistics that indicated that moderate drinkers live longer than teetotalers and remarked, "So you see, Henry, we are going to live longer than you." I replied, "But I am going to a better place."

Being a member of the Church is no sacrifice. People come up to me and say, "You're a scientist; isn't it wonderful that you're a member of the Church." I say, "I'm just trying to look after my own hide." I don't have to be noble. I'm just smart enough to try to take care of my own interests. There isn't a thing I'm expected to do in the Church that isn't the best thing for me.

I can understand that some people might want to see football on Sunday. In gladiatorial combat they were even crueler; they killed each other. In football all they do is cripple each other so that they can't pray. They wreck their knees so that at best they have to pray standing up. I want to be able to kneel down to pray. I don't have to make any sacrifice to be a member of the Church.

When I obey good rules and wise laws, even a little better than I'm required to do, other people leave me alone, and I'm free to do those good and right things that the best part of me wants to do anyway.
