Henry Eyring, Reflections of a Scientist ( 1983)

WARTS AND SKELETONS

The Church was planning the new Church magazines, which would begin to appear in 1971. As a member of the Sunday School General Board I got a letter from Richard L. Evans, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, to come to a meeting about the new magazines along with a great many other people. The night before the meeting, I was visiting my sister Camilla and her husband, Spencer W.Kimball, and I said, "I am going to a meeting for the magazines." Spencer said, "I am going, too, at nine o'clock." In the morning, my secretary was gone, and I was a little bit late, so I hurried down to the Church Office Building. I went in and said to the receptionist that I was supposed to go to a meeting. He said, "Well, isn't it this afternoon?" I said, "No, it's this morning." And so he took me in and there were four apostles—Spencer W.Kimball, Marion G. Romney, Brother Evans, and Howard W. Hunter —and the magazine editors. I was quite surprised that no one else was there from the Sunday School, but I thought, "Well, they must regard me very highly," and so I just sat down. The discussion went around, and I was willing to offer my view quite freely. However, Brother Evans said, "Your turn will come in a few minutes."

When they got around to me, I told them that the Church magazines never would amount to a darn if they did not get some people with independence in there who had real ideas and would come out and express themselves. If they were going to rehash old stuff, they would not hold the young people. I gave them quite a bit of very fine advice and I cussed a little when I wanted to, and when I got through, Brother Evans said, "I do not know anyone who characterizes the idea of independence any more than you do. Are you applying for the job?" I said, "No, I am not applying for the job, but I think I have given good advice."

I did not have any feeling, even after I had been there, that anything was wrong, and thought that they must have a high opinion of my wisdom. When I got back to my office, my secretary asked, "Where have you been?" I said I had been down to the Church magazine meeting. She said, "That is this afternoon at two o'clock."

What is so funny is not that I made a mistake, but that I was so insensitive as to not realize it. I didn't go to the two o'clock meeting. I felt I had done my work. Brother Evans got up in that meeting and, I am told, said that they had had a meeting in the morning and that very useful advice had been supplied by Brother Eyring. He did not say I had not been invited.

I was amazed at the graciousness of the Brethren in making me feel I belonged, when any one of them might well have been annoyed. They are a most urbane group. On my part, there was no holding back; I just tried to help them all I could.

However, the point I was making at that meeting still interests me. We should be willing to enjoy a full picture of our heroes, leaders, and history. I believe that when we ignore the "darker side" we leave ourselves unprepared for the revelation of some unhappy deed or event of past or present. We might be better off if we leave the warts on and let a few of the skeletons out of the closets ourselves for open examination. On the other hand, there are dangers in debunking everyone and everything that is a little above the ordinary. We ought to seek a happy balance of letting the truth flow forth without either hiding or digging for problems.

For example, I believe the biography of my brother-in-law, President Spencer W.Kimball, is excellent. It portrays a mortal, such as I am, struggling to do the best he can. I know him well, and everything I know about him is good. I admire him a great deal, and his biography helped me appreciate him even more. It showed that even while he was doing more than almost anyone else has ever done, he still worried about whether it was enough. He may have even done a "human" thing or two. How wonderful! That helps me admire even more the magnificent leader he is.

I've often said that I would be delighted to have someone point out some flaw in the Book of Mormon that proved that Joseph Smith made an error in translating or inserted some idea of his own that wasn't on the plates. Of course, he might have been inspired to deviate. But even if I thought otherwise, that would merely prove that he was human, a fact about which I was already quite sure. It would also show that the Creator is tolerant of a mistake now and then. These seem quite hopeful ideas to me, since I am clearly human and have made at least my full share of mistakes.

An example of what I am talking about is the recent discovery of the papyrus scrolls from which Joseph Smith was presumed to have translated the book of Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price. Modern scholars, looking at the scrolls, found nothing they considered to be similar to that book. I remarked at the time that such a finding didn't bother me in the least. God doesn't need a crib sheet in the form of a papyrus scroll to reveal Abraham's thoughts and words to Joseph Smith, with any degree of precision He considers necessary for His purposes. If the only function of the scrolls was to awaken the Prophet to the idea of receiving such inspiration, they would have fulfilled their purpose.

Scientists don't know everything about every topic either. I suspect that if I asked you to name a scientist, you would first think of Albert Einstein. Certainly he was an extraordinarily able man, but he didn't know everything.

I went to Princeton in '31. Einstein came in '33. I left in '46, so we overlapped thirteen years. In all that time I think I talked with him about ten hours. Obviously, he had other things to do than chat with me. You would have thought that with the charm I have that he would have wanted to talk to me all the time, but it didn't work out that way.

On one such occasion a man from the Navy and I spent the morning with Einstein at his home talking about high explosives. I think he was more interested in relativity than high explosives, but he was not a bad chemist. He didn't talk sense all the time because he had been studying astronomy and physics and such things. At noon we walked out into what had been a rose garden, but in wartime had been replanted as a victory garden. Now, I'm a farmer from Pima, so I guessed what the crop was, but I didn't know whether Einstein knew or not. So I picked up a plant and asked him what it was. He didn't know. We walked about a hundred yards to where the gardener was sitting on his wheelbarrow. As I walked by, I asked him what it was. He said, "They're soybeans." Well, I thought what you would have thought: "Einstein doesn't know beans." More than that, he had walked past that crop four times a day since it had been planted, and it was now ready to harvest. So there wasn't much hope that he would ever know, which is kind of a pitiful thing. But he knew everything else. He was just weak on beans.

Albert Einstein and I, along with everyone else, may have some foibles and weaknesses. These should be happily admitted, while at the same time giving due credit and appreciation for what valuable contributions are made. Let's tell it like it is, with adequate positive emphasis. Let's leave the warts and examine the skeletons.

Now, I'm not sure I was right about what should be done with the Church magazines. Perhaps the more inquisitive and sometimes not quite comfortable side of truth shouldn't be explored in official Church publications by Church employees or leaders. But I think there is a place for such inquiry when conducted as responsible scholarship.

I have one caution about scholarship as it relate to the Church, its history, leaders, and doctrines. We need to be continually reminded that however interesting some such topic might be, it has no relevance to religious faith, one way or the other. You can't intellectualize your way to a testimony. There will always be another question beyond the one you have just answered. Incidentally, the same is true of science. None of its findings are final. Still, some people seem to stumble when they run into a contradiction.

I have trouble understanding why people drift away from the Church. I'm sure the reasons are different and varied. I can understand if a person wants to misbehave and has to rationalize to himself. He has to think he's all right. But I also understand that people who think they have to be as smart as the Lord, understand everything, and have no contradictions in their minds may have trouble. There are all kinds of contradictions that I don't understand, but I find the same kinds of contradictions in science, and I haven't decided to apostatize from science.

In the long run, the truth is its own most powerful advocate. The Lord uses imperfect people. He often allows their errors to stand uncorrected. He may have a purpose in doing so, such as to teach us that religious truth comes forth "line upon line, precept upon precept" in a process of sifting and winnowing similar to the one I know so well in science.
