Henry Eyring, Reflections of a Scientist ( 1983)

THE SCRIPTURES

The scriptures record God's dealing with his prophets, and they are as accurate as God, in his wisdom, requires. They are particularly important in showing us how to live and treat one another. Such injunctions for living as "Love thy neighbor as thyself" are powerful tools in the hands of believers for shaping a better world. We can study the scriptures long and hard every day and still be struggling with the practical application of these great principles in our lives.

My family and I were having dinner one night with Spencer and Camilla. The doorbell interrupted us at one point, and Spencer went to give some time (and apparently substance as well) to a caller.

This prompted me, upon his return, to relate an experience with a visitor in my home of a few nights earlier. This fellow was an apparently destitute member of a minority group who had come to see me about once a year for the previous two or three years. He always had a wonderfully sorry story to tell and would introduce me to his wife or other companions and ask if I could help him out. One year I gave him my sweater and some money, and other years just money.

On this most recent occasion, however, alcohol had rendered him decidedly strong of breath and wobbly of gait, and his "wife" was not the same one as in the previous year. I gave him twenty dollars and sent him on his way with the stern admonition that he shouldn't come back again. (Indeed, I've not seen him since, and this was twenty years ago.)

The conversation turned to the particularly troublesome scripture in this regard in Mosiah: "And ye will not suffer that the beggar putteth up his petition to you in vain, and turn him out to perish. Perhaps thou shalt say: The man has brought upon himself his misery; therefore I will stay my hand, and will not give unto him of my food, nor impart unto him of my substance that he may not suffer, for his punishments are just—But I say unto you, O man, whosoever doeth this the same hath great cause to repent; and except he repenteth of that which he hath done he perisheth forever, and hath no interest in the kingdom of God." (Mosiah 4:16-18.)

I asked Spencer what he thought of my chances and how he dealt with that particular scripture, since he must have a never-ending stream of such visitors. His eyes twinkled, and he smiled slightly as he said, "I always read fast when I get to those verses." He didn't mean it, of course. I don't know anyone who comes closer to meeting the high standard of that scripture than Spencer, but it's nice to know that he understands the rest of us.

The scriptures set a high standard for the ways we should treat each other. In addition to teaching us how to live and relate to one another, the scriptures give us insight into the system of rules and laws within which God works and relates to us: "Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." (Matt. 7:14.) "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.) Apparently, even God is subject to the laws of justice and mercy: "What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:25.) The scriptures teach us, therefore, that it isn't enough to be good neighbors and honest with our fellowmen and do all other good and kind things. We must also be obedient and conform to the prescribed ordinances of the gospel, such as baptism and the temple ceremonies.

I was baptized a member of the Church by John C. Harper, a veteran of the Civil War, in the Piedras Verde River, which flowed through Colonia Juarez, where I lived. Brother Harper was a fine old gentleman whom we all admired and who performed most of the baptisms there. Father confirmed me a member of the Church the following Sunday.

Christ himself was baptized "to fulfill all righteousness." (Matt. 3:15.)

God has told us that the scriptures are incomplete. We are promised that we will receive more when we have mastered the lessons of what we have. Hence, teaching us how to live and treat others and how to obey the rules and laws of the gospel is the primary purpose of the scriptures; they are spiritual guides to religious questions. Of course, the scriptures do treat incidentally scientific, historical, and other nonreligious questions. In these areas, they should be supplemented by all relevant information. Viewed in this light, most problems disappear. I am obliged, as a Latter-day Saint, to believe whatever is true, regardless of the source. Questions involving the age of the earth, pre-Adamic man, or organic evolution may seem to us to be interesting and important. However, I doubt that God thinks they matter enough to have provided definitive explanations in our current scriptures. They will all receive adequate answers in due course. Whatever the ultimate answers are, the gospel will remain, and new questions will take the place of those we solve. For me, the truth of the gospel does not hinge on such questions, interesting as they are.
