Henry Eyring, Reflections of a Scientist ( 1983)

THE SPIRITUAL WORLD

The five physical worlds display order and complexity. The second law of thermodynamics tells us that, even if we can explain this complexity, we have a problem of how it all got started within the working of the natural laws as we understand them. This leaves scientists no better off than anyone else. We all have to rely on a very small measure of information and a very large measure of faith.

This brings us, then, to the sixth world, which includes and surrounds all the others. This is the world that existed before the "big bang." It is the world of the Creator, who provided the energy to wind up the watch and the knowledge and power to establish the complex order we have come to understand in the five physical worlds. As far as we know, this sixth world is without beginning and end of space and of time. Presiding over all is the Creator, whom we worship. Holding everything together are the eternal laws, which will require an eternity for us to master.

One of the first Soviet cosmonauts who circled the earth in space boasted on his return that he hadn't seen anything of God on his journey. This raises the interesting question of where the sixth world and its inhabitants are. Is heaven part of the physical universe as we know it, or is it in some other time and space—in another dimension?

Let's consider the notion of postulates. Postulates are those fundamental propositions that are assumed without proof, generally because there is no way to prove them other than to see if the theories built on them predict events that are then verified by experiments. For example, we all learned as part of our high-school geometry class the postulate that parallel lines never meet. This is a postulate of euclidian geometry. However, if you are willing to walk far enough, I can show you a problem. If you and a friend both start out at the equator and walk due north, you are walking parallel paths. You both start out at right angles to the equator. But, you will meet at the North Pole! (You can check this out by looking at two different degrees of longitude on a globe. Each intersects the equator at a 90 degree angle, but they meet at the poles.) The problem is that plane geometry works only on a plane, a flat, two-dimensional world. It doesn't work when the plane curves into a third dimension.

This points up the importance of examining our postulates, our assumptions. Whether or not a particular theory actually predicts reality or not is more a function of the underlying assumptions than of the elegance of the proof itself. Thus, euclidian geometry is perfect for the flat world for which it was designed, but it results in poor predictions in a three-dimensional world.

The same kind of problem occurs when we begin considering the sixth world. If it curves into a fourth or tenth or hundredth dimension, what basic assumptions should we adopt? Can nothing there travel faster than the speed of light, as in our world? What kind of matter are things made of? Are they subject to the pull of gravity? When they bump against our matter does it hurt? Or do they pass right through? How can we find out?

The avenue to religious faith lies in the examination of evidence. The Lord himself outlined the procedure when he said, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:17.)

The existence of the sixth world is necessary to an understanding of the other five. Put another way, the existence of the five worlds can be adequately explained only if we assume the existence of the sixth world. Of course, we can also look for evidence of the sixth world in history, and directly, by exercising that part of us that shares that other, spiritual dimension.

I worship the wisest being in the universe. I know there is a wisest being in the universe because you can take the wisest person in a room and say,"This is the smartest man in the room—and his wife is smarter." And then you can find the smartest person in the city, then state, then country, then world, then universe. I worship the wisest being in the universe. I know there is such a being. How could there not be? People are different in understanding, and there are lots of them. There must be one who is the smartest.

So I know there is a God. You say, "That still isn't religion." I say, "It is to me, because I can't believe that this wisest being in the universe wants anything except justice." You see, I know some things about him. If you went out in your car tonight and were hit by a drunk driver and killed, there are others who would say, "Isn't it a tragedy that he couldn't live out his life, that he was cut off?" And do you know what they would do if they could? They'd give you another chance.

The wisest being in the universe is surely as compassionate as these good neighbors that we have. He must like justice and not injustice. So I know there is a God. Because otherwise the world would be unjust. This idea takes us a long way toward understanding God. He exists. He is compassionate. He loves justice and relates to us. We are his children. Isn't that a comforting thought? I'm sure of it, but you don't want to believe anything I say unless it's true.

I can say that I am certain that God is just as real as anybody I know, and that he likes me. And that he likes you too. Those are my postulates for the sixth, spiritual world. They perform exactly the same function in helping me understand the sixth world as the postulates of science do in helping me understand the other five.
