Henry Eyring, Reflections of a Scientist ( 1983)

DUALITY IN NATURE AND GOD

Sir Isaac Newton, three hundred years ago, thought of light moving in straight lines and in general behaving much as material particles would. This point of view was given up when the Dutchman Huygens showed that many experiments involving light could be better understood if we thought of light as waves being deflected much as water waves are deflected by the obstructions on a pond. Still later, Maxwell developed the general theory of the wave nature of light to such a degree of perfection that the particle theory seemed completely discredited. The interesting point is that everyone felt that the particle theory and the wave theory of light were mutually exclusive. Light could be a particle or a wave, but it could not be both.

Then, in 1905, Albert Einstein published his theory of the photoelectric effect, for which he was given the Nobel Prize. If light hits a metal surface, electrons are ejected, provided the light is violet enough. Further, the energy with which the electron is ejected is proportional to the frequency of the light and to nothing else. This can be understood if light is made up of particles with energy proportional to their frequency. Einstein called these light particles photons, and with the acceptance of this particle theory, a full-blown paradox was born.

Physicists were at first thoroughly disturbed by this split personality exhibited by light, but as time went on they learned to live with it. It is now accepted that light is made up of the particle-like photons which, however, are accompanied by a wave that governs the direction in which light travels. On the other hand, whenever photons are absorbed by matter, they are swallowed up as a unit, just as any other particle might be.

In the middle 1920s, DeBroglie predicted that particles of matter would be found to have waves associated with them controlling their direction of travel just as light particles have. When a beam of electrons all having the same velocity is directed against a crystal, it is deflected just as light is. Accordingly, we must also think of matter as showing schizophrenic behavior, sometimes acting like a wave and sometimes like a particle. Again, physicists have learned to live with the unexpected behavior.

If we read the story of Robert E. Lee, the great military tactician, we find that even at a large battlefield as complex as Gettysburg, his army was maneuvered as though Lee himself were storming Cemetery Ridge alongside Pickett, as well as being everywhere else on the battlefield. Lee's success as a general depended to a very great extent on the gathering of information about the strength, position, and intentions of his adversary both before and during the battle. The result is that any story of Lee as a general would tell about his influence permeating the whole sphere of his activities and very little about Lee the man. In this sense Lee is two people, the man, like anyone else, and the far-flung intelligence system that governed the motion of him and his army much as a wave is spread out in space and governs the motion of a photon or a material particle.

In an analogous manner, we may think of God as the all-wise arbiter of the universe, with his infinite wisdom having an influence that permeates the most remote recesses of space, and yet being himself an exalted being with personality and deep concern for struggling humanity.

The strange thing is that many people have a struggle with this concept of God having a dual nature. On the one hand are those who prefer God to have only a wave nature—a Universal Mind providing order to the universe, everywhere present but not tied down to any locality. They may reject the idea of a kind of Heavenly Father who loves and cares about us, his children, as being a wishful fairytale.

On the other hand are those who emphasize the particle nature and may fail to understand how much different God is from man. That is, they focus on the similarities—"As man is God once was; as God is man may become" or "God created man in his own image" and miss the enormous differences. It is God who orchestrated the "big bang" 20 billion years ago and set the universe on its way. He it is who devised, promulgated, and now enforces the laws of nature with never-failing accuracy and consistency. I think we may have been with him in the beginning and, as his children, may have participated in some small way. I also believe that we have the opportunity of progressing and eventually coming to be like him, but I have no illusions about how far we have to go. It is a very long way.

One interesting observation I might make has to do with Einstein's religious views. He always said that Spinoza, the philosopher, who had converted in Holland from Judaism to Christianity, was his idea of the most important religious leader. Spinoza believed that God ruled the universe, but that God was very far away. Philosophers would call Spinoza a deist. Mormons would be called theists. We believe that when we pray to God, he hears and influences human affairs. Einstein didn't think that that happened, but he did believe, and used his belief in getting his general theory of relativity, that God wouldn't play tricks. So Einstein assumed that when he knew one law, he could guess another. He said something to the effect that the difficult thing to understand about the universe is that it is understandable. So, I'd have to classify him as a religious man. He was born a Jew but was not interested in Judaism. I don't think he went to synagogue very often, if ever.

Anyway, I find it interesting that Einstein, who won the Nobel Prize for demonstrating that light has both a particle and wave nature, might not have understood or believed that God is both a personage with body and location and a power and influence pervading everything, everywhere. (See D&C 88:41.)
