Henry Eyring, Reflections of a Scientist ( 1983)

REVELATION AND MIRACLES

One of the great messages of the gospel is that there is such a thing as revelation. After I had been at the University of Utah for three or four years, one of the regents of the university, a fine lady, not a member of the Church, said, "Dr. Eyring, I can understand how you as a scientist are religious, but I can't understand how you could believe in a revealed religion." But if I believe in a God who cares about us and is capable of doing anything, how can I not believe in revelation? I can't believe in a religion that doesn't accept that whenever it suits the Lord's purpose, he reveals things to us. That is the great message that the Prophet Joseph Smith brought back to the world.

Now I think there are plenty of times when God probably doesn't think it necessary to get involved. For instance, I've been asked whether I think God helps me with my science. That is, does God steer human efforts such as scientific study? I don't think God cares very much about reaction rate theory. He's known it all along. All he does is in his mind reach out his hand and pat me on the head and say, "That's a nice little fellow. It's nice that you try." I think he cares about how I treat my fellowmen and is not very much impressed with the rest. On his scale, as Creator of the universe, what I have done couldn't be very impressive. After all, he can do integral calculus in his head.

In a long life, I have seen a number of things that border on the miraculous and, to my mind, indicate divine intervention. I recently visited with a dear friend almost my own age who at the age of three was gored by a wild cow. About a yard of his intestines was strewn out on the ground, ruptured in several places. A country doctor was called from town about eight miles away. After arriving in his buggy, he washed the intestines with water as best he could and sewed up the ruptures. He then pushed the intestines back through the hole they had come out of and sewed up the hole in the belly. The doctor went back to town and waited for the family to come make funeral arrangements.

Infection set in, as was inevitable. The family, however, were devout, and they and their friends anointed and blessed the small boy and asked the Lord to spare him. After a few days when no one came to town, the doctor drove out to the ranch to see what had happened. He found the small boy sitting up. The lad's question startled the doctor. It was, "What have you brought me today?" The doctor remarked, "Some power far beyond mine is at work here." Experiences such as this could be multiplied almost indefinitely. Just a natural occurrence? Perhaps, but I don't think so.

The stirring story of Paul on the road to Damascus and the experience that changed him from an implacable foe of the Saints to their foremost defender is as compelling now as it was when it happened. No explanation of these events is as satisfying to me as Paul's own interpretation. He gladly dedicated his life to proclaiming the gospel, and at the end went unflinching to a martyr's death. Was he mistaken? I believe not.

Joseph Smith's story is strikingly similar. His experiences in the Sacred Grove and in many places afterward removed all doubt from his mind. For him, also, a life of dedication led to a martyr's grave. Was he wrong? I don't think so.

Now, what about the miracles of the Bible? Did Moses really turn the Nile to blood, or part the Red Sea? Did manna fall from heaven? First of all, the topic is hardly worth talking about. I don't know the answer, and it doesn't make any difference anyway. These are historical events and can't be confirmed by laboratory experimentation, but if someone could prove to me conclusively that any such miracle in the Bible didn't really happen, but was just hyperbole on the part of the writer or some later translator, I wouldn't lose my testimony. After all, I'm only interested in finding out what the truth is. The only miracle I can think of that makes a difference is the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Whether or not manna really fell from heaven or was just the dried sap of the tamarisk plants in the area doesn't seem to me to have much religious significance.

Second, the Creator of the universe almost certainly knows enough about how things work to control and manipulate events to meet his purposes, either within the rules of natural law or outside them, if necessary. Now, as a scientist, I'm not very enthusiastic about the notion of shoving natural laws aside. I prefer to keep things orderly and predictable. But, as we've noted already, I suspect the Lord can send messages faster than the speed of light, and so, even if natural law, as we understand it, had to be suspended in order for the Savior to walk on the Sea of Galilee, I certainly don't see even that as being an insurmountable problem for the Creator of the universe.

In summary, I accept Jesus as the Son of God, whether or not he walked on the water, and I can't see any reason why he, as the Creator of this world, wouldn't have the power to do it if he wanted to. Revelations and miracles seem like the natural consequences of having a compassionate and just Creator of the universe interested in human events.
