Henry Eyring, Reflections of a Scientist ( 1983)

BEFORE LIFE, AND AFTER

While I was at Princeton, on one occasion Einstein came to a lecture at the University. It was raining, and Dr. Hugh Taylor suggested that we give Einstein a ride home. I don't remember how it came up. Maybe I asked him the Golden Questions. In any case, on the way home I told him that we as Mormons believe in a premortal existence. Not only do we believe in a life after death, but that we lived before we came here. He asked, "What about dogs?" I told him I was a little weak on dogs, but that since we believe that all things are created spiritually before they are created temporally, that God would take care of dogs, too. He seemed to be awfully relieved about that, but he was not so impressed that he immediately asked for baptism. He was very courteous and gracious, however.

Have we lived before? Will we live again? These questions must be almost as old as thought itself. The poet William Wordsworth, in "Ode: Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood," voiced this unforgettable thought in this way:

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting, And cometh from afar: Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home.

To accept the idea that the human personality ends with death is to accept life as a futile, meaningless gesture. Every one of us has friends and loved ones who, if they had the knowledge and power, would preserve us and keep us as companions forever. God has that knowledge and power. He would be less compassionate than many good men if life ended at the grave.

Broken, uncompleted lives are the best possible reason for a hereafter in which the scales of justice are balanced by a just God. To believe otherwise is to attribute to God a lack of sensitivity that we find regularly in good men. Such a supposition is incredible to me. One sees good people cut off by death in their prime. It is impossible to reconcile such incompleteness with any other idea than that we will live again and that what we have lost through no fault of our own will be made up to us in full by a just God. Erwin Schrödinger, the scientist responsible for initiating wave mechanics, was convinced that nothing as remarkable as the human spirit could dissolve into nothingness.

To believe in the immortality of individuals is necessarily to believe in God, since the perpetuation of personality beyond this life without divine interposition is difficult to imagine. Also, if we consider the immense complexity of our mortal body, which works, it is easy to trust the Creator to supply a suitable tabernacle for the next stage of the journey.

We certainly don't know how the resurrection will take place nor how closely the immortal body will be a copy of our mortal one. However, we have learned some very interesting things about regeneration. Just as a salamander can regenerate a limb if it is cut off, so a single human cell, with its chromosomes, has in it the blueprints for generating the whole human body. A knowledge of the responsible molecular blueprints, the chromosomes, and of how to nurture the resultant cell would make it possible to completely regenerate the body, perhaps out of better materials. We also know that at inception life begins as a single cell that carries within it all the blueprints for fashioning the mature body. Further, simply recounting to us the events of earth life would restore to us our past. No doubt this is not the way immortality will be ushered in, but it should suffice to show that even we simple mortals can see the possibility of immortality. How much simpler it must seem to the Creator.

Just what God has in store for us in another puzzle. He's revealed to us some rules for life and at least a broad sketch of what is to come. If we have sense enough to listen, we've got it made. If we don't, it will take a little longer. He's not going to give up on us, if he can help it. He may have to place some of us honorable men of the world in the terrestrial kingdom and some of us, who just insist on being naughty, he may place in the telestial kingdom.

I have a vivid, if inaccurate, image of hell. After I got a master's degree in metallurgy, I went to work in Clarkdale, Arizona, at the United Verde smelter. As a prospective metallurgist, I was taking samples out of the twenty blast furnaces. The superintendent came up to me, slapped me on the shoulder, and said, "Eyring, I like the way you're working out. If you stay here a few weeks I'm going to put you in charge of all twenty blast furnaces." Well, you should have seen the sulfur smoke coming out of there. It looked like the devil himself was running the place. I put a handkerchief dipped in bicarbonate over my face just so I could breathe. I can tell you, when the opportunity came I didn't have any trouble taking a teaching job back at the University of Arizona. I figured that if I misbehaved, I wouldn't be any worse off in the hereafter than working in that smelter.

Now they say that the telestial kingdom really isn't that bad, but I wouldn't try for it. I'm counting on going to the best, which you're not supposed to say, but at least let's have our sights high. I hope the Lord will say, "That man Eyring is not too hot. He could have been lots better. But he also could have been a lot worse. Let's have him in here to smile at." I hope he'll also say, "His good wives would like to have him with them, so let's let him in." So I'm planning on going, but to make it as sure as possible, I'm also working at it as hard as I can.
