Blessings began to flow into my life when I joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at age 18. When the missionaries taught me that families can be together forever, this teaching immediately rang true to my heart, like I knew it before. I loved my family so much that I couldn’t imagine heaven without them.

However, I am the only person in my family who was taught the gospel and was baptized. My family respected my decision to be a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but they are not interested in learning more about the Church.

Elder Dale G. Renlund of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught that participating in family history and temple work brings “increased family blessings, no matter our current, past, or future family situation or how imperfect our family tree may be.”

I have experienced the truth of this promise. Although at times I have felt alone in the gospel, I try to focus on the Lord and trust in His plan of redemption. Temple and family history work has helped me find hope and see that I am part of a great family that includes all of God’s children.

As a new member of the Church, I was taught the importance of gathering family records. I began immediately to keep a journal and research my genealogy. I was surprised and pleased that my parents supported my efforts and showed interest in their heritage. I began to ask them questions about their parents and grandparents.

My father was 71 years old at the time, and his memory of dates and ages wasn’t always accurate. But I learned a lot about his childhood and life experiences. When he passed away two years later, I was so grateful that I had asked him about his life! The little bit of information I received from him was so precious because I was able to research his family’s information and prepare their names for temple work.

With the help of other family members, I also searched for family records. My mother seemed pleased to hear about our heritage, and I believe it softened her heart toward me following my baptism.

Prior to serving a mission, I received my endowment. That same day a kind brother at the temple performed proxy ordinances for my father. After my mission, I was blessed to perform temple ordinances on behalf of my mother, who had passed away shortly before my mission. I felt so much joy when my parents were sealed to each other and I was sealed to my parents.

Later, my joy grew as members of my ward and I performed temple ordinances for some of my ancestors.

Sometimes researching my family tree is difficult because many of my ancestors are from Ireland, where records can be challenging to find. Despite the obstacles, I know that the Lord has helped me. I have found some records through my research, and through DNA testing I have experienced the joy of finding living family members with whom we had lost contact.

Recently the granddaughter of one of my siblings reached out to me to receive help with her family tree. I was thrilled that someone in my family had been inspired to seek out her ancestors. As I see these miracles happen, I feel an assurance that the Lord’s hand is upon our family, that He hasn’t forgotten us, and that I am not alone.

I have also experienced blessings through a Church calling to help others record their family names and histories. And I have been blessed as I attend the temple regularly to perform ordinances for the ancestors of a friend and for my family.

I love the Lord and am so grateful that His redemption covers all people across time. I trust that He has a plan for my family—past, present, and future. I know that all of God’s children will have the opportunity to make covenants and receive His blessings if they accept the gospel of Jesus Christ and come unto Him.

The author lives in Utah.
