After college, I found an opportunity to work at my dream company. On the first day, I told my manager how excited I was. I also told her that honoring the Sabbath was important to me.

She said she would arrange my schedule to ensure that I would not need to work on Sundays. She said the company respected people’s beliefs.

I enjoyed the job and did my best. I could see myself working with the company for years to come.

One day a few months after I had started, my manager said, “I need you to come in on Sunday. We need the whole team together to finish the quarter strong and send good results to headquarters.”

I felt sick to my stomach.

“We talked about this before,” I replied. “I understand you want the whole team to be here, but working on Sunday goes against what I believe.”

Then she stared at me and sharply said, “Sounds like you’re willing to give up this job for your beliefs.”

As much as I loved my job, I was determined to show my love for the Lord by avoiding work on Sunday (see Doctrine and Covenants 59:9–10).

“You would have to work on Sunday only this one time,” my manager added.

That didn’t matter. I would know, and Heavenly Father would know.

“I’m sorry, but it doesn’t work that way for me. I believe that Sunday is a sacred day for me to worship God,” I said.

“OK, you’re fired!”

The words hit me hard. As I walked away, however, I felt the Holy Ghost in my heart. Not working on Sunday was a sign I had chosen to give God of what I thought “was appropriate for the Sabbath.” I knew He would bless me for it. Soon, I found another great job that allowed me to keep the Sabbath day holy.

The Lord promises in 1 Nephi 17:13, “I will also be your light in the wilderness; and I will prepare the way before you, if it so be that ye shall keep my commandments.”

The winds of the world may try to blow us off course from following the Savior. But as we follow Him with faith and strive to obey His word, we will find strength to overcome the world.
