In several different revelations in 1829, the Lord gave repeated commands to participate in a harvest (see Doctrine and Covenants 4; 6; 11; 12; 14). Because some of the verses are repeated in each revelation, we can assume that the Lord has an important message He wants us to learn.

A closer look at the symbols in these passages can help us better understand their significance.

When a field of grain appears white, it is a sign that the grain is finished growing and is ready to be gathered. The harvest can represent bringing God’s children into His kingdom.

A sickle is a tool used for harvesting crops. The sickle has a sharp, curved blade that allows the person using it to cut large clumps easily. It was a simple tool that anyone could use. It can represent the tools available to us, such as the temple, scriptures, our talents, testimonies, and more.

The word thrust means to push or advance. It carries the imagery of a determined effort rather than a casual, easy motion. Helping individuals come unto Christ takes faith, effort, persistence, and dedication.

When farmers reap, they go into their field and gather all the ripe grain, vegetables, herbs, or fruit. In the gospel sense, we help reap every time we engage in activities that help bring God’s children into His kingdom. This can include sharing the gospel, performing temple work for our ancestors, and helping the poor and needy.

This phrase gives a sense of urgency to the work of harvesting. Those who want to gather their crops need to work while the crops or grain is ready, or they will lose the harvest. The Lord said, “It is the eleventh hour, and the last time that I shall call laborers into my vineyard” (Doctrine and Covenants 33:3).

The harvest is complete when all the good crops have been gathered. They are protected and preserved. Similarly, when we help individuals make and keep covenants with God, they will be protected and preserved for eternity. The Lord has promised, “How great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!” (Doctrine and Covenants 18:15).

While the imagery of gathering is repeated across these sections, what is not repeated are the instructions of exactly where or how to harvest. The time for harvest is now, but conversion is unique to each individual. If you wonder what you could do to help gather the harvest, consider President Russell M. Nelson’s teaching: “Anytime you do anything that helps anyone—on either side of the veil—take a step toward making covenants with God and receiving their essential baptismal and temple ordinances, you are helping to gather Israel. It is as simple as that.”
