I love friends.

Having loved ones who make me laugh, smile, and even weep (in good ways) is one of my favorite parts of life.

However, as the years have passed, I’ve noticed that friendships aren’t all created equal.

But one friendship can be perfect, unfailing, and everlasting, and that’s our relationship with Jesus Christ.

He is always the best of friends to me, but how has He asked me to be a better friend and disciple to Him?

I can recall countless times when a loving friend has reached out to me to lift my spirits during a difficult season. I’ve also had friends who expected me to bear their burdens but weren’t willing to help with mine.

Nobody is perfect, including myself, and there have been times when I or my friends could have been better at serving and loving one another.

But this is the security of our covenant relationship with the Savior—as we keep our covenants that bind us to Him, He is our perfect friend in the good, the bad, and everything else in between (see John 15:14).

President Russell M. Nelson testified of this when he said, “If everything and everyone else in the world whom you trust should fail, Jesus Christ and His Church will never fail you.”

What a promise!

Some friends give more than they receive. That’s the type of friend the Savior is to us.

He always reaches out to me, but I need to remember to reach back to Him. As His disciple, maybe I’m not always as loyal to him as I should be and need to try harder. When we are intentional about our relationship with Him, our commitment and bond with Him can deepen.

We’ve all likely had new acquaintances with whom we are hesitant to share our full, authentic selves. Sharing my struggles, insecurities, and even differing opinions with friends was hard for a long time. I didn’t know how my friends would respond if they saw the real me, flaws and all.

However, the Savior wants us to come as we are. He understands all the struggles we face, so He knows how to succor and help us individually (see Alma 7:11–12).

President Jeffrey R. Holland, Acting President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, taught: “[The Savior] wishes us to come unto him, to follow him, to be comforted by him. Then he wishes us to give comfort to others. However halting our steps are toward him—though they shouldn’t be halting at all—his steps are never halting toward us.”

The Savior knows and loves us. Like a true friend, He encourages us to improve and, with His help, become more than we are.

We can get to know Him in return by learning about Him through His teachings, temple worship, making and keeping covenants, and through praying to our Heavenly Father.

John 15:13 says, “Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.” The full significance of the Savior’s atoning sacrifice strikes my heart whenever I read this truth.

Knowing that Jesus Christ was willing to suffer and lay down his life for me is a testament to the perfect love He has for each of us.

And to me, love is the centerpiece of every friendship.

Every hug we give, laugh we share, or tear we shed together is encapsulated in charity—“the pure love of Christ” (Moroni 7:47). So what better way to remember His love for us and to show Him love in return than by striving to be a friend to all? (See John 15:12.)

Although some relationships may come and go, our covenant relationship with Jesus Christ will last forever and flourish as we follow Him and endure to the end (see Doctrine and Covenants 14:7).

As one who deeply loves my friends, and especially my Savior, this makes my soul happy.

I hope we can continue to learn how much He loves, supports, and cherishes our relationship with Him and consider how we can better show Him love in return. Like any beautiful friendship, a firm relationship with Him will fill our lives with joy and meaning and help us share that joy with others.
