President Russell M. Nelson said, “It has never been more imperative to know how the Spirit speaks to you than right now.” President Nelson invites us to “stretch beyond [our] current spiritual ability to receive personal revelation.”

But how do we do that? What steps can we take to better hear the voice of the Lord?

Church leaders have spoken in general conference about receiving revelation and the Holy Ghost. They also have shared messages about these topics on social media, including the following:

“After we are baptized, [the Savior] promises to give us the gift of the Holy Ghost. We will be guided and comforted, and the Holy Ghost will help us to know the truth. We will feel the Holy Ghost is with us. We will have feelings of peace, love, and joy, and we will have the desire to serve others. We will strive throughout our lives to please the Lord.”

President Henry B. Eyring, Facebook, June 24, 2023, facebook.com/henry.b.eyring.

“One of the questions that many people in the world ask is if God really knows and hears us. The good news is that not only does God hear us—but personal revelation is available to each of us as we prayerfully seek the Lord’s will for our lives. …

“Scriptures make it clear that the Holy Ghost can communicate in many ways. Sometimes He speaks peace to your mind. Sometimes He prompts thoughts or ideas that occupy your mind. Sometimes He enlightens your mind. Sometimes He causes your heart[s] to be filled with joy.

“I appreciate the social media responses I have received to my post of how you receive revelation. One noted that we need to be humble and accept spiritual impressions that we receive. Then we need to hearken to the impressions instead of the world.

“President Russell M. Nelson has taught, ‘You don’t have to wonder about what is true. You do not have to wonder whom you can safely trust. Through personal revelation, you can receive your own witness that the Book of Mormon is the word of God, that Joseph Smith is a prophet, and that this is the Lord’s Church.’

“I assure you that revelatory guidance can be received by each of us as we labor in the Lord’s vineyard. Most of our guidance comes from the Holy Ghost. Sometimes and for some purposes it comes directly from the Lord. I personally testify that this is true. Guidance for the Church, as a whole, comes only to the President and prophet of the Church.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Facebook, Nov. 19, 2023, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“In my professional life, I worked as a cardiologist. When I used a stethoscope—a device to hear a patient’s heart sounds—I made sure the room was quiet; I turned off any radio or television that was on. I shut the door to the corridor and asked visitors or other patients to refrain from talking. I focused on what I was hearing and avoided thinking about any other concerns.

“Revelation requires similar concentration and elimination of distractions. To receive personal revelation, we need to walk away from worldly noise. We do not receive revelation when we are angry, agitated, or frustrated, or even simply preoccupied. Rather we create an environment that fosters feeling and recognizing the Spirit.

“Learning to seek and rely on the Spirit is a life skill, not just a temporary way to get through a crisis. As we seek the Holy Ghost, He will be a reliable, trustworthy, and beloved companion.”

Elder Dale G. Renlund, Facebook, June 24, 2023, facebook.com/DaleGRenlund.

“Sometimes we fall into a trap of believing in false dichotomies.

“For instance, we might believe that observation or reason are the only valid ways to learn the truth. Or we might believe that observation or reason undermine faith to such an extent that they should have no role in religious life. This is a false dichotomy because observation and reason work synergistically with faith. Faith ‘without works’ will not amplify itself. Faith will only grow by observation and reasoning, coupled with other spiritual work. In addition, observation, reason, and faith are often prerequisites not only to receive personal revelation but to understand that revelation.

“Observation, reason, and faith facilitate revelation and enable the Holy Ghost to be a reliable, trustworthy, and beloved companion. These elements will be key factors in producing ‘spiritual momentum in our lives,’ helping us move ‘forward amid … fear and uncertainty.’”

Elder Dale G. Renlund, Facebook, Aug. 22, 2023, facebook.com/DaleGRenlund.

“Throughout the ongoing Restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ, emergent technologies have contributed to His work reaching out across the world.

“In a meeting … with employees of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we discussed continuing developments in, and guiding principles for, generative artificial intelligence (AI).

“I suggested we be measured, balanced, and realistic in our assessments of opportunity and caution, that is, neither giddy nor alarmist.

“To me, while generative AI may be quick to offer information, it cannot replace revelation or generate truth from God. In the Church, we have a significant responsibility to ensure the Holy Ghost can attest to the truth and authenticity of what we say and share both in form and content.

“Overall, I am optimistic about our ability to use these AI technologies wisely and effectively, including as we seek to protect Church members and friends from deep fake deceit or falsehoods.”

Elder Gerrit W. Gong, Facebook, Mar. 14, 2024, facebook.com/gerritw.gong.

“Recently, at a speaking engagement, a woman approached me and told me that she had read my bio over and over again.

“Puzzled, I asked, ‘Why?’

“She told me that she had four young children at home and she felt guilt for being a working mother. Reading in my bio that I had worked outside the home gave her peace.

“I looked her in the eyes and asked,

“‘Do you know how to receive personal revelation?’

“‘Yes,’ she responded.

“Then I told her, ‘Every time someone says something that is hurtful or makes you doubt what you’re doing, just remind yourself: I know how to receive personal revelation for myself and for my family.’

“God knows you. He knows your situation. He knows your heart. Trust in the Lord, learn to hear His voice, and then go forward with confidence and relief. He needs you in His work.”

President Camille N. Johnson, Facebook, July 15, 2023, facebook.com/RSGeneralPresident.

“Meet Anastasia, one of my newest Primary friends. During a recent Primary devotional in Dallas, Texas, Primary children learned gospel principles, sang songs, testified of the Savior and His gospel, and shared their talents.

“During the meeting, I led an activity to help them learn about how the Holy Ghost can speak to us. I hummed a children’s song and the children guessed what song I was humming. I then asked the children what they did that helped them recognize the song.

“One child, Anastasia, enthusiastically waved her hand to share her simple but profound observation.

“In a confident voice, she described how she focused her eyes and ears on me as I hummed the Primary song, and then she could recognize the song and hear the words in her mind.

“When we are struggling to hear the voice of the Lord, who we listen to matters. Focus your eyes and ears on the words and love of our Savior.

“My friends, I testify that what Anastasia taught was true. When we look to our Savior—when we listen closely for His voice—we will be able to receive divine guidance pressed upon our minds and our hearts. We will be able to recognize truth and grow our trust in Jesus Christ. The direction we are pointed matters. So let us ‘look to God and live’ (Alma 37:47). Live lives filled with faith and revelation. Lives filled with peace, joy, and hope. Lives filled with the Spirit of God.

“How do you hear the voice of the Lord?”

Sister Tracy Y. Browning, Facebook, June 8, 2023, facebook.com/Primary2ndCounselor.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="164237379" id="p_gpBJv">Follow the <a href="https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/learn/social-media-accounts">teachings of living prophets and Church leaders</a>.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
