1. The Restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood.--While engaged in the work of translating the Book of Mormon, Joseph and Oliver found reference made in the record to baptism for the remission of sins; and on the 15th of May, 1829, they went into the woods to inquire of the Lord about it. While thus engaged a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light and announced himself to be John, the same that is called the Baptist,[10] in the New Testament. He placed his hands upon the heads of Joseph and Oliver and ordained them to the Aaronic Priesthood.[11] He explained that this priesthood held the keys of the ministration of angels, the gospel of repentance and of baptism for the remission of sins, but had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. He promised them also that the priesthood he then conferred upon them should never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness. [See note 1, end of section.]

2. John stated that he was acting under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Melchisedek Priesthood, which he said would in due time be conferred upon them. He then commanded Joseph to baptize Oliver, and afterwards Oliver to baptize Joseph.[12] After their baptism they were both filled with the spirit of prophecy and predicted many things concerning the rise and progress of the work. The angel also commanded them to each re-ordain the other to the Priesthood--Joseph to first ordain Oliver, and afterwards Oliver to ordain Joseph. To this commandment they were obedient, and thus the Aaronic Priesthood, the power from God which gives the right to those who receive it to preach repentance and to administer baptism for the remission of sins, was restored to men.

3. For a season, doubtless in order to avoid persecution, which constantly increased in bitterness, Joseph and Oliver kept their baptism and ordination to the Aaronic Priesthood a secret; but as men's minds were wrought upon to inquire after the truth, they at last let it be known that they had received authority to baptize for the remission of sins, and a number of people received the ordinance at their hands.

4. Restoration of the Melchisedek Priesthood.--Some time in June, 1829,[13] the promise made by John the Baptist to Joseph and Oliver, at the time he conferred the Aaronic Priesthood upon them--viz., that they should receive the higher or Melchisedek Priesthood, was fulfilled. This Priesthood was conferred upon them by Peter, James and John, probably in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville,  Broome county, on the Susquehanna River.[14] [See note 2, end of section] It is quite evident from the prominence given to these three apostles in the New Testament, that they held the keys of this Priesthood; and that of the three Peter was the chief. To him the Lord said: "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." [15] It was eminently proper therefore that these three apostles should be the ones to restore to the earth the Melchisedek Priesthood by conferring the apostleship upon Joseph and Oliver.

5. As after receiving their ordination under the hands of John the Baptist they were required to re-ordain each other, so after receiving the apostleship under the hands of Peter, James and John they re-ordained each other, Joseph first re-ordaining Oliver, and afterwards accepting re-ordination at his hands.[16]

6. The power and authority of this Melchisedek Priesthood [see note 3, end of section] is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church, and those holding it have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven--they have the right to have the heavens opened unto them--to commune with the general assembly and church of the First Born, and to enjoy the communication and presence of God the Father and Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant.[17] Hence, clothed with this power, Joseph and Oliver were authorized to organize the Church of Christ in the earth.

7. The Organization of the Church of Christ.--In all things, however, the two young men waited for direction from the Lord, and hence did not undertake to organize the church until he commanded them. It was in obedience to a commandment from the Lord, therefore, that they appointed the sixth  day of April, 1830, as the time to organize the church. Six persons[18] who had been baptized, and a few of their friends, met at the house of Peter Whitmer, Sen., in Fayette, Seneca county, in the State of New York, to effect that organization. The meeting was opened by solemn prayer, after which, according to previous commandment, the Prophet Joseph called upon the brethren present to know if they would accept himself and Oliver Cowdery as their teachers in the things of the kingdom of God; and if they were willing that they should proceed to organize the church according to the commandment of the Lord. To this they consented by unanimous vote. Joseph then ordained Oliver an elder of the Church of Jesus Christ;[19] after which Oliver ordained Joseph an elder of the said church. The sacrament was administered and those who had been previously baptized were confirmed members of the church and received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Some enjoyed the gift of prophecy, and all rejoiced exceedingly. [See note 4, end of section.]

8. While the church was yet assembled a revelation was received from the Lord,[20] directing that a record be kept in the church, and that in it Joseph be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church; and the church was commanded to give heed to all his words and commandments which he should receive from the Lord, accepting his word as the word of God in all patience and faith. On condition of their doing this, the Lord promised them that the gates of hell should not prevail against the church; but on  the contrary he would disperse the powers of darkness from before them and shake the heavens for their good.

9. The Voice of God and the Voice of the People in Church Government.--Thus the church was organized; and in that organization we see the operation of two mighty principles--the voice of God: the consent of the people. At the time that Joseph and Oliver received instruction to ordain each other to be elders of the church, they were told to defer their ordination until such time as would be practicable to get their brethren who had been and who would be baptized assembled together: for they must have the sanction of their brethren before they ordained each other elders of the Church; and their brethren must decide by vote whether they would accept them [Joseph and Oliver] as spiritual[21] teachers. Thus, notwithstanding Joseph and Oliver had been ordained apostles under the hands of Peter, James and John, and had doubtless re-ordained each other as already stated,[22] yet when it came to being ordained elders of the Church,[23] and made the spiritual leaders of it, it must be done by the common consent of the church; and thus early we see enforced that law which says: "All things shall be done by common consent in the church, by much prayer and faith." [24] But no sooner was the church organized than a prophet, a seer, a translator, is appointed and the church commanded to give heed to his words, and to receive them as coming from the mouth of of the Lord himself. Here in the very inception of the church organization is clearly established the great truth, the grand principle, that in the government of the church there is to be a union of the voice of God  and the consent or voice of the people. Not vox populi, vox Dei;[25] nor vox Dei, vox populi;[26] but vox Dei et vox populi.[27]

10. Revelation on Church Government and Discipline.--Previous to the organization of the church, a very important revelation was given--in fact it was the revelation which pointed out the date on which the church was to be organized[28]--which teaches many important truths and points out the duties of the members of the church and also the duties of the officers of the church--so far as the officers of the church at that time had been given. That revelation announces the following doctrines:--

I. Of the Existence of God.--There is a God in heaven who is infinite
and eternal from everlasting to everlasting--unchangeable; the framer of heaven and earth and all things which are in them.

II. Of the Creation and Fall of Man.--God created man male and
female, after his own image, and in his own likeness created he them. He gave them commandment that they should love and serve him, and that he should be the sole object of their worship. But by the transgression of these holy laws man became sensual and devilish--fallen man.

III. Of Jesus Christ.--The Almighty God gave his Only Begotten Son as
a ransom for fallen man, as it is written of him in the scriptures. He suffered temptations, but gave no heed to them; he was crucified, died, and rose again the third day; he ascended into heaven to sit on the right hand of his Father,  to reign with almighty power according to the will of God. As many as believe on him and are baptized in his holy name--enduring in faith to the end--shall be saved. Not only those who believed after he came in the flesh; but all those who from the beginning believed in the words of the holy prophets, who testified of him in all things.

IV. Of the Holy Ghost and the Trinity.--The Holy Ghost beareth record
of the Father and of the Son--is God's witness. The Father, Son and Holy Ghost constitute the Holy Trinity--one God or grand Presidency of heaven and earth, infinite, eternal.

V. Of Justification and Sanctification.--Justification and
sanctification come through the grace of God, and are just and true principles. That is, the grace of God supplies the means or conditions of justification and sanctification, and it is for man to apply those means of salvation. The means or conditions of justification and sanctification are that men love and serve God with all their might, mind, and strength. That would lead them to exercise faith in God, repentance of sin and baptism for the remission of sins, laying on of hands for the Holy Ghost, and the pursuit of a godly life and conversation--the old conditions of salvation.[29]

VI. Of Falling from Grace.--It is possible for men to fall from grace
and depart from the living God, therefore the saints are admonished to take heed and pray always, least they fall into temptation. Even those who are sanctified are cautioned to take heed.

VII. Of Baptism.--All who humble themselves before God, and desire
to be baptized and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness before the church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve Him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that  they have received of the spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins--shall be received by baptism into the church.[30] No person, however, can be received into the church of Christ, unless he has arrived unto the years of accountability[31] before God, and is capable of repentance.

VIII. Of the Manner of Baptism.--The person who is called of God, and
has authority from Jesus Christ to baptize, shall go into the water with the person who has presented him or herself for baptism, and shall say--calling him or her by name--"Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen." [32] Then shall he immerse him or her, and come forth again out of the water.

IX. Of Confirmation.--Confirmation into the church follows baptism
and is performed by the laying on of hands, by those who have authority in the church. The Holy Ghost is imparted in the same manner. There is no form of exact words given, so far as we know, for confirming persons into the church and imparting the Holy Ghost; but judging from the forms given for baptism, administering the sacrament, etc., a simple form would be most proper. But whatever other words are used, the following should not be omitted: I confirm you a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and say unto you, receive ye the Holy Ghost. Those officiating would of course be careful to do this in the name of Jesus Christ, or their administration would be of none effect.

X. Of the Duties of Members.--It is the duty of the members of the
church to manifest righteousness by "a Godly walk and conversation;" to abstain from ill feeling toward each other, neither indulging in lying, back-biting nor evil speaking. It is also their duty to pray vocally and in secret. They are required to meet together often to partake of bread and wine in remembrance of the Lord Jesus, which is to be administered by the elder or priest[33] in the following manner: kneeling with the church he consecrates the emblems of the body and blood of Christ in these words:

BLESSING ON THE BREAD.

"O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son Jesus Christ to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it, that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he has given them, that they may always have His Spirit to be with them. Amen."

BLESSING ON THE WINE.[34]

"O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son Jesus Christ to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of  all those who drink of it, that they may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, which was shed for them; that they may witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen."

XI. Of the Duties of Saints Respecting Children.--Every member of the
church having children is required to bring them to the elders, before the church, who are to lay their hands upon them and bless them in the name of Jesus Christ.[35]

XII. Duties of Officers--Elders. [36]--Elders have authority to
preside over meetings and conduct them as prompted by the Holy Ghost. They also have authority to teach and expound  the scriptures; to watch over the church; to baptize; to lay on hands for the bestowal of the Holy Ghost; confirm those baptized, members of the church; administer the sacrament, and ordain other elders and also priests, teachers, and deacons.

--Priests.--It is the duty of priests to preach, teach, and expound scripture; to visit the home of each member and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all duties. They may also baptize and administer the sacrament, ordain other priests, teachers and deacons, take the lead of meetings when no elder is present, and in a general way assist the elder; but they have no authority to lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost or confirmation in the church.

--Teachers.--The teacher's duty is to always be with the church, watch over and strengthen it; to see that there is no iniquity in it, and that the members thereof meet together often and all do their duty. Teachers may warn, expound, exhort, teach and invite all to come unto Christ, and take the lead of meetings when no elder or priest is present; but they have not the authority to baptize, administer the sacrament or lay on hands.

--Deacons.--Deacons are appointed to assist the teachers in the performance of their duties. They may also warn, expound, exhort, teach and invite all to come unto Christ, but like teachers have no authority to baptize, administer the sacrament, or lay on hands.

XIII. Conferences.--The several elders comprising the church of
Christ are to meet in conference once in three months, or from time to time as the said conference shall appoint, to do whatever church business is necessary. It is the duty of the several branches of the church to send one or more of their  teachers [or other representatives] to attend the conferences of the church, with a list of the names of those who joined the church since the last conference, that a record of the names of the whole church may be kept by one who shall be appointed to that work; and the names of those who are expelled from the church are also to be sent up to the conferences, that their names may be blotted out of the general record of the church. Members removing from the church where they reside are to take a letter certifying that they are regular members in good standing, and that when signed by the regular authorities of the church from whence they move is to admit them into the fellowship of the Saints in the church to which they go. Such is the plan of government and discipline contained in the revelation given just previous to the organization of the church, and in it one may observe the outlines of that more complete organization of the church which will be treated more fully in another section. The above was sufficient for the church in its infancy.

11. Commencement of the Public Ministry.--On Sunday, the 11th of April, 1830, the first public discourse was preached. It was delivered by Elder Oliver Cowdery, at the house of Peter Whitmer, in Fayette. After the services six persons were baptized. Thus began the public ministry of the church.

12. First Miracle in the Church.--In this same month of April the first miracle in the church was performed. It occurred in this manner: The Prophet Joseph went on a visit to Mr. Joseph Knight, at Colesville, Broome County, New York. This gentleman had rendered the prophet some timely assistance while translating the Book of Mormon, and he was anxious that Mr. Knight and his family should receive the truth. While in Mr. Knight's neighborhood the prophet held a number of meetings. Among those who regularly attended was Newel Knight, son of Joseph Knight. He and the prophet had many serious conversations on the subject of man's salvation. In the meetings  held the people prayed much, and in one of the aforesaid conversations with the prophet, Newel Knight promised that he would pray publicly. When the time came, however, his heart failed him, and he refused, saying that he would wait until he got into the woods by himself. The next morning when he attempted to pray in the woods, he was overwhelmed with a sense of having neglected his duty the evening before in not praying in the presence of others. He began to feel uneasy, and continued to grow worse both in mind and body, until upon reaching home his appearance was such as to alarm his wife. He sent for the prophet, who, when he came, found Newel in a sad condition and suffering greatly. His visage and limbs were distorted and twisted in every shape imaginable. At last he was caught up off the floor and tossed about most fearfully. The neighbors hearing of his condition came running in. After he had suffered for a time, the prophet succeeded in getting him by the hand, when immediately Newel spoke to him, saying he knew he was possessed of the devil, and that the prophet had power to cast him out. "If you know I can, it shall be done," replied the prophet; and then almost unconsciously he rebuked Satan and commanded him to depart from the man. Immediately Newel's contortions stopped, and he spoke out and said he saw the devil leave him and vanish from sight.

13.--"This was the first miracle which was done in this church or by any member of it," writes the prophet; "and it was done not by man, nor by the power of man, but it was done by God, and by the power of godliness; therefore let the honor and praise, the dominion and the glory, be ascribed to the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen."

14. The First Conference.--The first conference of the church was held the first day of June, 1830. About thirty members were in attendance, besides a number of unbaptized believers and others anxious to learn. The sacrament was administered, a number who had been baptized were confirmed,  and brethren were called and ordained to various offices of the priesthood. The time was spent in prayer, singing, instruction and exhortation. The Holy Ghost was abundantly poured out upon the saints. Some prophesied, and others were wrapped in heavenly vision, until their bodily strength was exhausted. When restored they shouted hosannah to God and the Lamb, and related the glorious things they had seen and felt while in vision. [See note 4, end of section.] Thus the ministry of God's servants began to be confirmed by the signs and the gifts of the Holy Ghost following those who believed.

15. Errors of the Saints.--It would be unreasonable to suppose that the members of the church fell into no errors. Some time in the summer of 1830, while the prophet was still living in Harmony, Penn., and Oliver Cowdery was with the Whitmer family in New York, he received a letter from Oliver informing him that he [Oliver] had discovered an error in one of the revelations, and added: "I command you in the name of God to erase these words [having named the passage] that no priestcraft be among us." [37] The prophet wrote immediately, asking by what authority Oliver took it upon himself to command him to alter or erase, to add to, or diminish a revelation or commandment from Almighty God. Joseph followed his letter in a few days, and was grieved beyond measure to find that the whole Whitmer family sustained Oliver in the position he had taken. By labor and perseverance, however, he convinced them that they were in error and the difficulty was settled.

16. Scarcely had this trouble subsided when another arose. In the month of August, 1830, in consequence of persecution having grown extremely bitter in Harmony and vicinity, the prophet removed with his family to Fayette, New York, at the invitation of the Whitmers, to live with them. On arriving  there he learned that Hyrum Page was in possession of a stone which he called a seer stone, and through which he was receiving revelations for the church in respect to the up-building of Zion, church government, etc. The Whitmers and the inconstant Oliver accepted these revelations and much harm was being done. A conference was to convene on the first of September, but before it assembled the prophet inquired of the Lord and obtained a revelation on the subject, which was directed more especially to Oliver Cowdery.[38] In regard to the subject in hand, it contained the following: Oliver was to be heard by the church in all things whatsoever he taught by the Comforter, concerning the revelations and commandments; and if led by the Comforter to teach by way of commandment, he had permission to do it; "But thou shalt not write by way of commandment," said the Lord to him, "but by wisdom. And thou shalt not command him who is at thy head and at the head of the church." No one was to receive commandments and revelations in the church, that is for the church, except Joseph the prophet; for the Lord had given him the keys of the mysteries and revelations, until he appointed unto the church another in his stead. Oliver was commanded to take Hyrum Page aside by himself and tell him that the revelations which he had written from that stone were not of the Lord, but that Satan had deceived him, and they must be given up, for he had not been appointed to receive revelations, neither would any one be appointed contrary to the church covenants, which provided that all things must be done in order and by common consent of the church.

17. During the conference the subject of the revelations from Hyrum Page's seer stone was discussed, and after much consideration, the whole church, including Hyrum Page, renounced the stone and all things connected with it; and the  church was made to understand more clearly that there is but one on the earth at a time who is authorized to receive the word and commandment of the Lord for the Church.[39]

NOTES.

1. The Visitation of John the Baptist.--On a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake peace to us, while the vail was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory, and delivered the anxiously looked for message, and the keys of the gospel of repentance! What joy! What wonder! What amazement! While the world was racked and distracted--while millions were groping as the blind for the wall, and while all men were resting on uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld, our ears heard. As in the blaze of day; yes, more--above the glitter of the May sunbeam which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then this voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, "I am thy fellow servant," dispelled every fear. We listened, we gazed, we admired! 'Twas the voice of an angel from glory, 'twas a message from the Most High! And as we heard we rejoiced, while his love enkindled upon our souls, and we were wrapped in the vision of the Almighty! Where was room for doubt? Nowhere; uncertainty had fled, doubt had sunk more more to rise, while fiction and deception had fled forever! * * * Think for a moment what joy filled our hearts, and with what surprise we must have bowed (for who would not have bowed the knee for such a blessing) when we received under his hand the holy priesthood as he said, "Upon you, my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer this priesthood and this authority, which shall remain upon the earth, that the sons of Levi may yet offer an offering to the Lord in righteousness."--Oliver Cowdery.

2. Melchisedek Priesthood Restored.--We cannot fix the exact date when this priesthood was restored, but it occurred sometime between the 15th of May, 1829, and the 6th of April, 1830. We can approximate within a few months of the exact time, but no further, from any of the records of the church. Joseph, the Prophet, designates  the place, where their ordination took place, in his address to the saints, written September 6th, 1842, as follows: "Again what do we hear? * * * the voice of Peter, James and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna River, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom and of the dispensation of the fullness of times." And in a revelation given September, 1830, referring to Joseph and Oliver, the Lord said, in reference to partaking again of the sacrament on the earth, that the "hour cometh that I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth, and with Moroni, * * * and also with Elias, * * * and also with John, the son of Zacharias, * * * and also with Peter, James and John whom I have sent unto you, by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you apostles and especial witnesses of my name." It would appear from the instructions given in the revelation, dated June, 1829, [Doc. and Cov. sec. xviii] that the apostleship had been conferred on Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer. If this supposition is correct, it reduces the period of uncertainty when this glorious event actually took place to a few weeks, or from the middle of May to the end of June.--Joseph F. Smith, "Contributor," vol. x, p. 310.

3. Why the Higher Priesthood is Called After Melchisedek.--There are in the church two Priesthoods * * * Why the first is called the Melchisedek Priesthood, is because Melchisedek was such a great high priest. Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the order of the Son of God; but out of respect or deference to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they the church, in ancient days called that priesthood after Melchisedek, or the Melchisedek Priesthood.--Doc. and Cov. sec. cvii.

4. Visions at the First Conference of the Church.--Among those who received visions was Newel Knight, who was so completely overcome by the power of the spirit that he had to be laid on a bed, being unable to help himself. "By his own account of the transaction," says the prophet, "he could not understand why we should lay him on the bed, as he felt no sensibility of weakness. He felt his heart filled with love, with glory, and pleasure unspeakable, and could discern all that was going on in the room; when all of a sudden a vision of futurity burst upon him. He saw there represented the great work which through my instrumentality was yet to be accomplished. He saw heaven opened, and beheld the Lord Jesus Christ, seated on the right hand of the majesty on high, and had it made plain to his understanding that the time would come when he would be admitted into His presence to enjoy his society for ever and ever."

REVIEW.

1. Relate the circumstances which led to the restoration of the Aaronic priesthood.

2. What explanation did the angel make concerning this priesthood?

3. What reason have you for believing that John the Baptist would be among the resurrected saints spoken of by Matthew? (Note.)

4. Under whose direction did John say he was acting?

5. What promise did he make to them about the Melchisedek priesthood?

6. What commandment did the angel then give to Joseph and Oliver?

7. How were these baptisms performed? (Note.)

8. What commandment did the angel give in relation to re-ordination?

9. What course did Joseph and Oliver pursue after their ordination?

10. About what time was the Melchisedek Priesthood restored? (Note 2.)

11. By whom and in what locality was it restored?

12. What made it especially appropriate that these three apostles should restore that Priesthood?

13. What is the power or authority of the Melchisedek priesthood?

14. What particular power did this Priesthood give to Joseph and Oliver?

15. When was the church organized?

16. How many persons effected the organization?

17. Were six persons all who had been baptized up to that date--6th of April, 1830?

18. Relate the circumstances connected with the organization of the church.

19. What was the organization called?

20. When was the phrase "of Latter-day Saints," added as a part of the name of the church?

21. What spiritual manifestations were experienced at the organization of the church? (Note 4.)

22. What important revelation was given immediately after the church was organized?

23. What two great principles are seen operating at the organization of the church?

24. What can you say of the union of these two principles in church government?

25. What revelation is it that commanded the organization of the church? (Note.)

26. State what that revelation says upon the existence of God.

27. --Of the creation of man.

28. --Of Jesus Christ.

29. --Of the Holy Ghost.

30. --Of justification and sanctification.

31. --Of falling from grace.

32. --Of baptism.

33. --Of the manner of baptism.

34. --Of confirmation.

35. --Of the duties of members.

36. --Of the duties of parents respecting their children. (Note.)

37. --Of the duties of officers--elders. (Note.)

38. --Of priests.

39. --Of teachers.

40. --Of deacons.

41. --Of conferences.

42. In what manner did the public ministry of the church begin?

43. Relate the first miracle performed in the church.

44. When was the first conference of the church held, and what occurred?

45. What error did Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmer family fall into?

46. How was Hyrum Page deceived by Lucifer?

47. What great principle concerning revelations to the church was brought out by these errors?
