1. Persecution.--From the very commencement the work of the Lord in these last days met with the most violent opposition. No sooner did Joseph Smith declare that he had received a revelation from God than it brought upon him the ridicule and wrath of many who heard of it. The stream of hatred grew broader and deeper as the work progressed. Joseph himself endured many vexatious persecutions, and those who believed in his teachings were doomed to share them. The first general persecution of the church, however, occurred in Missouri.

2. The people among whom the Saints settled in Jackson county, Missouri, were ignorant, jealous, bigoted, and superstitious. They were also given to Sabbath-breaking, drunkenness, profanity, horse racing and gambling. It will be seen at once, therefore, that there could be but little fellowship between them and the Saints. (See note 1, end of section.) Moreover, they were principally from the Southern states, and slaveholders; and as the Saints were from the free states of the north, they were inclined to be suspicious of them. It was an easy matter therefore, for demagogues to persuade the Missourians that it was the design of the Saints to supplant them in the possession of the country.

3. Expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County.--The saints themselves were not as prudent as they should have been. Many boasted that God would destroy the wicked and give their possessions as inheritances unto the righteous.  Many more failed to live up to the moral precepts of the gospel, and were disobedient to the counsels of the Lord. This gave the wicked great power over them, and the result was that the jealously and wrath which had been burning for some time in the hearts of the old settlers finally broke out into deeds of violence. Almost the entire population about Independence arose and drove the Saints from the county under circumstances of the utmost cruelty.[83] Twelve hundred people were driven from their possessions; and about two hundred of their homes and one grist mill were burned. This was in the fall and winter of 1833-34. [See note 2, end of section.]

4. Zion's Camp.--The excited Saints found a temporary abode in Clay County--the next county north of Jackson--and in the meantime the Lord commanded the Prophet Joseph to gather up the strength of the Lord's house--the young and middle-aged men in the church--for the purpose of going to the assistance of their brethren in Missouri, and to redeem Zion.[84] In the spring of 1834, therefore, about one hundred and fifty of the brethren from the churches in the eastern states assembled at New Portage, Ohio, about fifty miles from Kirtland; and this number was increased to about two hundred by the time the camp reached Missouri. They took with them money to purchase lands, food and clothing to assist their destitute brethren, and it was also the determination of the camp to help their exiled friends maintain their possessions when the governor of Missouri re-instated them upon their lands.[85] But en route to Missouri the brethren did not live up to the requirement made of the camp. Some of them were disobedient,  even rebellious towards the prophet, and the Lord was not well pleased with them.

5. As the camp approached Jackson county it was met by delegations inquiring into their designs for approaching Jackson county. Various reports had been spread abroad in respect to their intentions, and some of them were of a character to create alarm. In order to correct these false reports the brethren made the following statement:

    In the first place it is not our intention to commit hostilities
    against any man, or set of men; it is not our intention to injure
    any man's person or property except in defending ourselves. * * *
    It is our intention to go back upon our lands in Jackson county by
    order of the executive of the state, if possible. We have brought
    our arms with us for the purpose of self-defense, as it is well
    known to almost every man of the state, we have every reason to put
    ourselves in an attitude of defense, considering the abuse we have
    suffered in Jackson county. We are anxious for a settlement of the
    difficulties existing between us, upon honorable and constitutional
    principles.[86]

6. The brethren also made a proposition to submit their losses to a committee of impartial arbitrators, and another to buy out those of the old settlers who could not live with them. But before matters were brought to an investigation and adjustment the Lord in a revelation to the prophet,[87] gave instructions which led to the abandonment of any attempt at that time to redeem Zion.

7. The Lord in this revelation declared that Zion might have been redeemed by that time, had it not been for the transgressions of his Saints. They had not been obedient to the requirements made of them. They had withheld their means, and in their hearts had said concerning the Saints in Zion, "Where is their God? Behold he will deliver them in time of trouble, otherwise we will not go up unto Zion, and we will keep our  moneys." Besides these evidences of a want of faith, they lacked that unity required by the law of the celestial kingdom, and it is only through the observance of that law that Zion can be redeemed. The Lord, therefore, commanded the elders to wait a season for the redemption of Zion, until the Saints should obtain more experience, learn obedience, and until means could be raised to purchase all the lands in Jackson county that could be purchased and also in the surrounding counties; and until the Lord's army had become very great, and sanctified before him. And when this was done the Lord promised to hold his people guiltless in taking possession of that which was their own; and they should possess it forever. He had permitted the elders composing the camp to come thus far, for a trial of their faith; and now he had prepared a great endowment for them in the house which he had commanded to be built in Kirtland. Those who could stay in Missouri were to do so, but those who had left their families in the east were at liberty to return. In obedience to the commandment to await for a season the redemption of Zion, the Camp of Zion was disbanded early in the morning of the 25th of June. A number remained in Missouri, but the most of the camp returned to the east.

8. Relieved now of the immediate responsibility of redeeming Zion, the brethren who returned from Missouri and the churches in the east devoted their attention to building up Kirtland as a stake of Zion, and completing the temple, the foundation of which had been laid about a year before.[88] The declaration of the Lord in that revelation given on Fishing river, Missouri, to the effect that he had prepared a great endowment for the faithful elders in the house which he had commanded them to build in Kirtland, hastened the work, as they were anxious to receive those spiritual blessings.

9. High Councils.--Meantime the Lord had given many important revelations in respect to the priesthood and the organization of the church. In February, 1834--a few months previous to Zion's Camp starting for Missouri--the first high council of the church was organized. This council was appointed by revelation for the purpose of settling important difficulties that might arise in the church, and which could not be settled in the bishops' courts to the satisfaction of the parties.

10. The high council is composed of twelve high priests, presided over by one or three presidents, as circumstances may determine. The high council cannot act unless seven of its members are present; but seven have the power to appoint other high priests to act temporarily in the place of absent councilors. Whenever a high council is organized, the twelve members draw lots for their places. Those who draw the even numbers--two, four, six, eight, ten, twelve--are to stand in behalf of the accused; those drawing the odd numbers in behalf of the accuser. In every case the accused has a right to half the council to prevent injury or injustice. The councilors who represent the accused and accuser respectively, do not become partisans bent on winning their case irrespective of its righteousness or justice; on the contrary, every man is to speak according to equity and truth; and aside from that is merely to see that each party to the issue involved has justice accorded him, and that he be not subjected to insult or injury. [Note 3, end of section.]

11. Whenever the council convenes to act on any case, the twelve councilors are to consider whether it is very difficult or not. If it be not a difficult case, then only two of the councilors, one for the accused and accuser respectively, are appointed to speak. But if the case is accounted difficult, then four are appointed to speak; if still more difficult, six; but in no case are more than six to speak. In all cases both the accuser and accused are to have the privilege of speaking for themselves,  after the evidence is all in and the councilors appointed to speak have all spoken.

12. The evidence all in, the speakers for the accused and the accuser having spoken, as also the accused and the accuser, the president gives a decision according to the understanding he has of the case and calls upon the twelve councilors to sustain it by vote. But should the councilors who have not spoken, or any one of them, discover an error in the decision of the president, they have the right to manifest it and the case has a re-hearing. If after a careful re-hearing, additional light is thrown upon the case, the decision is altered accordingly. "But in case no additional light is given, the first decision shall stand, the majority of the council having power to determine the same." [89] Such are the general outlines of the organization of a high council and the manner of procedure before it. [Notes 4 and 5, end of section.]

13. Different Kinds of High Councils.--There are three kinds of high councils in the church. They are similar in organization, and the manner of procedure is practically the same before them all; but they differ in authority and jurisdiction.

I. The Traveling High Council.--This Council consists of the twelve
apostles of Jesus Christ. They are a traveling presiding high council; and, laboring under the first presidency of the church, they have the right to build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all the world.[90] Whenever they sit as a high council, there is no appeal from their decisions--that is, they can only be called in question by the general authorities of the church in the event of transgression.[91]

II. The Standing High Councils at the Stakes of Zion.--The church
is divided into branches or wards with appropriate officers; and these branches, wards, and settlements of the Saints are grouped for convenience into stakes of Zion. In  each stake there is a standing high council, limited in its jurisdiction to the affairs of that particular stake where it is located.

III. Temporary High Councils.--The high priests abroad, that is,
outside of the organized stakes of Zion, whenever the parties to a difficulty, or either of them request it, and the high priests abroad deem the case of sufficient importance to justify such action, are authorized to organize a temporary high council to try the case, appointing one of their own number to preside over the council during its continuance. Otherwise the council is to be organized after the pattern and proceed in the same manner as those at the stakes of Zion. "It shall be the duty of said council to transmit immediately, a copy of its proceedings, with a full statement of the testimony accompanying their decision, to the high council of the seat of the first presidency of the church. Should the parties, or either of them, be dissatisfied with the decision of said council, they may appeal to the high council of the seat of the first presidency of the church, and have a re-hearing, which case shall then be conducted according to the former pattern written, as though no such decision had been made." [92]

14. Organization of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles.--As early as June, 1829, the Lord revealed that there would be twelve especial witnesses or apostles called to preach the gospel to the nations of the earth. But it was not until several months after the prophet returned from the Zion's Camp expedition that such a quorum was organized. In the month of February, 1835, however, a general conference was called, and the three especial witnesses to the Book of Mormon selected the men--under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, for they were appointed to that mission by revelation--who were to  constitute the quorum of the twelve apostles[93] or especial witnesses.

15. Organization of Quorums of Seventies.--In the same month--February, 1835--the first quorum of seventies was organized by the Prophet Joseph and his two counselors and others. Shortly afterwards the second quorum was also organized. These quorums, as would be inferred from their being called seventies' quorums, consist of seventy men. Seven presidents preside over each quorum, and the first seven presidents--the presidents of the first quorum--preside over all the quorums of seventy in the church.

16. About a month after the organization of these quorums--28th of March, 1835--a revelation was given,[94] in which the duties of the apostles and seventies are made clear, as well as the duties of other officers.[95] We have now, however, reached a point in the historical development of the church of Christ where we can consider it as a system of ecclesiastical government; and to that consideration the next section is devoted.

NOTES

1. Character of the Old Settlers in Jackson County.--Speaking of his arrival in Independence and meeting with Oliver Cowdery and other brethren there, the Prophet Joseph says: "It seemed good and pleasant for brethren to meet together in unity. But our reflections were great, coming as we had from a highly cultivated state of society in the East, and standing now upon the confines and western limits of the United States, and looking into the vast wilderness of those that sat in darkness; how natural it was to observe the degradation, leanness of intellect, ferocity and jealousy of a people that were nearly a century behind the time and to feel for those who roamed about without the benefit of civilization, refinement or religion; yea, and to exclaim in the language of the prophets, 'when will the wilderness blossom as a rose? When will Zion be built up in her glory, and where will thy temple stand, unto which all nations shall come in the last days?'"--Missouri Persecutions--Roberts.

2. Persecution in Jackson County.--The month of November, 1833, was big with important events for the members of the Church in Jackson County. That month witnessed the expulsion of twelve hundred American citizens from their homes which they had purchased from the general government. The events of that month branded the sovereign state of Missouri with an infamy that will cling to her as long as the name is remembered on earth or in heaven; and when her officials of that period shall stand before the bar of God, gouts of blood will be found on their ministerial vestments--it will be the stain, too, of innocent blood! * * * Early in the spring the mob burned the houses belonging to the Saints. According to the testimony of Lyman Wight (Times and Seasons for 1843, p. 264), two hundred and three dwelling houses and one grist mill were so destroyed.--Missouri Persecutions--Roberts.

3. Fair Dealing in High Councils.--The council should try no case without both parties being present, or having had an opportunity to be present; neither should they hear one party's complaint before his case is brought up for trial; neither should they suffer the character of any one to be exposed before the high council without the person being present and ready to defend him or herself; that the minds of the councilors be not prejudiced for or against any one whose case they may possibly have to act upon.--Joseph Smith, Hist. under date of July 11, 1840.

4. Order in High Councils.--In ancient days councils were conducted with strict propriety; no one was allowed to whisper, be weary, leave the room or get uneasy in the least until the voice of the Lord by revelation, or the voice of the council by the spirit was obtained. * * * It was understood in ancient days that if one man could stay in the council, another could; and if the president could spend his time, the members could also.--Joseph Smith, Hist. under date of Feb. 12, 1834.

5. Just Judgment Demanded in High Councils.--No man is capable of judging a matter in council unless his own heart is pure; and we frequently are so filled with prejudice, or have a beam in our own eye, that we are not capable of passing right decisions. * * * Our acts are rendered, and at a future day they will be laid before us; and if we should fail to judge right, and injure our fellow beings, they may be there perhaps, and condemn us. There they are of great consequence, and to me the consequence appears to be of force beyond anything which I am able to express.--Joseph Smith, Hist. under date of Feb. 12, 1834.

REVIEW.

1. What can you say of the opposition which the work of God has met with in these last days?

2. Where did the first general persecution begin?

3. What was the character of the people in western Missouri? (Note.)

4. Relate the expulsion of the Saints from Jackson county.

5. What event brought Zion's Camp into existence?

6. Relate its history.

7. What prevented Zion's Camp from redeeming Zion?

8. When was the first high council organized?

9. For what purpose are such councils organized?

10. Describe the high council.

11. What are the privileges of the accused and accuser before the council?

12. What rule obtains as to the decision of the president of the council?

13. What is to be the course of the high council in respect to deportment, fair dealing and judgment? (See notes 3, 4 and 5.)

14. How many kinds of high councils are there?

15. Describe each.

16. When did the Lord first reveal that there would be a quorum of twelve apostles called?

17. When and in what manner were the members of this quorum selected?

18. When were seventies' quorums first organized?

19. State what you can concerning the presidency of the seventies' quorums.
