Ronald D. Dennis, Prophet of the Jubilee ( 1997)

AUGUST, 1847.

WHO IS THE "ANCIENT OF DAYS?"

THIS is a frequent question, which is answered in as many ways by the human wisdom of our age, as is nearly everything else that pertains to the "mystery of godliness." Anyone who reads without bias the visions of the prophet Daniel will easily perceive that it was the "ancient of days," who fills the character, holds the office, and fulfills the greatest, most wonderful, and most glorious work, except ONE, that Daniel saw through the whole majestic scene. Daniel was informed of the future situation and destiny of the world before then; he saw the one who "reveals mysteries," beneficially showing him the beginning, the growth, and the destruction of four of the empires, varied and strange, which were in their turn to stretch their iron rod across the world. In a previous vision he saw the four kingdoms shattered into ten parts, and still further he saw the tumults, revolutions, and massacres, of all the kingdoms of the earth for many ages and generations; last, and most remarkable of all, he saw the origin of the fifth and last kingdom, the one that would shatter all the other kingdoms and sway the imperial, godly, and golden sceptre over all the boundaries of this great creation forever.

He saw the setting of this last one, not done like all the previous ones, through earthly wisdom, covetousness, or power, rather "the GOD OF HEAVEN set up a kingdom," says he, Dan. 2. 44, indicating that he had nothing to do with the others before then; and after this the King did not say how in the dispensation he revealed himself; "My kingdom is not of this world," now, as if he were saying; nor will it be until the time that Daniel refers to. In order to satisfy the thirst and the desire to understand more that these scenes caused, especially about the glorious kingdom that would continue for eternity, once more wisdom flowed from its inexhaustible fountain through its overflowing pipes, displaying before him a more detailed portrayal of the object of his love, which through the help of former manifestations now shone forth in a brighter, clearer, and more glorious way, to his inspired and piercing sight; he perceived not only the wasting away of the widest monarchies that destroyed the crowned heads like the fine dust of the balance; but in wonder he perceived, in majestic splendor, his garment as white as snow, the hair of his head like wool,—crowned and sitting on the throne that was like a fiery flame—its blazing wheels consuming before it everything that opposed it, like stubble before an ardent flame:—before it ran rivers of fire, just like the boiling Volcanoes flowed, and preceding it an escort of a thousand thousands, and myriad myriads of the mighty ones of heaven, and the brave and splendid ones of the earth through the ages, the prophet saw the "ANCIENT OF DAYS ! !" Dan. vii, 9, 10.

After his coming to the earth he is seen organizing a chosen council from among the selected councilors of all the previous dispensations,—wearing his judging attire and adornments, with his royal sceptre in his able hand, and sitting as the Chief Magistrate over it all, and giving just sentences on every matter dealt with there. Among the first things that were deserving of his detailed scrutiny, having brought forth and opened the books, were the condemnation and execution of some of the highest and most able authorities that the previous emperor of the earth possessed, and his chief president was the first thrown into the eternal fire, [ver. 11]; the next thing is to impart more wisdom (which is strength) to the chosen officials so they may learn all the tenets of the victorious kingdom in every mystery, wisdom, and understanding that are attainable for their perfection and to prepare them to bear, and to be able to enjoy the unspeakable glory in the appearance of the great king himself to reign over his kingdom, ver. 18. "But the Saints of the most High shall take the kingdom [from their king through the 'ancient of days'] for ever, and for ever and ever." It will not be a small task to perfect everything by the time of this sight!

The purpose of the King of kings in sending the "ancient of days" and his heavenly retinue, is as forerunners to prepare the way before him to rule over his kingdom more perfectly,—to make the people ready, so that those who escaped from the "great Babylon," and who came out from the great affliction, would be able to stand in the midst of the numberless multitude with him on mount Zion, their garments whitened like the garment of the ancient of days, and so they would be taught what is, and how to sing the song of Moses and the sweet songs of the Lamb with one voice, metre, purpose, and heart; for the king will not come to prepare his bride; his servants will do this beforehand, "and the wife that prepared herself," will be said at that time. Who will not see the great work of his servants to teach such a multitude to that extent!—Such efforts will depend on the scholars, and also on the association that must be between them and the great chief Schoolmaster before they can understand what to teach! Who will believe that the school door has closed, and that the lips of the schoolmaster have been sealed up forever! We respond, that there is no one who understands anything about the remarkable period to which we refer. O, that will be a blessed day! O marvelous time!! hasten to come, when everyone [of those who are left alive after the plagues, &c.] will know the Lord; they will have been taught by his servants until all come to the foremost class to be taught by him. No wonder that old Daniel fainted from the joy and brilliance of this scene while yet a slave. And what tongue can tell,—what mind can portray; or which angels can proclaim the thousandth part of the happiness, the glory, and the joy of the righteous people who are living on the earth when all these things will be brought to pass!

Still it is asked, Who is this "ANCIENT OF DAYS" who will accomplish such a feat beyond all the godly visions of the last days? It is impossible for it to be the "Son of man," because after that "the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven; and came to the ancient of days, and they [the escort] brought him, [namely the Son of man] near before him," that is before the "ancient of days." It is obvious that there are three characters here, all different with respect to office and glory. These two cannot be one and the same person, unless he is brought before himself! which would be an absurd extravagance of language. Although they are all one in purpose, cooperation, and love, yet they are different persons filling different spheres. There is no doubt as to who is the "Son of man," but who is this "ancient of days" who will be second to him, who is hiding from the sight of multitudes among the other mysteries of the kingdom of God. Neither is it God the Father; for if the Saints were fit to withstand the brilliant glory of the Father, what need would there be for all these great preparations to fit them and prepare them for association with the Son? is not the glory of the Father above that of the Son? Also, it is not the Father that prepares the kingdom and its fulness for the Son, rather it is the Son who will do that, so that after he finishes perfecting it the Son may give it up to his Father, so that God will be all in all.

Still we are searching to know, Who is the "ancient of days?" We presume that it would be someone of great age; yes, the oldest who dwelt in flesh perhaps: his name in English, namely Ancient of days, suggests the oldest in days, which is a sufficiently distinct characteristic to distinguish him from all the others who were, who are, and who will be. We know of no logic or anything that disproves this.

But thanks to God who is in the heaven, and who reveals mysteries to his Saints on the earth, as gracious now as in the days of Daniel, and his other children, that he has not left his Saints in ignorance of this thing either, but has restored and revealed through his servants the prophets, assurance about this also as of the wondrous and glorious things he will yet reveal to prepare a people fit to meet him. Through these means we are informed that the "ancient of days" is none other than ADAM himself, namely the first Adam who placed the crown on the head of the second Adam who won it. Thus is seen the great diversity of the wisdom of God and his plan to bring many sons to glory. He sent the first Adam, with his first mission, in the beginning of the first dispensation to the world to preside over a few; and he will send him again at the end of the last dispensation to bring order to the chaos it caused; and as the last excels in grace through the second Adam, so will the glory of the "ancient of days" excel even more in numbers of his subjects, which will be unnumbered millions to present them all in one to their savior and their worthy King; after that he will present himself and his all to his Father, "so that he may be all in all." Amen.

THE "REV. W.R. DAVIES, FROM DOWLAIS," AND HIS CRUEL AND SHAMEFUL PERSECUTION AGAIN!—AGAIN!!

WE remember as a boy the harmful red hot overflowing of Etna and Strombulo, when they spewed from their crater the contents of their self-agitating hot belly, rivers of fire and brimstone, until they destroyed every flower, blade of grass, and every living thing within the reach of their furious fiery waves!

We have seen the overflowing floodwaters of the Nile, the Mississippi ("the father of waters"), the rapid Missouri, the majestic Niagra, and the splendid Ganges rushing over its cataracts, and its banks, sweeping houses, yes, towns—peoples, and animals, on the swell of their cruel waves in massacre into their bottomless vortex. We have heard the sound of earthquakes that swallowed mountains and whole cities almost into the mysterious depths of the land of oblivion! It is known, nearer home, about the subterranean fires which at times blow our dear neighbors in a second to the other world, whether they are ready or not!

But never (to this extent) have we seen a more detailed imitation of the above phenomena than the overflowing of the unclean bowels of the above man now and again through the press and over the pulpit, against his innocent neighbors, because of their religion! Like the Volcanoes—he pours forth one unclean bellyful only to empty the pit of his dreadful heart in order to collect an even more unclean stream: and when about to burst with malice and envy, out flows another scandalous stream as through the crater from an inexhaustible pool. I wonder in all seriousness whether there is not some sort of underground gas, or foul air that electrifies surface creatures around Dowlais. Certainly, the disturbances and overflow from the bowels of the "Caersalem" Volcano are not dissimilar at times! By now the people of Dowlais can tell when he is about to burst, and spew his filth over the town from his aches and pangs, as those who live near Etna and Vesuvius know, from their grumbling and their thundering.

From the least of these, his friends (if he has any) should notice if there is some electric gas, or the power of an anarchic element exerting such a strong influence on their self-motivating Volcano, so that he cannot help spewing out his evil and his folly; and persuade him to move from Dowlais to the land of Nod, the desert of Ethiopia, or some other desert place to spew up his filth, lest he should burst as Judas once did (who was a much more truthful man) and soil the moral climate under the noses of his neighbors for any longer to his shame! It is sufficient excuse for the harshness of our scourge to remember that we are defending our good names and our religion.

He who doubts the accuracy of the above comparisons, and their aptness, let him read the endless feats of libel, filthy stories, inventive, immoral, harmful, and persecuting false accusations of this man in the columns of the "Baptist," &c. Since the Saints first came to Wales, and their first preacher refused to be hired as a preaching servant to him, he has not stopped blowing out his hatred and his malice against them. In addition to this if he did not send his contentious devotees to disturb their meetings, he agreed to that, and out would go some fawning, deformed story through the press, carrying the name and language of its father on its forehead. Despite all this, the Saints were succeeding, and at last out he came himself like a shooting star through the country purposely to misrepresent and persecute the Saints from any pulpit he could; and it is fair to admit, that his rubbish is too poor in the sight of reasonable men to allow him to ascend into their pulpits to proclaim it. As though determined to be chief bully, or the champion of persecutors of his age, as were Goliath, Herod, Nero, and Adrian, in their ages, he continues to invent some new stories almost as regularly as the new moon; and in a word it could be said that he is almost "the father of lies" that are told even today about the Saints; he is their progenitor, and he will yet have to be accountable for them! Having disgusted his listeners with his cruel tongue, and worked his scandal-mongering machine out of use, he has collected his old lectures into a treatise in order to get even more use out of his blackguarding, and has called it "Substance of a Sermon!!" And since he admits that the substance of his sermon is there, no one need doubt who sent it to be preached!!

I reviewed his treatise carefully and fairly in "Star of the Saints" from September to October. There one can see his deceit, his dullness, and his evil so clearly that he has not to this day dared to disprove one bit of it. I did all this in case he was stupid enough to publish such things out of ignorance; but by now it is seen that he published it all knowingly since he admitted that he read "Star of the Saints," and thereby must have seen his errors, and instead of taking them back and repenting of them or leaving us alone to worship the God of our fathers, as all the other children of Gomer are allowed to do in this enlightened age, and as any man would have done who had a grain of conscientious honesty, or a desire for his fellowmen to have the truth, it all has no effect in restoring him from his madness, or in leaving them alone, but worse and worse, as though he were in a hurry to fulfill the measure of his iniquity, he rushes again like a wild horse into battle by revamping his "substance of a sermon" as a Catechism to trick and blind the poor little children of the Sunday Schools into his darkness. But what we are concerned about is this, that he is preparing and presenting destructive weapons, namely his false accusations, into the hands of the young rising generation, which to the extent they are believed nurture such hatred and envy that they thirst for the innocent blood of those who dare worship God according to the New Testament in their own country! We have seen before, to our chagrin, such an accusing and lying spirit as this quaffing the blood of godly martyrs in floods! Even in a Catechism for Sunday Schools, this gentle "evangelist" cannot find better names for his religious neighbors than "SATANISTS!!!" "Deceitful atheists," and "bloody old Chartists,&c.!!" Since I reviewed his treatise in such detail, and answered everything that merited attention, and as his Catechism is only a revamping of that, having had done to it what some ladies do to their bonnets, or the dandies to their old coats, that is to turn them and bring them out in some new fashion, we will not be expected to review his Catechism here until he offers to refute our previous review: yet, let us take note of the above accusations to see if it is he, or we who merit them at all. This man accuses the Saints of trying to "Entice the uneducated and the unbalanced, for the purpose of attracting their money, and living in idleness at the expense of the weak-headed ones who believe them," says he. This would be considered a very weighty accusation if it came from any mouth but the soiled lips of Mr. Davies of Dowlais; yes, one who needs strong proofs before he would be believed: but it is vain to expect any sort of proof, example, or reason from him to prove it, any more than he provides for anything else; otherwise it would long ago have been out in public. Is it Mr. Davies who brings this accusation! From how many chapels does he himself receive his salary, I wonder? Who lives in such idleness at the expense of his devotees, and electioneers so much for money, money, all the time as our accuser? No one we ever heard of. Who attracts the money of the weak-headed of Dowlais to his shop? Also, who was that stubborn, red man who was seen in such a frenzy in his pulpit that, while searching his pockets in alarm for his sermon, he brought out fistfuls of tickets of the "New debts act," ready to sue his customers who could not pay their old accounts! Who was that, Sir? Name him so that the public may know, but even so the people of Dowlais know that it was not one of the Saints who was found in such a dilemma. Living in idleness at the expense of others, is it? Which of them prove themselves guilty of this by building new houses, &c.? Who was the man who was off for three months without preaching once in any of his chapels, and on his return got l 50 from his devotees at home! Name him, Mr. Davies! What money do the Saints attract, poor things? Oh no, although over a hundred of us preach more often than you, I should think, yet I would challenge you to prove that among them all, yes, from one end of Wales to the other, they attract as much money for that as you yourself demand in Dowlais. There is a fair offer for you; now make use of it. Before accusing others of attracting money, a rich man like yourself should set a good example by preaching free, without any payment, as the Saints do. Or if your hatred is for avarice, new houses, shops, &c., are poor signs to prove it. Instead of trying to reform those you call "SATANISTS," start nearer to home, and no doubt you will have enough work with your own respectable denomination, if the letter of your own assembly that was held in Cwmtwrch on the 17th and 18th of last June is telling the truth. This shows that your assembly considers avarice to be almost the chief Lord of your sect. Mammon is considered so highly that they make him the main subject of their confidential letter, and we do not blame them for that, but we blame you for not reforming yourself and your faction before you accuse others. Do you not see your ailment in that mirror as your brothers see it clearly? "The harm of worldly affections," is their subject, and they admit it, that is, your brothers, remember, not the Saints: "And he [namely mammon] militates against our spiritual good, and threatens our destruction; [this is an admission that he is quite high up with the Baptists!] this accusation is so pertinent to us," they say, that is to the Baptists, remember! and why do you seek to attribute it to the Saints then, Sir? Having labored hard throughout the lengthy epistle to loosen the pursestrings, and unbutton the pockets of their devotees, so that the tokens would come out more easily, the cloven foot appears as clearly as yours. "But we consider [they say] that God [alias a Baptist preacher!] has the FIRST RIGHT, [here it is !!!] and every member should give the FIRST PLACE to him." How they can claim that giving to them is giving to God is a source of endless astonishment! Again, notice who is claiming the FIRST right to the treasures of their devotees, lashing them and us for avarice if we complain at all about such oppression. Fie on such shamelessness. They suggest that he who claims the first right to his own purse is an idolator, miserly, and doubts God's providence, &c.; without considering that they themselves by claiming the "first right" are sacrificing themselves to their own idols! Without doubting the suitability of their subject, we ask how they, let alone Mr. Davies, dare throw stones at others while living in glass houses themselves! Having registered Balaam, Achan, Gehazi, and Judas among their devotees; having spoken of their short measure, their light weights, and their despoiling the Sabbaths, &c., they grumble sadly like this: "some people's riches are increasing, and yet their contributions are scarcer than before!" Yes, here it is again, always eyeing the wealth! The scriptures warn us that men would heap up teachers unto themselves in the latter days, turn to fables, &c., and are they not these assembly letters? Is this not making merchandise of their devotees under a pretence of evangelizing? and are these not the ones who are living in idleness at the expense of the weak-headed ones who believe them? Our accusers assert that "contributing generously to God's cause (alias, the Baptists) is the way to keep wealth safe," and indeed, it is very "safe;" yes, too "safe" even for the interest ever to come back. "We (that is you) are earnestly called upon to make an effort to sustain the home ministry," they say. Well, that is more of a bum-bailiff than the Saints do to anyone, and their own words are appropriate for such people, namely, "It is vain for you to attempt to convince them (the world) that your treasure is in heaven when they see that your heart is on the earth." All true. "Charity begins at home," Mr. Davies. You, accusing the Saints of trying to get people's coin indeed! Put your spectacles on your eyes once again, and read the decisions in your "assembly letter;" after undoing the pursestrings, the mammon is seen rearing its head through three of the six decisions, tinkling for tokens, and collections for something or other. Physician, heal thyself and thy brothers. Afterwards comes the splendid "plan" under seven headings, and all but one of those tinkle like bells for money, until they grate on the country's ears! And although we do not care how much they get of the money of those who are foolish enough to allow them the first right, yet we are very surprised how these guilty ones can attribute their "love of money" to the Saints who work with their hands so they can preach the gospel for nothing!

As for the building of ships to go towards Jerusalem that he mentions, he knows very well that none of the Saints has any intention of going there, because he read differently in that "damnable" book as he calls it, Star of the Saints, yes, that little publication treats him just right; and it is a bad sign to see a dog chewing the rod that beats him. So much to prove who attracts the money of the weak-headed, and lives in idleness at the expense of their deceit.

[To be continued.]

TRUTHFUL MARRIAGE.

HE who ventures to marry the truth will be disappointed if he expects to have her other than an unendowed and unadorned maiden; she marries on behalf of that which is in herself, and is like that lady who had covenanted with a soldier to marry him when he returned from the battle; but the next letter she had from him was one freeing her from those conditions to marry someone else, because he had lost his four limbs on the battlefield, and was so badly mutilated, that he was not worthy of her. She answered him back as any wise person will upon hearing the truth, namely "that she was willing to marry him for better or for worse, despite his having lost his limbs, yes, even if there was only enough of his body to sustain life, and then she would hold him to the first condition." When one marries truth, one should covenant to love her, nurture her, and obey her, not only to death, but beyond that; for this union will continue not just until death, but longer than time, which overcomes death. The lover of truth is above the vile rubbish that glitters around him, strong in the midst of temptations, bold and brave in the midst of treacheries, his pearl before him attracting his love after her. Prejudiced men will envy him, only because he is without prejudice; they shout expensive bargain at him, because he cannot be bought; every partisan opposes him, because he is not a partisan; rather he is a groom who loves and follows his heavenly bride, who is an exquisite and beautiful lady, of divine ancestry, and of royal blood, and her name is truth.

GOOD NEWS FOR THE SAINTS.

House of Commons, Monday, June 14.

"LORD M. Hill appeared before the bar, and said that he on that day, by request of the house, had visited with her Majesty, and presented for her notice the speech the house had made on the colonization, and to this he was pleased to have from her Majesty the following gracious answer:—

"I have considered the speech of my faithful House of Commons. I am quite sensitive to the good that would come from the best measures to facilitate colonization, and I shall request that a more detailed search be conducted into the matter, to enable the Parliament to draw up some measures that will free the emigrant and the colonies from the damage of impulsiveness in this concern."

"It was ordered that her Majesty's response be recorded."

Although we do not think that the measures the Saints desire will be brought to the front directly, or on the first time, yet they seek nothing but justice, and that which will be for the benefit of all, without loss to anyone, in their recent request to her Majesty, and since the the hearts of all are in their heavenly Father's hand, all these considerations and others exhort us, and we would wish for them to comfort the hearts and strengthen the faith of every one of the faithful Saints to believe that God remembers his promise, and in due time he will open the way for his faithful people to gain deliverance. He promised that if kings and queens were not fathers and mothers, they would be nursing fathers and nursing mothers to his children, and it is likely through providing measures to gather his children together from the four corners that they are fulfilling this prophecy; at least, we believe this firmly, none of them will be held back because of their poverty, if they are but rich in the Spirit, and faithful in their duties.

That which most discourages the government to send its subjects to its new and distant colonies is the danger that they will be in need there before being able to grow a crop from the earth, or the great cost of supporting them until then, together with the cost of taking them there. The latter is nothing, and the former is but small after understanding the means. If the government would give 320 acres of land, which is only half a section, they could get merchants in this country who would transport them there for an interest in that land, and thus they could furnish food for all they had here, and then they would be free subjects in a fruitful land, with a healthful climate, where none would suffer want or hunger. Besides that, some of her Majesty's colonies, such as Oregon, Vancouver, Australia, &c., are in such a temperate climate that they will produce many kinds of food in a few weeks, and two crops of corn annually, besides the abundant game to be found there. And thus, if her Majesty were to allow just as many acres of land there to each male of age, she would put such in an independent state, yes, in a state of happiness and wealth, and their posterity after them; and thus future generations will call them blessed. We are confident that she will see fit to do this, so that anyone who chooses will be delivered from the famines, the afflictions, and the harsh judgments that are coming on all the ungodly of the earth.

SIGNS OF THE TIMES.

THE correspondent for one of the newspapers of New York, close to Galena, writes, dated May 18:—"I have heard many times of large hailstones, but had not seen any until yesterday. About four o'clock in the afternoon, a thick, black cloud came from the north, and poured upon us wind, hail, and rain. Some of the hailstones were the size of goose eggs, or turkeys. I did not have at the time a chance to weigh them, nor did I think to measure them; but I picked up some within 3 hours after they fell, and within 16 hours after they fell one of them measured 4 3/4 by 3 3/4 inches. A gentleman told me that he had measured some within about an hour after they fell that were 10 1/4 in circumference; and another that he measured was 9 1/4 in circumference. I understand that the crops in the path of the cloud from the north were badly damaged, and to the east of here they have suffered greatly. I assure you that the hailstones were as big as anyone would ever wish to see, filling the face of the earth under the center of the cloud."

The Marietta Helicon for the 20th of May says that a shower of large hailstones has come down in their town, and their county, Sunday night, and has destroyed much of the corn and the fruit. And on Monday night there was another heavy shower for about half an hour, and it cooled the atmosphere until a fire was not only tolerable, but a pleasure. In other places it is said that the Indian corn and cotton were completely destroyed even in those places of the southern States where the shower reached, until the farmers are reploughing their cotton land for crops of something else. A publication of Lagrange says that hail ranging from the weight of bullets to the size of hens' eggs had fallen, and some pieces weighed several ounces; that they had completely destroyed entire fields of Indian corn, wheat, &c., and had blown and beaten them level with the ground, together with the rail fences, the woods, and everything that was in their path. It is impossible to tell the extent of the loss, they say. This storm arrived through the state of Alabama, laying waste everything in front of it, and filling the face of the earth with hailstones several inches thick, and about six inches in circumference.

We are informed also that a fierce shower of hailstones remarkable in size rushed through the state of Georgia about the same time, causing great calamity, especially to the trees, fruits, and the crops. It is a very unusual thing to hear of hailstones such as the above. And, would we be considered presumptuous, I wonder, if we ventured to ask, Is the voice of the Creator of the elements speaking through things like these to the obstinate inhabitants of the earth? Job says that the Lord reserves hailstones against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war. The Psalmist says, Psalm lxxviii, 47, that the destruction of their vines with hail was the judgment of God on Egypt. The prophet Isaiah, chap. xxx, 30, says that the hailstones, and the devouring fire, are proof of the glorious voice of the Lord. He also says he will fight with hail against the enemies of his people Israel in their final restoration to their land, as he did with their enemies previously. See Ezekiel xxxviii, 22. It is seen also from Rev. viii, 7, that hail will be in the midst of other things of the materials that God will use to vent his anger on those of the family of great Babylon who refuse his gospel, disrespecting his servants: and in past centuries in what country have they done that to the extent they have in the country where the God of those servants begins to visit it with such great hailstones? although this is only the beginning of the worries. God said to his servants upon sending them through that land,—"After your testimony cometh the testimony of lightnings and thunderings, HAILSTONES, floods, and fires," &c. And it is remarkable that this is being fulfilled there already so much more than in any other country, especially ever since they drove the children of God from their midst!

John says, in Rev. xvi, 21, that he saw great hailstones the weight of talents falling from heaven on men, and that despite all that, men blasphemed the God of heaven because of the plague of hail, for exceeding great was their plague. It is obvious that plagues are not to convince men, rather it is the servants of God who are to convince men through preaching, and it is God who takes vengeance on those who reject them through plagues, &c.

Another marvelous sign that mighty God is preparing his destructive instruments against the day of spoil, when he will call together not only vultures, but all the birds of the air, to feast on the flesh of kings and princes, and on the flesh of all those who worship the beast, or who have received his mark, is the following:—The newspapers of the state of Missouri (namely the state that without cause or mercy exiled the Saints from their borders) contain strange stories of the appearance of a large host of vultures flying from the north to the south through that state. They extended in width about two miles, &c., from the north to the south, as far as the eye could see. They flew as close to the ground as the tops of the trees, and so high in the sky, that they were seen as one thick cloud, and as close to each other as they could fly. So dense were they and their shadow that they blotted out the light of the sun until it was like the darkness of Egypt beneath them. The inhabitants were greatly frightened at the sight, and great was the wondering as to the cause, together with what would be the results. But if this small thing frightens them, what will become of them when the God of the Saints gives their flesh as food for the birds of heaven?

Although signs will be in the heaven, and on earth blood, and fire, and hail, and famines, wonders, and pestilence, &c., yet all this is only the beginning of the afflictions: it is not "the end of the world" yet, as some say, nor will it come until "THIS gospel of the kingdom" has been preached throughout the world as a witness to all nations—until the earth is bathed in blood—cities are burned to ashes, or swallowed up into the bowels of the earth—until the nations are covered with paleness and with fright—until the others of the holy prophets and apostles are killed for their testimony of Jesus, as their brethren were killed earlier—not until the clear sign of the Son of God is seen in the heavens will the end of the world come. All the others are forerunners.

NEWS FROM CALIFORNIA.

FOURTEEN hundred emigrants landed in the valley of San Francisco last autumn. Two hundred of them were Saints, who had come around Cape Horn, and the others had come in 180 wagons under the leadership of governor Boggs across the mountains.

The trail is improving annually from the states to here. The first house they see on their path after leaving the states is that of Mr. Johnston, an Englishman, then that of Capt. Sutters, which are making better preparations for the immigrants in the coming years; and others intend to settle along the way, so that before long the immigrants will not have to want for anything. All are encouraged to use oxen to travel, instead of horses or mules. Those who brought provisions with them are selling them easily for high prices. The emigrants who went there with Col. Fremont had a splendid opportunity to sell their horses, saddles, guns, and everything they wanted, and they received 25 dollars a month in wages for 6 months.

They expect from 3000 to 4000 immigrants in the Sacramento valley this year. The natives are praised for their incredible skill in fighting while on their own horses, because they have been taught to do that in their own way very skillfully.

"On the 9th of January, General Kearney joined with Colonel Cooke, in San Diego, and the Mormon army with them. They were greatly praised for their orderly and well-organized arrival. It is said that all their soldiers were in good health and good spirits, with their weapons as shiny as the day they began their journey—in excellent discipline, and without suffering any losses. Soon after arriving here they went on toward Monterey, where they arrived safely. Two regiments of infantry joined with them there. Commodore Shubrick had joined Gen. Kearney there also, but their purpose could not be known, for the one and the other alleged their right to preside over the territory."—St. Louis Republican.

The California Star (a Mormon publication) gives an account of the tumult that took place in Santa Clara:—"As one of the navy officers, with an escort of six soldiers, had gone on business to the country, they were imprisoned by the Mexicans. The captain of the ship sent two regiments to fetch them, who pursued the Mexicans as far as Yerba Buena, and through their cannons they forced them to request conditions of peace."—St. Louis Union.

"We are informed through the Californian that 60 emigrants suffered great hunger as they tried to cross through the Mountains of California. Of the nineteen who started toward the valley, only seven arrived, and they had to eat the flesh of the others of their number, after they died, to keep from dying! Among those who arrived there were two young girls. A public meeting was held in Yerba Buena on the occasion, and 800 dollars were immediately collected, the worth of which was sent in food with a company to those who were yet in the mountains. The cause of this misfortune was that the immigrants have lost their cattle and their animals on the Salt Plains near Hastings Cut Off, a way that should never have been traveled."

This is the occasion for people to say, "that the Saints are eating each other in the wilderness." But thanks to the God of the Saints, despite the world, and despite the eagerness of everyone to eat them up, not one of the Saints was in that company. They are under better leaders than those.

"THE MORMONS. The Mormons who came to San Francisco have settled in two separate townships, and in this wide and unpopulated land, no doubt that will be better for the good of everyone than being in the same place. They have industrious practices, which they can make very useful in this land. They are a hard-working, thrifty, and honest people, and completely undeserving of the shameful characters given them by some prejudiced publications."—Californian.

"IMMIGRANTS.—Over the past several weeks, we have noticed hosts of emigrants going through this city toward the west. We were surprised at their neat manner of dressing, and their gentlemanly behavior almost without exception. The greatest part of them are from the class considered the most respectable and substantial of the eastern states. Never before have we seen so many immigrants of such a good appearance. And to our great disappointment we were informed by a gentleman who knows, that nearly all of them are Mormons! Pity that such wise and prudent people, with so many large families (for they were very large), have been beguiled by such deception."—Pittsburg Gazette.

Pity that he himself was not sufficiently humane as to examine their principles as much as they had, before condemning their religion as deceit. Pity such Editors! They did not ever have sufficient patience to search anything out for themselves, rather they snatch what they can from whatever comes along on the wings of the popular breeze, and off he goes like feathers before the whirlwind. Is it he, or the people who had experienced the religion who could best understand concerning it? But this is the custom of such almost throughout the world.

NEW AND NEARER WAY TO CALIFORNIA.

A WEALTHY company in London has taken the charter to join the Atlantic Ocean and the Pacific Ocean together at the Tehuantepec isthmus. It is said that they intend to begin the task as soon as peace is restored in Mexico. This way will save several thousand miles, besides the unpleasant weather of Cape Horn, for those who go by sea to California or Oregon. We wish them every success to complete it soon.

EXCELLENT ADVICE.

THOU man know thyself! understand thy nature, learn the powers of thy physical and spiritual faculties. Search into thy beginning, the purpose of thy present existence, and thy eternal destiny. Dig for the fountain of true happiness until thou findest it, and pour its streams into the bosom of all those around thee. Teach all that thou art of divine ancestry through thy virtues, prove that royal blood is in thy veins, not with thy tongue, rather by thy example. Reach for every chance to widen thy abilities, as a drowning man reaches for a straw that is within his grasp. Refuse not one ray of light because of the candle that gives it, for light is light, come from where it may, like truth. Continuing to do this, thou wilt fill the sphere in which thy father has set thee, thy name will be in remembrance in the chronicles of the house of thy fathers, thy brethren will call thee blessed, thou shalt sit on a white throne, a crown on thy head, a sceptre in thy hand, with endless generations to wear them!

DISEASES IN AMERICA.

THE Patriot for June 17th says that there is considerable excitement, and great fear through the main cities of the eastern states, because of the appearance of some disease in their midst they have named the Plague of the Ships. It is said that it is very deadly in New York, and kills some daily, not only of the immigrants, but also several others who caught it from them. There are several hundred in the hospitals, and in one place six of them died in the space of two hours. Nearly every ship that lands in Europe with emigrants on board tell of from fifty to sixty, or seventy, deaths from it during the voyage. In Boston, the government prevented some ships from landing their immigrants because of it, and in their hospitals some die from it daily. It is making a great carnage in Baltimore, and in Quebec and Montreal the hospitals are overflowing. From 40 to 70 are dying on every ship that comes in. There are 224 sick on board four ships, in the river near Montreal, and some more or less die every hour. It is said that this plague is as deadly as the Cholera, and it is rare they live more than a few hours.

GLAMORGAN CONFERENCE.

THIS Conference was held in Merthyr, Sunday July 11th. Twenty-seven branches belonging to this conference were represented, containing 124 preachers, 70 teachers and deacons, and all the total number of members was 1153. There were 142 baptized during the past two-and-one-half months. Four new branches were established, and about fifteen were called to the ministry. The meetings were orderly, the crowd of listeners very numerous, and much good advice and edifying teaching were given to the Saints throughout the day, which was borne out by the great cheerfulness and the attentive and polite hearing through it all.

Monday, at ten, a meeting for the Saints was held, and especially for the officers. At half past two the tables were spread with the finest china, and laden with the dishes prepared for the feast of the Missionary Society. And from then until eight o'clock over a thousand people feasted. We heard not so much as one incident of ungentlemanly conduct, or one unkind appearance throughout this entire orderly crowd; but everyone we saw had smiles on their faces, indicative of the joy of their hearts the whole time. More food was prepared than was used, so that everyone had his fill, and the remainder was sold for close to two pounds. After finishing the feast, the pleasant crowd was addressed by president Jones, Elders Henshaw, A. Evans, and Mitchell, in a warm and interesting manner.

The scribe read the numbers of the Missionary Society, namely its receipts and bills, how much was received for this feast, its costs, and also how much money is in the treasury at present. We were pleased to understand that the tickets and the bills, and all the numbers met with everyone's approval. At the end of the feast, thanks were given on behalf of the Saints to their kind and gentle friends from the world, and from other denominations, for their cheerfulness, their company, and their assistance in this blessed work. And after singing praise, the president dismissed the crowd with the blessing and protection of the gracious God; and no doubt this gathering was beneficial to eliminate much of the prejudice that was in the bosom of the listeners, to convince many, and bring them to believe the gospel, besides edifying the Saints in the most holy faith. May the gracious Lord hasten the happy day when the whole Welsh nation can unite to love one another, and agree without exception, and go together toward the same divine objective in Christ Jesus, is our fervent prayer for all our dear fellow-nation. Amen.

Tuesday, the committee met to apportion out what was on hand for the needs of those preachers who went to the North, and to Pembrokeshire, and other places, to assist them to continue preaching through the remainder of this season. It was brought to our attention that some of them had been suffering great want. We hope the Saints will strive in their monthly meetings to make contributions for these brethren who are giving their whole time in Christ's vineyard, without purse or script for the journey, for they are in the middle of a very stiffnecked and devotional generation; yes, so pious that they consider it a sin before God to give a meal, or a night's lodging, to his servants! O, such disappointment those charmed wretches will have when they have all gone to their own lodgings!

MEXICO.

THE Mexicans, after their strong armies failed to stand in the face of the braver armies of the States, who put them to flight with the loss of several thousand lives, in about 18 consecutive battles, have changed their strategy of waging war. Instead of bringing their soldiers face to face, and forcing them to kill their fellow men in this way, it is seen that President Antonio Canales has published his address to all the Mexicans, ordering each one, noble and lowly, old and young, in the towns and in the country, who are able to stand under arms, to gather together in small bands, and choose their leader, and attack or completely destroy every American, whether armed or not, mercilessly; and also, for them to look for every opportunity to rush upon and kill all those they find separated from the American army, searching for paths, seeking for food, &c. He orders that everyone who does not obey this call within eight days is to be considered a traitor to the government, to be killed without inquiry, and that all his possessions will belong to others. The president is serious, it is thought, about destroying lives. This way will not answer the purpose he desires, for the Americans will look out for them, and keep together; and where they succeed in killing some of the Americans who settled there before, they will bring a threefold revenge of the army on their heads. The former manner of waging war was sufficiently bloody as could be expected, when thousands on each side were being killed, but this manner is even more brutal. The excuse the Mexicans offer for starting this "Guerilla" war is that the Americans have been unfair with them, and have killed some number without trial. Many tales are published through the Mexican newspapers against the Americans, to create animosity against them; and they cannot expect less, for that is an old American trick. It is they who taught the world how to turn the flood of publicity against their enemies through the influence of the press, when all other ways had failed. This is what the American press did with the Saints for nearly twenty years, until succeeding through their baseless tales in getting the whole world to think ill of them; and is it any wonder that the Mexicans pay them according to the measure which they have meted out to others.

General Scott has published a proclamation to the Mexicans, in which he defends the character of his army, and denies the allegations published against them, and accuses the gentry and officers of Mexico of oppression and great unfairness to their subjects. He gives notice that he is on his way from Jalapa to Puebla, a very large town in Mexico, and from there to the capital city of Mexico. Some of the leaders of the country are urging that the city be burned rather than allow the enemies to possess it, and more of this important news is expected shortly.

ARRANGEMENTS OF THE PREACHERS

IN addition to those who were there already, the following persons have gone or will go shortly to the following places:—

Monmouthshire.—Robert Evans, William Davies, and Chason Thomas.

Caernarfonshire.—Eliezer Edwards, and Lewis Jones.

Denbighshire, and Merionethshire.—Abel Evans.

Flintshire.—John Jones.

Cardiganshire.—Several are on the verge of going soon.

Carmarthenshire.—Benjamin Jones, Howel Williams, John Roberts, Morgan Richards, and John Floyd.

Pembrokeshire.—E. C. Mitchell, J. Morris, John Davies, and John Price.

Cwmaman.—John Griffiths and James Phillips.

Cyfyng.—David Isaac Jones, and Daniel Williams.

We are pleased to understand that several other brethren are arranging their circumstances preparatory to going out to warn their fellow-nation, and to invite them into the kingdom of God. Dear brethren, be diligent, purchasing the time, for the days are evil. Now is the harvest, and we hope that no one will be caught sharpening his sickle, especially those of our brethren who have no worldly or family cares in their way. We receive frequent and earnest calls from many places where no one has ever preached, in the different counties, for preachers to preach to them the word of life: and, O brethren, those of you who can go, do not let them call in vain; rather send your names to us, and we shall inform you of such places. May the Lord give success and blessings to whoever obeys this call.

CAPT. JONES ON MORMONISM, IN 1846,

CONTAINING

The first Volume of Prophet of the Jubilee; the Old Religion Anew; the Reply; the Scales; the Defense; and the Millennium; and Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles; bound in one handsome volume, 12fold. Price Three Shillings.

It is better to secure a copy right away, for not one of the aforementioned can be obtained anywhere except in the Volume, with the exception of the Volume of the Prophet, for they are out of print, and we do not intend to reprint them any time soon.
