Ronald D. Dennis, Prophet of the Jubilee ( 1997)

OCTOBER, 1847.

APOSTLES.

TO PROVE that there were more than twelve in the church of Jesus Christ in the first age of Christianity, we offer the following:—

Luke ix, 1,—"Then he called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases." Here are seen the twelve disciples. Luke ix, 10,—"And the apostles, when they were returned, told him all that they had done. And he took them, and went aside privately into a desert place belonging to the city called Bethsaida." The same twelve are found here under the name apostles. Luke x, 1,—"After these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come." Seventy of what office were these? Were they elders? There has been no word of mention about that title or any other title earlier than this except for apostles: he had not sent anyone else. Why was the word "other" used, if they were not of the same order as the other? We cannot understand what name to put on them except apostles, and if it were said, seventy other (apostles), it would be just as clear, for apostles were being talked about before. The reason why some argue there were but twelve apostles at that time is, we suppose, so they can prove that there is no need to continue them in the church of Christ, rather that they were necessary only to establish it or to be witnesses for Jesus in that time. That argument is older than our fathers, we think, and if it could be defended, that would close the great chasm that is in every congregation that professes to be the apostolic church, and yet is destitute of apostles. But read the following:—Rom. xvi, 7,—L "Salute Andranicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my fellowprisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me." What divine peculiarity could have been in them to deserve praise, more than those of a higher office? if in fact it was higher. 1 Cor. xv, 5, 6—"And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve. After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep." I wonder if the seventy apostles were not in the midst of this multitude? Had they turned away, such a thing would have been worthy of recording. 1 Cor. xv, 7,—"After that he was seen of James; then of all the apostles." Here it is suggested that it was not known how many were meant by the phrase "all the apostles." The twelve did not include all of them, for he had already indicated in ver. 5, that the twelve had seen him. 1 Cor. xv, 8.9,—"And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time. For I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God." Acts xiv, 14,—"Which when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out." Here Luke definitely acknowledges that these two were apostles, even though they were not numbered with the twelve. Rev. ii, 2,—"I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are evil; and thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars." If there were supposed to be that number, namely twelve, it is seen how foolish it would be for anyone else to claim to be an apostle. We shall not consider the counter arguments that seeing Jesus Christ, having a personal commission from him, or that each one should have miraculous power, or should have been with him from the beginning, &c., together with having the power to miraculously speak every language, constitute indispensable qualifications in order to be an apostle, rather inconsistent assertions of those who claim "that apostles are among the unnecessary things and gifts." It is seen that it was not possible for all the above apostles, or anyone, to have all those high qualifications, according to what we read. Indeed, we do not understand that there were but four or five working more powerful deeds than the other preachers, or the Saints, and not everyone could be expected to work miracles, any more than it could be expected for all to be apostles. 1 Cor. xii, 29, 30. That one apostle is endowed with such a gift does not keep God from giving the same office to another who does not have that miraculous gift, for the one and the other are a gift from God. "According to his will" is everything.

REVIEW OF THE LECTURE OF THE REV. D. JONES, CARDIFF, ON "THE EXCELLENCE OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION."

THIS lecture was delivered in the Bethania chapel, Dowlais, on the 3rd of September, following the Rev. E. Roberts from Rhymni.

The first step that the lecturer took was into the job of Chairman, and the first thing that came from his mouth was the cruel sentence that follows:—"My brother [E. Roberts] has shown quite clearly that Mormonism is deceit, and only deceit;" when at the same time his brother had not disproved any principle that belongs to "Mormonism," but made horrible hobgoblins out of his own work, and that of others of the same taste, and torturing them alternately; yes, stories, we say, and assertions that were as inappropriate to the Mormons as to the Baptists, if not more so. It was not Mormonism they had in their hands, nor its shadow, but the imaginings of its enemies; i.e., if it is admitted that we understand something about it; and if we do not know something, having had years of its society, there is a poor chance of expecting these men who never knew the first thing about it to understand anything of it. Who, seriously, ought to understand it best? Still, we say, that it was not "Mormonism" that was being tortured so mercilessly in Dowlais; for it is more alive and successful today than ever. And we prophesy that it will live forever, despite all its opponents; it has in it divine life, and it will increase the more they martyr it and its followers. Yes, it has in it "the strength of everlasting life," and "the eternal arms are beneath it." No arm of flesh will succeed against it. Next he asserted that "only the Book of Mormon or the Bible can be true, because their contents clash with each other." He did not see fit to note the places, or give even so much as one example to show that clashing, nor can he or anyone else prove that one sentence of the Book of Mormon is contrary to the scriptures; for there is not one. On the contrary, there is complete accord between the two books, and so those who admit the veracity of the one, should admit the veracity of the other also, or prove that the two truths cross each other. He thought that none of his listeners had read anything of the Book of Mormon any more than he himself, and while he could hinder them from reading it, they would not see otherwise. Another assertion of his is,—"The Old Testament ended with an opening to the New to come into our possession. It was prophesied at the end of the Old Testament that there would be another; and at the end of the New Testament the great God, through the mouth of John, locked it forever, so that whoever adds to the words of the prophecy of this book (that is the Old Testament and the New) or who takes away from them, there are only these plagues to fall on his head." See Rev. xxii 18, 19. We have published enough on this counter argument already, to prove that John was not referring to the Old Testament or the New; but as he says himself definitely in the words in question, that is "the words of the prophecy of this book," namely, the book of Revelation; that is, the writing he had in his hand at the time on the isle of Patmos, and which contained the words of the prophecy he had received there alone. Does Mr. J. not know that the writings of the apostles were not collected into one book until centuries after John had been on the isle of Patmos? How then could he refer to the volume in the above words? If he forbade adding to the Bible as Mr. J. says, then John became open to the plagues himself, because the critics say that he wrote his three Epistles and his Gospel in Ephesus, after leaving the isle of Patmos; and yet they are in the volume. But concerning this see Reply pages 5, 6. The Scales, page 15. And yet, what addition to the Bible can the Book of Mormon be unless it is collected there as well, and professes to be a part of it? Is it not a book on its own? and it cannot be an addition to John's words unless it claims John as its author. A child's reason teaches it better than to bring that counterargument against the Book of Mormon; yet that is the mightiest he can think of; and it is good that he gets something against the book he hates without having seen it, is it not? His "brother" referred to this various times before him, and thereby they showed the vanity and stupidity of their arguments and proofs. This is a strange way to display the "excellence of the Christian religion," is it not! They themselves admit that its former "excellence" was its adherers' enjoyment of divine revelations, visions, &c., and Paul prayed to God to continue to give even to the Gentiles "the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him." Yes, he prayed for a continuation of this in the church "throughout all ages, world without end. Amen." Christianity like that was excellent, but the Christianity of Caersalem and Bethania, Dowlais, is more excellent now, without revelations, or any of its early power except the form alone. Still Mr. R. had admitted the previous evening "that Christianity is unchanging," namely its "revelations," and the whole of it; but here, against himself, he labels those who profess the gospel that brings revelations as "deceivers." Is this not a fair example of those who say of the darkness that it is light, and of the truth (according to their confession) that it is decit? That "Spirit of wisdom and revelation" which was the chief excellence of the same Christianity is denying revelations. Yes, they did all this with the Bible before their eyes, affirming the complete opposite in more than a hundred places. How these deniers and scorners can claim any part or share of the "Christianity" of Jesus Christ and his apostles, is a matter of surprise, particularly when despoiling and shaming it publicly! We ask Mr. J. to direct us to the chapter and verse in the Old Testament that promises us a book like the New Testament? How many books, or epistles or letters, chapters and pages were to be in it? We do not know of any prophecy in the Old Testament describing a book like the New Testament; and he cannot show any. True that there are there many prophecies about the coming of the Messiah, the great work he would do, the treatment he and his servants would receive after him, apart from many other things; but not one promise of the coming of such a book regarding size, &c., as the New Testament, as Mr. J. asserts. And if the prophets had described a book like the New Testament to appear, their description of it would be very different to what the book is now; because they would have described it as containing the following letters and epistles, (however many more) which, although he admits their veracity like the others, are still lost; such as Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians. See 1 Cor. v. 9. His Epistle to Laodicea, Col. iv, 16. Judas, "about the general gospel," Jude, ver. 3. Enoch's prophecy, ver. 14; apart from many others, says Luke 1, 1, &c. So it is seen that Mr. J.'s assertions so far are completely erroneous. Let us see further whether we can get any truthful assertion from him. He says that the Old Testament has been ended as well, but he does not say by whom; but since John has locked up the New with the above words, why is it not that Moses locked up the Old Testament with the similar sentence in Deut. iv, 2? And if so, Joshua, David, Solomon, Isaiah, yes, all the later prophets, and their work get excommunicated and denied by Mr. J. in the same way as the Book of Mormon and the entire New Testament! This is his logic! He locks himself up in the same dilemma again by asserting that the Old Testament is complete, as he did when he asserted that the New was complete; because if it is fitting to offer to him the Old Testament as proof, it will be seen that it as well is very far from being complete. The book itself admits over a dozen other books as divine as those that are in it; and yet not one of them is in the Old Testament. We refer to some of the many, such as Josh. x, 13; 1 Chron. xxix, 29; 2 Chron. ix, 29; Chap. xii, 15; Chap. xxxiii, 19, &c., &c. How can you claim that the Old Testament is complete, Mr. J., until it contains all these, at least? And having got these, perhaps they will give an account of others then. What, is it the two covers that make a book complete, or your assertion that it is thus? Does not the book itself say completely the opposite of your assertion in various places, how God would give more revelations from age to age, if men did not twist his paths, and deny revelations, &c, yes, that he would reveal his mind "line upon line," precept upon precept, here a little and there a little? And he is doing so in this age for his children through the Book of Mormon, through the spirit of revelation, and the spiritual gifts, &c., despite the fact that you deny that, and oppose the things you know nothing about, as did Cora, Dathan, and Abiram before. For the sake of your souls, and the souls of your listeners, do not be so eager to get the wages of injustice with that Baalam of old. What but this excites you and your persecuting brethren, to assert such foolishness and lies against the truth? Next, note Mr. J.'s comparison. He says that the light of the Mosaic, Patriarchal, and Jewish ages are like the light of the stars, the moon, and the sun, "but Joe's light is like the light of a candle." Thank you for admitting that "Joe" has as much light as that; because you were asserting first that he had only deceit, and there is not even the "light of a candle" in deceit. Light is the same; and it is good, from wherever it may come. Your comparisons neccessarily signify divine light, and so of the same sort as that of "Joe." From whence did "Joe" get that light of a candle? From whence do you claim to have received the light of the sun? Is it not from the New Testament? If so, was not the New Testament of "Joe" as good as the one you have, and as a result could he not have received the light of the sun that you claim, i.e., if it is to be had in the book; and here is your profession, and the only axis to your structure, since you deny the spirit of revelation. If the book is the source of light, from whence did the authors of the book get their light before composing a book? If the book was not the source of their light, how can it be a source of light now? It is said that "God's holy men spoke the scriptures as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost:" and not as they were moved upon by a book or books. Again, if the book is the source of light, why do you and all your fellow preachers with your opposing words not come to agree and jointly teach the divine principles of the New Testament, instead of being at loggerheads with each other every day, even regarding the important and unchanging ordinances of the gospel? There is hardly anything in which you pull together, apart from denying the spirit of the light, and persecuting and slandering the children of the divine light, and calling them "deceivers," "children of the darkness," "satanists," &c. Since we are to know men by their works, what is more obvious than that your works and assertions prove you children of darkness? The scripture says that men in the latter days would have a from (that is only a profession) of godliness, and would deny its power, (that is that spirit of light and revelation that was a "strength and great certainty" in the Saints of old;) who would not wish to come into the light, because their works would be evil.

[To be continued.]

QUOTATION OF THE LETTER OF APOSTLE O. HYDE.

THE following letter was written from St. Louis, dated August 5, to O. Spencer, Liverpool:—

"June 22nd, Elders Pratt and Taylor started from Horne, together with a company of Saints, with about 600 wagons, after the first camp. When returning from the Bluffs toward St. Joseph, five days ago, they met with 5 battalions of the Saints that had joined with the American army, returning to meet the camp, which had not yet arrived there. They and some others from the Fort went after them. A messenger came here recently informing us that the first camp had reached beyond the Rocky Mountains, through the "South Pass," all well.

The rest of the army have settled in California. Several messengers returned to meet with the first camp, who had been looking over conditions in California; and thus through the goodness of God all will meet together in a council near the foot of the mountains, at which time the focal point of their effort will be determined, &c. To God be the thanks! His own spirit began this work, and has guided it forward until now; otherwise all things would not have come together in such a remarkable and convenient manner to join together the ends of the earth, without the sound of a hammer. The crops of the Saints in the land of the Indians are bountiful and splendid; practically everywhere the face is turned, great fields of Indian corn, &c., are seen throughout this wilderness. A week ago last Sunday, I preached at my encampment in the woods to a large congregation of attentive listeners, and eight were baptized at the end, in a pool that had been made on the prairie; and although we are exiles, we have many lovely and sweet Sabbaths.

"Our camps are followed by hosts of people from the world, who enjoy our company; and many are being baptized all the time along the way, in the wilderness, &c., and others stream after them.

"I heard that the Pratt and Taylor company was within 150 miles of Fort Laramie on the 17th of July, all well. I have been preaching and holding Conferences for an extent of 50 miles on both sides of the Missouri river from Council Bluffs to St. Louis, besides laboring with my own hands until I have a field of over 50 acres fenced, and 30 acres in cultivation. It is an easy task to place a crop in these prairies, and it bears fruit splendidly.

"When a message returns from the twelve, you will be timely advised concerning emigration, and I hope the Saints will be patient a little time longer. If the Saints in Britain assist us here as much as they can, that will be all the better for them as well when they come here; for this is not personal work that we have, rather everyone cooperates to benefit the whole temporally and spirtually. I have come down here presently on business relating to the church and to train the Saints here; and it is not impossible but that I may run over to Britain again, when I have a whole day to rest. Yet be that as the Lord and my brethren will.

"Tell Capt. D. Jones for me that Zion's banners are nailed to the top mast, waving proudly over the sons of Joseph, lighting up their sad visage with a generous degree of hope that "the day spring from on high hath visited them." My warmest greeting to him and his family, and also all the brethren and sisters over whom he has been called to preside. May heaven's choicest blessings rest upon them,—and his favor distil on the Cambrian hills, like the dew on mount Hermon, or the fresh showers of dew upon the mountains of Zion. I remember Scotland also, brother Richards, and a thousand others just as good. May their God bless them.

"Greet all godly and dear brethren and sisters lovingly for me; those in England, Scotland, and in Wales.

"I am, your brother in the Everlasting Covenant,

"ORSON HYDE."

GREETING TO THE SAINTS.

DEAR SAINTS,—Here we are, once again, through the medium of the Prophet, and more earnestly than ever before, seriously calling your attention to assist the Saints that are in the wilderness. We remind you of our promises to them, by calling your attention to what has been said before of their troubled and suffering circumstances on their long journey. We remind you of the relationship that is between us and them through the bond of the new covenant, to exhort you to fulfill our duty and our privilege toward them in their present distress; and, that it is our duty to assist them, not with our prayers only, but also through "bearing one another's burdens," for "faith without works is dead." The fact that it is for our comfort and safety, yes, for our temporal and spiritual salvation, as much as for anyone else's, they are striving, comples us to say that we should bear as much as we can of this great burden. Also the tumultuous and pitiful condition of the world in general, and our country in particular, proves to "those who were given to know the signs of the Times," that freedom, enjoyment, yes, in a word, all the comfort of the children of Zion, depend on their success in building the gates of the daughters of Zion, as a resting place for her children, when forced to flee from the borders of great Babylon and all its daughters, before the days of tribulation come, in which the vials of the wrath of God are poured out upon them. All the persecution, the lecturing, the false accusing, the threatening, and the cruel and unfounded attacks that are upon us in these days, especially in these environs, remind us that that spirit that makes Babylon drunk with the blood of the Saints, is now working busily in her children to fill the measure of their lies; and to be the objects of the righteous judgments of God upon them; and no doubt their rage will increase to the same extent that the godliness of the Saints increases, with the great power of God in their midst, in other places besides here. All will remind us that we are foreigners and pilgrims, even in the land of our birth, and that there is no city with foundations for us in their midst, and proving as plainly as the sun the absolute necessity we have of securing our part of the "city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God," and that we have no time to lose if we desire "the resting place that yet awaits the people of God." Doubtless the Welsh will need it as much and as soon as any other nation. Let us remember that those who request our assistance now are are our servants and our forerunners, and no doubt it will benefit us to help them. "For on Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, there will be deliverance." Well, may all these considerations move us to help them along with all our might. Not many shillings have been contributed in their behalf by the Welsh for several months, I am sorry to say; and the previous faithfulness and readiness of the Saints lead us to believe that the fault was ours for being so silent about the matter, or perhaps it was the fault of the various officers, through neglecting to put the plan that was designed for this purpose into operation. Let the Saints give their contributions to their presidents according to their means, and in a book especially for that purpose, let the name of every contributor and the amount given be recorded, and that will be in remembrance of the future time, and the names found in the "book of the law of the Lord." It is true that the Missionary Society calls loudly for our assistance, to spread the gospel in the midst of our fellow nation; but in face of the present circumstances, what is a fellow nation in comparison to dear brethren and sisters, which are bound in the same eternal covenant—children of the same heavenly father, and joint heirs of the same heavenly resting place? Brethren before strangers,—children of God before children of the world, and builders of Zion before its mockers, may this be the motto of us all. Again we say, you officers—you gentle Saints above all other things now, remember this call, and let all of us strive together to fulfill our promise as a nation. The possessor of all the earth will repay an hundredfold to all who give, we say.

THE SIGN OF THE PROPHET JONAH.

MR. EDITOR,—The people of this country are seeking signs, but they will not receive any except for the "sign of the prophet Jonah." Yet no one accepts that one either! Not everyone understands what kind of a sign it was. Some think that because the prophet was in the belly of the fish it was a sign, but Christ said, "so shall the son of God be to this generation." Therefore, if the Ninevites saw Jonah after he had been in the belly of the fish, that generation did not see the resurrected Christ, for he himself said, "ye shall not see me henceforth, and the world seeth me no more," and he said that he gave it to make it clear to chosen witnesses, &c. If so, the nation did not see him after he resurrected; therefore, the miracle was not the sign. But Christ said that the Ninevites listened to the preaching of Jonah, and that for that reason they condemned that generation. Consequently, the preaching of Jonah was the sign, and not his being swallowed by the fish. Thus it is with Christ also, as Isaiah said, "Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel." Therefore, their coming as messengers to the people made them signs, did it not?

So it is in this age. Men have been sent by God to preach the sermon that he spoke to them, and not something they imagined; and not in excellence of speech, or in outward appearance, for if Jonah had a tidy appearance at the outset, his clothes had been soiled and dirtied in the belly of the fish. Next, Jonah knew what to preach; likewise with the servants of God always. Not one like this, and another like that, but each one preached that which he received at the beginning. What is the reason that men go through the country in this age, and that without money or majesty, but poor of appearance, and uneducated, yet testifying that they have been sent by God to warn the people for the last time before his judgment comes. What, I say, are these men? No doubt, this is a remarkable sign! Who would not say, What can this be? Who would not accept their word with all readiness of mind, "searching the scriptures daily, to see if these things are not so." Therefore, let the Welsh know assuredly that these his servants are sent to preach to you this gospel, which will testify greater things than this to whoever receives it.

The Spirit of God like a fire's ablaze,

The latter-most days have now dawned in this age;

The Lord has extended by heavenly rays,

Eternal deliverance, his word to engage.

That on Cumorah's hill the truth was revealed,

All backwoodsmen also will one day believe;

And when California their blemish has healed

Much peace and rejoicing at length they'll receive. R. EVANS.

THE LATE REV. JOHN WESLEY A MORMON!

CONCERNING the spiritual gifts the church of Jesus Christ enjoyed in the days of the apostles, the scriptures show too clearly for anyone to deny to this day, that they had them at that time, as in 1 Cor. xii, &c. They show so clearly that their purpose and their effect were to perfect the Saints in this life, Eph. iv, that it is seen in the same context and other places that they were necessary in the church until all the Saints had come to a unity of the Christian faith,—after being baptized with the same baptism, after drinking of the same spirit, and coming to an agreement of the same principles, and walking the same paths, or spiritual journey, until reaching the objective set before them, namely the payment of the reward. The promises of these things, we say, are as clear as are the conditions on which they were received formerly, and despite all that, nearly all who claim the ordinances agree to deny the gifts associated with them. They claim the right to the tree, but say there is no need of the fruits now. That no one needed those beneficial fruits except for the contemporaries of the apostles. Furthermore, the only purpose for which those fruits grew on the primitive tree (or the church) was, not to feed the soul of the Saints, but to satisfy the eyes of the world, and to prove that such a tree had existed. From what follows, it is seen that this tradition is older than Mr. Wesley, and perhaps almost as old as Calvin, Zuinglius, Menno, Peter Waldo, or Melanethon, but whatever of that, it is too popular now, yes, even among those who harbor great zeal for the name of the godly Mr. Wesley, and we hope that counsel from the mouth of their father will be beneficial to convince them of the absurdity of such an assertion, and to bring them to believe more of the principle of the one, although dead, who yet speaks to them about this. The following is quoted from his 94th sermon on the "More excellent way."

"It does not appear that supernatural gifts have continued generally in the church, except until the second or the third century. Rarely do we hear of them after that destructive period, when the emperor Constantine called himself a Christian, and through his selfish whim he intended to spread Christianity by piling wealth, honor, and power on the Christians in general. From that time they disappeared almost completely; at least, it was most unusual to hear of them after this time. The reason why they stopped was not as the common folk (vulgar) say, that they were not needed any longer, because all the world had embraced Christianity. This is an unfortunate misconception! There was not the twentieth part of the world who were Christians at that time, even in name. The real reason [why the miraculous gifts did not continue] is because of the cooling of the love of many—the Christians had not more of the spirit of Christ than did the other pagans! The Son of God, when he visited his church, could hardly find faith on the earth. This is the original cause for supernatural gifts of the Holy Ghost not being found any longer in the Christian church, because the Christians turned into pagans after that, with nothing but the dead letter remaining."

It is seen that we are not the only ones who call those who deny the need for spiritual gifts "vulgar," and an "unfortunate misconception;" but here is the revered Mr. Wesley saying that, yes, even above his own mistaken children; and is it not high time for them to return at his call to the church that has those gifts, as we are certain that he would do if he had the same opportunities as they? His honesty compels us to believe this of him.

THE SPIRITUAL GIFTS.

OUR able correspondent "Daniel ap Iago," is of the same belief as Mr. Wesley concerning the gifts, it is seen, although not one more than the other was in touch with Mormonism. And who, indeed, of those who profess to believe the scriptures, does not agree with what is so clear!

"A great surprise if there is one man—in Gwalia,

Who does not see this as a standard:

This is the power of every commandment,

Good will, and benefit to man."

"God gave signs in his primitive church, 1 Cor. 12, 38.

To keep it sound and orderly on its way; Eph. 4, 12, 13.

But in the present age these are as thorns,

To those whose faith is smooth and easy.

And since God gave them from his true infinite grace,

Woe to anyone so insolent as to try to extricate them;

Whoever does not avow all the gifts ardently,

Has nothing but a mirage of religion, having

denied its power. 2 Tim. 3, 5.

To whom is the promise? Is there a place to know this?

Yes, yes, within the scriptures to be seen in

black and white:-

To you and your children first, but here is better news. Acts 2, 38.

You see the promise reaches all afar. 39.

While God is calling, this promise

Stands firmly as a privilege before us;

But though it is God who calls, there are thousands in

our age

Who deny the promises by cruelly contradicting. 2 Tim. 4, 1.

Human traditions, without order of the true kind, 2 Tim. 4, 3, 4.

Instead of enjoying the pure rules and rites of our God.

Lead some astray, with every kind of evil bigotry, 2 Peter 2, 1, 3, 12-19.

And hold them in the midst of foolishness,

against the order of grace.

Upon the heads of those who follow scripture true,

Every foolish curse and woe will be proclaimed. 2 Peter 2, 10.

A partial explanation will satisfy some

Better than the teachings from the mouth of God himself. Jude 8, 15, 16, 18, 19.

If anyone mentions that gifts are to be had within thy gates,

The people begin to shout, why do not you do miracles?

Thus can their spirit be seen, proving it unfailing,—

The chronicle of their devil father asks the same thing. Mat. 4, 3.

There will be, I am sure, no miracles,

to please the whim of man;

When asked, Christ himself refused. Mark 8, 11, 12.

The Holy Ghost gives the power without doubt,

To those he wishes, and wherever he will. 1 Cor. 12, 11.

Say what is the cause, is this not strange,

That we do not believe the prophets while they are in our midst?

In centuries to come, they will be believed by every class.

But while they are among us, they're useless if not killed. Mat. 23, 30-34.

The foolish arguments among all humanity would cease,

If they would be taught, fairly by the Spirit of God, Eph. 4, 3-18.

And receive the testimony he spoke, every bit; Mark 16, 16-18.

It is strong on the earth, and strong

in the judgment to come." Mat. 24, 35.

CATECHISM OF THE SAINTS.

TUNE—"The Prophet Daniel."

Who is busy shaking the earth,

In boldly preaching without dearth,

And for their work meet scorn or mirth?

Saints of the Most High God.

Which is the party many shun,

Which is attacked by everyone,

Which after whom abusers run?

Saints of the Most High God.

Who is hated by the gentiles?

At whom do they aim their missiles?

Who is cursed in their ranks and files?

Saints of the Most High God.

Who are sought by the so-called wise

For empty signs before their eyes,

While gospel graces they despise?

Saints of the Most High God.

Who "confound the minds of many"—

Claiming they're as wise as any

In mild Jesus' tesimony?

Saints of the Most High God.

Who are thought to be but "sweepings,"

Or just dregs, or poor spoilings,

Fools, "deceivers" in their teachings?

Saints of the Most High God.

But who is it has a promise

In the Lord of holy solace,

Many blessings given to us?

Saints of the Most High God.

Who shall have prophetic spirit,

Who do knowledge, faith inherit?

Who will speak in tongues about it?

Saints of the Most High God.

Who'll express the Spirit singing?

Who its wonders are performing—

Every gift, including healing?

Saints of the Most High God.

And with whom do apostles stand,

Preachers and teachers as one band,

Helping their charges understand?

Saints of the Most High God.

Who expects one day to gather,

Jesus being the convener,

In perfection with our ruler?

Saints of the Most High God.

And who each day should therefore strive

To be as one in love alive,

Of their creation joy derive?

Saints of the Most High God. J. D.

NEWS FROM THE ELDERS.

WE would have great pleasure in setting before our readers quotations of the comforting letters of our traveling brethren from the north, if our columns permitted, but we must be brief. We received several letters from our dear and faithful brother Abel Evans from various places. The most distinguishing characteristic throughout all of them in nearly every place is the unfailing adherence of the Saints to the gospel through every obstacle. Their increase in love and wisdom, together with all virtues, are clear to him each time that he visits them, says he, and this is as it should be with all who are under the guidance of the Spirit of grace. He says that many have been baptized lately through the different counties of the North. Elder R. Evans is very diligent in Anglesey, and has baptized some there lately. We would be glad to see the face of our beloved brother in the South for a while this winter, if he agrees. Elder Eliezer Edwards gives very hopeful news from Caernarvonshire, and says that he also has baptized some; he in his turn will come to visit his brethren and sisters in the South before long. He raises longing in our heart to see all the cheerful Saints when he writes their stories like this, and raises even more longing to see the happy day when we shall all meet in Zion, with no one pulling the opposite way, rather all with their harps in tune to sing to him, the one who loved us and washed us in his blood, &c. May it hasten. Amen.

STATE OF THE CHURCHES.

MERTHYR TYDFIL. This mother branch is going forward steadily and successfully. Although not as rapidly, yet more faithfully, warmly, and unitedly, than ever, and in fuller enjoyment of the spiritual gifts, and other promises of the great head of this church. Five have been received in the church this week already, on the profession of their faith and their repentance.

DOWLAIS. We hardly know what to say of this town! There is general agitation through nearly all of it, like a boiling cauldron, between the lectures of Mr. Roberts, Davies, Jones, and other Reverends, from their pulpits (which will be reviewed in a TREATISE, and in the PROPHET); and besides these, some number of quarrelsome men are following the preachers of the Saints, and disturb them rudely wherever they preach. And among others there is some man by the name of Mr. Evan Lewis (although we do not know him from all the people of the world), who continues to hold meetings at the corners of the streets to lecture against the Saints, and proclaim the old customary false accusations against Joseph Smith. But after washing that old stock over and over, until souring the minds of his listeners, it is said that he is as zealous as can be in telling baseless tales about our own character; one example is the story he told to a crowd, namely, "that a woman in Dowlais was ready to swear that we tried to rape her;" but by the time that other men from Dowlais went to question that woman, she had confessed that there was not a word of truth in the matter! We had never exchanged so much as a word with her, and we assure you that we would not know her if we were to meet her on the street! Many find fault with us for tolerating such slander and blasphemy without seeking redress, and yet they would be more ready to blame us if we did, that it would be revenge, and unchristian behavior, &c.—As for the Saints who are in Dowlais, they are more determined and united here, as in nearly every other place, the more they are persecuted. They happily enjoy the spiritual and gracious gifts that were promised them, and this strengthens them to endure every attack joyfully.

MONMOUTHSHIRE CONFERENCE. There is growing excitement throughout this conference lately, and several have obeyed the gospel, especially in Nantyglo. We have heard of additional hostile fruits of Sectarianism around Beaufort lately. Two men, who claimed to be constables of another parish, got hold of three preachers of the Saints, one after the other, when out preaching on Sunday, with a large crowd listening respectfully until these rude and unlawful agitators came there, and under the pretence of civil authority they locked the three preachers up!! How long will the just God suffer such oppression and violence, in the name of Christianity? The men were released from prison at some time, and without either reparation or inquiry, or without knowing why, until now.

LLANELLI. Elders William Hughes, Morgan Richards, and others, are diligent and successful here, and in the environs, however much the Editor of the Revivalist proclaims that they are a bunch of illiterates, and that their religion is a small, insignificant thing, &c. Yes, there are from thirty to forty there who have been baptized by them in the last two months, and nearly that many in the two months before that, until there are over sixty Saints now, and almost all of these were with the different denominations of that town, and they were, it seems, considered to be of impeccable character before they received membership with them, and all of these were "deceived" by an illiterate and stupid man, were they not, Mr. Rees? If they were deceived, great was your neglect toward them for years; otherwise, you should have taught them better than to be deceived by such men as those! One of two things is acknowledged in your accusation in view of the fact of their success, either your negligence, or that it is illiterate men who are the most effective in convincing men. The latter was true previously; for example, remember the "fishers" of the sea of Galilee, and why not so now? Well, cease to boast of your college education any more then, and do not blame the illiteracy of such successful preachers. Who but Mr. Rees shouted in the Parks Chapel a short time ago,—"Nothing should be judged prematurely. When we judge beforehand, our judgment is erroneous, and we draw false conclusions." And he has substantiated that himself very clearly through his death sentence on that small, insignificant thing that is attracting the mind and heart of about thirty of the most honest and wise hearts that are around him. Yes, and many from his chapel also, without his knowing, supposedly by his speaking. But the people of Llanelli are too intelligent, and consider their souls of too much value to be persuaded that light is darkness, and that truth is deceit, despite all the priests of Baal on the walls of Llanelli shouting that.

PONTYBEREM. Elder Howell Williams, and several others, are laboring successfully in these areas round about. They are receiving an attentive and numerous hearing, and many are believing the gospel, and are calling for more preachers. And we would be happy if some of the priests who are in these areas could go there to help them. They praise the people of that land greatly, for their courtesy and their graciousness. Seven have been baptized in those environs lately, according to what we have heard, and we expect to hear of more daily.

CWMAMAN. Two elders, and one priest, have moved there to live and to work, for the purpose of being able to preach the gospel of Christ freely to those good people; and great is the hearing they have, and the cheerfulness that is shown them by almost everyone; and according to what we hear from nearly everywhere, the people, after being so long in wrangling with respect to sectarianism, are disgusted; and when they open their ears to hear this everlasting gospel, at times they shout, "This is it," and we answer, "Yes, dear friends, this is it," indeed! This is the godly religion you have searched so eagerly for; embrace it, and you shall find the treasure of treasures in it.

YSTRADGYNLAIS. Several have been baptized here and the environs also, and are rejoicing in their privileges. There are four preachers here also laboring diligently and boldly.

CWMBYCHAN. There is here a continual increase, and they are baptizing frequently in the neighborhoods. All the officers are in unity and love through the entire council, and the Saints lovingly enjoy abundant gifts, and are increasing constantly.

PEMBROKESHIRE. Elder J. Morris is baptizing here now and again, and sometimes in the midst of heated persecution and rock throwing; but despite it all, the kingdom goes forward here as in other places, until it has been offered to all.

CARMARTHEN. The zeal and love of these Saints are greatly praised to us also, and we have heard that elder B. Jones has baptized there lately. Onward, onward, dear Saints, you have hosts of honest people, seekers of the truth, around you.

LLANYBYDDER. The zeal and faithfulness of these Saints have been very noteworthy recently, and they have baptized 10 or 12 around Brechfa, &c., a short time ago. May the gracious Lord, who began this godly work in our midst, increase them more and more, and pour out a greater abundance of his Holy Spirit upon his Saints.

ANNOUNCEMENT.

We have for sale a number of volumes of CAPT. JONES ON MORMONISM, IN 1846.

For sale, newly bound, available with the Prophet, or as indicated for the following prices:—

s. p.

Bound in linen beautifully .. .. .. .. 3 0

" Half in calf skin .. .. .. .. 3 6

" In sheepskin .. .. .. .. 4 0

" Completely in best calf skin .. .. 4 6

Thomas Jeremy's question answered in "Doctrine and Covenants," page 330.

D. Jones, Bagillt, answered in "Doct. and Cov.," page 200. Also in the Prophet, No. 12, page 92.

We beseech our distributors to prepare to settle all their accounts by the end of the year, and if there are unsold books or Prophets on hand, to return them at that time.

We have on hand several "History of the Saints," price one shilling, and we hope that none of the Saints will be without one.

We have also a variety of nearly twenty kinds of essays at different prices, from a halfpenny to three shillings, which we have recently published in Welsh, and which can be obtained if you hurry.

Also, a variety of English books, such as "The Book of Mormon," and the "Voice of Warning," "Millennial Star," fornightly, 3p.

We ask for the patience of our other Correspondents for a little while yet. Our Prophet is a small one, with many attacking it.
