Ronald D. Dennis, Prophet of the Jubilee ( 1997)

MAY, 1848.

LETTER FROM WILLIAM DAVIES.

Llanelli, Carmarthenshire.

DEAR BROTHER JONES,—

It is with pleasure that I make use of this opportunity to inform you of my feelings and my decision about the glorious religion that I profess at present, namely the religion of the Latter-day Saints, after being for many long years zealous with the Baptists, the belief of which was very different from what I think of it by now, and different from the true religion of the New Testament.

Dear Brother,—It was not until I heard and obeyed this religion that I understood a little in relation to it, and I saw its divine and unchanging truths shining its rays of light through its preaching, although those who declared it to the world appeared very poor; yet, by this they bore the same character as their brethren formerly, those whom the Son himself chose from amongst men to preach his gospel, namely the apostles, and their fellow-brethren of that time, who were pleasing to heaven, but poor in the sight of the world. However, I was not without feelings with the Baptists, but they were very different from my present feelings. How much all this difference is I cannot say; but I shall tell a little of it, namely that it is as much difference as between sound and substance—between light and darkness—between day and night—between truth and falsehood—between fantasy and the power of religion; yes, as much difference as there is between being a member of the church of Jesus Christ and being an outsider. Also, it is easy for me, in this church, to understand the New Testament upon hearing its doctrines being taught, its ordinances being administered, and the promised blessings in it being divided "to every man severally as he will;"—earlier we had a church in one place, and the Testament in another, being impossible to recognize the Testament by the church, or the church by the Testament, without distorting the Testament through explaining it, &c. But in the church of Jesus Christ, the one which is among the Latter-day Saints, to read the Testament is to read the church,—to go to the church is to go to the place where the promises of the Testament are fulfilled, or where the will is given to the heirs by the Head of the church, who is Jesus Christ. My determination is to go forward with this religion, through the strength of my Father who is in heaven, and do whatever I can to spread it, let men say whatever they wish, "that I am not so zealous as I was before," despite that I will go forward, and intend to do my best to put down the false religions of the world, and to build up the religion of the Lamb. Although I tried my best with religion for about twelve years, I failed to obtain one conviction of my acceptance by God; but at best it was practically all fears and doubts; but after getting hold of this one, there are no fears concerning the plan, rather great certainty through the Holy Ghost that this is his church. There are many different religions in the world; but among them all, this I shall say, that

This is the best religion I have seen,

And that I have liked in the world;

This one brings to all men

Who come to it with obedient mind,

All knowledge, for perfecting

Them on their journey to their land,

And they will have the Holy Spirit,

To lead them to their Father.

Oh, that all my former and honest brethren, would come and experience this! They will receive a reward a hundred thousand times better than they now have, and in the end eternal life. This is the wish and the earnest and constant prayer of their well-wisher,

WILLIAM DAVIES.

MIRACLE OF THE INDEPENDENTS ! !

MR. ED.,—I suppose it will be good, if not new, for you and all your readers, to hear of the noteworthy miracle that was caused here lately. This is not a "Mormon Miracle;" otherwise, I would expect to have read about it in the Revivalist, and all the other publications throughout the country; but this is a miracle that puts an end to the debate with respect to the age of miracles forever, I suppose, the way it proceeds. Neither can one claim that it is deceit because one of the Satanists performed it. Oh no, one of the ram's horns of great Independia is the worker of these miracles; and even more remarkable, Sir, this is the Slugger who would follow the Saints from house to house, from one street to the next, all through the last season, practically, to disrupt their meetings, and who would come to the place before them, and take their publications from them, &c. His main chant at that time was, "Miracles have ceased," "Miracles were unnecessary after the age of the apostles," yes, he sounded his screeching horn almost as loudly as another Davies from Dowlais, that no one but the "Satanists and the Mohammedans claim miracles, and that is the same thing as Infidelism." But now behold the same man with the same tongue praying to God publicly from his pulpit, and begging him to remove those who posed an obstacle to the peaceful decision on the Dowlais lease; namely out of this world through judgment of course, he means, ready or not! The news came back that the Marquis of Bute had died quite suddenly, and great is the chatter through Dowlais of this, that it was the fulfillment of a miracle. "There is a challenge for you Saints to perform a miracle; there is a miracle for you," says the family of Independia.

But for my part I believe that performing miracles like that constitutes a craft akin to and suitable for thieves! I wonder whether this slugger-like preacher believed that God would answer such a prayer from his mouth? It was even worse then for him to say it if he did not believe that; yet I would like to know what is the difference between the principle of that man who prays for God to kill his fellowman, and his doing that himself if he could? He who would do the one thing would do the other if he had a chance, I suppose; or else he shows great foolishness in asking God to do what he will not do himself! Also, what is the difference between claiming the praise for this miracle and claiming the praise for the murder? How much greater a miracle would it be for him to pray the Marquis back into the world than it was for him to pray him out of it? Let him try that again, and no doubt it will be better than ever. Forgive me for answering the fools according to their foolishness this time, for their contradictions around Dowlais here are too shameless to answer in any other way; but we hope that despite this that this Independent miracle turns them to their senses, and that they will admit the age of miracles from now on, though they be different miracles from the foregoing that we mean. Behold the Shopkeeper and the Slugger head-to-head, nose-to-nose, and tooth-to-tooth, in this miracle also, and it is unlikely that they will finish the argument any time soon. May the God of heaven open the eyes of the men of Dowlais, to discern the true from the false, is the wish of your, &c.,

LEM. WILLIAMS.

TWOFOLD MIRACLE!

MR. ED.,—Inasmuch as there are many different stories being spread through this valley and other places, with respect to the misfortune that befell me lately, I consider it my obligation to the truth, and its lovers, to give a truthful report of the circumstance, and many besides myself wish for it to have space to appear in the columns of the Prophet, and I hope that you agree with our request, and that all the Saints will strive against giving way to similar unbelief and suffering.

On Saturday morning, the 18th of March, I was severely burned, especially my face and hands, by the damp in the coal works. My fellow-workers were very sympathetic and covered me against the breeze when I came to the surface, and led me to my house, and put me to lie upon straw in the corner, and soaked cloths in oil for fire burns, according to the usual practice, and I was in great pain all the time. One of the Saints went to Aberdare to fetch oil from the church, and brought back elder W. Howells with him, who having arrived, found me in the situation noted, and he began to teach those that were in the house that it was not only a privilege and a custom, but also an obligation on the Saints, to obey the divine commandments to anoint with oil, to lay on hands, and to pray to God to heal the sick, which the brother did with me, and I testify in thankfulness to God, that immediately the pain left me completely, and I got up in the sight of them all, praising God for this precious blessing. There were many in the house at the time, and they marvelled greatly. We held a meeting of prayer and thanksgiving to God for the healing, and everyone was very happy, and none more than I myself. About an hour afterwards Mr. H. and the Saints went away, and I intended at that time to return to the coal works; but because it was the end of the week, &c., I did not go. By the afternoon, the matter had caused an unusual commotion throughout the area, and the common assertion was by those who had not seen me, that I had not been burned, but that the whole thing was ficticious to deceive men. Many came to my house, and having seen that I was well, and completely without pain, they affirmed decidedly to my face that I had not been burned. Some religionists accused me of daring to purposely claim such a thing to deceive men. Some cried before me, especially one woman who was my neighbor, and begged me not to tell such a lie that I had been burned. The more I showed them my healthy skin, and my hair and eyebrows that had been burned, the more they were infuriated against me, gnashing their teeth at me. I remained completely without pain until the assertions of the impudent unbelievers began to affect me, so as to cause me to disbelieve the fact to a considerable extent. At about six o'clock I began to feel the burns of the fire coming back a little, and they continued to increase, until by Monday morning they were burning as much as they had been before the administering of the ordinance, and they blistered badly. After those who alleged that I had not been burned saw this, they could no less than believe to the contrary of their former allegations, and then they blamed me for neglecting to get medical treatment. By now the public gossip, namely that I had not been burned, had turned completely, and now they asserted that I had not been healed, but that it was all a lie of the Saints, which many believe to this day, because I was for about a fortnight unable to work because of the excruciating pains of the burns. Whatever may be said to the contrary, this in brief is the truth of the matter, and I advise all the Saints to take care not to listen to such heretical accusers, and sin against God, and by that bring shame on this holy religion; and my prayer is to have strength by the day, to continue in it to the end. I am your brother in the gospel,

EVAN DAVIES.

Cwmbach, April 21, 1848.

I also testify that the foregoing account is true. I was one of those working with E. D. I saw him in the fire, I followed him from the mine to his house, and I myself put the burn oil on him first. I was there while Mr. Howells anointed him, and prayed over him, and my eyes saw him rising from the straw immediately, and my hears heard him say that he was completely healed, and he praised God for his healing, and prayed in the meeting that was held in the house after that. I believed that he was well; I heard him say that he was about to return to work; and after going through the neighborhood, and leaving him well in the house, I told everyone who asked me that he was better, and that he would be at work as usual on Monday, and the reason he did not come was what he said himself. My witness is true, although some doubt me; and although I am not one of the Saints, nor do I believe their religion, yet I testify to the truth for the sake of those who wish to know the truth of this remarkable story. I am, &c.,

DAVID MORRIS.

There are many pecularities in the foregoing account that are worthy of attention, such as;—

LETTER OF ELDER ABEL EVANS.

Ffestiniog, April 24th, 1848.

DEAR BROTHER JONES,—

The best news I have to tell you in this letter is that some agitation has begun in the North, and the people are generally listening, and some are also obeying.

Mr. Parry, from Liverpool, came with me to Mostyn to work, and in a short while he and his sons are coming to Wales again to live, to work, and to preach. I baptized eight the week before last near Newmarket, a man and wife who live in the Light House, Point of Ayr, and five from Newmarket, and one from Llansaint; and John Parry is the president over all of them there. Mr. Davies, and Independent minister there, tried to create a division in the family of John Williams, coachmaker, by going there and saying that the Saints had come there to eat the food of his children; but he got a tidy rebuke for that from the man and his wife. I went to Rhosllanerchrugog last Wednesday, and Mr. Jones (from Liverpool), a Wesleyan minister, had been speaking against the Saints on Tuesday night; but it was necessary to pay sixpence to come and hear him. Robert Evans happened to be there that night, and he went to listen to the lecture by paying sixpence. He asked permission from the chairman to review the lecture, which he received. But he was stopped before long, because he was gaining influence over the people to perceive the lies of the lecture. After being stopped, he announced that Wednesday night he would review the lecture completely and in detail, at which time hundreds came to listen, and he smashed Mr. Jones's lecture to bits.

Seven from Cefnmawr were baptized the week before last, and five promised me on Friday that they would be baptized in public today, Easter Monday. Thus things are on fire in Rhos and Cefn. I am on my way now to request copies of the Prophet. I shall send another letter at the end of the month with a more complete account. We desperately need preachers in Bethesda, Caernarvonshire. The Saints are firm in the faith, and filled with the spirit almost without exception throughout the North, and enjoying the gifts of the Holy Spirit. Please be so kind as to remember me to all the Saints there. I am your brother in the new covenant,

ABEL EVANS.

We have received several letters from this faithful brother lately, showing baptisms in several other places. We are pleased to hear of their success and their faithfulness, and that the same Spirit that gladdens the hearts of the Saints of the South, leads and directs the Saints of the North to a unity of the faith also.

Gentle Saints, do not lose heart because the priests of great Babylon curse your religion. Neither their curses, nor all they can lecture and publish in the North will do you any harm, nor prevent the success of your religion, any more than did all they could do and say in these parts; and we are sure that they cannot say anything that prevents reasonable people from obeying the gospel; and those that believed their foolish tales would be of little benefit to you, nor would they be of any glory to God, if they came to you. It is necessary to gather the tares out of the midst of the wheat with such baskets as these. The lies that our persecutors utter against us are not enough excuse for one reasonable person to refuse our message; because if they were to come humbly to obey the conditions of the gospel, our God would prove to them beyond any doubt that all is baseless false accusations. What reason to believe them, then? What use to devote much of oneself to disprove them either, since God will do that for us, and in a much clearer fashion also?

Let us take heart in the face of it all then; and like the above uproar in the Rhos, so it is in every other place; they do good to the truth by drawing men's attention to it, and then embracing it. It is true that all things, especially such lectures, work together for the benefit and success of Mormonism. Let them lecture, gnash their teeth, blaspheme, shout and yell, make and scatter their claims, as they wish, for we have more for us than against us, namely God, despite all the ugly howling of the wolves. The death pangs of their great goddess are these howlings, namely the lecturing and similar things that are directed against the Saints.—ED.

GREETING OF THE "PROPHET OF THE JUBILEE."

Prophet of the Jubilee beware:—too harsh

To the sight is thy course;

And thy nature, in Noah's language,

Like a summer's evening.

Thou nurturest some empty imaginings;—not the word of God,

Rather thy purposes lead astray;

And thou shoutest some blasphemies,

Thou hast renoun from Abergavenny to Anglesey.

Keep to more definite things,—the Bible,

For the peoples who are disappointed;

If thou wilt insist in having an age of enjoyment,

Avoid speaking about the Saints.

The dear language of Matthew and Mark and Luke;—now,

Through an oath, as John,

Hand in hand will have a pure gospel

Exactly as she came forth.

Promising after the apostles,—to all,

Throughout the world, of her faithful,

That they would receive gifts—these rights,

To the extent of signs. SINGER OF THE TUNE.

VERSES OF D. JAMES, VICTORIA.

M. N. 8 and 7.

I HEARD the voice of the harps of heaven,

Resounding out above the sky,—

"Oh, for strength to remember daily

The man who was on the tree."

It is high time for us to awaken,

And to cease being cowardly,

For Jesus is telling us

That the time is drawing nigh.

M. N. 7 and 6.

My beloved Jesus will come,

Singing to meet his Saints;

The glorious morning will dawn,

And great will be our privilege.

The golden harps will sing,

Up above the sky;

And then Hallelujah,

I will sing forever, Amen.

THE SAINT OUT OF PRISON, AND HIS DEFENSE.

Ynysybont, March 25th, 1848.

OUR DEAR BROTHER JONES,—

We are happy to inform you that we have come to this point successfully. While on the way, we were informed by a responsible minister that he had heard from honest men that Thomas Harris had been a light-minded, lying, and ungodly drunkard, in Aberaeron, Llanddewi Aberarth, Cribyn, Talsarn, &c. That caused much grief to me, W. Evans, and I pressed Thomas Harris hard to tell the truth, and he testified that he was not guilty of such a thing. Then we decided to go to those places to find out if those accusations were true. Cribyn was the first place we went to. I, W. Evans, asked the people how T. Harris had behaved when he had come there to preach? the answer from everyone was, that they had never seen anyone more proper in every way than Thomas Harris, and that they had not heard from anyone that he was a drunkard, &c., and that the people did not believe that he had stolen the book deliberately. Not one witness came against him here, but many were eager to hear him preaching again soon. After that we went to Llanddewi Aberarth, where the owner of the book in question lived. We soon told the people what was in our message, and then they took the news to the village, where the people came together joyfully to see Thomas Harris; but no one was more pleased than Mr. Davies, the owner of the book, who gave his hand affectionately to T. H., confessing in the presence of the crowd these words,—"I never believed, my dear Harris, that you had stolen the book deliberately; and whatever trouble you have had, I can say that it has not been more than has been on us as a family, because of this circumstance." Then Thomas Harris gave a report of the way he found the book in his pocket without knowing how it had come to be there. He admitted also that he was at fault for neglecting to return the book at once himself, instead of trusting another to do that, during which the tears were streaming down the cheeks of Mr. Davies, the owner of the book, out of sympathy.

Then I, W. Evans, stood up, endeavoring to show to the crowd some of the principles of the Saints, and the good character of T. H. while a member with the Independents, and after his coming to the Saints, until the circumstance of the taking of the book; and after that T. H. arose again, and asked if there was anyone there that could say they had seen any unseemly behavior in him while he was preaching in the area? The answer was, that no one had, until the taking of the book. I, W. E., asked the owner of the book, whether he had seen any sign of a drunkard, liar, &c., in T. H.? and I said that I had heard that from a minister who belonged to the Independents. Mr. Davies answered that there was nothing of the sort. Then we went to Aberaeron, and we gave sixpence to a crier to go around the town to announce a meeting. Scores of people came together, among which was that policeman who had taken me up, and very mockingly; despite that the common people continued to listen politely. We went on in the same way as in Llanddewi; but there was no one there who could say to the face of Thomas Harris that he was guilty of the character mentioned above, despite persuading them to answer; but we had testimonies completely different from that of the policeman, and the people of the house where we stayed. When our work was finished, a man came to us, and asked when we would come to preach in his house, which was about three miles from there? We were in Llanybydder Thursday night, when I, T. H., received my place back in the church, and I decided from now on, to the best of my ability, not to leave room for the enemies of truth to revile. May the gracious Lord give me strength, and may this trial continue to be for the benefit of lovers of truth, is the prayer of your unworthy brethren. WILLIAM EXAMS,

THOMAS HARRIS.

After Thomas Harris was released from prison, there was a further inquiry before the Council of the Glamorgan Conference, where it was unanimously permitted that he should have his church membership, on the conditions that he go through the environs where he had been preaching when the unpleasant misfortune had taken place, and to make known there, in order to remove the obstruction out of the way of the honest in heart, the truth of all the aforementioned circumstances. At the inquiry additional supportive testimonies of the story which we have published already in the Prophet about this matter were given, and they demonstrated even more clearly that T. H. had no intention of stealing this book; and when it is understood that the man referred to in the previous account had come to the house where the book was lost with the express purpose of opposing T. H. as he preached, and that he obstinately argued with him after the meeting,—the same man happened by the next morning, and was the first one to utter a word about the book, to call the attention of the family of the house to it,—that he said he would guarantee that the Saint had stolen it, and then ran to fetch the policeman with no one asking that of him, and many other suspicious tricks which came to light with time, it will be understood more fully yet, we say, that the whole thing was one of the wiles of the children of perdition, and that, in order to disgrace and blacken divine truths that they could not gainsay. Again, he who digs a pit for his neighbor will fall into it himself. If there were not one other proof of the divine source of our religion, it would be thought that the union of the children of this world to plan evil, and to persecute the Saints, would be sufficient proof to every sensible man; and the Sectarian and slanderous Editors of our country, prove that they themselves are of the same stripe, by publishing every tale about the Saints, and not only to proclaim the truth of the matter, but barefaced lies, and those often contradicting each other! For example, notice the filthy Baptist, and its "scratched out his name," "admitted that he had stolen it," &c., &., when there was not a syllable of truth in them.

MONMOUTH CONFERENCE.

THIS Conference was held in Nantyglo, April 2, 1848. The morning session was begun by singing, and elder T. Pugh prayed. Then Capt. Jones addressed the large crowd that had assembled, by outlining the purpose of the meeting, and the necessity of unity and love in the church of Jesus Christ, and the joy that derived from such things. Then elder W. Phillips offered to preside over the Conference, which was unanimously approved; D. Jones, Penycae, offered to be the scribe, which also was approved. After that Capt. Jones addressed the congregation in English, showing the same duties to the English brethren and sisters. Then the president called on the representatives of the different branches to give an accounting of them, and they were found to be as follows:—

eld. prst. tch. deac. bap. mem. total

Nantyglo 6 4 4 2 23 49 65 T. Giles

Penycae 2 4 2 2 12 23 33 D. Jones

Blackwood 1 1 1 16 18 D. Lewis

Tredegar 1 3 2 1 11 27 W. Evans

Cwmcelyn 2 2 1 9 27 32 T. Giles

Abersychan 2 7 5 2 65 82 98 J. Jones

Blaenavon 2 2 2 10 W. Lewis

Victoria 3 5 3 1 50 66 J. James

Total 16 28 19 9 173 349

Last Conf. 12 25 18 8 209

Increase 4 3 1 1 173 140

The representatives reported that all the branches were in good condition, and with signs of great increase, not only in numbers, but also in gifts, love, faithfulness, and unity, and there was hardly any exception throughout the conference.

At half past two o'clock, the Saints' meeting began by singing, and D. Jones, Penycae, prayed. Then the president addressed the meeting briefly and enthusiastically: and he was followed by Capt. Jones, enthusiastically and powerfully on the principles and ordinances of religion.

One was confirmed. Then the Lord's Supper was partaken of. After that eight elders were called, one priest, four teachers, and two deacons.

Then Capt. Jones showed the necessity of the gathering of the Saints to Zion, in Welsh and in English, and he demonstrated clearly that the excellent principle of gathering the Saints together in Zion, contained the Salvation of God for his children; in accordance with the purpose of God through all his previous dispensations, and was speeding along remarkably in this age, despite the opposition from the world and the devil. Also he showed clearly, and to the joy of all the Saints, that poverty will deprive none of this deliverance, if they continue faithful in fulfilling their duties here—their heavenly Father will prepare the way before them—and He who began in them this good work will finish it also before the coming of Christ. We received many other beneficial counsels and teachings from Capt. Jones and the brethren in this wonderful meeting, which would be too long to write now; and we believe, from the signs of dedication and cheerfulness seen on the listeners, that they were like honeycombs to their hearts as well, and they will bear fruit after many days.

In the evening meeting, elders W. Phillips, T. Pugh, W. Davies, Rhymni, preached in Welsh, and Capt. Jones in English: and this wonderful Conference came to a close also after having done much good for the Saints, and eliminating much of the prejudice the malicious tales had created in the hearts of our neighbors against us and our godly religion. The large Greyhound Hall was quite full of noble listeners throughout the Conference, despite the many warnings given to believers not to come to listen to us on any account; in spite of that, the honest in heart came to listen to us; and they greatly marvelled because of the false accusations they had heard about us. May the wise and good God break the traditional bonds of our dear fellowmen in haste, so they may become true subjects in the church of Jesus Christ, is my constant prayer.

DAVID JONES, Scribe.

N. B.—The above Conference was announced in the Prophet as being held on the last Sunday of April. The mistake happened because the president of the Conference misunderstood the time, and prepared for the Conference before the Prophet came around, and we did not know of the mistake until it was too late to correct it; and lest so many be disappointed, it was deemed wiser to hold it at the above time. But in case a mistake happen again with respect to the time of any Conference, pay close attention to the Prophet, for he will tell the truth, and will advise everyone in good time also, unless some unusual circumstances come up unexpectedly at that time; and as for such things, we shall take care to notify the presidents by letter.

We are delighted to publish the numbers of this Conference to our readers; and we thank Him whose godly work this is for the unusual increase that is happening to it throughout our country. The false prophets are very diligent in shouting from their pulpits, &c., that the Saints are perishing here, and fading away, but increasing is what they are doing the more they are persecuted, and growing stronger and increasing in number is what they will do despite everyone and everything that may oppose them, until they bring all the honest in heart from among every party or non-party into the kingdom of God, and save them all in Zion victoriously. May the blessed period come when all the children of Zion will be seen having come out of the great affliction, and having reached the house of their Father to enjoy the wealth of the earth, and the blessings of heaven.—ED.

WHAT IS TO BE DONE WITH THE EDITOR OF THE STAR OF GOMER?

To the Rev. Daniel Jones, Felinfoel.

REV. SIR,—As your reverend brother from Dowlais considers you an experienced minister, and the most competent to say what is best to do with the "SATANISTS," when they come to request their places with the Baptists; I also think that you can give the best answer to the question, "What is to be done with the Editor of the Star of Gomer?

Perhaps you wish to know by now what has happened to him. Oh! it is grievous to tell, he has been excommunicated from the Baptist church in Carmarthen; yes, the Editor of the Star has been excommunicated! I do not know for sure the cause of this. Not long ago he was at the zenith, to oppose the Satanists; he opened the Star quite readily to the writings of the Rev. W. R. Davies; and what could be his transgression? But that is not the topic;—He has been excommunicated! and what is to be done with him, we wonder? For the sake of his soul, poor thing, he ought to get some religion yet; but which one, is the question. As the religion of the Satanists is the closest one to the Baptists, who knows whether he might obtain a place with those? But the worst thing is that many of the Satanists are Ivorites also; and perhaps they will not accept him—they may kick him out! Why? Was it the Ivorites who kicked the Editor out when he was in their lodge? The Ivorites know; ask them. If the Satanists are not of a forgiving nature, it is not likely that they will accept him, since he persecuted them so often in the Star. But what good is it to speak like this? for the Satanists are "very soon" to come to request their place with the Baptists; consequently, what good would it be for the Editor to join with the Satanists, and then be considered unworthy to be received back along with the Satanists? Well, the question is then, What is to be done with the Editor? That is what I wish to know from you. Is there not some sect lower than the Baptists and the Satanists? Let the questions of the Rev. W. R. Davies about the Satanists be, and come to a more important question, namely, "What is to be done with the Editor of the Star of Gomer? A ready reply will please several of the bosom friends of the excommunicant.

They sacked Sam, an accursed thing to do,

From his job in a rather unbecoming manner.

Yours, Rev. Sir, BENJAMIN JONES, Carmarthen.

STATE OF THE CHURCHES AND THE BAPTISMS.

MERTHYR.—Around a hundred have been baptized here since the last Conference, which was held at Christmas, which makes the present numbers of this branch over seven hundred faithful and determined Saints, with better prospects than ever for increasing; despite this the Saints are still few, fewer, fewest, dying out, and disappearing, say the false prophets! "A few of the dregs join, and many of the most responsible are leaving them," is the continual chant of Mr. Davies of Dowlais, and his persecuting partners! Yet, it would be a pity to deprive them, poor things, of the only pleasure they have, namely that of persecuting the children of God. The majority of the above have been faithful members with other denominations of the area, and great is their joy, that they have obtained at last the privilege of having membership in the true church of Jesus Christ, and of receiving of the comfort of the Holy Ghost.

DOWLAIS.—Twenty-four have been baptized here since the last Conference; and dozens with them since the time that Mr. R. of Rhymni was there "killing Mormonism," and since the time his foster father said that it had already "become a blight and a curse, and had received the homestroke, &c." How can these false prophets show their faces in public now, when their folly and their lies have become so obvious to everyone, and are a topic of wonder to every man who knows what shame is. Yet, among the above there was one who was a full-fledged member with Mr. Davies himself, and had been spotless for close to nine years. Thus Mr. Davies sees, if the believes his own eyes, that Mormonism has not yet received the homestroke, nor anything like it. You heads of families, if you want peace in your families, keep such malicious talebearers and persecutors of the Saints out of your houses, or all your endeavors will be in vain, yes, as vain as it would be to carry fire in your bosom without believing that you will burn. This branch is flourishing, despite all the financial obstacles that stood in their way, and they greatly rejoice in the abundant enjoyment of the various gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to the scriptures, and corresponding to their faithfulness.

RHYMNI.—Elder W. Howells, Aberdare, went over to Rhymni one Sunday lately, to preach for the first time since he left preaching with the Baptists, and the result was, during the few hours he was there, that he baptized four under the nose of the head champion of all our persecutors in the his own backyard, and the place where a short time before he "killed Mormonism, and buried it the next day," so he said. But poor Mr. R.; he did not fulfill his promise, to kill it, or else how did the Saints work at least one miracle under his nose, and through that resurrect Mormonism to a better life than ever! Which one will he admit? He proves himself, one way or the other, a very foolish false prophet, and very worthless as well. Despite getting the Rhymni Saints to listen to him preaching a burial sermon of their religion, he failed to cause as much as an inflamation of the eye to any one of them; instead what he did was to strengthen them through all his lying tales. On the other hand, when he went to Aberdare to kill it, for sixpence each from each one who came to hear him, he obliged some of the members of the Baptists, and their listeners, to believe the doctrine of the Saints, and to confess that the morning after his lecture. That is no way to kill Mormonism! But there are scores in these environs who thank him for opening their eyes to perceive the truth of Mormonism! Why has he followed to the brink of outer space all the other meteors that have appeared once before? His professed enemy is on the field, with his banners waving victoriously throughout Wales. But the roar of his cannons has gone silent, except their echoes on the walls of the occasional filthy pigsty. Does he not have another arrow? Is his quiver empty? Or, can he not stir someone else as a cat's paw, to burn his paws as he has done, instead of everyone laughing at him? All the better for us, and for the public, the more of his lies he utters, and may he do as he wishes; for neither he, nor anyone else, can forestall the success of Mormonism any better than by being silent about it. Go ahead and yell, wail, guffaw, lecture, and publish something, whatever it be; but never be silent! It is not known what other champion will follow him; for he himself has certainly not killed any part of Mormonism as yet.

SWANSEA.—Eighteen have been baptized since the Conference, and many are receiving the blessed gifts of the Holy Ghost.

LLWYNI.—Nineteen have been baptized, who, despite all the persecution they have suffered, are greatly enjoying the privileges of the church of God.

LLANELLI.—Elder W. Hughes, poor thing, complains that he has baptized only forty-eight since the Conference, but that those, together with the other Saints, are righteous ones, and eager for godly teaching, instead of the traditions of men, and empty husks. Go forward, gentle Saints; there is plenty before you, and hosts yet of honest people who will follow you on this spiritual course towards Zion.

PONT YATES.—Elder H. Williams writes that 35 have been baptized there since the Conference, but that two of them sinned afterwards, bringing disgrace on this godly religion. Again this is grievous; and it is foolishness for their neighbors to scorn the religion because two persons transgressed its rules, while the testimonies and faithfulness of scores of others are the direct opposite to them. Not one who possesses reason will judge them in that manner.

CARMARTHEN.—There is an excellent and numerous hearing in these environs, and a very sizeable call for preachers; and there are good jobs to be had on the new railway there. We hope that some will go soon from here to assist this small sister against the giants of great Babylon. The few preachers who are here are very diligent in their efforts, to the extent of their ability; but they cannot fill more than one place at a time. Four have received their baptism here since the Conference, with an abundant harvest about to ripen. All the Saints are extremely faithful also, and increasing in every goodness.

LLANYBYDDER.—Nine have been baptized here and the vicinity lately, and the whole branch is swiftly identifying itself with the person and the teaching of our faithful brother T. Jeremy. May he and his have more and more of the influences of the Spirit of the truth, is our prayer, despite every "Dark Daniel," and every other persecuting fool.

BRECHFA.—It is only a short time since even the goats bleated along the precipice of the crags, so to speak, in scorn after us when we preached there; but thanks to the God who sent us there, some scores of responsible people of this place, and surrounding areas, have embraced the gospel that we preached there, and God has proved the godly truth to them. God has blessed the labor and diligence of the faithful elder T. Jeremy here also, and his zealous brother D. Jeremy; and we need not exhort the Saints to listen to their counsels, for the Spirit of God directs them to do that. Another 16 have been baptized here lately. Our heart is longing to see the faithful Saints here, and throughout Wales, face-to-face, for paper is not an acceptable medium for us. We shall leave other things undone for a while, so we can satisfy ourselves in this also before long.

TREGARON.—One of the leaders of the Calvinists has come to the Saints lately, from near Tregaron. He has been made an elder now. He preached the gospel zealously to the point that his former brethren practically understood him to be their leader at the time. As soon as they heard his testimony, namely that he knew that the Latter-day Saints were the children of God, &c., they ordered everyone to stop listening to him under severe penalty. In spite of that, some of them were baptized soon, and there is now a flourishing branch there. Elder B. Evans is diligent in those areas, and has baptized some; and T. Harris is there, and has had a better reception and better success than before those evil tricksters bound him off to prison. Gold is only purified in the fire; so it is here.

ABERDARE.—Nineteen have been baptized here since the Conference, and the majority of them since Mr. Roberts from Rhymni was there "killing Mormonism!" This little branch is flourishing and very faithful; and also the new in the faith are receiving solid testimonies, and the gifts of the Holy Ghost in a powerful manner. The pastors have the bellyache because they are losing their flock, and consequently their profit; and the more diligent they are to walk the houses to set the wives against their husbands, by telling their lying tales—the more they curse the Saints from their pulpits, become infuriated, froth at the mouth from rage towards the Saints, all the more of their beguiled ones leave them, and see the "wolves" gnashing their teeth. The faithful elder, W. Howells, has baptized a greater number before being a half-a-year old in the gospel, than all his persecutors baptized in several years, and at a cost to their followers of thousands of pounds.

CARDIFF.—Elder W. Jenkins, and others, are very faithful here, and have succeeded in baptizing 50 since the Conference. All the Saints here are very faithful, and we had great joy in their midst lately. They are enjoying the spiritual gifts in abundance. Several came into the church from the Baptists, among which there was one who had been a deacon for years, and he thanks God for the godly light he has received.

CWMBYCHAN.—The sectarian stewards here, and in Bryn, have turned practically all of the Saints from their work because of their religion; and it is lamentable to think that those who profess bloody and cruel sectarianism are laughing scornfully and boastfully, because they have caused scores of their neighbors, women, and little innocent children, to suffer hunger, without one cause except that their consciences compel them to worship God according to the scriptures, instead of according to the contradictory beliefs of Sectarianism. This is the same inclination in bloody Calvinism in Wales towards the Welsh in this age, as was in its first founder, who was of the taste to burn people at the stake. It is no thanks to these that they cannot burn the Saints of Cwmbychan and Bryn in the same fashion; for the man who oppresses the conscience of his fellowman, and who takes revenge on him in this manner for his religion, I have no doubt, if he but had permission, would pile up the faggots to burn him. Despite it all, the Saints are determined, and some have been baptized. Perhaps we shall yet have a chance to furnish greater detail on this, and to indicate who these oppressors are. For the comfort of the sufferers, we shall say as much as this,—It is your Father who holds the reins of all authority; lift up your heads, and behold the salvation of the Lord on your behalf; behold the fate of the ungodly. The Lord will repay the oppressors an hundredfold, so that your names will be in honor when the remembrance of the oppressors will stink in the nostrils of every humanitarian.

PEMBROKESHIRE.—Elder J. Morris is having success here, and has baptized some lately, in spite of all the persecution.

NORTH.—The state and condition of the churches throughout the North are understood, in the letters of A. Evans, R. Griffiths, &c. With respect to Anglesey, we understand that there is success there because of the labor of R. E.

Many have been baptized in Monmouthshire and Herefordshire lately. It is seen that the increase in the number of Saints is over a hundred each month, and more than three each day, during the past four months. We thank him whose work this is, and we shall strive for even greater success in the days to come. May the gracious God allow it.

Direct letters, prepaid, to CAPT. JONES, Wellington Street, Merthyr. No one can expect a response, if there is no stamp on the letter. We are tired at last of paying postage for everyone!

ANNOUNCEMENT.

TO OUR DISTRIBUTORS.

WE earnestly implore all these our faithful brethren to do all they can to settle all their book accounts by the next Conference, which will be held in Merthyr about the middle of July. The date will yet be noted in time. We have many reasons to give for this sincere urging; namely, that we depend on the assistance of that money to pay our expenses for a while, and to take us to a foreign land far from here, to fulfill the godly and important mission that has been entrusted to us; and whoever of the Saints fails to pay what he owes by that time should remember that he is tying the fetter on our feet to prevent us from fulfilling our duty to God, and to foreign men who lie in darkness. Three-fourths of the money we have paid for printing books for the Saints is now owed to us! And no matter how hard times are now, the payment that each individual owes is so small, that it does not require much effort to pay it, but it is only right to consider the need for it. We hope this short plea will answer the purpose of getting the Saints to free us from this. Also, a book of the size of the TREASURY requires a considerable amount of money to take it through the Press. The third Part of it is off the Press, and the fourth will soon appear. We shall strive to finish it in the fifth, which will be the same size as the two noted. And now, we shall strive to circulate them, to read them, and to pay for them. Not profit, rather your perfection is our aim in all we do.

To our Correspondents.—We beseech the patience of our Correspondents for another issue of the Prophet. It is a small one. J. B., T. H., &c., will be answered in the next.
