Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

The Problems and Promise of Historical Memories

Joseph Smith's Friends

Who were these men and women who gathered around Joseph Smith? They were largely men and women with calloused hands and strong backs, farmers, carpenters, joiners, millwrights and wheelwrights, tanners and shoemakers, who stood beside women who could spin and sew, milk a cow, and bake bread over the open fire; these were men and women who knew how to carve a livelihood out of the land, how to turn a forest into fertile farmland, and how to barter goods. They lived with mud on their boots and sweat on their brows; the horse, the cow, and the ox were not only their servants, but their friends, on whom they depended for a livelihood. When the family cow died, the family wept; when she gave birth, the family rejoiced. These were men and women possessed of the skills to build cities out of wilderness: Kirtland grew out of the Ohio woods; Far West, Independence, and Adam-ondi-Ahman spread over the grassy plains of Missouri; and Nauvoo was built out of swampland into the largest, most prosperous, and most politically influential city in the state. Joseph Smith's Nauvoo outshone Abraham Lincoln's Springfield like the sun outshines the moon. These were a vibrant people who built vibrant cities, and when they left them none could restore them to their former luster. These same disciples went on to colonize the West, making the desert blossom as the rose.

In lesser numbers, these people had professional skills. John Bernhisel, Willard Richards, and Frederick G. Williams were physicians, as were Warren Cowdery and Luke S. Johnsonbut Cowdery and Johnson also farmed. William W. Phelps was a newspaper editor, and Orson Hyde clerked, taught school, ran a business, and practiced law. William E. McLellin was a schoolteacher, and Lorin Farr and Eliza R. Snow tutored the Prophet's children in his home. George W. Robinson was a merchant, and Algernon Sidney Gilbert teamed with Newel K. Whitney to operate a store in Kirtland. These professional people were fewer in number than the farmers and artisans, but they left a profound impress, reaching out and touching the many.

Joseph Smith surrounded himself with people from every walk and used their talents, large and small, to build the Lord's kingdom. He took men trained to farm and paint and turned them into master managers and great leaders. Brigham Young was a carpenter, a painter, and a glazier who took the principles Joseph taught him and became the greatest entrepreneur and colonizer in American history. Heber C. Kimball, a blacksmith and potter, opened missionary work in Great Britain and later stood as Brigham's right-hand man. John Page, a farmer, became a master missionary who baptized over six hundred converts, and another farmer, Wilford Woodruff, baptized thousands. Dan Jones, a riverboat captain, was instrumental in the baptism of some six thousand more. In the less noticed corners of the kingdom, Phoebe Chase was set apart to heal the sick, and Jane Johnston Black was set apart as a midwife. Sister Black then proceeded to deliver over three thousand babies, some in the most primitive of settings, without ever losing either a mother or a child. Elizabeth Kendall, whose mother washed and ironed clothes for the Prophet's family, received a blessing from the Prophet that she would be a great nurse and care for many; she too, as a midwife, safely delivered hundreds of babies. Ann Green Carling, another midwife, had a similar story, and Harriet Johnson, whom the Prophet also set apart as a midwife, delivered about four thousand more. These were men and women of capacity who, in large and small ways, joined hands in subordination to the principles Joseph Smith taught and in the process built a great empire.

These were a people who differed from their fellows because of what they carried in their hearts and in their souls. They saw truth where others were blind, and they felt things others could hardly imagine. Joseph Smith Sr. testified to Fayette Lapham about inspired visions and angels, and Lapham concluded the Smiths were an "illiterate" people involved with "witchcraft and other supernatural things" (Lapham, 1870, p. 306). Jonathan Lapham agreed with his cousin Fayette. Stephen S. Harding courteously turned aside. Peter Ingersoll scoffed, as did the whole of the Chase and Stafford families. But when Father Smith bore that same testimony to Solomon Chamberlain, Parley P. Pratt, Orrin Rockwell, and Thomas B. Marsh, they heard with their souls and knew in ways that words only inadequately explain that God had once again communed with man. Sanford Porter, John Pulsipher, and Samuel Turnbow reported visions similar to Joseph Smith, all of which pointed them to Joseph Smith. Robert Mason prophesied that his young friend Wilford Woodruff would be a "conspicuous actor" in a great and forthcoming work to be established by God, and John Taylor beheld a vision in which he saw "an angel in the heavens, holding a trumpet to his mouth, sounding a message to the nations" (Roberts, 1963, p. 28). The voice of the Lord directed him to leave England and come to America, where he heard the gospel taught in its fulness. George Spilsbury heard that same voice, telling him he would be a minister of the gospel. First, however, he was baptized. Along with thousands of others, these witnesses were having experiences that the E. D. Howes and Orsimus Turners of the world could neither understand nor appreciate, but these experiences were binding them together as one.

These people who followed Joseph came from all over, for Joseph was quick to send missionaries to every reach of the American nation. New England Puritan blood readily joined with the settlers of the Ohio Valley; missionaries harvested modern Israelite wheat from the fields of Tennessee and the South. The Canadian missionary adventure became the seed ground that stretched into Victoria's England. Joseph, remembered Brigham Young (1845), told the early converts to take the message to their families, and they thus quickly wrote, visited, and talked with their own blood. Joseph himself visited his grandfather and cousins in upstate New York; he took his brother Hyrum and his parents to preach to his mother's family in Pontiac, Michigan. Families brought families into the fold: the Smiths and the Kimballs were related by marriage, and Newell Kimball Whitney, as his name implies, was related to Heber C. Kimball; the Youngs and the Kimballs were related; and the Greens and the Youngs were also related. Mary Ann Angell gave a copy of the Book of Mormon to her cousin Joseph Holbrook, who read with avidity and was baptized. Heber C. Kimball and George P. Billings were cousins, as were Brigham Young, Willard Richards, and Albert P. Rockwood. William and Zerubbabel Snow were the first of the Snow family to be baptized; then came their brother Erastus and soon thereafter their cousin Gardner Snow. Smith cousins abounded. Parley P. Pratt preached to his brothers, William and Orson, and both were baptized; on a mission to Toronto, Parley baptized Joseph Fielding, whose sisters, Mary and Mercy, were also baptized. They in turn wrote to their brother in England, the Reverend James Fielding, thus preparing him for the later arrival of the missionaries. Eliza R. Snow testified to her brother Lorenzo, who was soon converted; Abel Butterfield wrote to his mother saying he had worked for Joseph Smith, that Joseph was a good man, and then he testified of the coming of the angel Moroni, adding, "I can say of a truth that I have not seen anything but what is according to the Bible." Joseph Smith Sr. gave Wilford Woodruff a patriarchal blessing, promising that he would take the gospel to his father's familyand he did. They came "one of a city, and two of a family," just as Jeremiah had promised they would (Jeremiah 3:14). In Palmyra the Church grew up around the Smiths, in Colesville around the Knights, and in Fayette, where the Church was organized, around the Whitmers. When the Church moved to Kirtland, the families of Newel K. Whitney, William Huntington, John Johnson, Ezekiel Johnson, and Isaac Morley, among others, stabilized the growing gospel tree. Intermarriage followed, and the Partridges married into the Young family, the Cowderys and the Whitmers were joined, and the Johnsons and the Hydes were also linked. Their descendants would preside throughout all Israel.

Mid-nineteenth century America, of course, is hard to capture in a paragraph, but those converts who were shaped by it were largely literate. They were familiar with the literature of the day, most particularly the Bible, but because they preceded the standardization of spelling and the penetration of Webster's dictionary into cultural usage, their spelling was often phonetic. When Frederick Kesler first met the Latter-day Saints in 1839 he wrote as he spoke: "This strange people as I thought they must be ware located in a place cald commerce, a place 20 miles distant from whare I lived." He met Joseph Smith and some of the leading brethren, and was "greatly surprised in finding them a verry intelegant people & that they believed in & taught the same Doctorn & princaples That was taught by Christ & His apostles & that all thare doctrons was founded on the Bible" (Kesler, 1988, p. 57). In July of 1844 Susan Fairbanks wrote to her sister telling of conditions in Nauvoo: "i can boast on one thing i have been heare more than a week and i have not heard one Oath since I come" (Fairbanks, 1844). When Philemon C. Merrill (ca. 1890) told of Joseph Smith being kidnapped by two Missourians, he wrote that it occurred when Joseph and his wife "went to visit her relations"where we would likely say "relatives"and when the Prophet's mother spoke in the October conference of 1845, she spoke of the organization of the Church, saying that "angels fluttered over us that time" (Lucy Mack Smith, 1845). We are not surprised when Jacob Butterfield wrote to his mother that he had "swoped [swapped] horses with Spaulding Smith," that "we had to hury to git our things on board the boat," and that he had "not but a small appertunity" to survey his new surroundings (Butterfield, 1836). Neither is it surprising to hear James Houston describe his conversion by saying he felt the convincing power of the Holy Ghost "run through me from head to foot" (Houston, n.d.)but we must in truth admit that while these extracts show personality, even vibrancy, they are as much the exception as the rule. These Saints who followed Joseph Smith were products of their time and reflected the speech patterns and peculiarities of their day, but they wrote well, with feeling and discernment, and communicated artfully what they felt. Some of them wrote with a sloppy or hasty hand, but others, like George Q. Cannon, wrote with an elegant and very readable calligraphy. They were perhaps more educated in the processes of maintaining a living than in the "book learning" of the day, but they still wrote with clarity and exactness. In reviewing what they wrote, only occasionally does one wrestle to understand their meaning.

The bond that held them together was religious; they were joined by the conviction that Joseph Smith was a prophet and the foremost spokesman for Christ since Jesus himself walked the earth. Some recognized gospel truth the moment they heard it; others wrestled upon hearing the testimony of the Restoration. Some came with inspired dreams or visions; others with the certainty of what they felt when they heard missionaries testify. They knew the Book of Mormon was a revelation from God and, with regard to its message, that no middle ground was acceptable: "God or the devil has had a hand in that book," said Willard Richards, "for man never wrote it"and within ten days he had read the book twice (Richards, 1997, p. 242). George Cannon, the father of George Q. Cannon, concluded that no man could have written the Book of Mormon, for an evil man could not write so good a book, and an honest man would never lie about having done so. And with all the conviction the Book of Mormon generated, it was the Bible that prepared people to receive the Book of Mormon. Warren Foote, for example, had read the Bible three times before the age of sixteen, when he first read the Book of Mormon. Rachel Ridgeway was so entrenched in Bible study she at first thought it a sin to attend Mormon meetings, yet converts like her followed the Book of Mormon into the waters of baptism by the thousands. It was the book that changed lives and emboldened these early Saints with the willingness to suffer the persecutions of the mob, the hardships of frontier life, and the enmity of the world. It was also the book that brought the Holy Ghost into people's lives, and thus sanctified souls and filled them with the fires of testimony.

Still, they were, in all their greatness, very human. Sometimes they quarreled, and sometimes they were annoyed one with another. In crossing the plains, Eliza R. Snow and Stephen Markham voiced strong differences (Gifford, 1975); during Zion's Camp, an erupting and quarrelsome spirit prompted the Prophet to warn that if the brethren did not repent, they would be visited with a scourgeand cholera followed, killing as many as thirteen, and some accounts say eighteen. Algernon Sidney Gilbert said he would rather die than preach the gospel to the gentiles, and the Lord soon took him at his word (HC, 1:118). But for all their failings, they were a record-keeping people. They kept journals and diaries, wrote letters, and filled the newspapers they published with anecdotes and experiences that have preserved, perhaps better than any people in American history, what they thought, experienced, and believed. At the same time, so central to their lives were their contacts with the Prophet Joseph Smith that they recalled with surprising consistency their interactions with him, sometimes decades after his death. In a culture that told stories, stories of Joseph Smith were repeated and then repeated again, and children inherited stories from parents, grandparents, and others. Children told the stories they inherited with the same degree of conviction as the primary storytellers.

The Problems of Memory

Both the problems and the promise of recording memories, and the memories of others, are captured in an editorial written by Joseph F. Smith in the Improvement Era of March 1898. In response to the question of whether it was advisable "to gather individual testimony from our aged brethren who have been faithful in the cause of truth, and also from our elders who return home from time to time from missions, and who are full of the spirit of their callings," Joseph F. Smith wrote:

We see no impropriety in brethren gathering individual testimonies concerning the truth, either from the aged brethren or from the elders returning from missions. On the contrary, we believe that the testimonies of our aged brethren who knew the Prophet Joseph Smith, and other early elders and leaders of the church, ought to be secured, and carefully recorded; provided, of course, that the circumstances are well authenticated and carefully and accurately stated. We fear that many things that are reported as coming from the Prophet Joseph Smith, and other early elders in the church, by not being carefully recorded or told with strict regard for accuracy, have lost something of their value as historical data, and unwarranted additions have sometimes been made to the original facts, until it is difficult to determine just how far some of the traditions which have come to us may be accepted as reliable representations of what was said or what was done. Let those who feel impressed to make a record of facts, as they become acquainted with them, do so; but let them exercise the greatest care in obtaining accuracy of statement and in giving the authority for the statements they record (Smith, 1898, p. 372; emphasis added).

What Joseph F. Smith says about careful recording of historical data is compounded by the problems of memory, and these warnings apply to the enthusiastic believer as well as to the critical nonbeliever. I illustrate from my own experience. As a young missionary I wrote to my father, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, asking about the events associated with his call to the First Council of Seventy. He wrote back in September 1968 and said:

Before telling you the historical details of how I was called to the First Council of the Seventy, however, I think I better offer a word of caution relative to stories in general. It is very common for people to be misquoted. This applies with particular force to the general authorities. Almost everywhere I go, including almost every stake conference I attend, someone comes to me and says that at such and such a time and place I said such and such to them or to someone else. Now I ordinarily have no independent recollection as to what was said on the indicated occasion. In the great majority of cases, however, I am confident I would not have said the thing attributed to me. Very often the language and approach in the quoted material is such that I can identify it in my mind as having come from some other one of the brethren. .. .

It is also not uncommon for a member of a Stake Presidency to get up in a general session of conference and say that Brother McConkie said such and such last night in the leadership session and in his recitation to totally and completely misconstrue and misquote what I had said. This matter of quoting the brethren falsely is of such general concern and creates such a problem that even the Church Handbook contains a statement that church members should not quote the brethren where extravagant or unusual things are concerned unless they have the matter in writing.

My father then continued, detailing some of his thoughts on the telling of stories and the recording of history:

There are two ways to tell a story. One is to recite factually what took place, leaving the hearer or reader to make what interpretations where feelings and other things are concerned that he desires to make. Another way to tell a story is to do it symbolically or figuratively: that is, to tell stories of events which are intended to leave the feeling as to what really was involved. This latter way is not historically accurate. [One of the Brethren] used to tell me and others that the way to write history was not to make a recitation of the facts and events that took place, but to comment about them in such a way as to give people a feeling of what was involved with the people about whom the data were being written. There are people who have this idea where storytelling is concerned. It is personally very objectionable to me. I think that stories should recite what happened and not some fairy-tale type dissertation about the events. To my mind one presentation is history and the other is mythology. It must be understood, however, that the people who talk in this mythological way, in their own minds at least, are not being dishonest. They are simply making a presentation in the dramatized way they think it should be made. It does not accord with how I think things should be done, but then other people have different ideas and are entitled to their views.

He then picks up on one of the dangersand temptations!of storytelling:

There is another thing about stories. Even those who attempt to tell them accurately soon begin to twist and change or to enlarge. I tell an occasional story in my sermons. .. . It would be very easy for me to amplify and expand, to put words in the mouths of people, in order to get the effect over. I could for instance, greatly improve upon the statements made by some of the people in the conversations. It would get the points over better. . . . President Heber J. Grant was a storyteller in his sermons and he is one of the few men who has ever done this who has stuck religiously and strictly to the actual facts involved, reciting them always in almost the verbatim language. It takes an exceedingly high degree of integrity and honesty to tell stories accurately like this. .. . When stories are recited for historical reasons they are told in one way, and when they are recited for entertainment they are presented in another.

Joseph Smith was aware of these kinds of problems, and thus Jesse Crosby quotes him as saying that he (Joseph) did not enjoy the gift promised "every American citizen; that of free speech." Joseph, Crosby said, could not give his private opinions, for "on any subject of importance his words were often garbled and their meaning twisted and then given out as the word of the Lord because they came from him" (Crosby, n.d. [b]). But Joseph could not control what was said when he was not present, or for that matter, after he died, when so many of the stories about him reached the public ear.

The problems of exaggeration and distorting perceptions are mammoth. So also is the temptation to intrude personal bias or preference upon a text, an event, or a memory. This is nowhere more evident than in the case of Jesus Christ, who has the single most misquoted, misapplied, and misunderstood voice in the history of the earth. The Bible, for its part, is the single most misquoted and misunderstood book. It is not surprising, then, that prophets would be similarly misquoted. Even the saintliest of the Saints can be so tempted, and religious recusants for reasons ranging from vanity to malice make professions of witting and unwitting distortions.

Knowing that we easily err, Joseph Smith warned that "a prophet was only a prophet when he was acting as such" (HC, 5:265). Thus it is that prophets are entitled to personal opinions just like any other man (Alma 40:20; 1 Corinthians 7:25), and sometimes have differences among themselves. They even make mistakes (Galatians 2:11). Orson Hyde, for instance, once preached a sermon that contained some false sentiments. Joseph Smith was present, and following the meeting said, "I told Elder Hyde that I was going to offer some corrections to his sermon this morning," and, to Elder Hyde's eternal credit, Elder Hyde replied, "They shall be thankfully received." In the afternoon meeting Joseph spoke and "then corrected Elder Hyde's remarks, the same as I had done to him privately" (Nelson, 1979, pp. 215-16). Similarly, we have in our history an account of Brigham Young preaching something in the morning session of a conference and returning in the afternoon session of the same conference and saying "this morning you heard what Brigham Young thinks about this subject, and now I would like to tell you what the Lord thinks about it." He then reversed the position he had taken in the morning session (McConkie, 1966a). Who is to be surprised, then, that men and women who do not hold the prophetic mantle, and who have less experience and exposure, would make mistakes as well? This would particularly be the case when they operated from memory, without notes.

This very human proclivity to read personal preferences, biases, and even prejudices into a memory or a text is so deeply rooted in our perception processes that we generally do not even see it unfolding. One simple illustration will suffice: the journals of the early Saints are filled with instances in which Joseph wrestled, always coming off the winner, as when he whipped the bully from LaHarpe (Moore, 1892, p. 255) or when he selected the best wrestler among the crowd and "threw him several times in succession" (Burnet, 1946, p. 41), for Joseph "never found his match" (Johnson, 1974, p. 89). In what is likely a more accurate assessment, James Henrie saw his father (William Henrie) wrestle Joseph, but he admitted that while his "father could throw the Prophet frequently" Joseph generally came out ahead (William Henrie, n.d., p. 2). In an age of heroes, the wrestling prowess of the hero Joseph Smith might easily be exaggerated.

This propensity to read a bias or a preference into an experience is particularly alarming when doctrinal interpretations are concerned. We have in the Church Historian's Office, for example, a statement made by one who knew the Prophet well, wherein he describes a question-and-answer session some of the early brethren are said to have had with Joseph. In that meeting Joseph is reputed to have taught that some of the less courageous souls in premortality approached the Father and pled not to come to this earth, reasoning that they lacked the faith to endure mortal testing. Joseph is also quoted as saying that Adam came from another planet as "an immortalized being" and that those who were fence-sitters and "neutral spirits" were sent to earth cursed with a darker skin (Anson Call, n.d.). These statements are all false. They are contrary to what the revelations say, are at odds with what Joseph himself taught, and in one instance even contradict a formal proclamation of the First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith et al., 1909, pp. 75-81). Written on this document, in the readily recognizable handwriting of President Joseph Fielding Smith, is the statement "Not to be considered Church doctrine." Joseph Fielding Smith then wrote his initials next to his statement. Yet somehow these musings carved their way into the aged imagination of a very good man whom the Prophet loved and trusted. It is important to note, in this connection, that this particular error on these particular items does not annul this man's testimony on other items. A man can be an expert witness on one thing but an unqualified witness on another, and we are sometimes at a loss to explain the thought processes involved. David Whitmer, to drive the point home, was always clear and consistent when he testified of seeing Moroni and the gold plates; he never wavered on those issues to his dying day. But on other issues he was not a competent witness, and on some doctrinal and historical issues he was an unreliable witness, even writing that Joseph Smith himself fell into apostasy after the publication of the Book of Mormon (Whitmer, 1887).

Some of the recollections contained in this volume were given when the storytellers were quite old. Memory, of course, often dims with age. One classic illustration of this problem comes from the remembrances of David Lewis, who at age ninety sat down with five members of the Church Historian's staff and shared his recollections of his early days in the Church, including his involvement in the organization of the Church on 6 April 1830, when he was twelve years of age. At some points in the interview he forgets a point or cannot recall another, and members of the Historian's staff volunteer information which he then confirms. Is that his memory at play or the memory of one of the Church historians? And what would have happened had the Historian's staff not been there to prod that ninety-year-old memory? And, more to the point, what does this episode suggest in the instances of aging memories of people who lacked the beneficial prod of the Church Historian's office? What was lost? Or altered?

Just as old age can affect memory, so also can youth. Again, a personal family experience illustrates. My own mother was two-and-one-half years old when President Joseph F. Smith passed away. She remembers going to the viewing. But what does she remember? Exactly what one expects from a two year oldthe ankle-high buttoned boots the women wore in that day, and her father picking her up, holding her in his arms, and looking down into the casket, which was covered with a glass shield. Many of the entries in this collection come from people who met and knew the Prophet in their childhood and youth. Thus Wilford Woodruff Jr., born in 1840, remembers what a child of his age might be expected to remember about Joseph Smiththat he visited the Woodruff home, played with the children, and was always kind (Woodruff, 1901, p. 616). Many are the children that remember sitting on Joseph's lap; perhaps every child here recorded remembers that Joseph was kind and that he loved children. The teens, for their part, remember "teen things"Elam Cheny, Enoch Dodge, Mary Dunn Ensign, and Edwin Holden, for example, all remember Joseph playing ball with them or his playing ball with other teens; Mary Jane Robey Epperson remembers when Joseph came and administered to her; and Goudy Hogan, for his part, sat on the stand behind Joseph when he preached the King Follett discourse and seems best to have remembered what Joseph wore. Alvah Alexander was somewhat of an exception, for he says he preferred hearing Joseph preach to playing ball with him. Still, when we read Alexander's self-assessment, written as he looked back through long years, we wonder if he was reinterpreting his teenage experience.

Sometimes right-spirited and well-intended memories leave challenging interpretive problems. Solomon Hancock, for instance, tells a touching story of being with his pregnant wife and meeting the Prophet on his way to Carthage, and of giving Joseph five dollars on that occasion to buy food. The historical record, however, shows no Hancock births in the year of the martyrdom. Was a child stillborn and thus unmentioned, or had time distorted Hancock's memory? Both Philo Dibble and Mosiah Hancock tell of lightning hitting the flagpole at the celebration held by the Saints in Independence, Missouri, on the Fourth of July, 1838. The pole was splintered. Dibble quotes Joseph as saying, "As that pole was splintered, so shall the nations of the earth be!" (Dibble, 1968, p. 88), while Hancock remembers Joseph said, "There goes the liberty of the people" (Mosiah Hancock, n.d., p. 7). Are they referring to the same expression? Did Joseph say both things? Is one or both of them interpolating?

Of a more serious nature are memories that touch upon the doctrines Joseph taught. On what has become a famous quote about the U.S. Constitution hanging by a thread, Brigham Young said: "Will the Constitution be destroyed? No: it will be held inviolate by this people; and, as Joseph Smith said, 'The time will come when the destiny of the nation will hang upon a single thread. At that critical juncture, this people will step forth and save it from the threatened destruction.' It will be so" (JD, 7:15). Jedediah M. Grant, a year later, quoted the same prophecy a little differently: "What did the Prophet Joseph say? When the Constitution shall be tottering, we shall be the people to save it from the hand of the foe" (see Bitton, 1996, p. 95). Orson Hyde, however, remembers what Joseph said quite differently: "It is said that Brother Joseph in his lifetime declared that the elders of this Church should step forth at a particular time when the Constitution should be in danger, and rescue it, and save it. This may be so; but I do not recollect that he said exactly so. I believe he said something like this'that the time would come when the Constitution and the country would be in danger of an overthrow; and' said he, 'if the Constitution be saved at all, it will be by the elders of this Church.' I believe this is about the language, as nearly as I can recollect it" (JD, 6:152).

Thus we have contradictory memories. In this instance, the puzzle seems easy to solve, for the preponderance of those who refer to Joseph's original quote remember it in substance the way Brigham Young reported it, and the leading Brethren have done the same in our own day. John Taylor, for his part, does not try to quote Joseph verbatim; rather he gives us the substance of what Joseph said in a paraphrase: "This nation abounds with traitors who ignore that sacred palladium of liberty [the Constitution] and seek to trample it under foot. Joseph Smith said they would do so, and that when deserted by all, the elders of Israel would rally around its shattered fragments and save and preserve it inviolate" (JD, 21:31). He reverbalized the same concept some years later (JD, 20:138; 21:349-50), but was nonetheless true to his original memory. What he illustrates, however, is another problem: sometimes in quoting Joseph, the early Brethren quoted the concept Joseph taught, putting that concept in their own words. This is both a help and a hindrance. It helps in the sense that we focus on doctrines, ideas, and issues rather than becoming rabbinic about word meanings. It hinders because perfect certainty about Joseph's exact words is lost. It also leaves unanswered the question, "Where does what Joseph said leave off, and what John Taylor interpreted Joseph to mean begin?"

Sometimes the Brethren would paraphrase a verse or more from the revelations Joseph received, and attribute the content to Joseph. For instance, George Q. Cannon quotes the Prophet as saying, "Let us not go up against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible" (JD, 8:302), which is a paraphrase of Doctrine and Covenants 45:70: "Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible." No substantive meaning has been changed, but it is helpful to know where the original quote is found. Others of the early Brethren were equally adept at quoting from the Doctrine and Covenants and attributing their expressions to Joseph Smithwhich, in a very real sense, they were (see, for example, Orson Pratt, JD, 16:5 and D&C 64:36).

Other problems also attract our attention. Sometimes it is difficult to know if a speaker is actually quoting Joseph from memory or placing such words in Joseph's mouth as he likely would have spoken (see, for instance, Orson Pratt, JD, 14:141). We have instances where one person quotes a second who in the original instance was quoting Joseph Smith, which in turn affects how we interpret what has been said. Nonetheless, the context in which the quotes occur generally reveal not only Joseph's intent, but the accuracy with which the speaker conveys what Joseph intended.

As the cumulative weight of all the weaknesses of memory presses upon our own minds, what confidence can we have in the recollections of these faithful Saints? How do we discern what to accept and what to reject? Several truths stand out. First, that soul who has filled his mind with truth will instinctively resonate to the voice of truth. Those familiar with gospel patterns and doctrines will have feelings about what is written by the early Saints and others that more accurately describe what is involved than academic scholarship can generally yield. Historical scholarship is important for it disciplines our thought, exposing us to alternatives and sometimes to better views. In the final analysis, however, it in no way compares to the simple expedient of filling one's mind with truth as a precursor to discerning truth. Students of the scriptures are always more discerning than those who do not study the scriptures. One compelling illustration, from our own history, comes from what has been dubbed "The Whitehorse Prophecy," an account of dubious historicity that purports to be a statement the Prophet Joseph Smith made concerning the wars, turmoils, and other difficulties that would exist in the last days. It became prominent enough in Latter-day Saint lore that President Joseph F. Smith was prompted to give corrective instructions with regard to it, and did so explaining that when people fill their minds with truth they are far less subject to errors of discernment and at the same time less prone to chase the extravagant, the marginal, the obscure, and the less reliable. They are simultaneously more inclined to judge by the doctrines and instructions in the standard works and the teaching of the living seers (see Joseph F. Smith, 1918).

In a similar vein, while speaking of the doctrines of the Church, President Joseph Fielding Smith said something that applies with equal force to our history and historical recollections:

It makes no difference what is written or what anyone has said, if what has been said is in conflict with what the Lord has revealed, we can set it aside. My words, and the teachings of any other member of the Church, high or low, if they do not square with the revelations, we need not accept them. Let us have this matter clear. We have accepted the four standard works as the measuring yardsticks, or balances, by which we measure every man's doctrine.

You cannot accept the books written by the authorities of the Church as the standards of doctrine, only insofar as they accord with the revealed word in the standard works.

Every man who writes is responsible, not the Church, for what he writes. If Joseph Fielding Smith writes some thing which is out of harmony with the revelations, then every member of the Church is duty bound to reject it. If he writes that which is in perfect harmony with the revealed word of the Lord, then it should be accepted (1967, 3:203-4).

Thus, where we have stories that illustrate false principles or draw false conclusions, such stories should be summarily rejected. We have, for instance, some who claim Joseph Smith said the ten tribes were hidden under the polar ice cap, or living together in the "north countries," or even that they were on a planet on the opposite side of the moon and hidden from our view by the rotational patterns of the earth and moon. Because these so clearly violate what the revelations say, we rightly conclude that if Joseph said anything on those subjects, it has been so distorted in transmission that what has come down to us is so inaccurate that it makes no sense to pay any attention to it. The same may be said of those who attribute to Joseph statements that men live on the moon who dress much like Quakers and who live to be nearly a thousand years old. Similar statements, for the same reasons, warrant no attention.

A second helpful standard in determining the accuracy and historicity of different statements and stories is that of comparing, where available, the testimonies of multiple witnesses. There is a richness that comes to historical detail by gleaning the insights and perceptions of multiple witnesses. For example, in the materials contained herein (including the accompanying CD), there are more than one hundred accounts of different people who were present on August 8, 1844, when Brigham Young was transfigured, sounding and appearing like the Prophet Joseph Smith. By comparing and contrasting those different accounts, a marvelous picture is drawn of what took place, and it is a picture that no single account conveys. Similarly, the multiple accounts of the First Vision add measurably to what the Prophet Joseph Smith has said as recorded in the Pearl of Great Price. Dozens of people left accounts of the kidnapping of the Prophet in Dixon, Illinois, in 1843, and some accounts add to or clarify that which other accounts leave less well described. Sometimes we have people who make historical errors that are readily corrected by comparison to other accounts, and in some few instances, we have some who have sought to falsify the historical record because of doctrinal or other differences. We have, for example, some journals written by people who apostatized; some such accounts are contradicted by so many other witnesses that it becomes clear that the bitter spirit that governed the writing also governed the interpretation of the data. Similarly, some have denied that Joseph ever preached the plurality of wives, in spite of the overwhelming number of people who heard him do so and made note of their recollectionssometimes in affidavits.

The Promise

What, then, is the value of these recollections, particularly in view of the potential for error in historical transmission? Several answers immediately come to mind. First, the memories of those not so frequently mentioned in existing histories of the Church enlarge, enrich, and add color and flavor to what has already been written. The classic experience illustrating the additive power of multiple witnesses comes from Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, each of whom were present when the Aaronic Priesthood was restored and each of whom made a different emphasis in the written accounts they left. Joseph was direct, succinct, and to the point; he grasped the essence of the experience, and told no more. Oliver, for his part, was much more descriptive, adding enlivening and expanding detail that Joseph neglected. Oliver, for instance, reminds us of the important Book of Mormon translation process out of which the experience grew, and then notes that they heard the "voice of the Redeemer," something Joseph does not mention, and that when the Baptist spoke, his voice "dispelled every fear." He also adds that the Aaronic Priesthood was restored "that the Sons of Levi may yet offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness!" thereby teaching that this was a part of the restoration of all things. For emphasis, he repeats the testimony, "we heard the voice of Jesus." What Joseph does in one verse, Oliver takes a page and one half to doand we are deeply enriched by the additional information he shares (see Joseph Smith-History 1:71n).

Another important illustration is found in the enlarged view that multiple witnesses provide of the importance of the First Vision, about which a good deal has been written. Joseph Smith gave several accounts of the vision during his lifetime, and several contemporary accounts were also produced before the Prophet's death. The picture painted by these additional, secondhand accounts helps us to see that Joseph told the story of his experience in the grove much more than had previously been imagined. The pattern that emerges is one of constant retelling of the First Vision and of Joseph deliberately using it as an aid to missionary work.

Lorenzo Snow, for example, makes specific mention of hearing Joseph tell of the Father and the Son appearing, when Lorenzo heard Joseph speak at the John Johnson farm in 1831. This accords with the pattern we see in what has already been printed, but the picture is now much more insistent: Joseph wanted to tell that story, and others wanted to hear it.

The same may be said of his experiences with the angel Moroni Joseph told that story over and over in order to bear witness of the restoration of the gospel and of his role in that restoration. When we read the accounts of converts coming into the Church, there are repeated accounts of Joseph telling of his own experiences, including the First Vision and Moroni coming. Mary Isabella Horne recalls that there was such power in the telling of these experiences that the Saints asked Joseph to tell them, which he did. The pattern that emerges of Joseph as a missionary is that of Joseph being a constant witness of his own experiences. In January 1840, William W. McGuire heard Joseph preach in the home of Edward Hunter, who was then living in Chester County, Pennsylvania. Joseph emphasized, "Brothers and Sisters, I will not tell you much of what the Lord told Paul, or of what He told Peter, but I will tell you what the Lord told me" (McGuire, 1886). The emphasis was on his own experiences, not those of the biblical prophets. This is important, for it accords with the instructions given in the Doctrine and Covenants on how the gospel should be taught, and it shows, once again, that Joseph was submissive to the Lord's will in all things. Some have written and spoken of Joseph's biblical backgroundwhich was mammoth!and have gone so far as to suggest that his approach was "Pauline," meaning it was filled with and patterned after the teachings of the apostle Paul. The many, many witnesses who told of their conversion experiences refute the "biblical and Pauline thesis" and emphatically demonstrate that Joseph was "a restoration man"he spoke about and from his own experiences, and when he quoted biblical texts, as he often did, he interpreted them in terms of the revelations he had received and the experiences he had obtained. In effect, Joseph used the biblical text to showcase the doctrines he had learned from Nephi, Alma, Mormon, and Moroni.

Lydia Knight was touched by the powerful testimony Joseph bore of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and the restoration of the priesthoodshe could now receive an authorized baptism! (Knight, 1974, p. 44). The Reverend George Moore, though he never joined the Church, remembered Joseph for teaching of the Book of Mormon plates and noted that Joseph's doctrines stood independent of all existing religious teachings (Moore, 1982, pp. 10-11). When Mary A. Noble heard Joseph speak of the Book of Mormon, she said, "Never did I hear preaching sound so glorious to me as that did. I realized it was truth from heaven" (Mary Noble, n.d., pp. 18-19). David Osborn was overwhelmed when Joseph spoke of the keys held by "Adam, Enoch, Noah, Moses, the patriarchs and some of the prophets," and he was impressed by Joseph's averral that he would be held accountable at the day of judgment for how he treated his testimony of the Book of Mormon (Osborn, 1892, p. 173). James Palmer was struck with the force of Joseph's conviction and his declaration that he "did translate the Book of Mormon . . . and all the powers of earth and hell can never rob me of the honor of it" (Palmer, n.d.). Parley P. Pratt, Eliza R. Snow, Jesse N. Smith, and others echo these sentiments, as do John Taylor, Lorenzo Snow, George Vogel, and Helen Mar Whitney. And the list goes on! And in so doing, it gives us a much enlarged view of Joseph as a missionary and of the fact that he was a firsthand witness, never beholden to the testimony of others, but reliant on his own experiences. It is a powerful display.

In addition to what these secondary accounts tell of Joseph, they tell a good deal about the people who followed Joseph Smith. What kind of people were they? They were men and women of extraordinary courage. When the mob burned Nauvoo and drove the Saints from their homes, Louisa Hall Harris remembered she had left a pewter teapot in her house and rushed back exclaiming, "I am going to get that tea pot. Damn them, they can't have that to melt into bullets to kill us with!"(Louisa H. Harris, n.d.). When that same mob came to Jane Johnston Black, demanding she hand over her firearms, she drew from her bosom a small six-shooter, pointed it at the leader of the mob and said, "Do you want it?" "Indeed I do," was the reply. "Captain, I am serving notice on you that I intend using it before giving it to you. Now do you think you want it?" With a piercing glance he replied, "I guess not" and rode on (Jane Black, n.d. [a], p. 7).

These people who interacted with Joseph possessed the same virtues he possessed. They showed the faith to follow, the hardiness to survive, and the spiritual sensitivity to know. Many came to Joseph because of inspired dreams and visions; others felt the testimony of missionaries; all came because the Spirit of the Lord directed them to. Illustrations abound: "Aunt" Jane James walked a thousand miles to meet the Prophet, wore out her shoes and stockings in the walk, but continued anyway, barefooted (James, 1905, p. 552). Hannah Simmonds Philips was seventeen when she joined the Church and secured permission from her parents to leave them and her native England and travel to Nauvoo. Her mother left her bonnet hanging on a peg in the hall next to the stairs and oft cried when she saw ita reminder of the daughter she had lost to Mormonism but at the same time a symbol of a young girl's faith (Philips, n.d.). Rachel Ridgeway Grant read the Book of Mormon "nearly all the night," knew it was true, and knew that she would not be happy unless she gathered with the Saints. She left New Jersey for Nauvoo (Grant, 1905, p. 550). Andrew Jackson Stewart was teaching at a Methodist camp meeting about baptism and was accused by one of his fellow exhorters of preaching "Old Joe Smith's doctrines." He was stunned, for he thought he was simply teaching what the Bible taught. Soon thereafter Elders William Coray and William G. Rule came and taught him the gospel. After he was baptized they told him they had been sent by Joseph Smith to him and that Joseph had instructed them not to return to Nauvoo until they had baptized Stewart (Stewart, n.d., p. 149). Thousands upon thousands of similar stories were unfolding in the lives of people everywhere the missionaries went and sometimes in places where they did not.

The same faith that attracted people to Joseph's side kept them there, even amidst the trials and poverty that were so pervasive. Caroline Butler was too poor to help with the construction of the Nauvoo Temple, but with the faith typical of these early gatherers, she earnestly wanted to help. One day while riding in the wagon with her children, she spotted two dead buffalo. She and her children pulled the long hair from the buffalo manes, took it home, washed it, carded it, and spun it into a coarse yarn from which she knitted eight pairs of heavy mittens, which were then used by the temple rock cutters in the winter. She had nothing to give, but gave her all (Butler, 1993, p. 113). Caroline Butler is but one of the thousands, and the recollections in this volume tell of their interactions with the Prophet and demonstrate that gifts of the Spirit had been restored to the earth and were exercised by manynot just by Joseph Smith and his immediate associates.

In spite of the occasional interpretive problems associated with memory and recall, there is much to be trusted in these accounts. In the scholarly world, students of memory are taught that we remember longer and more exactly when recall is associated with strong emotionsfear, anxiety, anger, or frustration, or, on the positive side, joy, excitement, anticipation, even love. It is unsurprising therefore that these early Saints had such deep, lasting, and uniform memories of Joseph Smith: they confronted the same mobs, personally saw him surrounded by the blood-hungry and the hateful; some three hundred or more were part of the kidnapping at Dixon, Illinois, for example. They shared in his joys; he spoke to crowds large and small. Margaret Pierce Young (n.d., pp. 1-3) remembered Joseph speaking until about 2 o'clock in the morning to her father's family in her father's home, while on the other hand Parley P. Pratt (1985, p. 298) told of Joseph speaking to a crowd of about three thousand in Philadelphia. Of Joseph's remarks, Parley said, "The effect was electric." People were touched! And crowds of thousands frequently gathered to hear Joseph speak in Nauvoo, and they remembered with unstrained consistency the events involved.

This brings us to an issue which the scholarly world cannot understand: that the Spirit of the Lord can leave an impress far more indelible than any other agent, and that when people heard Joseph speak by the power of the Holy Ghost, which Joseph so fully did, the impress upon their souls was infinitely more indelible than any human emotion can etch. One of the gifts of the Spirit is the gift of memory, and the consistency with which these early Saints and pioneers record their memories suggest they were more influenced by that gift than even they knew. Martha Thomas quotes Joseph as saying, "When a true spirit makes known anything to you, in the daytime, we call it a vision. If it is a true spirit it will never leave you, every particular will be as plain fifty years hence as now" (Thomas, 1927, pp. 23-24). Joseph knew the Spirit of the Lord caused people to remember what he said. When speaking from the stand in Nauvoo, the police sought to usher a group of teenage boys away. "Let the boys alone," Joseph told the police. "They will hear something they will never forget" (Harvey Cluff, n.d.). What Joseph said of visions and speeches is true of other gifts as well. In his own case, for instance, he received one revelation in 1831 but did not record it until 1843. When the written account of that revelation was destroyed, Joseph simply dictated it anew (JD, 6:281-82), much as Jeremiah had done in a very similar case thousands of years before him (Jeremiah 36:1-32).

Joseph knew he was speaking, writing, and behaving not just for those within his immediate reach, but that he was speaking to an entire dispensation, and that those who heard him would repeat what he said for generations yet unborn. He knew he would die before most of the Twelve, for instance, and thus promised them that after he died, they would be able to recall that which he had taught while yet alive. Brigham Young later testified that he remembered things Joseph had taught, even though he had not thought of them since he heard Joseph teach them (Kelley, 1938, pp. 81-82). In this context it is no accident, as so many of the entries in this collection testify, that on the day Brigham Young was transfigured before the Saints, so many youth and children were not only in attendance, but participant in the spiritual manifestations of the day. They were destined to tell the story of the transfiguration of Brigham Young for more than sixty years, for their testimonies, like Joseph's, were binding upon an entire dispensation. Sometimes Joseph even took specific occasion to counsel a particular Saint to teach to future generations what Joseph had taught. To Benjamin F. Johnson he said, "Benjamin, in regard to those things I have taught you privately, that are not yet for the public, I give you the right when you are so led, to commit them to others, for you will not be wrong in discerning those worthy of your confidence" (Johnson, 1903). Many are the Saints who said such things as "I shall never forget" or "I will ever remember." In short, the Savior's promise to his disciples that the Holy Ghost would "bring all things to [their] remembrance" (John 14:26) is hardly more applicable in one dispensation than another.

These early Saints collected strong memories, sometimes by the power of the Holy Ghost, which they wanted to have preserved long after they were gone. Mary Goble Pay tells of the struggles to get across the plains, which cost her own mother and two siblings their lives; Mary's frostbitten toes were amputated using a saw and a butcher's knife. She recorded her memories because "it is wise for our children to see what their parents passed through for the gospel, yes, I think it is" (Pay, 1974, p. 150). These people wrote and spoke because they wanted their recollections preserved as testimonies to their children and future generations. While in England in 1877, President Joseph F. Smith purchased a set of the Journal of Discourses. In volume eighteen he enscribed his name and address. Then he wrote: "Let my children value these volumes as Scripture. I treasure them for their [his children's] sake." It was a measure of his confidence in his brethren, and in what they said, that he would so speak.

It is too much to claim scriptural status for the stories recorded in this volume, but our feelings are akin to those of Joseph F. Smith with regard to what his brethren said. There is much of the sacred in these memories, and they give a much enlarged view of Joseph Smith. We see the very personable, human side of Joseph, hugging children, laughing and joking with teens, embracing his brethren, weeping with them and their wives. We see his mind expandingin Hebrew, Latin, Greek, German, and even, we are told, in Chaldean (Aramaic). Through the eyes of Joseph F. Smith we see the Prophet kneeling upon the floor, with the Egyptian manuscripts spread before him, studying, pondering, and notetaking. Through the ears of Eunice Billings Snow we hear Joseph sing his favorite hymns, and we stand with William Holmes Walker outside Joseph's house during the family's evening prayers, when with Emma and the children he sang the sweetest and most heavenly music Walker had ever heard. We sit on a rail fence and listen to the tale of one whose house had burned down, and we watch Joseph take five dollars from his pocket and say to those assembled, "I feel sorry for this brother to the amount of five dollars; how much do you feel sorry?" (Workman, 1892, p. 641). We see the hundredsor was it thousands?stand in the rain just to hear him preach; and with Wilford Woodruff, we are transfixed as Joseph speaks with such power that his face shone as amber.

We see how the Saints loved him and shared life's experiences with him in personal, intimate settings. We see him dining in the Johnson home, where he sat at the head of the table, after first having carved the turkey. In the same way we see Sister Myra Henrie put out hot potatoes and buttermilk for the Prophet; and we hear his grateful and gracious response when he was given food at the home of Mary Isabella Horne: "Sister Horne, if I had a wife as small as you, when trouble came I would put her in my pocket and run" (Horne, 1982, p. 64). He provides a banquet for the poor, and they speak of it for generations. They then take pride in having given him a meal, a knife, an article of clothing, a saddle, or a book. Immanuel Masters Murphy visited him in prison and was honored to give him a handshake with a five-dollar gold piece in it. Israel Barlow felt it an honor simply to hold his stirrup or the bridle of his horse.

More profoundly, however, are we touched by the number of memories that show us Joseph exercising spiritual gifts, for he healed the sick, prophesied of things great and small, spoke in tongues and interpreted the same, discerned the character of men, commanded the elements, dreamed inspired dreams, and saw great visions, and, through it all, exercised a greater number of spiritual gifts, and exercised them with greater regularity and frequency than any prophet of whom we have record. When poisoned and afflicted with projectile vomiting, he had the faith to be healed; he laid hands upon the unconscious Benjamin Brown, who had been sick for weeks, and Brown was immediately healed. Clint Harris had a crippling fever sore; Joseph spoke, and Harris was healed. On Zion's Camp the brethren were weary and parched with thirst; Joseph called for a shovel, dug a small hole in the prairie, and water sprang forth. As early as 1832 he prophesied that Brigham Young would be his successor; soon thereafter he prophesied that the Saints would go to the Rocky Mountains. He did so again in 1842. He promised Benjamin F. Johnson that his family would never leave the Church, notwithstanding mobbings, persecutions, and trials. Some thirty-five years before the event, he told Eliza R. Snow that she would visit Palestine, and he wept as he gave Andrew Lamoreaux an inspired blessing predicting that he would go on a mission to France, learn another language, do much good, and die a martyr before he returned to his familyall of which came to pass. He invited men to meetings with the promise that, when they attended, they would see visions. John Murdock and Zebedee Coltrin attended one such meeting and testified that they saw the Christ. Others did the same. In yet another moment, Zebedee Coltrin, in Joseph's company, saw Father Adam and Mother Eve; and Joseph B. Noble reports that Joseph confided to him that he knew the angels so well he recognized them by the sound of their voices even before he saw their faces.

Joseph Smith was a man who knew how to bring people to Christ, and that was his compelling emphasis. The Book of Mormon, which the world both hated and feared, is the most Christ-centered book in print, and its message haunted and yet haunts those who profess a conviction in Christ but are more wedded to their own traditions than to the humble Nazarene. The Pearl of Great Price contains accounts of people who saw the Christ anciently, and the Doctrine and Covenants contains accounts of those who have seen him in our day. It also contains the promise that all who are humble and pure may receive that same blessing. In the realm of Joseph's own experience there were those who did. We think of Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Newel Knight, John Murdock, Zebedee Coltrin, and others, and we are gladdened that they left such faith-building testimonies. Every healing Joseph performed, and there were hundreds if not thousands, was performed in the name of Christ; every prophecy he spoke, and there were multiple thousands, was spoken in the name of Christ; every sermon he preached, every blessing he gave, and every ordinance he performed, and again there were thousands, were done in the name of Jesus Christ. Given these experiences, and the host of faith-promoting accounts which a generation of faithful souls have given us through their suffering, how can we help but to be encouraged, strengthened, and bettered by what they gave? And how can we fail to be more grateful to a kindly God for restoring his work through the Prophet Joseph Smith. The recollections and memories in this volume tell but a part of that great eternal drama. Because of the effects these recollections produce in our lives, and the Spirit they bring to us, we are awed. Surely, eternal good comes from remembering Joseph.
