Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Adams, Charles Francis

(August 18, 1807-November 21, 1886)

Excerpts from the diary of Charles Francis Adams, son of John Quincy Adams, in which he tells of visiting the Prophet in Nauvoo with Josiah Quincy; he gives a brief description of Joseph; they converse on religious matters; Joseph shows them the mummies and Egyptian papyrus, and tells of Missouri persecutions.

Tuesday, May 14 [1844]. Clear. Steamer Amaranth. Visit to Quincy.

. . . As we [i.e., Charles Francis Adams and his traveling companion, Josiah Quincy] went on it became very necessary that we should settle upon our course. Quincy wished to stop at Nauvoo, the city of the Mormons and see something of Joe Smith, the prophet. I was passive, as I have always been on this journey. But it became late before we got up and the passengers were full of discouraging tales of the disposition of these Mormons. Had it not been for a certain Doctor Goforth, a living skeleton of a man, I think Quincy would have been discouraged by the darkness and solitude which reigned on the shore. But he urged our landing so much that we finally ordered our things on shore.

Wednesday, May 15. Joe Smith. Visit the Temple.

It was about one o'clock when we got into the very indifferent room which the labors of our tall and thin doctor had procured for us in a house on the bank of the river. For [arriving at] so late an hour we were determined not to attempt to disturb the great prophet himself, although he was the keeper of the tavern. We threw ourselves on the outside of the bed allotted to Quincy and myself and slept until five o'clock, when the daylight roused us. Shortly afterwards the carriage of the prophet which had been sent for by the doctor was announced as ready to take us up. We rode in company with the doctor and two other passengers who had stopped with us. There was also on the outside one of the leaders of the sect, who was called General White. The day was cloudy and it soon after set in to rain and rained in showers until night.

At the door of a two-story wooden house with a sign posted before it, we stopped and were introduced to the celebrated Joe Smith. A middle-aged man with a shrewd but rather ordinary expression of countenance, unshaved and in clothes neither very choice nor neat. He received us civilly and forthwith introduced us into his house, trying one room after another without success as they all appeared to contain occupants. . . .

. . . we sat down and held a long conference with the prophet upon himself, his doctrines and his projects. He then took us down into his mother's chamber and showed us four Egyptian mummies stripped and then undertook to explain the contents of a chart of manuscript which he said he had taken from the bosom of one of them. The cool impudence of this imposture amused me very much. "This," said he, "was written by the hand of Abraham and means so and so. If anyone denies it, let him prove the contrary. I say it." Of course, we were too polite to prove the negative, against a man fortified by revelation.

His mother looked on with attention and aided in the explanation whenever the prophet hesitated, from which I inferred that she was usually made the exponent of the writing to strangers. At the close, he notified us that for this instruction, his mother was in the habit of receiving a quarter of a dollar a piece from them, which sum we paid forthwith. Then came another long conversation, in which a brother of his and some other persons joined, detailing the severe and shocking persecution which they suffered at the time of their cruel expulsion from Missouri four years ago. This is one of the most disgraceful chapters in the dark history of slavery in the United States, and shows that the spirit of intolerance, religious and political, can find a shelter even in the fairest professions of liberty.

We dined at one, and after dinner, at our request, we went up in his carriage to see the stone temple and the font which the prophet is causing to be built. It is a massive edifice on a most commanding site, about half finished. The architecture is originaland curious. It is built by the contribution of one-tenth of labor and goods. The prophet seems to have drawn his ideas largely from the Jewish system.

Henry Adams, Charles Francis Adams Visits the Mormons in 1844 (Boston, Mass.: N.p., 1952), 20-22. See also Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 6:377 for the Prophet's account of this visit.
