Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Adams, William

(January 8, 1822-September 30, 1901)

Adams expresses joy at arriving at Nauvoo and meeting Joseph and Hyrum Smith.

I cannot express the joy and pleasure we enjoyed in first beholding the city of Nauvoo [about April 10, 1844], where we could behold the prophet of God, and we were not disappointed for he was with his brother Hyrum, leading men of the church and other prominent men of the city, to the number of two hundred or more, who were at the landing to receive us and make us welcome to the city of the Saints. I was very happy to behold the Prophet and Patriarch, and to have an introduction to them, and hear their voices and shake their hands.

William Adams, "History of William Adams, Written by Himself," January 1894, typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8-9.

Heard Joseph's last sermon; also heard Governor Thomas Ford accuse Saints of disloyalty.

. . . I belonged to Captain Folshawa Company of Col. Theodore Turley's regiment of infantry, Nauvoo Legion, drilled and stood guard and performed the duty of a soldier while the city was under martial law. Was close to the frame building where the prophet preached his great and last sermon, heard Governor Ford on the 27th of June [1844] make a speech accusing the Mormons of being disloyal to the government of the United States, and many other lies that I was aware of. At the same hour that Ford was haranguing the Saints of Nauvoo, the mob was assassinating the Prophet in Carthage Jail. News of the murder of Joseph was not received until the next morning, the 28th of June, it being stopped by the governor for fear that the Mormons would take his life in revenge for the murder of the Prophet. The bodies of Joseph and Hyrum were brought to Nauvoo the morning after the murder.

William Adams, "History of William Adams, Written by Himself," January, 1894, typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8-9.

Great sorrow at deaths of Joseph and Hyrum; Governor Ford's subsequent deterioration and loss of influence.

. . . I am not able to describe the sorrow and lamentation of the Saints in beholding the dead bodies of the Prophet and Patriarch, butchered in cold blood by assassins and murdered under the promise of protection by the governor of the state of Illinois. The curse of God must have followed him, for I saw him at the legislature in Springfield, the capital of Illinois, not as a member, but having come from Peoria where he resided, and he had not influence enough to get a door keeper elected. He looked like a poor rejected creature, and short time afterward he died a pauper and was buried by public expense in Peoria.

William Adams, "History of William Adams, Written by Himself," January, 1894, typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8-9.

Sidney Rigdon sought to be guardian of Church after the martyrdom and began to organize; Adams heard the voice of Joseph when Brigham Young spoke on August 8, 1844.

Joseph had sent letters to the Twelve to hurry home to Nauvoo and among the first was Sidney Rigdon who hurried home from Pittsburgh and laid claim to be guardian of young Joseph, the eldest son of the Prophet, and was using his influence to get the Saints to sustain him. He began to organize the Church. [He ordained] apostles, and preached to the Saints sustaining his claims as young Joseph's guardian, and appointed a day for a general meeting for the Saints to sustain him, his object was to [be] sustained before the brethren of the Twelve would arrive in Nauvoo. Brother Parley P. Pratt was among the first to arrive, and he and Brother Willard Richards, two of the Twelve, labored with Sidney not be in a hurry until the Twelve would arrive, but he was determined to have the vote taken according to his appointment. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball arrived one day before the meeting, and others had arrived previously so that nearly all the Twelve were in Nauvoo. William Marks, President of the [Nauvoo] Stake, called the meeting to order, and took charge of the meeting. After the opening exercises Rigdon spoke of his claim as guardian to young Joseph showing the necessity of the office, which took between one half to one hour.

There was a great multitude attending the meeting, more than one half the crowd could not find seats, and stood on their feet. Never were so many at one meeting that I ever saw. I was sitting down and could not see the speakers on the stand. I was listening very attentively, so that I could hear every word.

I heard a voice speaking, I was surprised, and jumping to my feet, expecting Joseph the Prophet was speaking, having heard him often in public and private, so that I was quite acquainted with his voice. This was a strong testimony that the Twelve Apostles were the rightful leaders of the Church and that the mouth of Joseph had fallen on Brigham Young. Out of that vast multitude about twenty votes for Rigdon to be guardian of young Joseph until he should come of age, he then being a boy of ten or eleven years of age. Rigdon, Marks, and these that sustained him were cut off from the Church, and the Twelve were sustained as the successors of Joseph the Prophet.

William Adams, "History of William Adams, Written by Himself," January, 1894, typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8-9.

Note: Adams' experience is an important witness that the Lord was testifying to the Saints that Brigham was the rightful successor to Joseph; he heard Joseph's voice, while others saw Brigham transfigured so that his appearance was that of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The History of the Church notes, however, that Sidney sought to become "a guardian for the Church," not to young Joseph, and that Sidney "harangued the saints for about one and a half hours" (Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2ded., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 7:231).
