Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Alexander, Alvah

(September 21, 1831-February 16, 1917)

Childhood memories of playing with Joseph's children and of Joseph treating his abusers kindly; on way to Carthage, Joseph said he never expected to return; young Alexander among those who received the Prophet's body following the martyrdom.

I came to Nauvoo in the fall of 1842. At this time I met the Prophet Joseph Smith, and knew him from then till the time of his death. I was only a boy of eleven when I first knew him, but I always loved him, and no amusements or games were as interesting to me as to hear him talk.

I remember one day I was at his home playing with his children, when he came home and brought two men. These men had been arrested for abusing Joseph. He brought them in and treated them as he would one who had never done him a wrong; gave them their dinner before he would allow them to depart [see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 5:460]. Just before they sat down to dinner he brought his children up and introduced them. Pointing to me he said:

"This is a neighbor's little boy."

When the officers were taking Joseph to Carthage, at the time of his assassination, my father and I met them. We stepped to one side of the road to allow them to pass.

Captain Dunem [i.e., Colonel Jonathan Dunham], who was with Joseph, stopped and told my father that Joseph said he never expected to return. And he never did, for he was foully assassinated at the Carthage Jail.

When they returned with the body, I was among those who went to meet them. I saw him lying in state at the Mansion House. I was deeply affected, as my love for the Prophet was great. As a boy, my testimony that Joseph Smith was a true Prophet was as strong as it is now as a man; and I verily testify that Joseph Smith was a true Prophet of the living God.

Alvah Alexander, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 541.
