Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Allen, Lucy Diantha Morley

(October 4, 1815-October 19, 1908)

Joseph rebukes evil spirits in a meeting at Morley farmhouse; Lucy saw him run and wrestle, thought him a man of God.

The first time Joseph and family came to Kirtland they lived with Isaac Morley, Lucy's father. Later "Father Morley" built a small house for them on his farm. The twins were born here. Lucy and her elder sister kept house for Emma Smith while she was ill.

Later Joseph went to Hiram, about thirty miles distant, to organize a branch of the Church there. While he was absent from Kirtland evil spirits molested the inexperienced Saints, and Bishop Partridge could not manage the people.

When the Prophet returned and learned the condition he called a meeting in a little schoolhouse on Isaac Morley's farm, and those who desired attended.

When a crowd was gathered, Joseph arose and said in a powerful voice:

"Let the spirits be made manifest."

Immediately, some began to sing, some to shout, some to cry, etc. When Joseph rebuked them, all became quiet except two, whom he rebuked separately.

We moved to Far West, where I married Joseph Allen, a member of Zion's Camp, who stood guard for the Prophet many times. I've seen the Prophet wrestle, and run, and jump, but have never seen him beaten. In all that he did he was manly and almost godlike. The only words that express his looks and actions are: "Surely he was a man of God."

Lucy Diantha Morley Allen, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 537.

Witnesses the transfiguration of Brigham Young; remembers Joseph preaching, wrestling, and that he had a noble, god-like demeanor.

From Kirtland, Isaac Morley and family moved to Jackson County, and from thence to Clay County and Far West, Lima and Nauvoo, suffering with the other Saints in those days.

While in Far West, Lucy married Joseph Allen, one of Zion's Camp, who stood guard for the Prophet many times. She was present at the meeting after Joseph's death, when it was so plainly shown that Brigham Young was the born successor to the Prophet.

A short time before Joseph, the Prophet's death, he was doing work in the temple, Joseph and Lucy Allen with many other Saints had the privilege of receiving their endowments and hearing the Prophet's instructions. They were in the temple all of one night.

Sister Allen is now ninety years of age, but she still remembers the Prophet, and never tires of telling of him and the early experiences of the Church and the settling of Utah.

Sister Allen says: "I've seen the Prophet wrestle, and run, and jump, but have never seen him beaten. In all that he did he was manly and almost godlike."

Tears come to Sister Allen's eyes when she recalls his looks, while speaking to his Saints, and also how majestic he looked when he rode on his great black horse at the head of the Nauvoo Legion.

She says the only words that express his looks and actions are:

"Surely he was a man of God."

Lucy Diantha Morley Allen, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 537-38.
