Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Cheney, Nathan Beebe

(February 11, 1811-February 10, 1852)

In letter to family, describes events surrounding the martyrdom: Nauvoo Expositor; the Prophet surrenders, then surrenders arms of Nauvoo Legion; Ford's insulting speech to the Mormons; continued mob threats.

Nauvoo City, Ill. June 281844

Kind Parents Brothers & Sisters in Freedom:

As the day is gloomy and I do not feel like labor, I think I will sit down and converse with you with the pen. We are well as to bodily disease. In all probability before you get this you will hear that our enemies are trying to take our lives.

I will inform you that in the forepart of April the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints cut off several people from the Church for seeking to kill the Prophet and the Smith family, together with forgery and bogus making and gambling. These people formed themselves into a church, chose Mr. William Law their prophet and all other officers that it takes to constitute a Church of Jesus Christ. This church, or in other words, this gang of murderers, they sought to destroy the Church of Latter-Day Saints in every way they could. They sought to have our charter taken away from us, they bought a printing press and commenced to print. They printed all the lies the devil could think of and some that he could not think of. The City Council declared it to be a nuisance and ordered the City Marshal to destroy it. The Marshall called on 18 or 20 men to assist him, the Marshall went to the building and took the press and papers into the street and burned the papers, and broke the press.

This gang of murderers then thought they had a good chance to destroy the people, they then in one days time left the City, they hired one of the men to set the printing office afire in the night, but it happened that the policemen saw it and put it out. This gang then went and reported that the Mormons had driven them out of the City and burned their steam mill and printing house. Then our enemies around about us thought they had a good chance to glut their thirst in our blood. They began to gather to gather and drive the Mormons from them. Then they got writs for the Marshall and the man that assisted him in destroying the press and papers. The warrants were served on them, the Justice lived in Carthage, the Capitol of our County, the warrants were made returnable to him or any other Justice in the County. The Marshall got a writ of habeas corpus for him and the man that assisted him and went before the municipal court of the city. They were discharged.

That did not satisfy the mob, then the Marshall went before the Justice of the Peace. He was not a Mormon. The Marshall and the man were again discharged and that did not satisfy the mob. The excitement became so great that General Smith called out the legion to defend the City. The legion was on duty five days. By this time the Governor came to Carthage and sent two of his aids to Nauvoo to have an investigation of the difficulties. The Governors aids and three of our citizens went to Carthage and stayed two days, did not accomplish anything as I can learn. The Governor sent to have the Marshall and the man that assisted him in destroying the press to come to Carthage and have the prophet and his brother Hyrum come with them. The Prophet knew all they wanted was to get him, he felt delicate about going, but after some reflection went, and Hyrum too. Upon his starting to go he came back three times to bid his family good-bye. The last time he came back he bid his wife and family fare-well. That was last Sunday. The Prophet and his guardian were within two miles of Carthage, there he met a company going to Nauvoo. He found that the governor had demanded the government arms, that the Nauvoo legion had brother Joseph come back with them and assisted in getting the arms in. Monday went back again. The Marshall and his men were bound over to Court then they came home.

Then this gang of murderers got a writ against Joseph and Hyrum for treason, they were taken and put in jail. The Governor sent on Wednesday 60 men he said to guard the mob from the Mormons. These men never went on guard whilst they were here, but the Mormons were on guard all the time. The Governor and 160 men came to Nauvoo Thursday P.M. five o'clock the governor made a short and insulting speech to the Mormons, then immediately left with his troops, however, he said he had left a guard at Carthage so that the prisoners would not be heart, he said that the prisoners would be here Saturday to have their trial.

I can't write further at present my eyes drip on the paper so. Again I commence to give you an account of the bloody murder. While the Governor was in Nauvoo the mob came upon the jail and fired through the door and shot Hyrum through the head. Brother Joseph run up stairs the mob rushed after him. Joseph attempted to jump out of the window, the mob fired him through and he fell to the ground, the mob run him through with their bayonets a number of times and fired him through a number of times after they had stuck their bayonets through him.

This murder you will have to put your own construction on. The corpses have just been brought to Nauvoo. The governor passed through Carthage last night at 12 o'clock and sent a letter to Nauvoo, he said he would do all he could to bring the murderers to justice. He thinks it is the mob of Missouri that done the murder. There was from 100 to 200 men that rushed upon the jail, there was not a person taken by the governor's militia.

I will inform you that the governors militia had bound themselves to destroy the Mormons and had assembled for that purpose before the governor came out and after he did come, they were the governors troops.

Monday morning, June 29th, 1844

Nothing particular took place last night. To-day Joseph and Hyrum are put in the tomb. When this excitement will end I know not. The mob are threatening to destroy us daily and in fact it was thought they would come on us last night, we were under arms all night. . . .

[Signed] Nathan Cheney

"Nathan Cheney to Mr. Charles Beebe, Sandusky Cattauraugus Co., N.Y., June 28-29, 1844," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.

Note: While most of Cheney's recall is excellent, it is not true that Joseph was "run through with bayonets a number of times (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 6:618-22; 7:101-8).

Joseph holds sick Cheney baby in his arms, silently prays over him, and predicts he will get well, fill an honorable mission, and live to be an old man; these promises are all fulfilled.

Eliza and Nathan left the farm house for Kirtland and from Kirtland they journeyed to Nauvoo with the Saints. They became friendly with a Brother Hyde and his family with whom they lived in a double house. Two more children were born August 19, 1843. One day after a mob attack, Eliza was holding her babe, Nathan Beebe, in her arms when the Prophet Joseph entered her house. Seeing that she looked weary and worried he asked if she was concerned about the baby. She answered that she was and that she was afraid he would be taken with sickness as two of her children had been. The Prophet took the babe in his arms and silently prayed over it. He then said: "Eliza, if I am impressed right, your child is going to get well promptly and will live to be an old man and fill a good mission." As to the fulfillment of this blessing we find that Nathan Beebe Cheney was 87 on August 19 [1930], and he has filled a very great and honorable mission, from deacon, ward teacher, Superintendent of Sunday School, to Bishop of Centerville for a number of years. An honorable mission was filled by appointment of President John Taylor, years on the High Council of Box Elder Stake and many years of faithful, regular active temple work in company with his dear wife are some of the notable events in the life of this grand old man.

"Descriptive Narrative of the Lives of our Great Grand Parents, Nathan Calhoun and Eliza Beebe Cheney," typescript copy, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
