Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Cheney, Talitha Garlik Avery

(September 22, 1824-April 17, 1902)

Was baptized by the Prophet; heard him preach; was present at transfiguration of Brigham Young.

I was baptized April 7, 1840, by the Prophet Joseph Smith, in the Mississippi River. I worked in his home and knew his family well. In [March] 1842, the Prophet organized the Relief Society. I was a member because there were no other organizations for young girls at that time. Brother Joseph came to our meetings often and gave us good counsel. I heard the Prophet preach his last sermon just before he and his brother Hyrum were brought back to Nauvoo. It was the saddest sight I ever saw, to see two, so great and good men as ever lived, killed in cold blood by a mob. These were times long to be remembered.

I was in Nauvoo when Sidney Rigdon came from the east after Brother Joseph and Hyrum were killed to take lead of the church. There were none of the Twelve Apostles at home but Brother Taylor and Brother Richards. Brother Taylor had been badly wounded so Sidney Rigdon thought he would have things his own way, but he was mistaken; he called a meeting and said the church was old enough to choose a guardian for itself, it had been fourteen years since it was organized. But Brother Brigham Young and the rest of the Apostles got there in time to be at the meeting. After Rigdon sat down Brother Brigham got up and said, "All who want Brother Rigdon to lead them can have him, but I tell you the Keys of the Kingdom are in the hands of the Twelve Apostles. They are the ones to lead this people."

As soon as Brother Brigham got up to speak, I said to myself, "That is the man to take the lead of this people." He looked just like Brother Joseph and spoke like him, I said "Surely the mantle of the Prophet Joseph has fallen on Brother Brigham." I never had a doubt, I knew Brother Brigham was the man to fill the place of our beloved Prophet. I knew Joseph Smith was a true Prophet of God and was the mouthpiece of God to the people and that Brother Brigham was his lawful successor and a man of God.

"Baptized in the Mississippi by the Prophet," in Kate B. Carter, comp. Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1958-77), 12:202.
