Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Chidester, John M.

(January 22, 1809-1893)

Chidester's first impressions on meeting Joseph; memories of Zion's Camp: as the leader, Joseph was the first to confront difficult tasks; his inspired choice of camping site protects the brethren from mob; another inspired prompting saves Joseph and Hyrum from the assassin's bullet.

My first recollection of seeing the Prophet Joseph Smith was at a place about sixty or seventy miles from Kirtland, where two companies of Zion's Camp met. My impression on beholding the Prophet and shaking hands with him was, that I stood face to face with the greatest man on earth. I testify he was a Prophet of God.

Zion's Camp, in passing through the state of Indiana, had to cross very bad swamps, consequently we had to attach ropes to the wagons to help them through, and the Prophet was the first man at the rope in his bare feet. This was characteristic of him in all times of difficulty.

We continued our journey until we reached the Wakandaw River, having traveled twenty-five miles without resting or eating. We were compelled to ferry this stream; and we found on the opposite side of it a most desirable place to camp, which was a source of satisfaction to the now weary and hungry men. On reaching this place the Prophet announced to the camp that he felt impressed to travel on; and taking the lead, he invited the brethren to follow him.

This caused a split in the camp. Lyman Wight and others at first refused to follow the Prophet, but finally came up. The sequel showed that the Prophet was inspired to move on a distance of some seven miles. It was reported to us afterwards that about eight miles below where we crossed the river a body of men was organized to come upon us that night.

When we reached Salt Creek, Missouri, Allred settlement had prepared a place to hold meeting in. Joseph and Hyrum Smith and others were on the stand at the meeting when some strangers came in and were very anxious to find out which of them were Joseph and Hyrum, as they had pledged themselves to shoot them on sight. But the Prophet and his brother slipped away unobserved, being impressed that there was danger of their lives being taken.

John M. Chidester, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 5 (1 March 1892): 151.
