Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Child, Warren Gould

(February 21, 1835-April 17, 1906)

A visit from one of Three Nephites; the Prophet takes Child family through Kirtland Temple; Alfred B. and Mark A. Child imprisoned with the Prophet in Missouri.

[On August 11, 1838, the Child family left St. Lawrence County, New York, en route to Kirtland, Ohio] . . . The family was all riding in the wagon with the sides of our painted cover all rolled up a few feet at the sides and fastened with strings to buttons on the bows to admit the fresh air and permit the family to view the varied changes, brooks, etc., by the road side when a voice was hear to say "Whoa." Our team was in the lead and the other two followed close in the rear. Father was sitting in the front driving and had not to that time, when the voice was heard, seen any person in that vicinity. At the word "whoa" from a strange voice, the team stopped so suddenly that the teams traveling behind came in contact with our wagon. When Father recovered a little from the sudden and so abrupt a stop, a personage walked unconcernedly up to the wagon. He had the appearance of being very aged, well dressed with an unusual long white beard, tidy in his appearance from head to foot, apparently about six feet tall, of rather spare build, carrying a very pleasant and happy look on his face. He asked no questions as to who we were or where we were going, but proceeded to shake hands with the family commencing with Father first, then Mother, and each of the children according to age, blessing them in the name of Jesus Christ, the writer being the next to youngest in the family at that time. After getting through in this manner he turned to me the second time and pronounced a further and special blessing placing his hand on my bare head. Without further words he slowly passed on. The visit was so sudden and unlooked for that not a word had been spoken by the family. Father expected he would do likewise with the families occupying the two wagons behind us, but he simply made a slight bow as he passed them. Some of the families got out to hail him and get a further explanation of so strange and unlooked for occurrence. They went quickly to the rear and to their surprise, he was no where to be seen. They made a hasty search in every direction but he was no where to be found. [A] Search in each direction was made in the road for his tracks but none were anywhere to be found. The families traveling with us remarked that we had received a very strange blessing from a stranger. On arriving in Kirtland Father related the occurrence to the Prophet Joseph Smith and he told him that the personage was none other than one of the Nephites who were permitted not to taste death, and that they made occasional visits where there were permitted to.

The family stopped but a few weeks in Kirtland when under the direction of the Prophet's council, continued their journey in like manner westward to Missouri. Arriving there some time in October of the same year, they purchased a farm on Shoal Creek in Caldwell County. While in Kirtland they family were shown through the temple by the Prophet Joseph. He took the writer, then three and [a] half years old, in his arms and carried him up the different flights of stairs (p. 14).

. . . Alfred Bosworth Child [the father of Warren Gould Child] and my brother, Mark Alfred Child, were taken prisoners in Missouri with Joseph Smith while out with the defense guard during the troubles there. (p. 5)

Sylvia C. Williams, comp., Journal of Warren G. Child, copies in private family possession, 1973.
