Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Clark, Mary Stevenson

(August 29, 1825 [or September 29, 1816]-November 24, 1911)

Mary's brother saw night of the falling stars; she heard Joseph testify of gospel; saw him ride his horse; knew he prophesied of westward trek.

He (her brother, Edward Stevenson) was carrying the mail and saw the falling of the stars in 1833. . . .

I had a dream of seeing the Saviour. He took me in His arms. We sat in a circle. He blessed and kissed us. It was only the members who accepted the Gospel that sat in the circle. I told Mother my dream. She said it was a good dream and for me to be a good girl. I was about 7 years old.

My sister Elizabeth and I were baptized when I was 12 years old, in Far West, Missouri by David Patten. I have always been taught to keep the Sabbath Day holy and have had a testimony of the Gospel from childhood. That testimony that I have heard from the Prophet Joseph Smith and others. It has always stayed with me and I can truly say that I rejoice in the Gospel of Life and Salvation. It will continually be a joy in this life, also in the world to come if w will be obedient to keep the commandments of the Lord.

My mother was very handy with a needle and used to help the Prophet's wife and others of the Authorities and so she was well acquainted and received much instruction and intelligence.

When we lived seven miles west of Nauvoo, my husband's Father (Timothy Baldwin Clark, father of Ezra T. Clark) had a good supply of animals and we went often to attend Conferences and Fourth of July celebrations in Nauvoo and reviewed the Nauvoo Legion in their marching. It was a beautiful sight to see the Prophet Joseph on his prancing black horse that seemed to keep time with the music of the band. We would sometimes attend meetings in the Grove. We witnessed the laying of the corner stone of the Temple and later attended the Conference held therein and received our Endowments there on New Year's Day 1846.

We passed through the sad afflictions of the Saints in the assassination of our dear Prophet and his brother. My mother walked the dooryard in lamentation. But with all the persecutions we had passed through, we were driven again toward the wilderness.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said, before his death, that we would go to the Rocky Mountains. My brother, Edward Stevenson, went with a company in 1847. My husband and I and babe in June 1848. . . .

"Autobiography of Mary Stevenson Clark," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: For the Prophet Joseph Smith's account of the night of the falling stars, see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:439-40.
