Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Tells of her mothers strong desire to see and hear Prophet; would have gone without bread to do so.

[She tells of being about ten years old and traveling with her family to Nauvoo.] The next move we made was to a little town called La Harpe, twenty-five miles from Nauvoo. There was a pork-packing house there, and quite a demand for barrels. As one of father's trades was that of a cooper, he could get plenty of work there at fair wages. He was anxious to lay a good stock of provisions before going to Nauvoo, as they were very scarce and high there. Mother would have gone right on without a loaf of bread, she was so anxious to be where she could see and hear the Prophet.

. . . My parents were faithful attendants at the meetings in the grove to hear the Prophet Joseph preach, and I have seen and heard him many times.

"Mothers of Our Leaders: Rambling Reminiscences of Margaret Gay Judd Clawson," Relief Society Magazine 6, no. 6 (June 1919): 259, 261.

Ever friendly, Joseph gives unpretentious handshake to Clawson's mother, even though he did not know her.

I have heard mother tell a little incident about the Prophet: Soon after we went to Nauvoo, she had occasion to do a little shopping, and on her way to the store, she passed the Mansion House. The Prophet was standing on the lawn conversing quite earnestly with several very elegant Gentile gentlemen. As she passed along, very naturally she looked at the Prophet. She knew him, but he did not know her. All at once he reached his arm over the fence, grasped her by the hand, and gave her a hearty shake. He did not hesitate in his conversation with the gentlemen but kept right on talking, and mother passed on. I need not say she was delighted. I am sure he divined what a noble-spirited woman she was.

"Mothers of Our Leaders: Rambling Reminiscences of Margaret Gay Judd Clawson," Relief Society Magazine 6, no. 6 (June 1919): 317.

Great mourning upon hearing of martyrdom.

In the spring of 1844, we went to Springfield. We had not been there more than two or three months when we got the news of the prophet's death. Mother would not believe it, saying it was a false report, but when it was confirmed, our house was a house of mourning, and I don't think mother could have felt worse if it had been one of her own family.

"Mothers of Our Leaders: Rambling Reminiscences of Margaret Gay Judd Clawson," Relief Society Magazine 6, no. 6 (June 1919): 320.

Met, shook hands with the Prophet.

Margaret was almost ten before the family finally arrived at the Nauvoo scene, and had the joy of shaking hands with the great Prophet, Joseph Smith.

Ruby K. Smith, "Margaret Gay Judd Clawson," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
