Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Clayton, William

(July 17, 1814-December 4, 1879)

After arrival in Nauvoo, tells of meeting the Prophet, who was "not an idiot, but a man of sound judgment"; he is "familiar," pleased to answer questions, and filled with the Spirit of God.

We have had the privilege of conversing with Joseph Smith Junr. and we are delighted with his company. We have had a privilege of ascertaining in a great measure from whence all the evil reports have arisen and hitherto have every reason to believe him innocent. He is not an idiot, but a man of sound judgment, and possessed of abundance of intelligence and whilst you listen to his conversation you receive intelligence which expands your mind and causes your heart to rejoice. He is very familiar, and delights to instruct the poor saints. I can converse with him just as easy as I can with you, and with regard to being willing to communicate instruction he says "I receive it freely and I will give it freely." He is willing to answer any question I have put to him and is pleased when we ask him questions. He seems exceeding well versed in the scriptures, and whilst conversing upon any subject such light and beauty is revealed I never saw before. If I had come from England purposely to converse with him a few days I should have considered myself well paid for my trouble. He is no friend to iniquity but cuts at it wherever he sees it, and it is in vain to attempt to cloke it before him. He has a great measure of the spirit of God, and by this means he is preserved from imposition. He says "I am a man of like passions with yourselves," but truly I wish I was such a man. His wife seems an excellent woman. . . . There are some who are not good saints and some very good ones. Joseph says, that when he is out preaching he always tells the people not to come here for examples, but to set them and to copy from the Savior, who is our pattern. It is not until corn is gathered into the barn that thrashing and sorting commences. If I were in England I would raise my voice and testify that Joseph is a man of God, and a prophet, that the book of Mormon is true, and this is the work of God, which will roll forth unto the ends of the earth and gather together all the good there is in the earth. Brethren and Sisters rejoice for the Lord is God and will deliver his saints.

"The Historian's Corner," BYU Studies 18, no. 3 (spring 1978): 477. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.

Heard Joseph preach on 2 Peter 1, followed by first administration of sacrament in Nauvoo Temple.

On Sunday May 21st [1843] president Joseph preached in the Temple from the words in the 1st Chapter of Peter's 2nd Epistle. In the afternoon the ordinance of bread and water, as sacrament was administered to the saints for the first time in the Temple.

William Clayton, History of the Nauvoo Temple, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 40.

The Prophet's first mention of doctrine of plurality of wives.

[In February, 1843] the Prophet invited me to walk with him. During our walk, he said he had learned that there was a sister back in England, to whom I was very much attached. I replied there was, but nothing further than an attachment such as brother and sister in the Church might rightfully entertain for each other. He then said, "Why don't you send for her, and I replied, 'In the first place, I have no authority to send for her, and if I had, I have not the means to pay the expenses.' To this he answered, 'I give you authority to send for her, and I will furnish you with means,' which he did. This was the first time the Prophet Joseph talked with me on the subject of plural marriage.

"Sworn statement of William Clayton, February 16, 1874," in Andrew Jenson, ed. The Historical Record 6 (1887): 224.

Note: It was William Clayton who became the scribe who, on July 12, 1843, recorded the revelation on plural marriage now contained in D&C 132.

Clayton tells of one of Joseph's land deals, hears Joseph say covetous men to be damned.

Tuesday 23 [May, 1843] . . . President Joseph and Lady [Emma Smith] rode to his farm. Evening Prest. gave up lot 4 B 148 which he agreed to purchase of Asa Smith some time ago in consequence of Asas wanting to drag all money out of Prest. and paying it for land else to here. Pres. Said such covetous minded men would be damned.

Robert C. Fillerup, William Clayton's Nauvoo Diaries and Personal Writings, 23 May 1843, http://www.code-co.com/rcf/mhistdoc/clayton.htm.

Adam's first [mortal] word was the grand key word, which Joseph learned through Urim and Thummim.

"[Joseph] . . . spoke concerning key words. The g[rand] key word was the first word Adam spoke and is a word of supplication," he told his small audience. "He found the key word by the Urim and ThummimIt is that key word to which the heavens [are] opened."

"William Clayton Journal, June 15, 1844," cited in Andrew F. Ehat, "Joseph Smith's Introduction to Temple Ordinances and the 1844 Mormon Succession Question," master's thesis (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1982), 38.

While building font for the Nauvoo Temple, temple-worker Samuel Rolfe's hand is healed because of his faith in Joseph's promise.

Brother Samuel Rolfe being present, and being seriously afflicted with a felon on one hand. President Joseph instructed him to wash in the font, and told him he would be healed, although the doctors had told him it would not be well before spring, and advised him to have it cut. He washed his hands in the font and in one week afterwards his hand was perfectly healed. After this time baptisms were continued in the font, and many realized great blessings, both spiritually and bodily.

William Clayton, History of the Nauvoo Temple, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 21.

On Zion's Camp Joseph prophesies of plague to come because of disobedience; cholera plague follows, and eighteen die.

[Sat. May 29, 1846] Elder Woodruff said he remembered the time when the camp went up to Missouri to redeem Zion, when Brother Joseph stood up on a wagon wheel and told the brethren that the decree had passed and could not be revoked, and the destroying angel would visit the camp and we should die like sheep and rot. He had repeatedly warned the brethren of their evil conduct and what it would lead to, but they still continued in their course. It was not long before the destroying angel did visit the camp and the brethren began to fall as Brother Joseph had said. We buried eighteen in a short time and a more sorrowful time I never saw. There are nine here who were in that camp and they all recollect the circumstance well and will never forget it . . .

William Clayton, William Clayton's Journal: A Daily Record of the Journey of the Original Company of "Mormon" Pioneers from Nauvoo, Ill., to the Valley of the Great Salt Lake (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Clayton Family Association and the Deseret News Press, 1921), 200.

Joseph taught Saints to "mind their own business."

[On Sunday, July 1, 1846, Brigham Young spoke to the camp, saying] I believe in Brother Joseph's religion which he said was a key that would save every man or woman, and that it is for every man to mind his own business and let other people's business alone.

William Clayton, William Clayton's Journal: A Daily Record of the Journey of the Original Company of "Mormon" Pioneers from Nauvoo, Ill., to the Valley of the Great Salt Lake (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Clayton Family Association and the Deseret News Press, 1921), 335.

In Dec. 10, 1840, letter, quotes Joseph as saying people should look to Christ, not the Saints, for their examples; "it is not until some is gathered into the barn that thrashing or sifting commences."

[This letter has news from Nauvoo; tells of the hardships the Saints experienced, and then at one point says:]

. . . There has been much sickness here a little while ago, but there is little now. There has been a great influx of saint this year. Commerce or rather Nauvoo, is a large city. The houses are built of wood and each house has an acre of land attached to it. There is space left for streets apparently from 10 to 15 yds wide. There are houses belonging to the saints for several miles round. There are a great many saints, who are in general poor on account of being driven. There are some who are not good saints and some very good ones. Joseph says, that when he is not preaching he always tells the people not to come here for examples, but to set them and to copy from the Savior, who is our pattern. It is not until corn is gathered into the barn that thrashing or sifting commences.

"William Clayton to 'Beloved Brothers and Sisters,' Dec. 10, 1840," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
