Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Coates, Allen

(b. 1794)

Joseph was poor, a hard worker and not lazy; worked for Allen Coates; also says Coates invited Joseph to the revival which ignited his religious interests.

Joseph Smith (Jr.) raked and bound [i.e., raking and binding hay] [for] my grandfather when he was in the cradle on the folks homestead on a little outright east of where our residence was. . . .

[The Smiths] came here awful poor people from out toward Victor somewhere. I didn't know too much about them beyond that, but he [Joseph, Jr.] was a poor boy. . . .

. . . And Grandpa, at that time they were having revival meetings in the Methodist Church and my grandfather invited Joseph Smith, the boy, to go up with him, you see. And, a great revival, trying to experience both things and he got interested and excited and involved in the meeting so that when he went home he had some kind of a dream or vision or something. And, Grandfather, a great man, talked religion any (?), while he was working, see. And he got the boy interested And he said, "Are you ready to go to a meeting with me?" Well, the boy agreed to it right away because everything looked bright in that way to him and he was getting on the road somewheres where he ought to be. And so they went over to the meeting and he got so interested in it, he caught the spirit sometime. And he had a vision afterwards but it didn't seem to be what you'd think a person would get out of a revival hardly. But he claimed he was led into some orchard, they call it the sacred orchard, you know, the Mormons do, out near Palmyra.

. . . [Joseph] was a good boy to work. I heard that. Oh yes, there was nothing lazy about him. He was up and coming and looking to get ahead and he got more inspiration from my old grandfather.

"Notes from Oral History conducted Feb. 13, 1974 of Allen Wesley Coates by Gordon C. Thomasson, in Shortsville, New York," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8, 9, 12.
