Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Conover, Peter Wilson

(September 19, 1807-September 20, 1892)

First saw Joseph in Spring, 1838; in Nauvoo sent by Joseph up-river to get rock for round windows in temple; appointed life-guard for the Prophet; helped free Joseph from Dixon kidnapping, was exhausted in the process, and Joseph arranged for him to rest; tells account of young boy bit by dog, and of Joseph counseling that he go for medical help.

The spring of 1838, I first saw the Prophet Joseph Smith, the day of the convention to appoint delegates to go to Congress to try to get redress for the wrongs in Missouri.

. . . Catherine Ann was born in Nauvoo November 1840. Right after joining the Church I went to work on the Nauvoo Temple. The Prophet called me to get some men to go with me to get some rock for the circle windows in the basement story of the Temple. I called for volunteers at a meeting held in my house. I soon had all the men I wanted. We worked all the week and got all the rock that was needed. I then worked on the Temple until Joseph called on me to go up to Black River to get lumber for the Temple six hundred miles above Nauvoo. I started September 28. I remained up the river just nine months and came down the river in twelve days in a small boat. Alpheus Alonzo was born just ten days before I reached home on June 10, 1842.

The winter of 1843, I worked on the Temple again. In 1843 they took the Prophet Joseph prisoner. He called for help and I and nineteen others were appointed to go to Rock River. We me him just after leaving Rock River. After meeting him, we stopped and rested for about three quarters of an hour. We traveled eighteen miles that night after four o'clock. The round trip was six hundred miles. During that trip I went five days and nights without sleep. I was sent ahead to my cousin's Mike Craner's to have them get supper for 300 men. I assisted them by killing pigs, turkeys, and chickens. By the time the Company came up we had supper ready. I was appointed life guard to Joseph the Prophet on that trip in place of a man by the name of [blank space] who backed out and would not go.

After supper Bill Cutler and I were standing outside washing and talking to cousin Mike, when Joseph came out and asked him if he had a spare bed. He answered yes, two or three of them. Joseph said, "I want you to put these two boys in the best bed you have." We soon after retired.

Eight miles from Nauvoo Emma, Joseph's wife, came out to meet us on horseback, bring his black horse fully caparisoned, and Joseph's uniform. He mounted his horse and we came on the way to Nauvoo. I held command of the second battalion of the second cohort of the Nauvoo Legion at that time. We came to Nauvoo and Joseph was tried before the Municipal court and cleared.

An incident That Happened at Golden's Point, written by Jeannette Conover Whipple:

"The boys were playing ball about half way between our house and the school house. A mad dog came running by them and jumped on another dog. As they were fighting, Hougton ran up and grabbed the mad dog by the hind leg and was beating its head on the ground when it bit him in the thigh. He killed the dog and that broke up the game. The boys all went down to the Mississippi River to swim and were in the water quite awhile. When they came in for supper, some of the boys told about the dog biting Hout. Mother was badly frightened and they sent for the Elders and had him administered to. Father felt satisfied to let it go at that, but Mother was not satisfied. She wanted to know what Brother Joseph would say about it and insisted that Father should go to Nauvoo and see him. He hitched up his horse to a light wagon and drove to Nauvoo. He arrived about nine thirty and found Brother Joseph engaged in a game of checkers and as he didn't want to interrupt the game he waited until they were through. Then Joseph turned and asked father what he had come for. Father told him. He turned to a man and said, 'Doctor, go with Brother Conover and cut the place out.' The Doctor went home and got his instruments and they drove home arriving about twelve o'clock. They found the boy asleep. The Doctor said, 'Never mind, it will be just as well to wait until morning.' So they went to bed and all slept but Mother.

"After breakfast the Doctor set Hout upon a table and began to cut. He was very slow, cutting awhile then waiting and then cutting again, but finally he was through and Hout who never groaned, got off the table and walked into the kitchen and said, 'I would like to hit him once just for fun.' He soon recovered. Still Mother was not satisfied, and as another young man that was bitten about the same time was going to use a mad stone they had heard of, Mother wanted Hout to go and try it also. He went and tried it but it would not stick. The other young man tried it and it stuck and filled with poison fifteen times. They never had any symptoms of hydrophobia although several dogs, sheep and one cow that was bitten by the same dog went mad and had to be killed."

"Biographical Sketch of the Life of Peter Wilson Conover," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
