Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Cottam, Thomas

(October 20 [or 21], 1820-November 10, 1896)

In seeing Joseph on the way to Carthage, Cottam felt Joseph knew he was on his way to his death; reports the sense of shock and alarm he felt on hearing of the martyrdom.

There are some things that are, as it were, engraved on my memory. One is particularly so. In Nauvoo I lived near Brother Caspar's on the creek, about a mile and a half from the temple. Accidentally going into the city on that fatal day, the 27th of June, I met Brothers Joseph and Hyrum with others of the brethren and a posse of men on their leaving Nauvoo for Carthage for the last time. His appearance and demeanor conveyed plainly to my mind that he realized he was going as a lamb to the slaughter. I should judge his feelings to be similar to that of the Savior when he uttered these memorable words: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!"

As I was on guard in and around Nauvoo I did not see the bodies of our honored dead after they were brought home, but I recollect the feelings that came upon me when I just heard of their death. "Can it be possible! Can it be possible!" I repeated in my mind; "well, I shall have to go back to England." But it was only temporary, for I soon realized that there would be a leader for the people. Even some of the disciples of Jesus thought momentarily that they would have to return again to their fishing.

Thomas Cottam, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith." Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 2 (15 January 1892): 65.

Note: While Cottam associates this memory with June 27, 1844, the Prophet and his brother actually left Nauvoo on Monday, June 24, 1844, arriving at Carthage that same night, which is the more probable date of the above memory.
