Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Coray, Howard

(May 6, 1817-January 16, 1908)

Coray's first meeting of the Prophet, who invites him to be his clerk; Coray accepts; gives his assessment of the Prophet's character.

On the 3rd or 4th day of April, 1840, I set out with a few others for Nauvoo, for the purpose of attending conference and to gratify a curiosity that I had to see the Prophet. Sometime during the conference, I took occasion to visit him, in company with Joseph Wood. He introduced me to Brother Joseph with something of a flourish, telling him that I was a collegiate from Jacksonville College. This was not true and was not authorized by me. The Prophet, after looking at me a little and asking me some questions, wished to know whether it would be convenient for me to come to Nauvoo and assist, or rather clerk, for him. As this was what I desired, I engaged at once to do so; and in about two weeks thereafter, I was busily employed in his office, copying a huge pile of letters into a book, correspondence with the elders as well as other persons, that had been accumulating for some time.

While I was employed in this manner, I had many valuable opportunities. The Prophet had a great many callers or visitors, and he received them in his office where I was clerking, persons of almost all professions, doctors, lawyers, priests and people seemed anxious to get a good look at what was then considered something very wonderful: a man who should dare to call himself a prophet and announce himself as a seer and ambassador of the Lord. Not only were they anxious to see, but also to ask hard questions, in order to ascertain his depth. Well, what did I discover?. . . . He was always equal to the occasion, and perfectly master of the situation; and possessed the power to make everybody realize his superiority, which they evinced in an unmistakable manner. I could clearly see that Joseph was the captain, no matter whose company he was in, knowing the meagerness of his education, I was truly gratified at seeing how much at ease he always was, even in the company of the most scientific, and the ready off-hand manner in which he would answer their questions.

"Diary [Autobiography] of Howard Coray, 1821-1881," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 7-8.

In a friendly wrestle with the Prophet, Coray's leg is broken; Joseph splints the leg, and later prophesies Coray to marry; leg soon heals.

In the following June [1840] I met with an accident, which I shall here mention: The Prophet and myself, after looking at his horses, and admiring them, that were just across the road from his house, we started thither, the Prophet at this same time put his arm over my shoulder. When we had reached about the middle of the road, he stopped and remarked, "Brother Coray, I wish you were a little larger, I would like to have some fun with you." I replied, "Perhaps you can as it is," not realizing what I was saying, Joseph a man of over 200 pounds weight, while I scarcely 130 pounds, made it not a little ridiculous for me to think of engaging with him in anything like a scuffle. However, as soon as I made this reply, he began to trip me; he took some kind of a lock on my right leg, from which I was unable to extricate it, and throwing me around, broke it some three inches above the ankle joint. He immediately carried me into the house, pulled off my boot, and found at once that my leg was decidedly broken; then he got some splinters and bandaged it. A number of times that day did he come in to see me, endeavoring to console me as much as possible. The next day when he happened in to see me after a little conversation, I said, "Brother Joseph, when Jacob wrestled with the angel and was lamed by him, the angel blessed him; now I think I am also entitled to a blessing." To that he replied, "I am not the patriarch, but my father is, and when you get up and around, I'll have him bless you." He said no more for a minute or so, meanwhile looking very earnestly at me, then said, "Brother Coray, you will soon find a companion, one that will be suited to your condition and whom you will be satisfied with. She will cling to you, like to cords of death, and you will have a good many children." He also said some other things, which I can't so distinctly remember.

In nine days after my leg was broken, I was able to get up and hobble about the house by the aid of a crutch and in two weeks thereafter, I was about recovered, nearly as well as ever, so much so that I went to meeting on foot, a distance of a mile. I considered this no less than a case of miraculous healing. For nothing short of three months did I think it would be ere I should be around again, on my feet, able to resume work.

"Diary [Autobiography] of Howard Coray, 1821-1881," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 10.

Joseph appoints Coray to compile the Church history; works with E. D. Woolley, and later with a Dr. Miller.

I was . . . requested by Brother Joseph to undertake, in connection with E. D. Woolley, the compilation of the church history. This I felt to decline, as writing books was something in which I had had no experience. But Brother Joseph insisted on my undertaking it, saying, if I would do so, it would prove a blessing to me as long as I should live. His persuasive arguments prevailed; and accordingly, in a short time, Brother Woolley and myself were busily engaged in compiling the church history. The Prophet was to furnish all the materials; and our business was not only to combine and arrange in chronological order, but to spread out or amplify not a little, in as good historical style as may be. Brother Woolley's education, not being equal to mine, he was to get the matter furnished him in as good shape as he could; and my part was to go after him and fix his up as well as I could, making such improvement and such corrections in his grammar and style as I might deem necessary.

On seeing his work, I at once discovered that I had no small job on my hands, as he knew nothing whatever of grammar; however, I concluded to make the best I could of a bad job, and thus went to work upsetting and recasting, as well as casting out not a little. Seeing how his work was handled, he became considerably discouraged and rather took offense at the way and manner in which I was doing things, and consequently soon withdrew from the business.

Immediately after Brother Woolley left, I succeeded in obtaining the services of Dr. Miller, who had written for the press, and thus was considerably accustomed to this kind of business. Now I got on much better. I continued until we used up all the historical matter furnished us by the Prophet. And, as peculiar circumstances prevented his giving attention to his part of the business, we of necessity discontinued our labors, and never resumed this kind of business again.

"Diary (Autobiography) of Howard Coray, 1821-1888," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 10-11.

Coray tells how Joseph's prophecy is fulfilled in that he finds a wife; Joseph assists in the courtship.

Subsequent, some three or four weeks, to getting my leg broken, and while at meeting, the blessing of the Prophet came into my mind, viz: "that I should soon find a companion, etc. etc." So I thought I would take a square look at the congregation, and see who there was, that possibly the fair one promised me might be present. After looking and gazing awhile at the audience, my eyes settled upon a young lady sitting in a one-horse buggy. She was an entire stranger to me and a resident of some other place. I concluded to approach near enough to her to scan her features well and thus be able to decide in my own mind whether her looks would satisfy my taste. She had dark brown eyes, very bright and penetrating, at least they penetrated me, and I said to myself, she will do. The fact is, I was decidedly struck.

After the dismissal of the meeting, instead of going for my dinner, I remained on the ground and presently commenced promenading about to see what I could see. I had not gone far before I came square in front of the lovely miss, walking arm in arm with a Mrs. Harris, with whom I was well acquainted. They stopped and Mrs. Harris said, "Brother Coray, I have the honor of introducing you to Miss Martha Knowlton, from Bear Creek." I, of course, bowed as politely as I knew how and she curtsied, and we then fell into somewhat familiar conversation. I discovered at once that she was ready, offhand, and inclined to be witty; also, that her mind took a wider range than was common for young ladies of her age. This interview, though short, was indeed very enjoyable, and closed with the hope that she might be the one whom the Lord had picked for me; and thus it proved to be.

I shall not go into all the details of our courtship; suffice it to say, every move I made, seemed to count one in the right direction. I let Brother Joseph into the secret and showed him a letter that I had written, designed for her. He seemed to take uncommon interest in the matter and took pains to see her and talk with her about me, telling her that I was just the one for her. A few letters passed between us; I visited her at her home, proposed, was accepted, and on the 6th day of February, 1841, we were married at her father's house. Brother Robert B. Thompson performed the ceremony.

I will say in this connection that what the Prophet said in regard to the companion which I should soon find has been fully verified. A more intelligent, self-sacrificing, and devoted wife and mother, few men have been blessed with.

"Diary (Autobiography) of Howard Coray, 1821-1888," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 11-12.

Describes power of God resting on Joseph as he preached; heard Joseph prophesy, saw him translate, was present when a revelation on priesthood was given, and received blessing from Joseph which was literally fulfilled.

I soon went to Nauvoobecame acquainted with the Prophetheard him preach and saw him conduct the April Conference of 1840. The power and wisdom that he displayed on this occasion was more evidence . . . I have studied the Gospel as revealed by Joseph Smith and wondered if it were possible for any one unaided by the spirit of God to have revealed such a system of salvation and exaltation for man. My conclusion is in the negative. I sat and listened to his preaching at the stand in Nauvoo a great many times when I have been completely carried away with his indescribable eloquencepower of expressionspeaking as I have never heard any other man speakI have heard him prophesy many things that have already come to pass, I have seen him translate by the Seers stone. I was present when he received a revelation on priesthood; he blessed me and prophesied that on my head, which has been literally fulfilled; and I have seen him by the aid of the Spirit of the Lord, as a prophet raised up to usher in the dispensation of the fullness of times; besides this, the work and the workings of it, have been made manifest to me by the good spirit. . . .

"Howard Cory to Martha Jane Lewis, Aug. 2, 1889," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Tells of birth, of coming to Illinois and of being introduced to the Church, baptized; met Joseph, who invited him to come live with him; served as Joseph's secretary; Joseph always able to answer questions posed by visitors; Joseph told Stephen A. Douglas he taught true principles and the people governed themselves; recorded much Church history; heard Joseph dictate Nauvoo Charter; saw Joseph and Robert B. Thompson looking through JST for an item, and being unable to find it, Joseph dictated it instead to Thompson; Coray deeply humbled by this experience.

I, Howard Coray, was born on the 6th day of May 1817 in the Township of Dansvill[e], Steuben County and State of New York. When I was about 10 Years of age, my father moved down to Pa. Luzern Co. and Township of Providence; in this State, we continued to reside until the fall of 1838, being then in my 22 year of age. At this time my father, hearing about what a beautiful country Illinois wasthe lovely Praries &c &c, got the western fever; so about the first of Dec. he put $1000.00 worth of Mdze. in his wagon and taking myself and my brother George, he started for the west: We reached Perry Pike Co. Ills. sometime in the following January; here we were brought face to face with Mormonism. The next spring, as those who were driven out of Mo. scattered about in Ills. seeking homes, or somewhere to live, I came in contact with them, and was anxious to know something about their faith;I attended one of their meetings; & the man's name that preached, was Joseph Wood,a very bright intelligent person;he took for the foundation of his remarks this scripture: "The Priesthood being changed there is made of necessity also a change of the law": Well, he handled this scripture in such a manner as to make me wonder where he got his information:he showed up in a masterly manner what the Priesthood had to be change to, and all about it. This made me anxious to follow up Mormonism, and know all about it and what there [was] in it, so on the 25th of March 1840, I and my 2 brothers, Geo. & Wm were baptized by the said Joseph Wood. On the following April I went to Nauvoo to see the Prophet and attend Conference. It so transpired that I obtained an interview with him. After eyeing and questioning me a little, he asked me if I could come and live [with] him and clerk for him; I replied in the affirmative; but desired to go home first which would take me about 2 weeks he said; that would do: So in a couple of weeks, or such a matter I was on hand to go to work. Well, I went to work the next day after my arrival at his house. The first thing he gave [me] to do was to copy a large pile of letters into a Record. This labor was performed in his kitchen, having no other place at that time to do such business

While thus engaged, I had many very precious opportunities great and Small, almost every day, were calling on him, some for one thing, and some for another.polititians and preachers and of different persuationssome with the view of testing the depth of his knowledge and, if possible, confounding him and putting [him] to shame. Well, what did I discoverthat he was equal to every occasion, that he had a ready answer for all questions. I heard him say that God had given him the key of knowledge by which he could trace any subject through all its ramifications. I had heard it remarked that Joseph Smith was Sidney Rigdon's cat's paw: soon after he returned from the East he came to see Joseph, and the thought went through my mind: now I will see, who the cat's paw is.well, I did see; after passing the usual compliments, Rigdon said to Joseph:"When I was preaching in Philadelphia after I had finished my discourse a man stepped up to me and desired me to explain something in John's Revelation, mentioning at the same time what it was)"Well, I could not do it, how is it Joseph?" Joseph cited him at once right offhand to a passage in Ezekiel and something in some other book of the old Testament, saying that they explained all about it." I thought to myself, that don't look much like Joseph's being a cat's paw.

Stephen A. Douglas called to see him [and] ask him some questions. One thing he desired to know, was how he managed to govern a people so diverse, coming from so many different countries with their peculiar manners and custims. "Well," he said "I simply teach them the truth, and they govern themselves," was his ready answer. Among other great men who called to see him was Cyrus Walkera lawyer of much note; he tried to sound the Prophet, and see how deep he was. Well, it was with Walker, as it had been with all the others, he soon got enough, found Joseph too deep his lead and line, and gave up the enterprise. Thus it was in every instance that came under my observation: how could we expect it to be otherwisefor any man who had never peered into heaven and seen heavenly things, be a match for one who had a half a score or more heavenly messengers for teachers.

I continued the work of copying his letters until I finished the same. He then desired me to write up the Church history, saying that he would furnish all the material. I declined telling him that I did not myself competent for such a workhe said, if I would undertake it, I would be thankful for it as long as I lived: having more confidence in him than I had in myself, I engaged in the business of a historian. He placed in my hands some items and scraps of history for me to arrange cronologically and fix up as best I could. We had now moved into his new officea two-story building arranged to do the office work in the upper story, John C. Bennet was occupying a portion of the room engaged in writing the Nauvoo Charter: Joseph dictated much of the Charter. I could overhear the instructions he gave Bennett, and know it was gotten up mainly as Joseph required.

One morning, I went as usual, into the Office to go to work: I found Joseph sitting on one side of a table and Robert B. Thompson on the opposite side, and the understanding I got was that they were examining or hunting in the manuscript of the new translation of the Bible for something on Priesthood, which Joseph wished to present, or have read to the people the next Conference: Well, they could not find what they wanted and Joseph said to Thompson "put the manuscript [to] one side, and take some paper and I will tell you what to write." Bro. Thompson took some foolscap paper that was at his elbow and made himself ready for the business. I was seated probably 6 or 8 feet on Joseph's left side, so that I could look almost squarely into Joseph's left eyeI mean the side of his eye. Well, the Spirit of God descended upon him, and a measure of it upon me, insomuch that I could fully realize that God, or the Holy Ghost, was talking through him. I never, neither before or since, have felt as I did on that occasion. I felt so small and humble I could have freely kissed his feet.

Dean C. Jessee, "Howard Coray's Recollections of Joseph Smith," BYU Studies 17, no. 3 (spring 1977): 343-44.
