Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Corrill, John

(b. September 17, 1794)

False spirits manifested but overcome; elders sent to Missouri, where Joseph selects site for temple.

Previous to this there was a revelation received, requiring the Prophet to call the elders together, that they might receive an endowment [D&C 38]. This was done, and the meeting took place some time in June. About fifty elders met, which was about all the elders that then belonged to the church. The meeting was conducted by [Joseph] Smith. Some curious things took place. The same visionary and marvelous spirits, spoken of before, got hold of some elders; it threw one from his seat to the floor; it bound another, so that for some time he could not use his limbs nor speak; and some other curious effects were experienced, but, by a mighty exertion, in the name of the Lord, it was exposed and shown to be from an evil source. The Melchisedek Priesthood was then for the first time introduced, and conferred on several of the elders. In this chiefly consisted the endowmentit being a new orderand bestowed authority. However, some doubting took place among the elders, and considerable conversation was held on the subject. The elders not fairly understanding the nature of the endowments, it took some time to reconcile all their feelings. In a few days, however, a commandment was received for the elders to go to Missouri, two by two; no two were to travel in the track of the others, and they were to preach the gospel by the way. After a little delay we started. Smith, Rigdon, and six or eight others came in company. They continued their journey until they arrived in Jackson County, where they found Oliver Cowdery and his companions, Smith pointed out the spot for the temple, received some revelation concerning the purchasing of land and settling the church in that place, appointed some persons to remain there, held one or two conferences, and then returned with part of his company to Kirtland. . . .

John Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints (Commonly Called Mormons, Including an Account of their Doctrine and Discipline, with the Reasons of the Author for Leaving the Church) (St. Louis, Mo.: N.p., 1839), 18-21.

Sending forth missionaries, Joseph instructs them to avoid contention, not to meddle with others, or rail against them, but to teach in simplicity.

At the close of the solemn assembly meetings [in the temple] in Kirtland, [Joseph] Smith told the elders that they were now endowed with power to go forth and build up the Kingdom, that they must now call upon God for every man was accountable to God for his own doings, and he charged them to be careful and avoid contention, and not to meddle with other orders of Christians, nor proclaim against their doctrines, but to preach the gospel in its simplicity, and let others alone.

John Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints (Commonly Called Mormons, Including an Account of their Doctrine and Discipline, with the Reasons of the Author for Leaving the Church) (St. Louis, Mo.: N.p., 1839), 26.

Compliance with law of consecration an individual choice.

Every man was [urged] to put in all his property by leasing it to the firm for a term of years; overseers or managers were to be chosen from time to time, by the members of the firm, to manage the concerns of the same, and the rest were to labor under their direction. . . . Many joined these firms, while many others were much dissatisfied with them, which caused considerable feeling and excitement in the Church. [Joseph] Smith said every man must act his own feelings, whether to join or not.

John Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints (Commonly Called Mormons, Including an Account of their Doctrine and Discipline, with the Reasons of the Author for Leaving the Church) (St. Louis, Mo.: N.p., 1839), 46.
