Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Allred, James

(January 22, 1784-January 10, 1876)

Tells of Joseph coming to James' wife, Elizabeth Warren Allred, asking that she assist him in cutting out garments, which Joseph wanted to be white in color with as few seams as possible.

In An Early Pioneer History, related by Eliza M. Allred Munson, a granddaughter of James Allred, she tells the following incident: "It was while they were living in Nauvoo that the Prophet came to my grandmother, who was a seamstress by trade, and told her that he had seen the Angel Moroni with the garments on, and asked her to assist him in cutting out the garments. They spread unbleached muslin out on the table and he told her how to cut it out. She had to cut the third pair, however, before he said it was satisfactory. She told the Prophet that there would be sufficient cloth from the knee to the ankle to make a pair of sleeves, but he told her he wanted as few seams as possible and that there would be sufficient whole cloth to cut the sleeves without piecing. The first garments were made of unbleached muslin and bound with turkey red and were without collars. Later on the Prophet decided he would rather have them bound with white. Sister Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife, proposed that they have a collar on as she thought they would look more finished, but at first the Prophet did not have the collars on them. After Emma Smith had made the little collars, which were not visible from the outside, then Eliza R. Snow introduced a wider collar of finer material to be worn on the outside of the dress. The garment was to reach to the ankle and the sleeves to the wrist. The marks were always the same."

Eliza M. A. Munson, "Early Pioneer History," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. As quoted in Dawnell Hatton Griffin, Kiss the Babies for Me: A Story of an Allred Family (N.p., n.d.), 1-2.

Sister Allred put out potatoes, bread, and fresh buttermilk for Joseph and Hyrum who were constantly hunted by the mobs; Joseph gave his sword to Allred; conveyed John Taylor home following the martyrdom.

Grandmother often used to put potatoes in the coals in the fireplace at night and leave bread and butter and fresh buttermilk (of which the Prophet was very fond) out on the table so that they could come in during the night and eat.

In the year 1844 in June the Prophet Joseph Smith, his brother Hyrum, President John Taylor and Willard Richards were taken to the Carthage jail, Hancock County, Ill. At the jail the Prophet Joseph handed his sword to my grandfather and said, "Take thisyou may need it to defend yourself." (Grandfather carried this sword with him to Utah, and it is now on display at the Utah State Capitol).

. . . Grandfather took President Taylor from the prison to take him to his home. He only had his wagon to carry him and the trip was long by road, so they decided that a sleigh could be pulled behind the wagon by going through the fields which were mostly swamps, and this would be only eighteen miles distance from Nauvoo by cutting through the fields. Accordingly, they secured a sleigh, fastened it behind the wagon and placed President Taylor in it. He was bleeding badly, and so weak from the loss of blood that he could scarcely speak. His wife sat beside him bathing the blood from his wounds and trying to make the journey as easy as possible. The sleigh was much easier riding than the wagon, and by the time they reached home, President Taylor was able to talk enough that my grandfather could hear him from where he sat in the wagon.

Eliza M. A. Munson, "Early Pioneer History," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 3.
