Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Cowdery, Oliver

(October 3, 1806-March 3, 1850)

Instructions to John Whitmer about record keeping in the Church.

You have requested instruction on the subject of Church Records: I have just conversed with Brother Joseph concerning the same; and he has given me instruction upon his letter published in the 8th No. of the Star; but says that we shall probably receive more on the same, and then we will communicate it. I will say, however, that it is necessary to keep the names of the Saints, and when a child is brought forward to be blessed by the elders, it is then necessary to take their name upon the Church Record. Put down the name of the man, his place of birth, and when, etc., and also of his family. If he begets children after that and they do not come into the Church their names are not known with their brethren in the book of remembrance. The names of the Saints are to be kept in a book that contains the laws of God, this is what is meant in Brother Joseph's letter. Each family will have its record with the law of the Lord in it; each branch of the Church the same in every city; and each city one general record kept by a general clerk. Brother Joseph says, that the item in his letter that says, that the man that is called, etc., and puts forth his hand to steady the ark of God, does not mean that anyone had at the time, but it was given for a caution to those in high standing to beware, lest they should fall by the shaft of death as the Lord had said.

"Oliver Cowdery to John Whitmer, 1 Jan., 1834," Huntington Library, San Marino, California.

Testifies that he was present when angels restored both the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthood.

I was present with Joseph when an holy angel from God came down from heaven and conferred on us, or restored, the lesser or Aaronic priesthood, and said to us at the time, that it should remain upon the earth while the earth stands. I was also present with Joseph when the higher or Melchizedek priesthood was conferred by the holy angel from on high. This priesthood we then conferred upon each other by the will and commandment of God.

In Joseph Fielding Smith, "Restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood," Improvement Era 7, no.12 (October 1904): 941-43.

Note: Oliver bore the above testimony in a meeting held in Kanesville, Iowa, in 1848.

Account of restoration of Aaronic Priesthood in fulfillment of prophecy of Joseph in ancient Egypt; refers also to restoration of Melchizedek Priesthood.

[Joseph Smith] was ministered unto by the angel, and by his direction he obtained the records of the Nephites, and translated by the gift and power of God. He was ordained by the angel John, unto the lesser or Aaronic priesthood, in company with myself, in the town of Harmony, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, on Friday, the 15th day of May, 1829; after which we repaired to the water, even to the Susquehanna River, and were baptized; he first administering unto me, and after, I to him. But before baptism our souls were drawn out in mighty prayer, to know how we might obtain the blessings of baptism and of the Holy Spirit according to the order of God; and we diligently sought for the right of the fathers, and the authority of the holy priesthood, and the power to administer the same; for we desired to be followers of righteousness, and in the possession of greater knowledge, even the knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of God.

Therefore we repaired to the woods, even as our father Joseph [the son of Jacob] said we should, that is, to the bush, and called upon the name of the Lord, and he answered us out of the heavens. And while we were in the heavenly vision, the angel came down and bestowed upon us this priesthood; and then, as I have said, we repaired to the water and were baptized. After this, we received the high and holy priesthood; but an account of this will be given elsewhere, or in another place.

In Joseph Fielding Smith, "Restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood," Improvement Era 7, no. 12 (October 1904): 942.

Joseph in ancient Egypt prophesies both Joseph and Oliver to receive Aaronic Priesthood "in the bush" and later receive the Melchizedek Priesthood from divine messengers (Peter, James, and John).

[On December 18, 1833, when the Prophet gave his father a blessing, and ordained him to be the Patriarch, he also blessed others, including Oliver Cowdery. After pronouncing Oliver's blessing, Joseph said:]

These blessings [i.e., those contained in the blessing] shall come upon him [Oliver] according to the blessings of the prophecy of Joseph in ancient days, which he said should come upon the seer of the last days and the scribe that should sit with him, and that should be ordained with him, by the hands of the angel in the bush, unto the lesser priesthood, and after receive the holy priesthood under the hands of those who had been held in reserve for a long season, even those who received it under the hands of the Messiah, while he should dwell in the flesh upon the earth, and should receive the blessings with him, even the seer of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saith he, even Joseph of old.

In Joseph Fielding Smith, "Restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood," Improvement Era 7, no. 12 (October 1904): 943.

Note: This statement, in the handwriting of Oliver Cowdery, is found in the Patriarchal Blessing Book under the date of October 2, 1835.

Gives account of the acquisition of Egyptian mummies and papyrus from which the Book Abraham was translated: Antonio Lebolo obtained them in Egypt; when Lebolo died, they went to his nephew, Michael Chandler, who in turn presented them to the Prophet.

Upon the subject of the Egyptian records, or rather the writings of Abraham and Joseph, . . . may I say a few words. This record is beautifully written in papyrus with black, and a small part, red ink or paint, in perfect preservation. The characters are such as you find upon the coffins of mummies, hieroglyphics and etc., with many characters or letters exactly like the present, though perhaps not quite so square form of the Hebrew without points.

These records were obtained from one of the catacombs in Egypt, near the place where once stood the renowned city of Thebes, by the celebrated French traveller Antonio Sebolo [Lebolo], in the year 1831. He procured license from Mohemet Ali, then Viceroy of Egypt under the protection of Chevralier [Chevalier] Drovetti, the French Consul, in the year 1828; employed 433 men four months and two days, (if I understood correctly, Egyptian or Turkish soldiers), at from four to six cents per diem, each man; entered the catacomb June 7, 1831, and obtained eleven mummies. There were several hundred mummies in the same catacomb. About one hundred embalmed after the first order and deposited and placed in niches and two or three hundred after the second and third order, and laid upon the floor or bottom of the grand cavity, the two last orders of embalmed were so decayed that they could not be removed and only eleven out of the first, found in the niches.

On his way from Alexandria to Paris he put in at Trieste, and after ten days illness, expired. This was in the year 1832. Previous to his decease, he made a will of the whole to Mr. Michael H. Chandler, then in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, his nephew, whom he supposed to have been in Ireland.

Accordingly the whole were sent to Dublin, addressed according, and Mr. Chandler's friends ordered them sent to New York where they were received at the customhouse in the winter or spring of 1833. In April of the same year Mr. Chandler paid the duties upon his mummies and took possession of the same. Up to this time they had not been taken out of the coffins nor the coffins opened.

On opening the coffins he discovered that in connection with two of the bodies were something rolled up with the same kind of linen, saturated with the same bitumen, which when examined proved to be two rolls of papyrus, previously mentioned. I may add that two or three other small pieces of papyrus, with astronomical calculations, epitaphs, etc., were found with others of the mummies.

When Mr. Chandler discovered that there was something with the mummies, he supposed or hoped it might be some diamonds or other valuable metal, and was no little chagrined when he saw his disappointment. He was immediately told while yet in the customhouse, that there was no man in that city, who could translate his rolls; but was referred by the same gentleman, (a stranger) to Mr. Joseph Smith, Jr., who continued [that] he possess some kind of power or gift by which he had previously translated similar characters. Brother Smith was then unknown to Mr. Chandler. Neither did he know that such a book or work as the record of the Nephites had been brought before the public. From New York he took his collection to Philadelphia, [Pennsylvania], where he exhibited them for a compensation. The following is a certificate put into my hands by Mr. Chandler, which he obtained while in Philadelphia and will show the opinion of the scientific of that city:

"Having examined with considerable attention and deep interest, a number of mummies from the catacombs, near Thebes, in Egypt and now exhibiting in the Arcade, we beg leave to recommend them to the observation of the curious inquirer on subjects of a period so long elapsed; probably not less than three thousand years ago.

"The features of some of the mummies are in perfect expression. The papyrus covered with black or red ink, or paint, in excellent preservation, are very interesting. The undersigned, unsolicited by any person connected by interest with this exhibition, have voluntarily set their names hereunto, for the simple purpose of calling the attention of the public to an interesting collection, not sufficiently known in this city."

[Signed]

John Redman Cone, M.D., E. H. Rivinius, M.D., Richard Harlan, M.D., J. Pencoat, M.D., Wm. P. C. Barton, M.D., Samuel G. Morgan, M.D."

While Mr. Chandler was in Philadelphia he used every exertion to find someone who would give him the translation of his papyrus, but could not satisfactorily, though from some few men of the 'first eminence' he obtained in a small degree the translation of a few characters.

Here he was referred to Brother Smith. From Philadelphia he visited Harrisburg, [Pennsylvania] and other places east of the mountains, and was frequently referred to Brother Smith for the translation of his Egyptian relic.

It would be beyond my purpose to follow this gentleman in his different circuits to the time he visited this place, the last of June or first of July, at which time he presented Brother Smith with his papyrus. Till then neither myself nor Brother Smith knew of such relics being in America. Mr. Chandler was told that his writings could be deciphered, and very politely gave me privileges of copying some four or five different sentences or separate pieces, stating at the same time, that unless he found someone who "could give him a translation soon he would carry them to London."

I am a little in advance of my narrative. The morning Mr. Chandler first presented his papyrus to Brother Smith, he was shown by the latter, a number of characters like those upon the writings of Mr. C. [Chandler] which were previously copied from the plates containing the history of the Nephites, or Book of Mormon.

Being solicited by Mr. Chandler to give an opinion concerning his antiquities, or a translation of some of the characters, Brother J. [Joseph] gave him the interpretation of some few for his satisfaction. For your gratification I will here annex a certificate which I hold, from under the hand of Mr. Chandler, unsolicited however, by any person in this place, which will show how far he believed Brother Smith able to unfold from these long obscure rolls, the wonders obtained thereon:

"Kirtland July 6th, 1835

"This is to make known to all who may be desirous, concerning the knowledge of Mr. Joseph Smith, Jr., in deciphering the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic characters, in my possession, which I have, in many eminent cities, shown to the most learned; and from the information that I could ever learn, or meet with, I find that Mr. Joseph Smith, Jr., to correspond in the most minute matters.

"Signed Michael H. Chandler

"Traveling with and proprietor of Egyptian Mummies."

The foregoing is verbatim as given by Mr. Chandler excepting the addition of punctuation, and speaks sufficiently plain without requiring comment from me and it was given previous to the purchase of the antiquities, by any person here.

The language in which this record is written is very comprehensive, and many of the hieroglyphics exceedingly striking.

The evidence is apparent upon the fact, that they were written by persons acquainted with the history of the Creation, the fall of man, and more or less of the correct ideas of the notions of the Deity.

The representation of the Godheadthreeyet in one, is curiously drawn to give simply, though impressively, the writer's views of that exalted personage. The serpent represented as walking, or formed in a manner to be able to walk, standing in front of and near a female figure, is to me, one of the greatest representations I have ever seen upon paper, or a writing substance; and must go so far towards convincing the rational mind of the correctness and divine authenticity of the holy scriptures, and especially that part which has been assailed by the infidel community, as being fiction, as to carry away with one mighty sweep the whole atheistical fabric, without leaving a vestige sufficient for a foundation stone. Enoch's pillar as mentioned by Josephus, is upon the same roll. True, our present version of the Bible does not mention this fact, though it speaks of the righteousness of Abel and the holiness of Enochone slain because his offering was accepted of the Lord, and the others taken to the regions of everlasting day without being confined in the narrow limits of the tomb, or tasting death, but Josephus says that the descendants of Seth were virtuous, and possessed a great knowledge of the heavenly bodies, and that in consequence of the prophecy of Adam, that the world should be destroyed once by water and again by fire. Enoch wrote a history or an account of the same, and put into two pillars one of brick and the other of stone; and that the same were in being at his (Josephus') day. The inner end of the same roll (Joseph's record) presents a representation of the judgment. At one view you behold the Savior seated upon His throne, crowned and holding the scepter of righteousness and power, before whom also, are assembled, the twelve tribes of Israel, the nations, languages and tongues of the earth, the kingdoms of the world over which Satan is represented as reigning, Michael the Archangel, holding the key of the bottomless pit, and at the same time the devil as being chained and shut up in the bottomless pit.

But upon this last scene, I am able only to give you a shadow, to the real picture. I am certain it cannot be viewed without filling the mind with awe, unless the mind is far estranged from God; and I sincerely hope, that mine may never go so far astray, nor wander from those rational principles of the doctrine of our Savior, so much, as to become darkened in the least and thereby fail to have that, to us, the greatest of all days and the most sublime of all transactions so impressively fixed upon the heart, that I become not like the beast, not knowing whither I am going, nor what shall be my final end . . .

"Oliver Cowdery to William Frye, December 22, 1835," Huntington Library, San Marino, California.

In letter to William Frye Oliver tells how Chandler sold some mummies to museums.

Dear [William Frye]:

. . . You will have understood from the foregoing, that eleven mummies were taken from the catacomb, at the time of which I have been speaking and nothing definite having been said as to their disposal. I may, with propriety add a few words. Seven of the said eleven were purchased by gentlemen for private museums, previous to Mr. Chandler's visit to this place, with a small quantity of papyrus, similar (as he says) to the astronomical representation, contained with the present two rolls, of which I previously spoke, and the remaining four by gentlemen resident here.

Though the mummies themselves are a curiosity, and an astonishment, well calculated to arouse the mind to a reflection of past ages, when men strove, as at this day, to immortalize their names, though in another manner, yet I do not consider them of much value compared with those records which were deposited with them.

If providence permits, I will, ere long, write you again upon the propriety of looking for additions to our present scriptures, according to their own literal reading.

Yours as ever, O. Cowdery

P.S. There are a great number of elders in Kirtland now, many of whom are attending an English school. We are expecting a Hebrew school to commence in a few weeks, if we get a room prepared.

The most of those elders who are now in the school are studying and reviewing grammar, history, writing, etc., the house of the Lord is being finished as fast as can be expected considering the smallness of the means in the hands of the Church, but we trust the Lord will open the way that we may fulfill his commandments: and in due time, also we look for the redemption of Zion. I earnestly pray that you may be prospered in all lawful pursuits, and that your family may be blessed with health, and that you may, according to your own wish, be one of the hundred forty and four thousand, who are to stand upon the Mount Zion, having the harps of God.

I will however, close, referring you to Elder Groves for instructions upon other matters, who will be able to answer your requests.

O. C.

To: William Frye, Esq., Lebanon, Calhoun County, Illinois

"Oliver Cowdery to William Frye, December 22, 1835," Huntington Library, San Marino, California.

Oliver testifies that he was present when John the Baptist restored the Aaronic Priesthood, and when Peter (and James and John) restored the Melchizedek Priesthood.

I have cherished a hope, and that one of my fondest, that I might leave such a character as those who might believe in my testimony, after I should be called hence, might do so, not only for the sake of the truth, but might not blush for the private character of the man who bore that testimony. I have been sensitive on this subject, I admit, but I ought to so be, you would be under the circumstances, had you stood in the presence of John with our departed Brother Joseph, to receive the lesser priesthood, and in the presence of Peter, to receive the greater, and looked down through time, and witness the effects these two must produceyou would feel what you have never felt, were wicked men conspiring to lessen the effects of your testimony on man, after you should have gone to your long sought rest. But, enough of this. . . .

"Oliver Cowdery to Phineas Young, March 23, 1846," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah; see also Stanley R. Gunn, Oliver Cowdery: Second Elder and Scribe (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1962), 251.

Note: Oliver's testimony here is important, for from time to time there are those who suggest that the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored by the voice of God speaking "in the chamber of old Father Whitmer" (see D&C 128:21), and not by the visitation of Peter, James, and John. Yet here Oliver certifies that he stood in the presence of Peter, obviously meaning that James and John were present also. In the Patriarchal Blessing Book, under the date of October 2, 1835, Oliver testified that he and Joseph received the Melchizedek Priesthood "under the hands of those who . . . received it under the hands of those received it under the hands of the Messiah, while he should dwell in the flesh upon the earth. . . ." In 1848 Oliver testified: "I was also present with Joseph when the higher or Melchizedek priesthood was conferred by the holy angel from on high" (cited in Joseph Fielding Smith, "Restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood," Improvement Era 7, no. 12 [October 1904]: 941-42).
