Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Cowley, Matthias

(b. December 2, 1829)

Cowley tells of his determination to go to Nauvoo to meet the Prophet; met Wilson Law who introduced him to two women who claimed Joseph sought to seduce them; later, he met Joseph and found him to be what a Prophet should be; apostates threatened and order him to leave Warsaw for refusing to take arms against the Saints; forced out of town at bayonet point; warns Joseph, who prophesies the mob would not hurt a hair of Cowley's head; joins Nauvoo with pitch fork as a weapon; tells of Joseph's last speech and martyrdom; of boys throwing horse and cow dung on him. Mob hired a drunk to drown him, but the drunk let him free, thus fulfilling Joseph's prophesy that not a hair of his head would be hurt.

[A]fter leaving New Orleans, a distance of about twelve hundred miles;while remaining there a few days Father was offered ten dollars per day to stop and go to work making oatmeal in a new Mill that had just been finished for that purpose; there were very few in the Country at that time, who understood making the article.

"No! says he, I started from home to go to Nauvoo, to see the Prophet of the Lord, Joseph Smith, and I'm going, bless your souls, I would not stop here for all St. Louis."

They of course thought him a Fanatic and a Fool,deluded by the Mormons.

However, we engaged passage on Board the Steamer "Mermaid" for the City of our anticipated destination for some time, a distance of about Five hundred miles farther up the River; in two or three days and nights we arrived safe at Nauvoo late in the evening, and all being strangers, we did not go about much that evening, but engaged in a large house on the Bank of the river, about one mile from the landing, and we all bundled in there together;the house belonged to a brother by the name of Thomas, and in the morning he gave us some directions how to go aboutin traveling through the City, Father met with an Elder by the name of Blakesley, who had been on a Mission to the Isle of Mann and had known each other before; but it so happened that his Elder Apostatized from the Church, and Father did not know it, until after had had gone around with him considerable, and met with some others who had also turned aside: they knowing that Father had just arrived green from the "Old Country" as they called it;thought they had a fine chance now of leading him away in the same path in which they were going, and had taken him to Wilson Law's, a pretty popular man in that place; but a Devilish mean scamp towards Joseph and the Gospel; they there introduced him to one of Mr. Law's Daughters, and another lady who was sitting in the Parlor with her: and says they:there are two young women whom Joseph Smith tried to seduce, and lead away;"very well, says Father, "I'll see Joseph Smith for myself, I started for that purpose," leaving them with these few words. After a day or two we found an acquaintance, who was very intimate with the Prophet, and thereby had an introduction to him: we spent some time in conversation, on matters and things as they came along and we found the Prophet to be, what a man bearing that title ought to be;a man of God in every respect, in word, and in deed, publicly, and privately, and was loved by every good man, woman, and child, we then felt very well satisfied after seeing the Prophet of the Most High God, Joseph Smith.

. . . Well, in this little Hell called Warsaw, Father was ordered to take up arms against his brethren and sisters with the rest of the inhabitantstwo armed men came to the house we lived in, and took him by force to the office where they took names, offered him a musket which he refused accepting, saying at the same time, "Gentlemen! I shall never fight against my brethren the Saints of Almighty God, no never!!" Those that were walking behind were going to cut his throat. They would not have anything to do with me because I was too young, and told me to go home and take care of my Mother. They then ordered us to leave the Town within 24 hours; we were not able to do so because we could not procure any Conveyance. Father himself was then obliged to leave, he was driven before the point of the Bayonet several miles out of Town:it was late in the afternoonthey told him if he ever returned they would shoot him, and there was a guard appointed that night to see if he came back; he traveled on to Nauvoo a distance of between 20 and 30 miles; there had been some very wet weather previously, and the Creeks were high and overflowing so that he was obliged to swim many of the streams during the night, and was carried down some of them a distance of a mile or thereabouts before he could reach the other Side, owing to the current being so swift; and it being so very dark he could hardly tell whether he was going right or wrong: However he reached Nauvoo in the morning half dead,after resting some time, and receiving some refreshment, he went to see the Prophet Josephtold him what had happened to him, and that he had left his Family behind to the mercy of a Mob, and he was afraid they would Massacre them; Joseph then raised his hand and said, "Brother Cowley, they shan't hurt a hair of their heads; Brother Cowley, God bless you." He then joined the Nauvoo Legion and the Guns being all engaged he procured a Pitch Fork, and marched with themthe Officers of the Law were after Joseph Smith now for several weeks, he finally thought it best to give himself up to them;did so; but the brethren were not willing that he should, and before he went to Carthage, the County Seat of Hancock County, to be tried, he got up on the top of a Frame house that was in course of building, and made a lengthy speech, he says:"Brethren are you willing to die for me"the whole Legion and inhabitants answered, Aye! Then says he "I'll die for you, I am going like a lamb to the slaughter; but I am calm as a summer's morning: I have a conscience void of offence towards God, and towards all man! I shall die innocent, and it shall yet be said of me, he was murdered in cold blood." His Brother Hyrum the Patriarch of the Church, Willard Richards, and John Taylor, two of the Twelve Apostles went with him, and while confined in Jail: waiting for trial; they were shotJohn Taylor was severely wounded, and Willard Richards escaped without being hurtthe Massacre occurred on the 27th of June 1844. That night, the mob in Warsaw were very much frightened, expecting the saints from Nauvoo, to come and sweep them all off the earth. Father had not left Nauvoo as yet;About 4 o'clock P.M. on the 27th of June 1844, Mother and Myself heard a very great noise, cheering and throwing their hats in up the air. I felt like knowing what was the matter, and I ran right among them, made my way through the Blood-thirsty mob towards the one that was speaking; the amount of his harangue was that they had killed "Joe Smith" and his Brother Hyrum, he then happened to see me, and ordered me home, to stop with my Mother, knowing that I was a Mormon boy[.] There was a lot of School boys followed me, being set on by the Mobthey clubbed me all the way home with Horse and Cow dung, and everything else they could find in the street. I escaped them through a neighboring yard, and got into the House the back way.

In a little while after I had occasion to go to the River for a Pail of water, the Mob saw me again and they hired a drunken man and paid a large sum of money to throw me into the River and drown me. Hawk was the name of the man that prompted him to go and do so, a Tailor of the Town of Warsaw,The drunken man followed me was far as the Bank of the Mississippi River, and I was stooping to dip up the Pail of Water, he caught me by the back of the neck, and, Now, says he, "You damn little Mormon, I'll drown you." I asked him why he would drown me, and if I ever did any harm to him? No, says he, "I won't drown you, I'll be damned if I do, they may drown you themselves. I've got my pay, You're a good boy, you may go home." During was drowning me: I started home with my pail of water, and met her coming to rescue me; Says I, Mother all is right, the Lord is on our side, you know Joseph prophesied that the Mobocrats should not hurt a hair of our heads; they can't do it.

That same evening they put a torch to the house we lived in three times; but it would not burn,it was about 1 o'clock. There was another family of Saints in the town at the same time by the name of Cotterellthe mob went to Brother C's househauled him out of Bed, he being sick at the same time, and made him stand guard over one of their large cannon. Mother went that night and stopped with Sister Cotterell, and consoled each other the best they knew how,while the Mobocrats were moving their wives and children across the River, so as to be secure from the expected Mormon Company.

"Matthias Cowley Autobiography," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
