Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Cox, Henrietta Janes

(March 8, 1835-June 17, 1917)

Joseph's figure of stalk of grain bending with the weight of its store becomes a prophetic figure for the apostasy of an elder.

In the spring of 1841 my parents were both baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and soon after started for Nauvoo in company with some other Saints. After reaching their destination the company camped for a few days on the bank of the Mississippi until they had opportunity to find homes, a Brother Sherwood kindly giving them the use of one small log house which he owned.

While the Saints camped here the Prophet visited them. A meeting was held in the aforementioned log house. I remember that when the Prophet came into the room he shook hands with all, old and young, who had assembled. I cannot remember much that was said that day in meeting, as I was so very young, but one incident of the day's proceedings fastened itself so firmly upon my mind that I have never forgotten it.

Brother Joseph was sitting with his head bent low, as if in deep thought, and had not spoken for a few minutes, when one of the elders present began to chide him for being bowed in spirit, and said, "Brother Joseph, why don't you hold your head up and talk to us like a man?"

Brother Joseph presently answered the elder by calling his attention to a field of ripening grain, saying that many heads of grain in that field bent low with their weight of valuable store, while others there were which, containing no grain to be garnered, stood very straight.

Proof of the correctness of his words was given shortly after, as the elder to whom they were addressed soon after apostatized and went back east.

Henrietta Cox, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 7 (1 April 1892): 203.

Remembers seeing the Prophet; also recalls his death.

"Those were five eventual years for Henrietta in Nauvoo. She may have forgotten the major events during those stormy years, but she never forgot the time when she saw the Prophet Joseph Smith. She was deeply moved by his untimely death. Soon after the Prophet's death, her own father passed away, leaving the family in desperate circumstances."

"(Biography of) Henrietta Janes Cox," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
