Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Joseph blessed Jacob Hamblin, promising he will go on mission to Lamanites in "the thirty-fifth hour."

[Jacob] Hamblin was passing the home of Father Smith. The prophet came out and asked of his name. When told his name he said to him to come into the house. When he came in the Prophet told him he wanted to set him apart to his mission among the tribes of the Lamanites. The prophet asked his father to assist. Before leaving Hamblin asked the prophet when he should go on his mission. The prophet replied "You will commence in the thirty-fifth hour." Hamblin's first missionary service was given when the church had been organized thirty-five years.

"Martha Cragun Cox (1852-1932) Autobiography, 1928-1930," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 103.

Note: That Joseph would have prophesied that Hamblin was to go on a mission to the Lamanites, and given a blessing incident thereto, is perfectly in harmony with gospel law, though it is much more likely that he would have been set apart for such a call by those who issued the call.

Quotes Allen Stout as saying he was with Joseph when he talked with John the Revelator, yet Stout remained "unawares."

[139] "uncle' Allen Stout, Lizzie's uncle used to come to live with us while he worked in the Temple . . . We all liked "uncle Allen" and was glad to have him stay with us. He had used coffee for many years but when he came to work in the Temple he would not drink it any more. He was in Nauvoo a bodyguard to the prophet and when asked to tell something about the days of Nauvoo he would tell it but he was not much of a talker unless asked to do so. He gave me much information about the early history of the Church because I asked him many questionsOne day he said in answer to a statement I made that I thought it could not be possible for one to see a heavenly being, that I might see one without recognizing it as suchas happened once with him. I immediately became anxious to know all about it. He told me he was once walking with the Prophet on the west side of the Mississippi River on the road to Montrose, I think. They saw a man walking along a road leading in from the south and coming towards them. The Prophet told Allen to remain where he was while he stepped over to speak with this pedestrian. Allen turned his back towards them and for a time forgot the prophet, and became engaged with his own thoughts while he stood whipping a low bush with the cane he carried. The hand of the Prophet upon his shoulder aroused him. The Prophet said, "We must return immediately to Nauvoo. They walked silently and rapidly. Allen became very sorrowful over his recreancy to his duty and could not refrain from weeping. The prophet asked him why he wept. Allen confessed "I am an insufficient bodyguardcriminally neglectful of your welfare. I allowed that man you met to speak with you without even being ready to defend if he attacked you. He could have killed you and made his escape without my knowing who he is, which way he went or what he even looks like. You will have to dispense with my services and take a guard on which you can depend. Your life is too precious to be trusted to my care." The prophet then said "That man would not harm me. You saw John the Revelator." Some years afterwards I referred to this instance while speaking with the grandson of "Uncle Allen," and was surprised that he had never heard of it before. On further investigation we found that the old man had never told that story to his children, so we let valuable history slip by us.

"Martha Cragun Cox (1852-1932) Autobiography, 1928-1930," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 139.
