Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Crookston, Robert Sr.

(September 21, 1821-September 21, 1916)

First meeting with Joseph was "the most thrilling Experience of my life"; heard Joseph preach on 2 Peter in Macedonia (Ramus); said men could get their own revelation; Joseph perceived George Miller would apostatize; plural marriage taught in Nauvoo; fights against mob; some of the Saints perceived the trip to Carthage was a trip to death; tells of Saints hearing mob threats on Joseph's life.

When the river opened up we started for Nauvoo, a distance of 300 miles. As we approached the landing place to our great joy we saw the Prophet Joseph Smith there to welcome his people who had come so far. We were all glad to see him and set out feet upon the promised land so to speak. It was the most thrilling experience of my life for I know that he was a Prophet of the Lord.

. . . While there, my brother James and I were called out to attend military drill at Nauvoo. The Prophet Joseph Smith was the General and Paraded the Legion. . . .

The Prophet and many others were there on the wharf looking for her [i.e., the Maid of Iowa] and waiting to welcome the Saints. The Captain and myself were the only ones on board who had ever seen the Prophet and they were all anxious to have us point him out. I remember Old Crook when he got hold of his hand, said, "I've come a long way to see the Prophet." "Yes," said Brother Joseph, "You have, but you will never regret it." And he never did. He was a faithful Saint and lived to be a good old age. [Note: "Old Crook" is a Brother Crook, not a Crookston.]

. . . Uncle John Smith, who was President of the Branch and was also a Patriarch, came to our house and always gave us blessings. He also sealed my Father's two wives to him for time and eternity. Joseph had authorized him to seal the old people that might not live to see a temple constructed. We were happy about this as the old Gentleman was not so very well fixed for clothing, having been driven so much and as we had brought quite a lot of shirting cloth from Scotland, we were able to supply his wants in that respect.

The Saints were all willing to divide their substance with each other as long as they had anything to spare.

Joseph and some of the Twelve came to Macedonia to preach to us. There was a large gathering of people, members and others. He took his text from the first chapter of the Second Epistle of Peter. There was a portion of which was reported and it appeared in the new edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. The place where he preached these sermons was first called Ramas and later Macedonia. He said that it was a man's privilege to have revelations for himself. That his name was written in the Lamb's book of life. He preached in a grove that surrounded the house where we lived and in selecting the best place to face the congregation moved his chair nearer the house. The brethren who were with him moved theirs also except Bishop Miller. Joseph said, "Brother Miller, are you going to forsake me?" To which he replied, "Oh no, Brother Joseph." But I met that same man turning his back upon the Church when we were at Winter Quarters.

It reminded me of what Jesus said to one of his Disciples. "Will you also turn away?" [See John 6:67] He said in his remarks that there were three degrees of glory in the Celestial Kingdom, and to attain the highest a man must abide the law of that kingdom [See D&C 131:1-4].

Some will say that polygamy was not practiced in those days. Brother Thomas Callister had two women sealed to him at one time with whom I was personally acquainted. Uncle John Smith's daughter was one and Ellen Clark the other. Callister was later Bishop of Fillmore, Utah.

The Prophet Joseph was Mayor of Nauvoo City. Some apostates published a paper with so many malicious lies about our people that the city counsel [sic] proclaimed it a nuisance. They then raised the hue and cry of rebellion of our people against the government and collected a mob so as to get Joseph in their power.

I was called with a number of the brethren to protect the city. I was just recovering from a spell of fever and ague. My legs were so swollen I could hardly walk the length of a block far less travel twenty miles across a prairie half a leg deep in water about half the distance on account of heavy rains. The fever sores on my legs forbade me getting wet under any ordinary condition, but I had faith in God and the blessing of our grand old Patriarch who promised that I should take no harm and would return in safety to my parents. We were quartered in a large brick house yet unfinished, belonging to a man by the name of Foster. Joseph reviewed the Legion that day on the flat and spoke encouragingly to them. Drawing his sword he said that if there was a drop of blood spilt it should never again be sheathed until this nation is drenched in blood.

The last time I saw him in life he and his brother Hyrum, Brothers Taylor and Richards were on their way to Nauvoo on horseback. Joseph's horse was a pacer and the other three were trotters. He rode his horse in a kingly manner. Frocham and his wife and others were there. Brother Frocham's wife, with a look of fear on her pale face, said, "Poor Joseph. We will never see him again," and rushed into the house and threw herself on the bed and wept aloud.

Her impression was right. He and his brother were martyred the next day. Our company was dismissed. Brother Fife and I started for home alone, but we mistook the Carthage road for the Macedonia Road and walked into Carthage where we were arrested and placed in Carthage Jail under guard until morning. We were then escorted to the Court House where the Judge merely asked us what we wanted there. Brother Fife had a happy thought and spoke up, saying, "We want to pass to Macedonia." The Judge, turning to the clerk, said, "Write these gentlemen out a pass to Macedonia."

They had gotten what they wanted. Joseph and Hyrum were in jail and they did not want any more Mormons around so we went home, the distance being about eight miles. We were not molested but we overheard threats as to what would happen to the Smiths, so we went to our Captain and entreated him to call out our brethren and go within a half mile of Carthage to strip off timber and lay in ambush. But he refused saying that the Governor had put the county under martial law and anyone bearing arms under his command would be liable to arrest. We told him we were willing to risk that but he was firm in his purpose. In the afternoon the troops from Macedonia who were friendly to the Mormon prisoners were sent home. They said they would not give a button for the lives of the Smiths, but if that damned old Governor had allowed them to remain they would have seen to it that the prisoners would have had a fair trial.

But the Governor left them to the mercy of a mob, while they, themselves, went up to Nauvoo to argue the people about being law abiding citizens, knowing full well that the mob at Carthage were doing their bloody work.

Brother Babbet, lawyer, came home soon after on horseback stating that the mob had given him but five minutes to leave or they would kill him, and he fully expected that our Prophet would be killed.

When the awful tidings reached us the people wept aloud. One could hear the sobs and crying from every quarter. They felt as though the hosts of Hell were let loose to do their murderous work of extermination if possible.

The Gentiles approved of the ghastly deed and predicted that it would be the end of Mormonism.

"Autobiography of Robert Crookston Senior," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
