Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Crosby, Caroline Barnes

(January 5, 1807-February 16, 1884)

Joseph has vision, sees daughter of F. G. Williams and husband overturned in wagon but remain uninjured; he so prophesies.

It was a general time of rejoicing for several months among the Saints. They frequently met from house, to house, to break bread, and drink wine and administer to the poor and afflicted. We also would attend a [meeting] at Dr Frederick G. Williams. His eldest daughter had been lately married, and was about to leave for Missouri: he therefore blest her family previous to their leaving. He laid his hands upon each of their heads, and the scribe wrote them [the blessings]. The prophet Joseph was present and had a vision of their journey, saw their wagon turn over, but no one was injured. It came to pass even as he said.

"Caroline Barnes Crosby: Autobiography (1807-1882)," in Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvey Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1982), 51.

Note: Lovina Williams, eldest daughter of F. G. Williams, married Burr Riggs on November 19, 1834. The events described herein must have transpired some time thereafter.

Caroline's husband (Jonathan) works on the Prophet's home, but Joseph is unable to pay him; Emma gives him ham and flour in payment.

Mr. [Jonathan] C[rosby] worked on Brother Joseph's house, as he was building tolerably large, but frequently got so straitened that he had nothing to give the workmen when Saturday night came, and they were obliged to borrow or do without. They all left at one time, except Mr. C[rosby], he worked on for several days alone. Sister Emma observing that he was laboring there alone, came in one day, and inquired of him whether or where he got his provision. He told her he was entirely without, and knew not where to look, as he had no money and the boss who employed him had no means in his hands. She then went into her chamber, and brought him a nice ham [weighing] 20 lbs. telling him that it was a present for his faithfulness, and that he should bring a sack, and get as much flour as he could to take home. Accordingly he came home rejoicing, considering it a perfect Godsend. It was a beautiful white flour, and the ham was very sweet. I thought nothing ever tasted half as good.

"Caroline Barnes Crosby: Autobiography (1807-1882)," in Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvey Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1982), 55-56.

Witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Sidney Rigdon came to the stand and tried to show to the people that he was the rightful successor of Joseph. And his arguments were so powerful that many were almost persuaded to believe him such. But as soon as the twelve apostles with bro Brigham Young at their head took the stand it was shown conclusively where the power rested. It was the first time that I ever thought he [Brigham] resembled bro Joseph. But almost everyone exclaimed that the mantle of Joseph had fallen on Brigham. For one I never had any doubts afterwards. We all soon became comforted concerning our leaders, but persecution continued all around us. The brethren were obliged to be on guard all the time.

Caroline Barnes Crosby, "Memoirs Begun at Tubuai, Society Islands, 1851," holograph, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
