Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Crosby, Jesse W.

(November 25, 1820-1890)

Crosby works with Joseph in Nauvoo quarry to obtain stone for Nauvoo Temple.

During the summer of 1840, a charter was obtained and Nauvoo became an incorporated city and began to answer to its namefair, beautifuland a site was selected for a temple, and the 19th of October was pitched upon to commence the work by opening a quarry. I was present to assist. Joseph the Prophet was also there and assisted, in company with some 200 or 300 brethren in opening a beautiful quarry of lime rock, almost as white as marble.

"Jesse Wentworth Crosby Autobiography (1820-1869)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 10.

Saints rejoice at safe return of Prophet.

After my arrival in Nauvoo sometime in June [1843], there was a general excitement raised in consequence of an attempt to take Joseph Smith and others to Missouri. He happened at the time to be on Rock River 100 miles from home. The attempt was fruitless, for Joseph returned in triumph to Nauvoo, and was met in the prairie by a great many of the inhabitants who went out on horses and carriagesa great companywith colors flying, and music playing to "Welcome the Prophet." The scene was animating in the extreme!

"Jesse Wentworth Crosby Autobiography (1820-1869)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections Library, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 12.

Joseph a skilled financier, though his enemies undermined his success; an orderly farmer, but persecutions prevented his temporal prosperity; Crosby tells of loaning the Prophet his ax, knowing Joseph would sharpen it before returning it.

Brother J. W. Crosby, a prominent man in early Dixie and an early preacher of the Gospel lived a close neighbor to the Prophet in Nauvoo. Being a very observing man he learned much of that great man's home life, and he used to tell us many interesting things about it. He said the Prophet had great ability as a financier, and that had his enemies left him he would have become one of the wealthiest men in America. Everything his hand touched seemed to prosper. His fields, were always in good condition and yielded well. When people came to see him, and he had many visitors, their teams were fed the best of hay and his barn was full. No other orchard had as fine fruit as his did. If an inferior cow was by any means shoved on to him it would be but a short time before she became a first-class milker. Many men sought his advice when in financial difficulty, and none failed to profit by it if they followed the counsel he gave. A period of great prosperity for him, Brother Crosby said, would seem to induce a raid upon him. One trial after another would be launched until he was left penniless and perhaps in debt. On one of these occasions when the Prophet had been absent from home for some time, Brother Crosby went to his home to see if he might render some assistance. When he made the purpose of his visit known the [Prophet's] wife burst into tears and said that if the persecution would cease they could live as well as any other family in the land. They could even have the luxuries of life.

Bro. Crosby related the following items of interest concerning the Prophet. He was strong and active, and could build more rods of good fence in one day than most men could do in two, and he always left his fence clear of everything that might gather fire, such as underbrush, loose limbs, and tall strong weeds. He was orderly. His wood yard was an example of order. Logs were neatly piled and all trash cleared away. If he did not finish the log on which he was chopping the remnant was laid back on the pile and not left on the ground for a stumbling block. The chips he made he picked up himself into a basket and put them in a wooden box which stood in the wood yard to carried them into the house to be burned.

Bro. Crosby confessed this: During a period of financial depression for the prophet, the ax was stolen from his wood yard and brother Crosby contributed to loan him the ax belonging to himself because of the unfailing habit of the Prophet to always sharpen the ax he had been using before it left his hand. People in that section burned hard wood and to keep the ax in good shape required much time and energy. Some of the home habits of this best friend, however, such as building kitchen fires, carrying out ashes, carrying in wood and water, assisting in the care of the children, etc. were not in accord with brother Crosby's idea of a great man's duty.

"LaFayette C. Lee, Notebook," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Joseph could not speak with the freedom others had; subject to misquote and misinterpretation.

Brother Crosby said that he with some other brethren once went to the Prophet and asked him to give them his opinion on a certain public question. Their request was refused. He told them he did not enjoy the right vouchsafed to every American citizen; that of free speech. He said to them that when he ventured to give his private opinion on any subject of importance his words were often garbled and their meaning twisted and then given out as the word of the Lord because they came from him.

"LaFayette C. Lee, Notebook," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Predicts war between England and Russia.

A group of men were standing at the Prophet's gate conversing on the prophecies relating to the latter days, especially those pertaining to wars. The Prophet himself was one of the party and as he turned to leave the group he tapped Bro. Crosby, who stood among them, on the shoulder and said, "When the Lion, England lays her paw on the Bear, Russia, the fur will fly."

"LaFayette C. Lee, Notebook," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Joseph taught borrowers are slaves to the lenders; men should humble themselves in the service of others.

One day when the Prophet carried to Bro. Crosby's house a sack of flour he had borrowed, the wife remarked that he had returned more than he had received. He answered that it should be so. That anything borrowed should be returned always with interest to the lender. "Thus," said he, "The borrower, if he be honest is a slave to the lender." Bro. Crosby felt it to be an opportune time to give to the man he loved so well some corrective advice, which he had desired for a long time to do.

He reminded him, of every phase of his greatness and called to his mind the multitude of tasks he performed that were too menial for such as he. And to fetch and carry flour, he told him, was too great a humiliation. "Too terrible a humiliation," brother C. repeated, "for you who are the head, and you should not do it." The Prophet listened quietly to all he had to say then made answer in these words: "If there be humiliation in a man's house who but the head of that house should or could bear that humiliation?"

"LaFayette C. Lee, Notebook," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Joseph said husbands should help wives; husbands who fail to appreciate their wives in this life, will not have them in the hereafter.

Sister Crosby was a very hardworking woman taking much more responsibility in her home than most women take. He husband thinking to give the Prophet some light on home management said to him, "Brother Joseph, my wife does much more hard work than does your wife." Brother Joseph replied by telling him that if a man cannot learn in this life to appreciate a wife and do his duty by her in properly taking care of her, he need not expect to be given one in the hereafter. Brother Crosby said in telling this incident "His words shut my mouth as tight as a clam. I took them as a terrible reproof." After that he tried to do better by the good wife he had, and tried to lighten her labors.

"LaFayette C. Lee, Notebook," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Joseph tells of his method for dealing with criticism: he would examine self, correct his errors, and forgive others.

Bro. Crosby told us he went one day with a sister to the Prophet. She had a charge to make against one of the brethren for scandal. When her complaint had been heard the Prophet asked her if she was quite sure that what the brother had said of her was utterly untrue. She was quite sure that it was. He then told her to think no more about it for it could not harm her. If untrue it could not live for nothing but the truth will survive. Still she felt she should have some redress. Then he offered her his method for dealing with such cases for himself. When an enemy had told a scandalous story about him, which had often been done, before he rendered judgment he paused and let his mind run back to the time and place of setting of the story to see if he had not by some unguarded word or act laid the block on which the story was built. If he found he had done so, he said that then in his heart he forgave his enemy, and felt thankful that he had received warning of a weakness that he had not known he possessed. Then he said to the sister that he would have her to do the same: search her memory thoroughly and see if she had not herself all unconsciously laid the foundation for the scandal that annoyed her. Brother Crosby said the sister thought deeply for a few moments and then confessed that she believed that she had. Then the Prophet told her that in her heart she could forgive that brother who had risked his own good name and her friendship to give her this clearer view of herself. The sister, Brother Crosby said, thanked her advisor and went away in peace.

"LaFayette C. Lee, Notebook," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
