Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Curtis, Joseph

(December 24, 1818-August 1, 1883)

Heard Joseph preach in Far West during summer 1838.

[While living in Far West] I saw the Prophet Joseph Smith in March [1838] I think. Worked on the farm during summer of '38 went several times to Far West to hear the Prophet Joseph preach in August 6th day at an election an affrey [sic] took place caused some excitementthe 3rd of Sept. 1838 my mother died of the quick consumption after a sickness of about 2 weeks.

"History of Joseph Curtis, son of Nahum & Millicent Curtis, which was born Dec. 24, 1818, in the Town of Coneatea, Erie Co., Penn.," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 8.

Observes Joseph preside over high council court.

Sund. Feb. 1843 I attended the high councill at Nauvoo while they were investigateing the case of Uriel C. Nickerson & Wilson law respecting the title of some land on the island. President Joseph Smith & Hyrum were presant decided that Nickerson had the oldest claim.

"History of Joseph Curtis, son of Nahum & Millicent Curtis, which was born Dec. 24, 1818, in the Town of Coneatea, Erie Co., Penn.," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 54.

Learns of martyrdom; sees blood of the martyrs on the walls at Carthage.

7th [Sept. 1844] I worked some for money came to Peru on the Illinois river engaged a pasage for St. Louis then to Warsaw traveling from there to Nauvoo where I arrived about the 25th of Sept. 1844 having learned the facts concerning the deaths of our Prophet & Patriarch as occured on the 27th of June 1844. At the following October conference I was ordained in the quorum of seventies 9th quorum saw the Blood of the Prophets on Carthage walls having a share in the Masonic hall I pased several degrees.

"History of Joseph Curtis, son of Nahum & Millicent Curtis, which was born Dec. 24, 1818, in the Town of Coneatea, Erie Co., Penn.," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 64.

Note: There is an incontinuity in the journal, but Curtis here begins to share some of his feelings about the martyrdom. They are inserted into the record and do not come chronologically; indeed, these comments come prior to his discussion of the martyrdom, but they give a feeling for his reaction.

Vents feelings regarding the martyrs, the martyrdom, and the murderers.

It seemed to be my drift to call on the Allmighty to damn the infernall spirits that murdered the Martyrs of God it seemed as though the regions of the damned were opened and they spent their fury and wrath on me at the same time feeling as strong as a lion & fierce as a Tiger that had been bereaved of her young as though I could stamp them in my fury and fight them with the words of my mouth in defence of inocence at the same time it seemed as though there were some friendly spirit saw my sorrow & would have come to my relief but were held back In going at a certain time though remaining the most of the time at one of two places but on a time not unlike the feelings of pulling cobwebs from my fingers ends

"History of Joseph Curtis, son of Nahum & Millicent Curtis, which was born Dec. 24, 1818, in the Town of Coneatea, Erie Co., Penn.," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 47.

Tells of being present when Joseph testified of First Vision and coming of Moroni in Pontiac, Michigan, in October 1834.

In the spring of 1835 [October 1834] Joseph Smith and company with his father and mother and some others came to Michigan and paid us a visit. In a meeting [he] stated the reason why he preached the doctrine he did. I will state a few things according to my memory. As a revival of some of the sects was going on, some of his father's family joined in the revival. Himself being quite young, [and] he feeling an anxiety to be religious, [and] his mind [being] somewhat troubled, this scripture came to his mind, which says, "if a man lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth liberally and upbraideth not." Believing it, he went with a determination to obtain [wisdom], to enquire of the Lord himself. After some struggle the Lord manifested to him that the different sects were wrong; also that the Lord had a great work for him to do. It worried his mind; he told his father, [and] his father told him to do as the Lord manifested. [He] had other manifestations . . . [and he] saw an angel with a view of this hill Cumorah and the plates of gold; [he then] had certain instructions, got the plates by the assistance of the Urim and Thummim, translated them by the gift and power of God. . . . [He] also stated he [had] done nothing more than he was commanded to do; for this his name was cast out as evil; for this he was persecuted . . .

"History of Joseph Curtis, son of Nahum & Millicent Curtis, which was born Dec. 24, 1818, in the Town of Coneatea, Erie Co., Penn," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 5-6; cited in Dan Vogel, ed. Early Mormon Documents (Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books, 1996), 1:36-37. Spelling, grammar, and punctuation have been modernized.

Curtis, Levi

(birth and death dates unavailable)

Retells William D. Huntington's account of having been raised from the dead by the Prophet Joseph.

About the month of August, 1856, William D. Huntington and I went into Hobble Creek Canyon to get a tree or log suitable for making drums. After we had finished our labor and started for home, both of us riding on the log, our conversation naturally turned upon the doctrines of the Church and experiences of the past, when the life and labors of the Prophet Joseph were touched upon. This subject aroused into more than usual earnestness the mind and conversation of my associate.

He said that in Nauvoo he lived in the family of and worked for Joseph Smith at the time the Prophet had such a wonderful time with the sick, when nearly everybody was stricken down and he himself was among the afflicted, and was one of those who were healed by Joseph. He said he had been sick some weeks and kept getting weaker, until he became so helpless that he could not move. Finally he got so low he could not speak, but had perfect consciousness of all that was passing in the room. He saw friends come to the bedside, look at him a moment and commence weeping, then turn away.

He further stated that he presently felt easy, and observing his situation found that he was in the upper part of the room near the ceiling, and could see the body he had occupied lying on the bed, with weeping friends, standing around as he had witnessed in many cases where people had died under his own observation.

About this time he saw Joseph Smith and two other brethren come into the room. Joseph turned to his wife Emma and asked her to get him a dish of clean water. This she did; and the Prophet with the two brethren accompanying him washed their hands and carefully wiped them. Then they stepped to the bed and laid their hands upon the head of his body, which at that time looked loathsome to him, and as the three stretched out their hands to place them upon the head, he by some means became aware that he must go back into that body, and started to do so. The process of getting in he could not remember; but when Joseph said "amen," he heard and could see and feel with his body. The feeling for a moment was most excruciating, as though his body was pierced in every part with some sharp instruments.

As soon as the brethren had taken their hands from his head he raised up in bed, sitting erect, and in another moment turned his legs off the bed.

At this juncture Joseph asked him if he had not better be careful, for he was very weak. He replied, "I never felt better in my life," almost immediately adding, "I want my pants."

His pants were found and given him, which he drew on, Joseph assisting him, although he thought he needed no help. Then he signified his intention to sit in a chair at or near the fireplace. Joseph took hold of his arm to help him along safely, but William declared his ability to walk alone, notwithstanding which, the help continued.

Astonishment had taken the place of weeping throughout the room. Every looker-on was ready to weep for joy; but none were able or felt inclined to talk.

Presently William said he wanted something to eat. Joseph asked him what he would like, and he replied that he wanted a dish of bread and milk.

Emma immediately brought what he called for, as one may easily comprehend, every hand was anxious to supply the wants of a man who, a few moments before was dead, really and truly dead! Brother Huntington ate the bowl of bread and milk with as good a relish as any he ever ate.

In a short time all felt more familiar, and conversation upon the scene that transpired followed. William related his experiences, and the friends theirs.

Joseph listened to the conversation and in his turn remarked that they had just witnessed as great a miracle as Jesus did while on the earth. They had seen the dead brought to life.

At the close of his narrative to me William Huntington remarked:

"Now I have told you the truth, and here I am a live man, sitting by the side of you on this log, and I testify that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God."

Levi Curtis, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 12 (15 June 1892): 385-86.
