Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Dana, Charles Root

(November 8, 1802-August 7, 1868)

Tells of Joseph blessing his wife, who was near death; wife healed.

[August 2, 1841] Soon after I got there [Nauvoo] I engaged to labor on the Temple of the Lord. My business was for a time laying stone; finally I obtained tools and learned to cut stone. However before this we had a great deal of sickness. My wife was very low for a long time. I despaired of her living; until I mustered courage to go for Bro. Joseph. I found him much engaged with several gentlemen, lacking for some instrument of writing, at his own house, but not finding it there, he arose from the table and said it must be at Bro. ______ and all left the house to go in search of it. I took the opportunity as he was passing out of the gate to say, "Brother Joseph, will you go and administer to my wife?" He answered hastily (for he appeared perplexed about the paper) "I cannot." I stopped as short as possible in my tracks; the tears trickled down my cheeks, but I made out to articulate. "Brother Joseph, she is sick, nigh unto death; and I do not want to part with her." I suppose that he heard me; and he turned his head, saw my countenance and answered. "I will be there presently." My heart leaped for joy. I hurried home (it was in an old log house on the bottom with Elder Truman Gillets family) and had not much more than got there before Brother Joseph came bounding over the bottom like a chased roe.

He asked me, "How long has she been sick?" He then walked the house for some minutes. I began to fear that he considered her past recovery, but he finally went to the fire, warmed his hands, throwed his cloak off, went to the bed, laid his hands on her, and while in the midst of his administering to her, he seemed to be baffled. The disease or evil spirit rested upon him; but he overpowered it and pronounced great blessings upon her.

After he took off his hands he turned to me and said, "That sister will get well; take good care of her."

I afterwards learned by Sister Gillet that one side of him was much affected. [My wife] Margaret was afflicted in that way; one whole side of her had been attacked with the numb palsy, but she began to amend from that [time] having firmly believed that if he had not been called in that she would have died; and he told her so afterwards.

We did not linger very long in the bottom; but got a comfortable situation on the bench, and kept from one to six boarders.

Charles Root Dana, "Journals 1847," microfilm on holograph, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some grammar and spelling has been modernized.
