Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Day, Henry

(February 6, 1824-October 17, 1898)

A nonmember living in Nauvoo, Day knew of mob gathering to kill Joseph and Hyrum and destroy Mormon property; tells of Tom Sharp riding out to prairie to muster a mob for the murder; Day encountered mob (fortified by whiskey) on its way to Carthage; some 2 hours later they returned, having killed Joseph and Hyrum.

During the winter of 1842-43 I drove a team from Augusta to Warsaw for a man named Tondy (?) who was in the slaughtering business. In the spring of 1843, I rented a farm off Samuel Corner. A County Commissioner gave me a contract to grade 5 miles of a turnpike between his farm and Warsaw and to keep bridges in repair. At this time, there was a great excitement throughout the country pertaining to the Mormons.

During this time there was a mob gathering on the prairie about one mile from where I lived for the purpose of capturing Joseph Smith and taking him as prisoner. Also for the purpose of destroying the property of the Mormons. On the 27th day of June, 1844, Tom Sharp a mobocrat and the editor of the Warsaw Signal, rode out to the mob on the prairie to beat up volunteers to go to Carthage to kill Joseph and Hyrum Smith together with the rest of the Mormon's who were in Carthage jail. On the same day, I was on the road that led from Warsaw to Carthage repairing a bridge which had been washed out by a flood. While working there, the mob was on their way to Carthage. When they got to where I was working they could not cross on account of the bridge not being completed. The mob cursed and swore at me in a disregardful manner and called me everything but a gentleman. Their leader, Colonel Williams, said, "Hold on boys, I have known that man for a long time to be a straight forward man."

They went half a mile out of their way to get to the road again and passed on to Carthage. Such a low disrespectful set as the mob was I have never witnessed before or since. Out of about 300 of the mob, but between 55 to 60 of them volunteered to go kill Joseph & Hyrum Smith.

The mob was on foot following a low broken wagon drawn by a pair of the poorest looking horses imaginable. In the end of the wagon was a barrel of whiskey and hanging at the side of the wagon was a tin cup, as the mob could have whiskey at their pleasure. After they had passed, I finished covering the bridge and went home. I unyoked my oxen and was eating supper, when the mob passed coming back from Carthage. They were not gone exceeding 2 hours until they returned with three men forcing them along by a pistol which Elder Whelock had given Joseph while in prison. I was at Carthage on the morning of the 28th about sun up and went and examined the jail. The Mormons had come from Nauvoo and had taken Joseph & Hyrum and had started back to Nauvoo just as I arrived at Carthage.

"Life of Henry Day," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
