Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Allred, William Moore

(December 24, 1819-January 8, 1901)

First impressions of the Prophet; as a youth, remembers playing ball with him; Joseph said he relaxed to retain his vibrancy; Allred was present during the Prophet's first sermon of baptism for the dead.

I thought he had a very noble appearance, very kind and affectionate. I visited the camp several times while they were stopping on my Uncle James Allred's farm. I know he was a true Prophet of God, for I have lived to see many of his prophecies fulfilled, and I am willing for this testimony to go to all the world.

. . . As I was not quite fifteen years old when I first saw him, I cannot remember many of his sayings at that time; but as he was returning, he preached in the Salt River Branch.

I was with him in the troubles at DeWitt, Adam-ondi-Ahman, and in Far West. I have played ball with him many times in Nauvoo. He was preaching once, and he said it tried some of the pious folks to see him play ball with the boys. He then related a story of a certain prophet who was sitting under the shade of a tree amusing himself in some way, when a hunter came along with his bow and arrow, and reproved him. The prophet asked him if he kept his bow strung up all the time. The hunter answered that he did not. The prophet asked why, and he said it would lose its elasticity if he did. The prophet said it was just so with his mind, he did not want it strung up all the time. Another time when I heard him preaching he said if he should tell the people all the Lord had revealed to him, some would seek his life. Even as good a man as old Father C, here on the stand, he added, (pointing back to him) would seek his life.

I was present when he preached the first sermon on baptism for the dead. I remember my father said it was astonishing to him to think he had read the Bible all his life and he had never looked at it in that light before. I was present at the first baptism for the dead.

William Allred, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 15 (1 August 1892): 471.

First met Joseph in Missouri, in 1833; tells of hiding in ambush to protect Joseph from the mob; later, mob apprehended Joseph and Hyrum amid great tumult and fanfare; the Prophet condemned to die, but Alexander Doniphan refused to obey the order; heard Joseph preach the first sermon on baptism for the dead, say he could not reveal all the Lord had told him or some would seek his life; taught of need for relaxation by telling of a certain hunter who unstrung his bow to ease tension.

While living here [Jackson County, Mo., 1833] I first saw Joseph Smith the Prophet, as he was going up in what was called Zion's Camp, we then moved to Clay County in 1839.

I think the next day I was on guard right on the road when C. C. Rich and others went out to meet the officers of the army. Brother Rich carrying a white flag. I stood in plain view and watched them until they met the officers, and conversed a few moments, and when Bro. Rich started back, and got three or four rods away, Bogard shot at him. Finally this same Col. Hinckle made a treaty with the mob (as we called them) and agreed to deliver up Joseph, and Hyrum, and some others, and to deliver up our arms, and leave the state.

On the seventh of September previous to this Joseph was put on trial in Daviess County and we heard that a mob was collecting to take him. So a company of us went out to lay in ambush near the Court, in case we were needed. I lived eight miles from Far West, but I was in town when the Company was made up so I volunteered to go and as I passed a door I asked a lady if she would give me a piece of bread to take with me, and she gave me a small piece, and when we got out there we found there were a great many in the same fix, or worse, than I was. [illegible] the commander sent a sack around and got all there was in camp, and then we all fared a like and had enough [to eat]. We lay in ambush till night, and Joseph was discharged, and we returned home.

I never shall forget the night that Joseph and Hyrum went into the camp of the mob, such yelling and screaming and swearing I never heard; we could hear them up to town. They held a Court Martial, and condemned Joseph and Hyrum to death. But General Doniphan, a noble Gentleman, interfered and opposed it. He said he would march his Brigade away & have no hand in such cold blooded murder, as he called it. Then on the 1st of Nov. the troops marched up in to the edge of Town, formed a hollow square, I should think about ten or fifteen deep, of the footmen and then the horsemen on the outside. They opened a place for us to march in, then closed up the place, and ordered us to march to the center of the square, and lay down our arms. . . .

. . . I was present when Joseph preached the first sermon on baptism for the dead. I was also present when the first person was baptized in the Mississippi River for the dead, before the Baptismal Font was finished in the Temple.

. . . I was present one time when Joseph was preaching, and he said if he should tell all the Lord had revealed to him, some would seek his life, says he, even as good a man as old Father Cole here (pointing back to him as he sat on the stand) but there were but few I suppose that knew what he meant. I have played Ball with him many times, but it was quite a stumbling block to some. After some had found fault with it he was preaching one day, and he told a story about a certain prophet that was sitting under the shade of a tree amusing himself in some way, and a hunter came along and reproved him, and he asked the hunter if he always kept his bow strung up: "Oh, no" said he. "Why not?" "Because it would loose its elasticity." "Well then," said the Prophet, "it is just so with my mind. I do not want it strung up all the time." Well I might keep on quoting his sayings; that would be interesting, and many Prophesies that I have heard him deliver, and have seen many fulfilled.

William Moore Allred, Reminiscences and Diary 1883 Feb.1887 Oct., LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some spelling and punctuation has been modernized.

Was present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Sidney Rigdon one of Joseph's counselors had moved to Pittsburgh, and when he heard of Joseph's death he came to Nauvoo claiming his right to lead the Church. At least he said the Church was 14 years old and had the right to choose a guardien, but Brigham Young, the President of the twelve Apostles and others of the twelve (that had been on a mission) just got home as the meeting was called for Rigdon to preach. And after he got through Brigham got up and spoke with such power that it convinced nearly all that were present that the Mantle of Joseph had fallen on him. I was perfectly satisfied.

William Moore Allred, "Reminiscences and Diary, 1833," holograph, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 11.
