Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Decker, Isaac

(December 29, 1799 [or November 1800]-June 13, 1873)

Scientific advances precede destruction of the gentiles; technological advancement to help build Zion.

In 1836, soon after the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, and while the brethren were holding meetings from house to house, breaking bread, consecrating and drinking wine and prophesying, I attended one of the meetings where Joseph Smith, Martin Harris and John Smith were present. Martin said there would not be a living Gentile on the earth in four years. Joseph reproved him and said, "Brother Martin, you are too fast; after messages are sent with lightning speed, with iron carriages drawn by iron horses snorting fire and smoke, with less speed than the messages were carried, then, it may do to talk about the time for the destruction of the Gentiles. But before that takes place they will make wonderful improvements in machinery of every kind, especially implements of husbandry for the working of the land and raising grain, saving a great deal of labor to the saints in building up the kingdom. The Lord will inspire the Gentiles to do this, but they will not acknowledge his hand in it, nor give him the glory, but will take the glory to themselves, and when their destruction comes the wicked will slay the wicked; the saints will not destroy the Gentiles, they will be divided among themselves and destroy one another. But the time is with the Lord. The benefits of all their ingenuity and inventions will be the means of advancing the building up of Zion with greater speed. The Lord will have the glory."

Isaac Decker, "Statement Made by Isaac Decker," 21 September 1870, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: Some may feel Joseph alludes to trains"iron carriages drawn by iron horses snorting fire and smoke." Note, however, that trains existed in Joseph's day; indeed, the earliest and most primitive trains existed even before his birth, and some were in commercial operation during his life time. For that matter, Joseph himself rode on a train in July 1836 (Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 2:436). Others of the early Saints did as well. Perhaps this is a reference to cars and trucks, or for that matter, something not yet invented. The significant dimension of what Decker mentions, it seems, is the timing of the destruction of the gentiles as something that follows dramatic technological advancement, and the fact that they will not be destroyed by the Saints but that "they will destroy one another."
