Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Draper, William

(April 24, 1807-May 28, 1886)

Meets Joseph; attended School of Prophets; Joseph sent him on mission to Canada; returns, prospers on farm by following Joseph's counsel; agrees with Saints to give mob their guns because Joseph said to; tells of Far West imprisonment of Joseph and Hyrum, and of Gen. Clark's speech; move to Commerce; tells how Joseph organized the first stake there; moves to Green Plain, which is mob country; they want him to join with them, he refuses, and is therefore persecuted by them.

[Draper was baptized March 20, 1834; ordained a Priest by Brigham Young. Went to Kirtland, arriving] the 24th of the same month and I was satisfied and rejoiced at meeting some of my old friends, brethren from Canada, and more satisfied to see the face and hear the voice of the Prophet Joseph; and from him and his brethren received much valuable instruction. . . .

The following winter [1835-36] I had the privilege of attending the Theological School, which was superintended by the Prophet Joseph Smith and his counselors; from which I received much good instruction and information, and the meeting instructions preparatory to the endowment, when the temple was finished during which time I was put into the Presidency of the Priests Quorum which the Bishops preside over. . . .

. . . Then all things remained quiet about the first of June the Quorum of the Twelve was sent to the Eastern States and Canada to hold conferences and regular affairs in the Church abroad in that direction. I was counseled by the Prophet to go on a mission, which I did and traveled in company with them to Larorough in Canada, where I had formerly lived and joined the Church.

. . . Things went on comfortable and pleasantly during the ensuing fall and winter [1836] and by the assistance and counsel of the Prophet I prospered exceedingly well, so that I got a nice little farm on twenty acres on which I build a good comfortable house and made other suitable improvements suitable for the comforts of life. . . .

. . . We hastened to comply with the instructions received from the Prophet and in a few days were on our way to Far West. . . . [Draper then tells of confrontations with the mob in Missouri, mentioning all the defensive and protective measures the Saints took and that word finally came] saying that a treaty had been effected in which we were to lay down our arms in evidence of our leaving as peaceful citizens and sign our property to the state to pay the expense of the war.

Joseph had agreed to all of this and that the army would be up soon to carry the treaty into effect and that we must act accordingly. That was a tough pill to swallow, however, if Joseph says so all right. . . .

I will now say that after we had got mostly through the business of signing deeds, we were called to witness one of the most heart rending scenes. Joseph and his brethren were brought up from the camp and driven up to their own dear ones where they were permitted to see their wives and children and few moments to bid them everlasting farewell; being told they would never see them again. They were then driven off, leaving wives and children overwhelmed in a flood of tears, when one of the wives was in a condition not to be left one day without the assistance of her husband, let alone having him dragged off by a ruthless mob never to return but such was their condition; both husbands and wives in the hands and to the mercy of an unmerciful set of beings. But the Lord over-ruled all and delivered them out of their hands in his own time.

[Tells of Joseph and Hyrum being in custody, of the order Alexander Doniphan refused, and of the speech given by General Clark warning the Saints to leave and never return. Tells of moving to Illinois, arriving at Quincy. A conference in Commerce, Oct. 6, 1839:] I went and another such sight my eyes never beheld. That portion of the assembly that had lived in Commerce during the summer looked more like ghosts that had neither flesh nor blood, or but very little, yet they seemed to be satisfied and glad to think they were able to attend conference. They organized the place into a stake of Zion and changed the name of the place from Commerce to that of Nauvoo, a resting place. In the organization I was chosen one of the High Council but was subsequently released by telling Joseph what I was doing and what the prospect was in Pike County where I had been laboring during the summer, about eighty miles from Nauvoo. He told me to return and continue preaching and when the branch reached the number 100 he would then come and organize the branch into a stake of Zion. I went home and to my field of labor, doors were opened on every hand. I preached and baptized and in about two weeks the branch numbered 112. I let Joseph know according to his instructions and he being overtaxed with business sent his brother Hyrum who was his first counselor and Bishop George Miller. They came and organized the branch into a stake of Zion for a resting place for the saints that were gathered from the east and from the south.

. . . In the spring of 1843 I moved with my family and located in a place called Green Plain in the vicinity of Warsaw in Hancock County with the notorious Levi Williams for one of my neighbors. I there bought a farm on terms and went to improving. Built me a good house and grist mill and put about twenty acres of land in a good state of cultivation with a good fence around it; was on good terms with my neighbors although most of them were gentiles. They professed to be much pleased with my enterprise in the place and all went well with me until sometime in June 1844. Then there were frequent reports about Joseph from Nauvoo, that produced some little excitement for priests and lawyers and apostates had combined together to again make trouble. The men in the neighborhood where I lived organized to go to Nauvoo and arrest Joseph, but I refused. They wanted to know if I would go if the Governor ordered me to go I said "No, I will not if the devil himself ordered me to go against Joseph for his people are my people and where he goes I will go also."

This appeared to vex them a little although we had always been on good terms as neighbors, and they said, "Then you will have to leave for you can't live here although we like you as a neighbor." So they left me and soon started for Nauvoo, with old Colonel Williams as their leader, which resulted in the martyrdom of Joseph the Prophet and Hyrum the Patriarch. This was done in Carthage Jail, June 27, 1844.

"Life of William DraperBorn in Richmond, Frontanact County, Canada, April 24th 1807; Died in Freedom, Sanpete County, Utah, May 28th 1886," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some spelling has been modernized.
