Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Duncan, Homer

(January 19, 1815-March 23, 1906)

Joseph F. Smith's appearance like that of Joseph Smith; tells of transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Referring to the appearance of Joseph Smith, the speaker said: "If you could see Joseph F. Smith when he was about 25 years of age, you would see as near his Uncle Joseph's profile in him as in any man I have ever seen. If you laid a rule on his forehead and down his nose, it would come very near filling up. He had a large head, and heavy shoulders, not quite as rounding as President Young's. He was a very handsome and a very strongly built man."

The speaker briefly related the circumstance [of the transfiguration of Brigham Young on August 8, 1844] . . . when the mantle of Joseph the Prophet rested upon President Brigham Young. He was much impressed on this occasion, as were all others present. He particularly noted that the gestures, voice and personal appearance of Brigham Young were a perfect counterpart of those naturally assumed and exhibited by the Prophet.

"When Joseph was taken to prison I felt if they would only let me go, I would willingly lay down my life for the Prophet of God."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:34.

Witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young, and saw Brigham imitate Joseph's voice, appearance, and hand gestures.

At the special meeting held at Nauvoo, after Joseph Smith's deathat the time that the mantle of the Prophet of the Lord fell upon Brigham YoungI sat listening to someone speaking, with my head down, my face hid in the palms of my hands and my elbows resting on my knees. While in this position Brigham Young came to the stand and commenced to speak with the voice of Joseph the Prophet. Being so well acquainted with the Prophet's voice, I nearly sprang from my seat, through astonishment; but I sat and heard the Prophet Joseph's voice as long as Brigham was speaking. Not only did the voice of Brigham sound like that of Joseph, but the very gestures of his right hand, when he was saying anything very positive, reminded me of Joseph. My decision was then made as to who should lead the Church: for surely the mantle of Joseph had fallen upon Brigham.

"Homer Duncan," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:625.
