Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Ensign, Mary Dunn

(November 2, 1833-November 8, 1920)

Cordial greeting by Joseph when arriving in Nauvoo; moved in near the Prophet's home; her father helped rescue Joseph from Missourians following Dixon kidnapping; remembers black horse, Joe Duncan, and Joseph playing ball games with children; Joseph prophesied her father would get measles, and he did; bathed a sick baby in river, and it was healed; as a playmate of Julia Murdock Smith often in Smith home; Julia told her the "hired girls" were actually Joseph's plural wives; on way to Carthage the Prophet's entourage passed her father's home; recalls gloom in Nauvoo June 27, 1844; witnessed transfiguration of Brigham Young, as apparently did her father.

I was born 2 Nov. 1833, in Wayne County, Michigan; removed to Nauvoo in August, 1841. The first person who met us was Joseph Smith the Prophet. He stopped and shook hands with all, even to the baby. .

We settled on what was called Hyde & Parley street not far from the house of the Prophet, then called the Mansion House. In time we became well acquainted with the family, and witnessed many trying scenes relative to the martyrdom of the Prophet.

I remember when he was kidnapped by the Missourians, how dreadful everybody felt. There were five hundred men ready to go to his release, and father was one of them. How glad every one was when Joseph arrived home five days after. It turned our sorrow into joy. How earnestly we had prayed night and day for his return.

I saw him on parade one fourth of July riding his black horse named Joe Duncan. I thought I had never seen a more beautiful sight. I have also witnessed him on the ball grounds many times. None could excel him in the games.

He was also a man of great faith. On one occasion my father was very sick and sent for the Prophet to come. He shook hands with father and asked him if he had ever had the measles. Father said "no." The Prophet then said, "you will have them," and before he took his hands off, father was broken out with the measles as thick as could be.

At another time the baby was very sick with black canker. Mother took him to the Prophet Joseph, who went with us to a stream of water. When the Prophet Joseph took the baby he laid him across his hand face down and immersed it in the waters. The baby recovered and is now living.

I went to school with the Prophet's children, passed their home going and coming and frequently called for their adopted daughter, Julia, who was the same age as their son Joseph Jr., the present leader of the Josephite Church. One day in particular we were in the dining room. There were three young women at work setting the table as fast as they could get it set. Young Joseph would gather the knives and forks etc., and disarrange them. They were having a jolly good time. When we left, when we left [sic] and on on our way to school Julia remarked to my sister and me: "It is said these young girls are hired girls, but they are not. They are father's wives."

That was the first time that I had heard of a man having more than one wife, and if she knew it, it is reasonable to assume that young Joseph knew.

After that I heard father and mother talking on the subject. Father also tried to get another wife. Between that time and the exodus from Nauvoo. There were many who had had plural wives that I knew of, but owing to the intense feeling it was not practiced openly.

There were a number of apostates associated with people at that time; among them, Mark Bennet, William Smith, Foster and others. William Smith had been cut off from the church for adultery and eighteen years later became an apostle in the Josephite church. [Note: William Smith was excommunicated October 12, 1845.]

I remember the persecutions. Brother Joseph stood these until he felt that he could stand it no longer so he concluded to go West and find a place for his people. I well remember when the people found (?) that he was gone. There were certain ones among the people who raised the hue and cry that the shepherd had deserted his flock. It seemed, as thought they could give him no rest, so he returned and faced his enemies until they took his life together with his brother at Carthage Jail.

When he made his farewell speech we could hear him from our house. Governor Ford promised protection to him and to the saints, providing he would surrender, but you know how that pledge was kept. They passed our house the next day on horse back. It was a sad day and one long to be remembered.

At that time my father was on a mission to the Eastern States, and mother and I was going to Bro. Chase's to see if we could learn anything about father, as he and Brother Chase were on the mission together. It was after sundown. We heard a man coming on horseback and shouting. He had just come from Carthage where they had driven him out. It was Stephen Markham. He told us what he expected would happen, as he had heard shooting in that direction. That night the gloom that was cast over the city no men can describe: cows looed; dogs howled and the whole atmosphere was impregnated with the calamity. The next morning news was received of the massacre of our Prophet and Patriarch. The people were afraid that the mob would come in a body and massacre the whole body of saints.

I well remember when the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum were brought home and placed in the mansion house. Thousands came to view the remains. The cry was soon raised who will lead the people now? Sidney Rigdon was one candidate

I was at the meeting when he stood in his carriage and harranged the people for three hours. He thought it his place to lead them. The saints did not know what to do. It seemed as though everything was at a standstill. The meeting was held in a large grove at that time one afternoon. There was an immense crowd in attendance. Meeting was opened as usual and Brigham Young stepped to the stand. It seemed as though the Prophet was before us and had been resurrected. People craned their necks to get a better view of him, he so resembled the Prophet in looks and speech. Surely the mantle of the Prophet had fallen on Brigham. I remember as well what father said on our way home after the meeting. "They need not hunt any farther. Brigham Young is the man."

In closing I want to bear my testimony to the divinity of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I knew him to be a Prophet then and my testimony has brown stronger with years, and today I am firm in the knowledge that this work is of God, and it is my desire that I an my posterity may ever prove true to the covenants that I have made.

"Biography of Mary Dunn Ensign, daughter of Simeon Adams Dunn and Adaline Rawson Dunn," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
