Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Everett, Addison

(October 10, 1805-January 12, 1885)

Joseph said he did not teach William Law the doctrine of the plurality of Gods; also that Jesus' first miracle was to create the world; gives account of restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood given.

I heard the following conversation between Joseph and Hyrum a few days before they were martyred.

Hyrum was telling Joseph that William Law apostatized because Joseph believed in a plurality of Gods.

Joseph said, "Who told him I did? I did not."

"Now brethren if you will prepare a good lot of seats at the stand I will preach you a sermon on the plurality of Gods from the 5th and 6th verses of the first chapter of Revelation." (He was murdered before he had a chance to preach the sermon.)

In the conversation between Joseph and Hyrum, Oliver Cowdery was spoken of-Joseph said "Poor boy!" and went on to state that at Colesville he and Oliver were under arrest on charges of deceiving the people. When they were at the justice's house for trial in the evening, all were waiting for Mr. Reid, Joseph's lawyer. And while waiting the justice asked Joseph some questions, among which was this:

"What was the first miracle Jesus performed?"

Joseph replied, "He made this world, and what followed we are not told."

Mr. Reid came in and said he wanted to speak to his clients in private and that the law allowed him that privilege, he believed. The judge pointed to a door to a room in the back part of the house and told them to step in there. As soon as they got into the room, the lawyer said there was a mob outside in front of the house, "and if they get hold of you they will perhaps do you bodily injury; and I think the best way for you to get out of this is to get right out there," pointing to the window and hoisting it. They got into the wood in going a few rods from the houseit was night and they traveled through brush and water and mud, fell over logs, etc., until Oliver was exhausted; then Joseph helped him along through the mud and water, almost carrying him.

They traveled all night, and just at the break of day Oliver gave out entirely and exclaimed,

"O Lord! Brother Joseph, how long have we got to endure this thing?" They sat down on a log to rest and Joseph said that at that very time Peter, James and John came to them and ordained them to the Apostleship.

They had 16 or 17 miles to travel to get back to Mr. Hales, his father-in-law's, but Oliver did not complain any more of fatigue.

Now Brother Huntington I have told you what I heard Brother Joseph tell, almost the only time I ever heard him talk. It is a source of satisfaction and pleasure to me to have seen and heard the Prophet of God."

Your humble servant, Addison Everett.

In Oliver B. Huntington, "Words and Incidents of the Prophet Joseph's Life," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 2 (November 1890): 75-76.

Hears Joseph teach that "in my Father's house are many mansions."

Joseph interprets "in my Father's house are many mansions" to mean many kingdoms and worlds.

Addison Everett heard the Prophet say that God was continually forming worlds for his chosen to dwell upon, hence the saying, "In my Father's house are many mansions, or in my Father's kingdom there are many kingdoms" and I go to prepare a place for you.

"Sayings of Joseph by Those Who Knew Him at Different Times," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
