Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Fielding, Joseph

(March 26, 1797-December 19, 1863)

Tells of Joseph's imprisonment by two Missourians; freed at Dixon, Ill.; a company of hundreds come to escort him back to Nauvoo, where is he welcomed amid great joy and celebration.

In the spring of this year, 1843, our Prophet Joseph Smith was seized while on a visit to his wife's relatives by two men having a bill against him from the governor of Missouri. They dragged him from his family, got him into a carriage with the design of taking him at once to Missouri, but the Lord delivered him. The driver would stop at Dixon to feed his horses, and so the matter got out and the people were ready to deliver him. He then got a writ against the two men for their unlawfully taking him (i.e.) by threat of arms, and by a writ of Habeas Corpus obtained right to have his own case tried at the nearest Municipal Court.

All started to go to some certain place, I forget the name, but in a short time they were met by a company of the Saints, 50 of whom had been dispatched from Nauvoo mounted on horses and privately armed. When our Prophet saw them, he told those with him he was [mayor of?] Nauvoo, and seeing such a company of his friends, his persecutors durst make no resistance. A little before they reached here they were met by our band and hundreds of others in haste to congratulate our beloved head and leader on his escape from the hands of the wicked. I suppose so great tokens of respect and honor had never before been manifested towards him, and although it was attended with considerable expense, yet it was a day of great rejoicing with us, to see our beloved Prophet instead of being taken a prisoner into the hands of those that thirsted for his blood, riding on his horse, his brother on one side and his wife on the other, and hundreds or thousands of his friends and a band of music in full play, as though he had been a mighty monarch returning from some glorious victory, and all this in the sight of his enemies. (This is according to the best of my knowledge).

In Andrew F. Ehat, " 'They Might Have Known That He Was Not a Fallen Prophet'The Nauvoo Journal of Joseph Fielding," BYU Studies 19, no. 2 (winter 1979): 144.

Joseph speaks of apostate conduct, and the apostates are offended; later, Joseph names the Fosters, Laws, Chauncey Higby, and Joseph H. Jackson, who claim Joseph to be a fallen prophet; they object to doctrine of plurality of wives and plurality of Gods.

On the 7th of March [1843], a meeting was called and several addresses delivered by the Prophet and others on some evils in the city. Several received a severe exposure in the Church and out. Of the latter was the brother of R. D. Foster. He asked in the congregation if Mr. Hyrum Smith alluded to him in his remarks, but did not get a direct answer. He then asked Mr. Joseph Smith if he meant him. Brother Joseph Smith asked why he thought so, but he repeated the question and said "if you will not hear me, you soon shall hear from me. Did you allude to me?" When Brother Joseph Smith answered, "you say it," and bid the officers to take him and fine [him] 5 or 10 dollars I forget which. His Brother R. D. [Foster] then spoke to justify him and clear him of censure, and after exchanging a few words, Brother Joseph Smith told him to hold his tongue or he would fine him too. Thus it ended for the time, but the reproof and exposure which he and several others had received stirred up feelings that could not be suppressed.

A few weeks after this, our Prophet told us from the stand, by the wall of the partly built [Nauvoo] temple, that a conspiracy was formed by the two Fosters, the Laws, C. Higby, and J. H. Jackson and others against himself and all the Smiths. By some of them it was declared that there should not be one of the Smith family alive in a few weeks. Many accusations and threats of this kind were uttered. All this the Prophet had had from a Mr. Heaton and another. The testimony was credible. They had formed a caucus and had invited others to join it but much of this was found to be the false statement of the said Joseph H. Jackson, who proved to be as corrupt and guilty as a man could well be. Yet it was partly true. I do not know to what extent. But this I do know. Jackson quickly left the place and William Law, his brother Wilson Law, the former one of the first presidency, and the latter major general of the legion of the city. R. D. Foster and others revolted from the Church, saying that Joseph was fallen, the same as all the apostates have said, such as Parish, Cowdery, Harris and Russell, etc. They formed a church of themselves, appointed one as their prophet or head and held meetings in the house of the Laws, got up all the affidavits they could, especially from the sisters against the conduct of the Prophet, to publish to the world.

They object to the doctrine of plurality of wives and of gods. I was present when the two [William and Wilson Law] Laws, the wife of William and R. D. Foster, were cut off from the Church. The feeling as to their conduct was very unanimous except that Brother [William] Marks did not raise his hand against Sister Law. Their principle charge against Joseph is that he has and seeks to obtain other women or wives and has taught the same to others who have done the same.

As to me, I have evidence enough that Joseph is not fallen. I have seen him after giving as I before said, the origin of Masonry, organize the kingdom of God on the earth and am myself a member of it. In this I feel myself highly honored but I feel grieved that at this time of the greatest light and the greatest glory and honor, men of so much knowledge and understanding should cut themselves off.

In Andrew F. Ehat, " 'They Might Have Known That He Was Not a Fallen Prophet'The Nauvoo Journal of Joseph Fielding," BYU Studies 19, no. 2 (winter 1979): 146-48.

In April Conference 1844 Joseph speaks convincingly; Joseph Fielding sees it as evidence he is not fallen; many appointed to campaign for Joseph to become president.

April 6, 1844, our annual conference began and continued four days. Joseph's discourse on the origin of man, the nature of God and the resurrection were the most interesting matters of this time and any one that could not see in him the spirit of inspiration of God must be dark. They might have known that he was not a fallen prophet, even if they thought he was fallen. Elder Rigdon also spoke of persecution he and Joseph passed through at the commencement of the work. Many were appointed to go out through this nation, particularly on the subject of the electing of Joseph to the presidency of the United States.

In Andrew F. Ehat, " 'They Might Have Known That He Was Not a Fallen Prophet'The Nauvoo Journal of Joseph Fielding," BYU Studies 19, no. 2 (winter 1979): 148.

Brethren vote to turn apostates over to "buffetings of Satan"; Joseph teaches Satan always opposes kingdom of God.

At the last Grand Council I attended, William and Wilson Law, R. D. Foster and those in connection with them were by the voice of the council delivered up to the buffetings of Satan, after having been visited in all kindness by two of the brethren. On Sunday, the 13th of May, Joseph spoke on the gospel of the kingdom and showed that when God set up his kingdom on the earth, Satan always set up his in opposition, alluding to apostasy at this time. Working in this place, I never felt more delighted with his discourse than at this time. It put me in mind of Herod when they said at his oration, it is the voice of a God and not of a man. The circumstances were widely different, he also spoke some on the resurrection.

In Andrew F. Ehat, " 'They Might Have Known That He Was Not a Fallen Prophet'The Nauvoo Journal of Joseph Fielding," BYU Studies 19, no. 2 (winter 1979): 148.

Note: The second Sunday of May, 1844, was actually the 12th, and not the 13th. A summary of the Prophet's discourse is found in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 6:363-67.

Gov. Ford orders Joseph and Hyrum to Carthage; with Willard Richards and John Taylor, they go, are imprisoned and murdered by a mob which included apostates.

June 22nd [1844], an order came from the governor at Carthage for Joseph, Hyrum and the rest of the city council to appear at Carthage or rather, they were informed of this by letter by two or three who went there to see him. The prospect now looked very dark and threatening and they were much perplexed and after holding council together most of the night, Joseph and Hyrum and one or two more left the city before day. Early in the day a company of men arrived with an order from the governor, but as they could not be found, all but one of them returned, leaving one to see if they could be found and would go. They were found by the brethren but they refused to go. The prospect however was so dark, and seemed to threaten the entire destruction of our city, the governor saying if they refused to go, our city stood upon kegs of gun powder and a small spark would blow it up, and the officers saying that we should be put under martial law until they should be delivered up, if it took three years. These things together with a recollection of the horrid scenes of Missouri and also a firm trust that God would deliver them, induced many of the Saints and of Joseph's friends to wish them to go. Yet it was some time before they consented, which they finally did.

On Monday morning, Joseph, his brother Hyrum, Willard Richards, John Taylor, the only two of the Twelve at home, with several others, started for Carthage, of course with solemn feelings, and it appears that Joseph in particular anticipated the fatal result in part, but said he wished at any rate that Hyrum might be saved to stand in his place. He expressed himself to this effect, that he should die for this people, and if so, he should be murdered in cold blood. Sometime before they reached Carthage, they met a company of men with orders from the governor of the state to take our public arms, i.e., the arms belonging to the state. The captain of this company was polite and friendly and gave the strongest assurances of their safety and it was agreed upon that the brethren return with them to Nauvoo.

I was down in the city when they came in, and was in Brother Hyrum's company. In his own house, he was in better spirits by far than when he left. He told me he thought that all things would go well, etc. and as soon as the arms could be collected, they again took their leave of their wives and families, alas for the last time, and came to Carthage (from henceforth of cursed memory).

The governor, it appears, treated them respectfully and took them to his own lodgings until as he said, for fear of the people he desisted and after having had a trial in part, they were unexpectedly and unlawfully thrust into the jail. They went to Carthage on Monday evening, the 24th of June, 1844. On Thursday, the governor left them and with a company of men, came to Nauvoo, having left a guard at the jail, but of the Carthage Greys who had just before been in a state of mutiny. Yet as all the troops had pledged themselves to the governor to abide by the laws, these were entrusted with the care of the prisoners.

It seems that a party of the mob had come to Golding's Point [located between Nauvoo and Carthage] on their way to Nauvoo, and that messengers were sent to them to order them to disperse. At this, their leader, Colonel [Levi] Williams ordered all who were not willing to go to Carthage and kill the Smiths to lay down their arms, and the rest to step out together, saying now is the time or never. This was soon done, and the murderers disguised themselves by blacking their faces and started on their way to shed blood, and came to the place about 5 o'clock in the evening of the 27th [June, 1844].

A young man named [William M.] Daniels, who had given up his gun, went with them, as he said to see what they would do, and was an eye witness to all that passed. He heard Wills say he had shot Hyrum. This Wills was one of the company of Saints (an Irish man) who came with me from England with his wife and two children. He was an elder in the Church. It is understood that he received a wound in the arm from a bullet by Brother Joseph. It took his wrist and ran up by the bone, of which wound he soon after died. A ball passed through the door and entered Brother Hyrum on one side of his nose just below his eye, when he exclaimed, "I'm a dead man," and fell, at which Joseph cried out to Hyrum. As he lay, another entered under his chin

Brother John Taylor attempted to get out a back window, but a ball met him, which it seems threw him back into the room, owing to its taking his watch which beat in the watch, thereby giving the exact time at which it occurred. He had received four balls before he was taken by Brother Willard Richards and put under the bed. He suffered much but survived, a living martyr. Joseph too endeavored to escape by the same window but the mob quickly met him there. He fell from the window and was taken by the mob and was set against the well curb and four men shot him in the upper part of his body. Williams then said "take his head off," but at this moment as Daniels states, a light shone between Joseph and the mob which so affected them that they had no power to touch him and the four men dropped their arms and had to be carried off by their companions. The whole then ran off, leaving their victims weltering in their blood. Thus the earth was once more stained with the blood of the Saints, even the anointed servants of God and their blood echoes the cry of former Saints for vengeance to be taken on the wicked that the earth may be cleansed from the blood of the righteous. [Andrew Ehat notes that "This account of the 'wondrous light' cited from the writings of William M. Daniels was never accepted in official Church accounts and has been rejected by many historians. See Dallin H. Oaks and Marvin S. Hill, Carthage Conspiracy (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1975), p. 90 fn. 60."]

Their bodies were washed from blood and put into boxes and the next day were conveyed in two wagons under a guard to Nauvoo. This was the most solemn sight that my eyes ever beheld. I had often read of the martyrs of old, but now here I saw two of the greatest of men who sealed the truth which they had held and taught with their blood. Is this an earnest of what has to take place in this Last Dispensation? Is the blood of the sheep again to be shed like that of the shepherd as in former days? "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from us, but if not, let thy will be done and let us be strengthened to endure to the end."

Joseph and Hyrum Smith were of large stature, well proportioned and had a noble appearance, and this appearance was by no means lost in death, as they lay side by side, for what can make men more noble than to hold the truth of God against his own interest (temporally) to be at war with the world, for the salvation of the upright in heart, and finally seal that truth with their blood. When I think of them and write of them, I feel as though I want to ask their forgiveness that I have not mourned for them more deeply. Joseph had been brought before rulers and judges scores of times, but was never convicted of any crime, neither Hyrum, and although the governor said the burning of the printing press was unlawful, yet the persecutors said they knew the law would not reach him, but powder and ball would, so that they justly are ranked with the martyrs of Jesus Christ.

My consolation in the midst of this affair was that all had been done. Joseph and Hyrum had done all that they could have done and the foundation of the great work of the last days was laid so that it could be finished by the Twelve Apostles who had been instructed in all things pertaining to the kingdom of God on the earth.

In Andrew F. Ehat, " 'They Might Have Known That He Was Not a Fallen Prophet'The Nauvoo Journal of Joseph Fielding," BYU Studies 19, no. 2 (winter 1979): 150-53.

After martyrdom, Fielding doubts Rigdon's claims; Rigdon anxious to leave for Pittsburgh; Joseph had not preferred Rigdon as a counselor.

Not long after the death of these men, Elder Sidney Rigdon who had long been one of Joseph's counselors came here from Pittsburgh and informed the Saints that he had an important vision after long and earnest inquiry of the Lord, in which it was shown him that Joseph had died holding the key of this kingdom, that he still held it, and would continue to do in eternity. That we are a people must build up the kingdom to Joseph. If we did not, we should be damned and that he himself stood next in authority and he was in haste to get the assent of the Saints in this matter. As he said he must be in Pittsburgh in a short time, this all seemed right to some, but many felt as though it was not the voice of the Spirit. I felt doubtful about it partly because I considered he had not been faithful in his office a long time and partly because the Spirit did not bear witness to it. But there was a general desire that the Twelve might come home first, i.e. before they gave a decision on the subject and so it came to pass which soon gave a new face to things.

A meeting was called and Rigdon again addressed us, but seemed to have no liberty or power, after which Elder Brigham Young spoke to the people. He said he saw here a hurrying spirit, showed the true organization of the Church and called a meeting again when all the quorums of the Church should be placed in proper order. He said that if the people wished Elder Rigdon to be their guardian and leader, they were quite at liberty to take him, but it must be passed in a regular and legal manner, by the separate quorums.

He had much liberty and the power of the Spirit in speaking and at the said meeting, he showed that Rigdon, if he were to take his place as counselor to Joseph, he must go beyond the veil where he was gone, and the Saints soon began to see how things were and that the Twelve must now hold the keys of power and authority according to the revelation which says the Twelve are equal with the first presidency. [See Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 7:232-41.] Before this he asked the Church if they wished to choose themselves a guardian, but they did not raise their hands, and it was now no hard thing determining who should lead the Church. It was also shown that Joseph had told the Twelve after he had instructed them in all things that on them would rest the responsibility and the care of the Church in case he should be taken away. They invited Rigdon to their council but he did not attend and he soon began to use threatening language against the Twelve, Joseph, etc. to say that he had known for some years that Joseph had not been led by the spirit of God [and gave this] as the reason why he did not attend with him as his counselor, he soon so far committed himself that his license was demanded by the Twelve, but he refused to give it up. He seemed in no haste now to get to Pittsburgh, but labored hard to raise a party to himself and succeeded in some degree. Some few cleaved to him, and were in a short time cut off from the Church along with him. Among the [party] were Samuel Bennett, Leonard Soby, Samuel James, William Cottier, etc.

When Rigdon had thus selected a party, they held meetings and he taught them those things which he had learned in the quorum, as it is called, i.e. a company on whom Joseph had conferred the endowment, being clothed in garments and received the last instructions that Joseph could give them, being washed and anointed, etc. These things were to be kept sacred, as it was not to become a general thing until the temple be finished. Rigdon was admitted there a short time before these troubles took place, almost the last to be admitted, and when he became thus cut off if not before, he began to teach those things to his party and to ordain them prophets, priests and kings, though it appears that he obtained some things from William Marks, one of the quorum and the president of this stake, but he and his party soon left Nauvoo and went to Pittsburgh where they began to publish a paper chiefly to expose the corruptions of the Church. But I soon began to hear but little of them, so I leave them for the present.

Note: Ehat notes, in his commentary on the above passage: "The specific charge against Sidney Rigdon at his excommunication trial, 8 September 1844, was that he had administered the highest ordinances of the Temple to individuals when he had not received them himself. See Brigham Young's statement of the charge in Times and Seasons 5 (15 September 1844): 648. On 2 September 1844, Sidney Rigdon taught 'that it was not necessary to build the Templethat it never would be builtthat God had rejected the Church.' See Speech of Orson Hyde, Delivered before the High Priests' Quorum, April 27th, 1845, p. 17."

It seems that Joseph had not looked upon Rigdon as his counselor for a long time, yet as the Church with Brother Hyrum seemed willing to continue him in that office, he was not openly dismissed therefrom. Joseph said he had carried him until he was [sick] of it. He wanted one that would stand by him in danger and peril and at all times, but it appears that Joseph had chosen Brother Hyrum and Amasa Lyman in the stead of Rigdon and William Law.

In Andrew F. Ehat, " 'They Might Have Known That He Was Not a Fallen Prophet'The Nauvoo Journal of Joseph Fielding," BYU Studies 19, no. 2 (winter 1979): 155-57.
