Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Ames, Ira

(September 22, 1804-January 15 [or 16], 1869 [or 1918])

Describes first meeting with Joseph, who was "in some respects like other men."

After a land journey of 700 miles, [I] arrived about the beginning of October in Kirtland. When we landed in Kirtland, I found the Saints had begun to build a temple there. It was raised up to the first floor.

I immediately rented a house and put my family into it and in a few days had the pleasure of an introduction to the Prophet Joseph Smith, Jr. I found him in some respects like other men. I commenced at once the business of shoe-making, having means and leathers to do so. I did pretty well. I accumulated means to build a house the next season for my family.

"Journal of Ira Ames," typescript copy, 5; copies in private family possession.

Goes to Joseph's home the morning after the Prophet received D&C 100; Oliver greets them saying, "We have just received news from heaven."

In December [1833] Martin Harris stayed all night at my house. Towards morning before day, we were impressed to get up and go to Joseph's house. On reaching his house we found Joseph and Oliver Cowdery at breakfast. Oliver said to us, "Good morning. We have just received news from heaven," and pointed to some sheets of paper lying on the table. They had been up all night receiving and writing revelations, and Emma had just gotten breakfast for them. It was the revelation in December 1833 [i.e., D&C 101] . . . Martin Harris took it up and read it to us. We rejoiced exceedingly.

"Journal of Ira Ames," typescript copy, 6; copies in private family possession.

Present when the first high council organized, and heard Joseph give the revelation regarding it.

I was present at the organization of the High Council in February 1835 and heard Joseph give the revelation in relation to it.

"Journal of Ira Ames," typescript copy, 6; copies in private family possession.

Note: This statement refers to D&C 102, given 17 February 1834.

Served as a bodyguard to the Prophet.

Ever since my arrival in Kirtland, I had stood guard at night in consequence of the mob and persecutions we enduredespecially in the winter of 1835 and 1836. Frequently I took my blanket and slept in Joseph's house and guarded my portion of the time and continued as one of Joseph's bodyguards until I left Kirtland.

"Journal of Ira Ames," typescript copy, 6; copies in private family possession.

Signs statement attesting to good character of Joseph Smith following Joseph's differences with Sylvester Smith.

At a council held on 23 August 1834, Ira V. and several others signed a statement that went as follows: "We, the undersigned, members of the above named conference, for the satisfaction of our brethren abroad, feel it to be our duty to say to those with whom we have a personal acquaintance, that we were present during the foregoing investigation, and cheerfully concur in the spirit of the above minutes, and join in saying that we are perfectly satisfied that whatever impressions may have gone abroad, or whatever may remain with any in this vicinity, relative to the conduct of our President, Joseph Smith, Jr., we are certain (from evidence) that he conducted himself in all respects as set forth in the resolutions of this conference. We are induced to make these statements that the innocent may not suffer wrongfully, and that the minds of our brethren and friends may be satisfied, that every appearance of evil is, in this place, searched out, and that nothing unbecoming a society of people professing godliness is suffered to exist among them." This statement was the result of a difficulty existing between Joseph Smith, Jr., and Sylvester Smith which was signed by several people stating that the conduct of Joseph Smith, Jr., was nothing but honorable.

Ira V. Ames et. al, Evening and Morning Star 2, no. 23 (August 1834): 182.
