Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Foote, Warren

(August 10, 1817-July 23, 1903)

Illustrating the kinds of falsehoods spread about Joseph, Foote tells of hearing tale of Joseph's contriving to walk on water.

My brothers David and George attended occasionally but George soon became a convert to Methodism, and joined that sect. He became bitterly opposed to the Latter Day Saints, believing all the lies about Joseph Smith which were put in circulation by the ministers of his church. My brother-in-law who lived within a few rods of Father's house, belonged to the Methodist and the Circuit preachers, generally put up with him. I have repeatedly heard one of them tell the stories then in circulation about Joe Smith, one especially with regard to his attempt to walk on the water, which story ran about like this: "On a certain occasion, J. Smith proclaimed that he would perform a miracle the next Sabbath, by walking on the water. Accordingly he went to work and fixed some planks on some posts, just under the water of a pond. After all things were arranged, some fellows went in the night, and sawed his plank nearly in two. When Sunday came, a multitude came to gather to witness the miracle. When the hour appointed arrived, 'Joe Smith' walked boldly into the water, and on reaching the middle of his last plank, down he went, and came nearly being drowned, before he could be got out." I have heard that Methodist Priest relate that story to my brother-in-law, and sister, and chuckle over it, as though it was a splendid joke on "Joe Smith," and that story was sufficient to burst up "Mormonism."

I could relate other stories, but this will serve for a sample; to show what foolish lies the first members of the church had to contend with.

"Autobiography of Warren Foote," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 3-4.

Foote tells of first meeting with Prophet Joseph, and of seeing mummies and record of Abraham; the Prophet's father explains meaning of part of Abrahamic record.

13th [of May, 1837] The rest of our company being somewhat anxious to see the Prophet Joseph, and the Temple, concluded to accompany Father, and myself to Kirtland. We hired a man to take us to that place for $5.00-distant 12 miles. We arrived there about noon. In the afternoon we went into the [Kirtland] Temple, and saw the mummies and the records which were found with them (we went to the prophet's house to see him. This is the first I saw him, and shook hands with him). Joseph Smith Sen. explained them to us, and said the records were the writings of Abraham and Joseph, Jacob's son. Some of the writing was in black, and some in red. He said that the writing in red, was pertaining to the Priesthood. We were also shown through the Temple.

"Autobiography of Warren Foote," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 5-6.

Tells of first meeting with the Prophet, of seeing the mummies in the Kirtland Temple, and that they contained writings of Abraham and Joseph; red markings pertained to priesthood.

Father came home in the Spring of 1837 intending to visit Kirtland again. I concluded to accompany him. On the 8th day of May, 1837 we started our journey. The rest of our company being somewhat anxious to see the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Temple concluded to accompany father and myself to Kirtland. We hired a man to take us to that place for $5.00a distance of 12 miles. We arrived there about noon. In the afternoon we went to the Prophet's house to see him. This is the first I saw him and shook hands with him. We went into the temple and saw the mummies and the records which were found with them. Joseph Smith Sr. explained them to us and said the records were the writings of Abraham and Joseph, Jacob's son. Some of the writings were in black and some in red. He said that the writing in red was pertaining to the Priesthood. We were also shown the temple.

"Diary of Warren Foote," cited in Foote Genealogical History (N.p.), 7; copies in private family possession.

Recalls first meeting with Prophet, and of seeing mummies and manuscript from ancient Egypt.

In May, 1837, I went with my father to Kirtland, Ohio. On the 13th we went to Joseph Smith's house, and had a short interview with him. This was the first time I ever saw the Prophet. (Father had become acquainted with him the year previously.) Father Joseph Smith, Sen., went with us, and others, to the Temple, and showed us the four Egyptian mummies and the record that was found with one of them. I gazed upon those writings with intense interest. I stayed in Kirtland ten days, and then returned to Greenwood.

In Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:376.

Joseph placed manuscript of Book of Mormon and a copy of Doctrine and Covenants in the cornerstone of Nauvoo House; preaches on baptism for dead, saying cannot be baptized for murderers.

[October] 2nd [1841] Conference commenced today. After meeting a deposit was made in the southeast corner stone of the Nauvoo House. A square hole had been chiseled in the large corner stone like a box. Any one had the privilege of putting in any little memento they wished to. I was standing very near the corner stone when Joseph Smith came up with the manuscript of the Book of Mormon and said that he wanted to put that in there, as he had had trouble enough with it. It was the size of common foolscap paper and about three inches thick. There were also deposited the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, a five cent piece, a ten [cent], a 25 [cent] and a 50 [cent] and a one dollar all American coin. A close fitting cover of stone had been prepared and was laid in cement and the wall built over it. The day was clear and cool.

3rd. [October 1841] Sunday. The weather is very pleasant. A large congregation assembled this forenoon. Joseph Smith preached on the subject of baptism for the dead. Among a great many other things, he said that the Saints could be baptized for any of their dead relatives, or friends, who had been murderers. Such could not be baptized for. The Lord had other ways of dealing with murderers.

4th. This is the last day of conference. There has been a great deal of business transacted with regard to Church matters; and much good teaching. This afternoon as Joseph Smith was talking; all at once his countenance brightened up and he said, "Verily thus saith the Lord, Let there not be another general conference held until it is held in mine house."

"Autobiography of Warren Foote," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 46.

Note: While the History of the Church mentions Joseph's speech on baptism for the dead (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 4:424-25) it makes no mention of murderers.

Saw Joseph place manuscript of Book of Mormon in cornerstone of Nauvoo House.

I attended the first conference held after Joseph Smith escaped from Missouri, in the old Presbyterian meeting house, near Quincy, and also attended a conference held in Nauvoo in October, 1841. I saw Joseph Smith deposit the manuscript of the Book of Mormon in the corner stone of the Nauvoo House.

In Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols.(Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:377.

Feelings on hearing of martyrdom.

28th. [June 1844] Elihu Allen and I were working in the harvest field cutting his wheat when about three o'clock P.M. my wife came out and told us that word had just come that Joseph Smith and his brother Hyram was shot in Carthage Jail yesterday afternoon. I said at once, "that it cannot be so." Yet it so affected us that we dropped the cradle and rake and went home. We found that the word had come so straight that we could no longer doubt the truth of it. We all felt as though the powers of darkness had overcome, and that the Lord had forsaken His people. Our Prophet and Patriarch were gone. Who now is to lead the Saints? In fact we mourned "as one mourneth for his only son." Yet after all the anguish of our hearts, and deep mourning of our souls a spirit seemed to whisper "All is well. Zion shall yet arise and spread abroad upon the earth, and the kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdom of our God and His Christ." So we felt to trust in God.

"Autobiography of Warren Foote," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 62.
