Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Forsgren, John E.

(November 17, 1816-January 22, 1890)

Baptized in 1843, Forsgren went to Nauvoo and met the Prophet; later, serving a mission in Sweden, a civil magistrate burns a picture of the Prophet in Forsgren's presence. Forsgren sees in vision the burning of the same city from which the magistrate came, and lived to see his visionary prediction come true.

John E. Forsgren . . . left Sweden for the seas at the age of 9 years. For about 18 years his life was mostly spent on the mighty ocean. He visited nearly every important seaport on the globe. In the spring of 1843, while at Boston, Massachusetts, he became acquainted with the Latter-day Saints, was convinced of the truth, accepted the same, and was baptized by Elder William McGhee. July 16, 1843, he went to Nauvoo where he became acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, his brother Hyrum, Brigham Young, and other leaders. He suffered many of the persecutions of the early days of Nauvoo. . . .

[In the October, 1849 General Conference, Forsgren was called on a mission to Sweden, where he] was persecuted greatly for preaching the gospel and was finally arrested. Upon being brought before the magistrate, [he] was asked to show them a picture of his wonderful "prophet." Elder Forsgren gave them a picture of Joseph Smith. The magistrate received it and held it over the lamp, and as it was slowly smoldering and burning, John E. had a vision in which he saw the city of Geffe in flames. John E. related this vision to [his brother Peter A. and his sister Erika, who were living in Sweden]. They were greatly concerned about what would happen to them, but he told them not to fear, as they would be in America at the time of the catastrophe. Nineteen years from the date of the burning of this picture, fire broke out in the very place and almost totally destroyed the city of Geffe; but [Peter and Erica] were safely in America, as had been prophesied, having left their native country on December 20, 1852, arriving at New Orleans on March 6, 1853, having been driven about on the ocean in a sailboat for two months.

"John E. Forsgren," in Kate B. Carter, comp., Heart Throbs of the West, 12 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1939-51), 6:38-39.
