Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Fox, Jessie Williams

(March 31, 1819-April 1, 1894)

Saw the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum.

. . . he investigated the principles of Mormonism, and being converted thereto, followed his brother William and his sister Charlotte, who were Latter-day Saints, to Nauvoo, Illinois. He arrived there just after the bodies of the martyred Prophet and Patriarch were brought from Carthage, and was permitted to view them as they lay in state at the Mansion House.

"Jessie Williams Fox," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:347.

Joseph predicts greater battles than Waterloo, and that Russia will attack Great Britain.

Speaking about Russia brings to mind a prophecy which is accredited to the Prophet Joseph Smith, concerning this country. Elder Jesse W. Fox, Sr., received the narration from Father Taylor, the father of the late President John Taylor. The old gentleman said that at one time the Prophet Joseph Smith was in his house conversing about the Battle of Waterloo, in which Father Taylor had taken part. Suddenly the Prophet turned and said, "Father Taylor, you will live to see, though I will not, greater battles than that of Waterloo." The slave question will cause a division between the North and the South, and in these wars greater battles than Waterloo will occur. But," he continued, with emphasis, "when the great bear (Russia) lays her paw on the lion (England) the winding up scene is not far distant."

These words were uttered before there was any prospect of war with Mexico, and such a thing as division in the United States was never contemplated. Yet these fierce struggles came, and though Joseph himself was slain before they occurred, Father Taylor lived to witness some of the world's most remarkable battles. [He died May 27, 1870, in Salt Lake City, Utah.]

The struggle between the bear and the lion has not yet happened, but as surely as Joseph the Prophet ever predicted such an event so surely will it not fail of its fulfillment.

Jessie W. Fox, "A Russian Naval Station," Juvenile Instructor 25, no. 6 (25 March 1890): 162.
