Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Fullmer, John S.

(1807-1883)

Fullmer writes Stowell, who was a childhood playmate and school mate of Joseph Smith, asking if he will send letter on character of Joseph, repeating what Fullmer had heard him say in person about Joseph's good character.

Cambria, Luzerne (?) Co., Penn.

February 10th 1843

Josiah Stowell Jr., Esq.

Elmyra, N. Y.

Dear Sir,

I hope you will pardon me for the liberty I am taking, in addressing you this letter, which is intended, not as an obtrusion but to elicit a statement of facts which came under your own personal observations, or such as you know to be the facts from circumstances with which you are well acquainted, relative to the youthful, and also more matured character of Joseph Smith, Jun., your play mate and school fellow, but now the leader of the "Latter day Saints."

I have been laboring now for some weeks in this section of the Country, by way of preaching the Gospel as understood by said Smith and others, and find here a great deal of opposition & persecution, in consequence of the reputed bad character of Mr. Smith in his youth, and the consequent deception it is said he is practising upon the public.

Being convinced of the great injustice done him everywhere in alleging charges of the most character against him, which are verily believed by the people here, and greatly to the prejudice of the spread of the gospel in this section; and having recently had an opportunity of conversing with you (while at your house together with Mr. Bird) on the subject and learned that you were his youthful companion, and had, on many occasions, defended his character from the fulsome abuse of the slanderer; I cannot forbear to solicit from you a statement of such things as you feel warranted in making in his defence and in defence of the truth, and more especially as you are not a member of the church.

It is here stated and believed, that he, Smith, was a gambler, a Black leg, a notorious horse jockey, an adept at the slight of hand or juggling, and was notorious for frequenting grog shops, and intemperance, and that he was also exceedingly profane, etc., etc. Now, if this matter can be answered to the satisfaction of some half a dozen persons in this neighborhood, it would have quite a beneficial effect here; besides, it would be a vindication of the character and reputation of one who is receiving more than his share of misrepresentation and abuse. I have openly and boldly denied these charges, and although not required to prove a negative, have still agreed to do so in several instances, which if I can do, through you, will set this matter at rest in this place.

I hope you will take the trouble, (if you think me reasonable in requesting it,) to answer in reply to those charges as soon as circumstances will posibly admit of your doing so; I should be pleased to have you make also such general remarks as the occasion seems to require. I should be pleased also to have the old gentleman, your father, subscribe to as much of your reply as his is knowing to.

Address to Cambria etc. as above.

Give my compliments to all that I had the pleasure of seeing at yr. House, & Mr. Bird, should you see him.

Very Respectfully,

Jno. S. Fullmer

"John S. Fullmer to Josiah Stowell, Jr., Feb. 17, 1843, in Elmyra, N. Y.," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
