Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Garner, Mary Field

(February 1, 1836-July 20, 1943)

Heard Joseph preach in Nauvoo; remembers Joseph inviting Indians to a meeting at the Mansion House; recalls sad feelings when Joseph crossed the Mississippi; recalls events surrounding the martyrdom; present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

[Upon arrival in Nauvoo] My father did not have enough money to buy a home, so we rented a house from one of the Saints. Here we lived in peace and happiness under the leadership and guidance of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Here he stood at the head of this dispensation, as Adam stand in the forefront of the human race. We were very glad to attend church and listen to the Prophet Joseph and other leading brethren teach the Gospel of Jesus Christ to us. We marveled at Joseph's superior intelligence of the gospel and the simple way he could explain it unto the Saints, so that the most unlearned member could know and understand the truth. . . .

I can remember the first American Indians I ever saw. It was at Nauvoo, when Prophet Joseph invited them to attend meeting in the Mansion House he would explain the Gospel to them. While the Indians were in the meeting the children watched them through the picket fence. I was one of these children. We stooped down to keep from being seen. The Indians were quite a curiosity with their quaint dress and manners. Especially the squaws with their babies hung on their backs.

I shall never forget the morning Joseph and Hyrum crossed the Mississippi River and started west for the Rocky Mountains, because the mob demanded them taken to Carthage. They knew if the went to Carthage the mob would murder them. To escape death they started for the west. When some of their friends sent them word that they were fleeing from Nauvoo to leave the Saints to certain butchery Joseph said "If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of none to myself." So they returned to Nauvoo. The news spread rapidly of Joseph's return. We all hurried to greet him and welcome him back home, only to find he was giving himself up and going to Carthage, and had only stopped to see his family and talk with the leading brethren and to bid us all good-bye. Joseph seemed to realize he would never see his family and friends again. Joseph lingered to look at the beautiful city of Nauvoo and the temple. He said, "This is the loveliest place on earth and the best people under the heavens. Little do they know of the trials that await them." He afterwards said, "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as a summer morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and towards all men. If [I am killed, my blood will cry] from the ground for vengeance, and it shall be said of me, He was murdered in cold blood." We felt very sad to see them leave us, not knowing when they would return again to us. How happy we were a few days later when we saw a group of men coming to Nauvoo. Believing it our beloved Prophet and Patriarch returning, the women and child rejoined hands and ran to meet them, glad to welcome them back home. To our surprise it was Governor Ford and his men coming to Nauvoo.

We were very disappointed to learn Joseph and Hyrum were still in Carthage Jail. That afternoon Governor Ford and his men held a meeting in the Bowery and Governor Ford delivered an address. He warned the Saints if they caused any disturbance whatever, the whole country would come upon them to punish them. This statement the Mormon people resented, as they were not guilty of an offense toward any people. They had kept the laws of the country. We were glad to [have] Governor Ford and his company leave Nauvoo, because of the ill feeling they held toward the Saints. While Governor Ford and his men were at Nauvoo the mob gathered at Carthage jail to take the life of our Prophet. They were not content that he was persecuted and being held in prison on false charges. They wanted to kill him. Thus the mob, with painted faces to disguise them, rushed up the stairway of the jail, and finding the door being held shut by the brethren [sought to force an entry. The mob fired through the door, and] . . . The ball passed between the brethren. As there was no usable lock on the door it was forced open by the mob and many shots were fired into the room, killing Hyrum Smith and wounding John Taylor. As Joseph was about to leap from the window someone on the outside of the jail shot him. He fell to the ground a dead man. After succeeding in killing the Prophet and Patriarch, the mob fled from the scene of their terrible, dishonorable crime. Elder Richards told the Saints not to rush to Carthage, but to stay at home and be prepared for another attack from the mob. These orders were obeyed. We all tried to be as calm as possible, although we felt so badly over the terrible tragedy.

The bodies of Joseph and Hyrum were placed in crude lumber boxes and put in a wagon and each covered with brush to protect them from the hot sun. I was with the Saints who met them outside the city and followed them to the Nauvoo Mansion House, where they were prepared for burial.

The Saints were grief stricken over the martyrdom, which had taken their beloved Prophet and Patriarch, who had guided them so faithfully through all persecutions in hours of darkness and despair, giving them hope and encouragement.

Mother took us children to view the bodies after they were prepared for burial. At the public burial only bags of sand were deposited in the grave, the bodies being buried at night in the Nauvoo Mansion House, afterwards being taken up and buried in the rear of the house where Joseph had lived. . . .

After Joseph's death there was some confusion as to who should be our leader. Sidney Rigdon claimed to have had a vision that he should be our leader, but I, with my mother, was present at the meeting in the bowery when the mantel of Joseph fell upon Brigham Young while he was talking to the people. Mother had the baby on her knee. While [paying] attention to the floor [and her child], Mother stooped over to pick it up. We were startled by hearing the voice of Joseph. Looking up quickly we saw the form of the Prophet Joseph standing before us. Brother Brigham looked and talked so much like Joseph that for just a minute we thought it was Joseph. There was no doubt in the hearts of the Saints from that moment on who was to be their inspired leader. Who had been chosen by God to guide his people in the path of truth and righteousness, and who, later, was to guide them through many days of bitter trials, and persecutions across the tractless desert. Out beyond the borders of civilization, west to the Rocky Mountains to a very desolate land, and somewhere in that vast unknown to build a home where the Saints could dwell in peace away from the persecutions of their mob enemies.

"Autobiographical Sketch of Mary Field Garner, 1836-1943," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-4. Some spelling and punctuation have been modernized.
