Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Gee, Lysander

(September 1, 1818-June 27, 1894)

Tells of an escape plan sponsored by the Prophet to escape from Liberty Jail; the plan was foiled by a man named Shoemaker.

Toole City, Toole Co., Ut

April 2nd, 1879

Br. Alex. McRae

My Dear Brother: Having been acquainted with you for many years, and also, having been cognizant of many matters connected with your life, and connections with the Prophet Joseph Smith, one of which, I particularly figured, and to which I wish to call your attention, as I believe you to be the only living man at this time, besides myself who knows of the circumstance. If you please, I wish you to endorse the same, and place it in the hands of the Church Historian; that it may be made record of, and show that, boy as I was at that time, I was true to my trust and faithful to my brethren in tribulation, as I hope I ever may be.

You will recollect, that soon after Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Caleb Baldwin, and yourself, were confined in Liberty Jail, Clay Co., Missouri, Sidney Rigdon was let out on bail, soon after which, preparations were made and arrangements entered into, for the release of the Prophet and his fellow prisoners from their confinement, and from the hands of their persecutors; to effect which purpose, a letter was prepared by you and your fellow prisoners, directed to Alanson Ripley, then residing in Far West, forty miles from Liberty, with instructions for him to furnish tools and implements, sufficient to break the prison. The said letter was delivered to me by Joseph, at the lower window of, and on the South side of the jail in which you was confined, with instructions from Joseph to read the letter, and then fold up the same in as small compass as possible, and if driven to a corner, to eat and swallow the same, but to carry the contents thereof, and deliver the same verbally. I started immediately for Far West, traveling on foot, through mud, and wading streams, in the winter time, and faithfully delivered the message to A. Ripley and Heber C. Kimball. The result of which you will remember, and how nearly it succeeded, and no doubt would have done so, had it not have been for a little indiscretion on the part of one single man, by the name of Shoemaker. Wishing you health and yet many years to do good in this life, I am

Respectfully your Brother,

Lysander Gee

Deposited in the Historian's Office by Bishop Alex. McRae, May 10, 1879

"Lysander Gee to Alexander McRae, 2 April 1879," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some changes in spelling have been modernized.
