Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

The Gem

(A Rochester, New York, Literary Journal)

A Sept. 5, 1829, account telling of origin of Book of Mormon, its translation, and of Martin Harris seeking confirmation of its linguistic origin from Charles Anthon.

GOLDEN BIBLE

A man by the name of Martin Harris, was in this village a few days endeavouring to make a contact for printing a large quantity of a work called the Golden Bible. He gave something like the following account of it. "In the autumn of 1827 a man named Joseph Smith of Manchester, in Ontario County, said that he had been visited by the spirit of the Almighty in a dream, and informed that in a hill in that town was deposited a Golden Bible, containing an ancient record of divine origin. He states that after a third visit from the same spirit in a dream, he proceeded to the spot, removed earth, and there found the bible, together with a large pair of spectacles. He had also been directed to let no mortal see them under the penalty of immediate death, which injunction he steadfastly adheres to. The treasure consisted of a number of gold plates, about 8 inches long, 6 wide, and one eighth of an inch thick, on which were engraved hieroglyphics. By placing the spectacles in a hat and looking into it, Smith interprets the characters into the English language.

Harris states that he went in search of some one to interpret the hieroglyphics, but found that no one was intended to perform that all important task but Smith himself. Smith has interpreted the whole, and it is now in press in Palmyra, Wayne Co. The subject attracts a good deal of notice among a certain class, and as it will ere long before the public, we shall endeavour to meet it with the comment it may deserve.Ed. Gem.

The Gem, of Literature and Science (Rochester, N.Y.) 1, no. 9 (5 September 1829): 70.

Early Book of Mormon preachers have some success, face opposition; Book of Mormon condemned as wickedness, and prediction made that it will not win many converts: "the public are too much enlightened."

BOOK OF MORMONIn the 2nd number of the GEM, we gave a full length portrait of this bantling of wickedness and credulity. By a late Painesville, Ohio paper, we perceive that this pretended revelation from heaven has found some believers, and that there are preachers travelling about in those parts who pretend that it is the only revelation which men can safely live and die by. In Canadaigua, it is said, that there is a book of Mormon preacher, who is attempting to push his way forward, in spite of all opposition. The reason for these efforts is obvious. When the work spoken of came before the world, it proved to be such a spawn of wickedness that the press aimed a blow at it, and it fell, ere it had scarce seen the light. The getters-up therefore, seeing their hopes all blasted, and their names coupled with infamy, have determined to 'make a raise,' on the public by some [sic.] means, and thus they are going about "like roaring lions, seeking whom they may devour." We do not anticipate a very great turning to this heresy. The public are too much enlightened.

The Gem, A Semi-Monthly Literary and Miscellaneous Journal (Rochester, N.Y.) 2, no. 17 (25 December 1830): 135.
