Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Gibson, Jacob

(January 1, 1814-May 1, 1882)

First meets Prophet at landing in Nauvoo; then on a second meeting Joseph warned them to follow him if they wanted light. Heard Joseph preach; dreams mob hangs and butchers his wife, foreshadowing mob treatment of Church; after the martyrdom heard W. W. Phelps plead that the Saints do no revenge, but act peaceably; tells of bodies coming to Nauvoo.

I left for the west or Nauvoo, Illinois, on the 13th of April 1844, stayed with Mrs. Young in Green Street. Myself wife and child in company with Joseph Newton and wife, sister Heney, four families from New Jersey and when we got to Pittsburg our company was increased to about 30 souls, including Elder Grant and intended Judge Richards and family, also William Smith brother of the Prophet Joseph. We had quite a pleasant trip and arrived about May, all alive and happy. The Prophet and others came down to the boat on our arrival, then for the first time I saw him, of whom I had heard so much. I got wagons and hauled the things up to Brother Whipple, where we were treated first rate. Joseph Newton got sick on Sunday and was poorly for some days. We then traveled around and saw the place, I was much pleased, we met a number of our old brethren and sisters, went down to the mansion house, and were introduced to the Prophet, who spoke very pleasantly and turned and looked a look in my face, giving me an earnest look, and said, "Brethren stick to me or by me, and you shall always have light." Which saying I have often proved true. I rented a part of the house of Brother Whipple and lived there quite comfortably. We traveled all around to see and hear. I prepared to fence my lot which I had bought two years before, from Amos Davis, while in Philadelphia and the while attending to this I heard the Prophet Joseph preach two first rate sermons, and others very good. . . .

About the first of June the press of apostasy came out, with all manner of stuff, this had to be stopped and was a great nuisance. After Joseph's nomination by [the] church [a] as candidate for the presidency, owing to the other candidates non-attention to the church to redress their wrongs, the wrath of the surrounding country became so enraged that, mob us out they must, so we had to take up arms to defend or retreat and organize. To do so I with some four thousand others were under arms, some two weeks, night and day, guarding our selves from the bloodthirsty and ungodly mob. Joseph and Hyrum Smith were then taken to Carthage, the faith of Governor Thomas Ford, was pledged for their safe return, after the enquiry. But alas the consequences of faithless promises, of things professing to be men, they were both shot while in charge of State officers, by, as they say, a mob, on the 27th of June 1844, in the afternoon. And that night I shall ever remember. I dreamed that a band of men, very large in form and order, and yet like a mad mob, through some form of law, took my wife Hannah, who is now dead, but I thought that they had condemned her to die, why it was or what it was for, I could not say or get a knowledge, but notwithstanding all my pleading cries, and tears I cold not entice them to desist, hung she must be, and that naked by this mob. Blindly they rushed on until I saw her extended in the air, and then like fiends they went to work to quarter her, and gibbit her and Oh the distress I had in my dream was awful. Yet the fiends would do all they chose, in spite of all I could say or do. In the morning I interpreted it to mean the church that was to be served as I saw my wife, by a wicked and ungodly mob, and in a few minutes after. I got word that the two Prophets were slain. Oh, the distress and many tears and weeping. After breakfast I met with some thousand others on the public stand in the Temple Block, to hear the awful news read, by W. W. Phelps and confirmed. The first murmurs, were revenge from almost every quarter, but in a moment the line was turned and the speaker said, "Be still and know that God reigneth, be composed and return to your homes," which was done amidst many a heavy heart, at the thoughts of being thus betrayed, having the servants of God murdered or crucified, while we felt sufficient strength to protect our selves and them. But all was quiet, all was deep mourning, lamentation and sorrow. About noon their mangled bodies were brought into town in rough boxes, in an open wagon amid thousands who were going to meet the procession on its entry at the outskirts of the town. The procession marches in solemn file to the mansion where, oh terrible to relate, the families met them, but I can not describe the scene, no, no, no. After the funeral was over, my wife being dissatisfied all the while and I having nothing particular to do, to get along, I concluded to leave for St. Louis, which I did on the 2nd of July, in company with Elder Grant and wife, he being married that morning. . . .

"The Book of the Generations of Jacob Gibson 1849-1881," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some spelling and punctuation have been modernized.
