Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Gifford, Samuel Kendall

(November 11, 1821-June 27, 1907)

First time he met the Prophet, he heard him teach and encourage the Saints; refreshments followed the meeting.

We were finally driven into Caldwell County, where I first beheld the Prophet Joseph Smith. About the first time I saw him he had gathered the Saints around him in and around an open frame structure that was being built for a school house, in Far West. After the prophet had spoken to and encouraged the Saints, refreshments were partaken of by the whole congregation. It was truly a feast to me, as if dealt out by a Savior feeding the multitude.

S. K. Gifford, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 28, no. 1 (1 January 1893): 15.

His father heard of Joseph Smith, and was prompted to go to Palmyra, was baptized and preached from Book of Mormon; first saw Joseph in Missouri; saw Brigham transfigured in Morley settlement before Joseph died; forced from Missouri; at first conference in Nauvoo Joseph spoke on Missouri persecutions.

My father was the son of Noah, who was the son of Peleg Gifford, they were born in Barnstable Co., Mass. My father, on hearing concerning Joseph Smith, the Prophet, who had lain the foundation of a new church, and was everywhere spoken evil of, was prompted by the Spirit to go to Palmyra where the Church was organized where he learned the truth, was baptized, this was in 1830. He was ordained a Priest and returned home in company with Enos Curtis who accompanied him to Palmyra and also received the Gospel.

Father brought home with him five Books of Mormon and was full of joy and thanksgiving. He preached the Gospel until the Church was moved from New York to Ohio, and when he and several others went to Kirtland to again visit the Prophet, that was in 1831, father was ordained an Elder. . . .

Here [Missouri] I was enrolled in the first company of militia that was ever organized by the Latter Day Saints and here I first saw the Prophet Joseph Smith. And I saw the chief corner stone placed in its place of the Temple that will be someday built in the Far West. The people of Missouri were not satisfied to let the Saints have a resting place and remain in peace in that State. . . .

Previous to the death of the Prophet, Brigham Young, who was President of the Twelve, and Heber C. Kimball were on their way to Quincy, stopped at the Morley settlement and preached in the Hickory Grove.

As President Young arose from his seat to speak to the people, a sudden change came over him before my eyes. And he stood there to all appearance as the Prophet Joseph Smith himself. He stood the same as Joseph and every motion of his body and his voice and manner of delivery was truly that of Joseph Smith. I did not understand the meaning of it for Joseph was still living and I did not suppose the Lord would suffer his enemies to take his life. . . .

[Later] I was enrolled in a Military Company belonging to the Nauvoo Legion. Solomon Hancock was our Major, Steven Markham was our Colonel. I attended every general training in the city of Nauvoo which was 30 miles above the Morley settlement. I attended the first conference that was held in the city of Nauvoo, presided over by Joseph Smith. The Prophet talked to us for some time upon our persecutions and driving us from our homes, and said he was going to Washington to lay our grievances before the President of the United States.

A Short Biography of Samuel Kendall Gifford, son of Alpheus and Anna Nash Gifford, born November 11, 1821 at Milo, Yates County, New York. Dictated by himself and written by Hannah Jane Gifford, a grand-daughter, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some punctuation has been modernized.
