Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Grant, Rachel Ridgeway

(March 7, 1820-January 27, 1907)

On her first hearing the Prophet, her own prejudices prevented her from gaining testimony; compares Joseph to Hyrum, who was more sober; was in his home many times, heard him preach to the Indians; the people were tested when told not to gather to Nauvoo; also remembers prophesy that Saints would gather in Rocky Mountains; after the martyrdom, saw the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

The first time I saw the Prophet Joseph Smith was in New Jersey, before I joined the Church. He preached there that night, but I was prejudiced at the time. I just went to hear him out of curiosity. My sister joined the Church before I did, and she had wanted me to go a great many times, so finally I did go. After that I went several times to hear the Mormons.

The Baptist minister and everyone warned me about going to hear them. He said if I did not stop going, I must give up my place in the Baptist Church; and then I went right along. I commenced to read the Voice of Warning and the Book of Mormon. I read nearly all night in the Book of Mormon, and felt that it was true, and then I got the spirit of gathering and went to Nauvoo. The spirit of the times is so much the same as it was in Nauvoo. I often think of the difference between the circumstances surrounding the President now and then. Then there were so few that he could trust or put any confidence in; but there was the same influence and spirit that is manifest now.

He was not at home very much. His life was so often sought that he had to be hid up. After he had been in hiding and had come out, he was always so jolly and happy. He would play with the people, and he was always cheerful and happy whenever he would come out. He was different in that respect from Brother Hyrum, who was more sedate, more serious. I thought at the time Hyrum seemed more like a Prophet than Joseph did. You see there was a great deal of sectarianism about me. I thought it was bad to sing or read a newspaper on Sunday. Once when a schoolmate of mine had come down from Trenton and wanted me to go with her to hear the Mormons, I went Saturday, but did not want to go on Sunday at all. But I thought it would be impolite not to do as she wished, so I went. When I came home I went right upstairs and asked the Lord to forgive me for going to hear them on Sunday.

I was many times at the Prophet's house, but not so many times when I saw him. We used to have parties there.

I guess you have seen the picture where Brother Joseph was preaching to the Indians. I was there at that time. The Indians were all kneeling down on the grass in front of the Mansion, and if you have seen that picture, that just describes the way everything was, though it is a miserable picture of the Prophet. He was a fine, noble-looking man, always so neat. There are some of the pictures that do not look a particle like him. When he was preaching you could feel the power and influence.

The first year I was in Nauvoo was a happy year, but after that it was all confusion. When the press was burned there was such excitement; it was that way all the time. It tried a great many people when the Prophet gave out the word that there was to be no more gathering at Nauvoo, as the people thought that was the place. He first told them to gather there, but later told them the Rocky Mountains would be the gathering place. It was his thought that they would come to the Rocky Mountains.

I was in Nauvoo when the Prophet went to Carthage, and when his body was brought back. I had come to Nauvoo in 1842, and came home to New Jersey in the fall of 1844.

After the Prophet's death when Sidney Rigdon came to Nauvoo and spoke, he thought that it was his right and privilege to be President of the Church. President Young jumped right up on the seat and spoke. If you had had your eyes shut, you would have thought it was the Prophet. In fact he looked like him, his very countenance seemed to change, and he spoke like him.

I know Joseph Smith was a Prophet, and I have lived to see many of his sayings fulfilled.

Rachel Ridgeway Grant, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 550.
