Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Green, Mary Ann

(b. December 29, 1832)

Her father bought eighty acres from the Prophet in Nauvoo; she remembers Joseph and Hyrum visiting her father's home, and, as a child, of sitting on Joseph's knee; the day before the martyrdom her father visited Joseph in Carthage; when Gov. Ford and troops passed by her father said, "I fear something will happen," as events proved.

Mary Ann Green was the daughter of William A. Green and Ester Ann Peirce, she was born in west Montmeal (?) Co. Pennsylvannia on the 29 day of Dec. 1832. Her father was a prosperous farmer. In her early childhood her parents were Quakers. In the Spring of 1840 the first missionaries were sent to that part of the Country where they lived and in August the same year they joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. In 1841 her Father, in company with Edward Hunter, went to Nauvoo to visit the Prophet and the Saints. While there he received his patriarchal blessing under the hands of Hyrum Smith. He returned home in good health and spirit on the 21 of Jan. They prepared to gather with the saints in Nauvoo, and on the 11th day of May 1842 they bade farewell to their country and they arrived in the City of Nauvoo on the 28 day of June, having been 7 weeks on the way. Mary's father bought an acre of land just 2 blocks west of the temple and built a two story brick house; he also bought 80 acres of prairie land from the prophet Joseph Smith on the Carthage road, for which he paid 8 hundred dollars. He labored diligently to build and improve and to cultivate the earth and assisted in building the temple by labor and liberal donations. He was always very kind to the poor. The Prophet Joseph and Hyrum were frequent and welcome visitors at the Green home. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball also visited there often. The 2 oldest daughters became the wives to Brother Heber C. Kimball; on the 10 day of Sept. 1844 [they] were married by Brigham Young.

Mary Ann being but a child she often set on the Prophet's knee. Often, in later, years [she] talked about the many wonderful things which the Prophet did and of the many miraculous healings he did perform . . . Mary with her folks went through the mobbing and different troubles which the saints in the days of the prophet had to meet. Her father was very much attached to the prophet and his brethren, and often he was bowed down with grief . . . when he witnessed the life of jeopardy and persecution that they endured from day today. The day before the Prophet Joseph and Hyrum were killed he visited them in the jail and was received with many blessings. The day that the Prophet and Hyrum were killed Mary's father [was] sitting by the window and looking out. Seeing the soldiers and the Governor pass by, he said, "seeing those men a coming I fear that something will happen"and sure enough that day they were killed. The following year her father took very ill and died, on the 15 day of July 1845. . . .

"History Taken From Record of Irene Louise Peterson Elmer Marriott, North Weber, Ogden, Weber Utah," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.
