Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Greenhalgh, William

(July 29, 1811-April 3, 1882)

Was in Nauvoo when Joseph commissioned the Twelve to continue after his death; tells of events surrounding martyrdom: before going to Carthage, Joseph told the Saints he would die for them; then visits Emma, blesses her and their unborn son, naming him Hyrum David; prophesies that the innocence of the Saints would be a testimony against their enemies; also witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

I was in Nauvoo when the Prophet Joseph Smith rolled the responsibility of the government of the Church on to the shoulders of the Twelve and I heard him tell them they must bear it for a while. And on June 25 [1844] he was called upon by the Governor of Illinois to give himself up to Carthage Jail to be tried by the law. Before going he called the people together and asked them if they were willing to die for him, and they told him they were. He then said, "I will die for you." As he was going to Carthage he was met by a set of the government's men and they demanded the government arms from him. Joseph turned back with them and told the people of Nauvoo to give them up. While there he begged leave to go and see his family again. He then went to see his wife Emma and blessed the child in her womb and called his name David Hyrum and gave himself up to the officers of the law again.

The officers said, "Now Mr. Smith, there (are) great reports about the people of Nauvoo, but I see nothing to do with them." Joseph then said, "There was something the matter with them." Then the officer said, "What is it?" and Joseph replied, "Their innocence would bring condemnation on this generation." He then turned around to us and blessed us in the name of the Lord and on June the 27th in the year of our Lord 1844 he was murdered in Carthage Jail (even) after the Governor had told him he would be protected according to law.

The Governor came to Nauvoo with all his men while they murdered him in Jail. The Governor was heard to say as he stood on the housetop "We have to make a sacrifice." Just about this same time they were murdering him in Carthage Jail and about two day previous to his assassination he said, "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as the summer's morning, and I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men. I shall die innocent."

The next day he was brought into the city dead while the bells were all capped and tolling. All men and women were born down with grief with tears in their eyes. All seemed to feel the shock. The elements seemed all confused for it was thundering and lightening all the time for several days and nights.

In a few days Sidney Rigdon came up to Nauvoo with a pretended revelation saying the Lord had sent him as a guardian to act for Joseph. He then told the people if they did not accept of him God would reject them as a people, with their dead, and he was to return to Pittsburgh where God would raise up a people at Pittsburgh for him. Then with uplifted hands he called on God and angels to bear him witnesses and he appointed again the next day to speak to them and see if the people would accept of him.

Just at this time came home Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. On the morning following, Brigham Young ordered the people to bring a wagon to the south side of the congregation so that the people could all hear what he had to say. Sidney Rigdon spoke a little and then Brigham rose and said, "I would to God there were not such a hurrying spirit here." He spoke with such power and the voice of Joseph sounded through him so plain that the people who could not see him thought it was Joseph come again. Even those that could not see him knew that it was the voice of Joseph speaking through Brigham Young. Now my wife, who was sitting close by me, was not able to turn her head. She asked me if that was Joseph? I told her no, but that it was Joseph speaking through Brigham. To me this was a living testimony that the mantle had fallen from Joseph on Brigham. From this time on many wanted to wheel off and part from the Saints. But Brigham forbid them and told them that the flock must not be scattered.

"The History and Life of William Greenhalgh, son of Robert and Ellen Greenhalgh, Born July 29, 1811, in Bregmat (Brightmat) (Near Belton, Lanceshire, England)," typescript copy from "The History and Life of William Greenhalgh," in a journal written in his own hand; copies in private family possession.

Greenhalgh has inspired dream in which he sees the martyrdom before it occurs.

In 1841 William Greenhalgh had a dream concerning Joseph Smith, and dreamed he was on an open prairie. I saw wood houses and a large building a distance from that, like a coach house. On the side of these two wood houses I saw a company of men that looked very dark in their appearance. They seemed to (be) hollowing and making a noise. While this was going on I saw a man rise up in the air above them. Then in 1842 I came to Nauvoo. [In] 1843 I went to Layart and when I came to Carthage I stood still and looked at the place and saw it was the very place I saw in my dream. My dream came to my mind when looking at it. In 1844 when Joseph Smith was martyred in Carthage, then the fulfillment of my dream came to me again.

"The History and Life of William Greenhalgh, son of Robert and Ellen Greenhalgh, Born July 29, 1811, in Bregmat (Brightmat) (Near Belton, Lanceshire, England)," typescript copy from "The History and Life of William Greenhalgh," in a journal written in his own hand; copies in private family possession.

Note: The above is an accurate transcription of Greenhalgh's history. He begins in the second person (" . . . William Greenhalgh had a dream . . . and dreamed he was") and moves to the first person ("I saw two wood houses").
