Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Greer, Catherine Ellen Camp

(October 17, 1837-November 15, 1927 [or 1929])

On first meeting with Joseph, felt inspiration he was a Prophet; says Joseph and Hyrum visited their home in Tennessee, and heard them sing; Prophet and Hyrum defended by an old negro; Joseph prophesies the baptism of her mother; tells of LDS mother who prays, and the testimony of Joseph had healing effects on ailing son.

The first time I saw the Prophet Joseph Smith, I remember him very well, and remember going to his house. My father sent me there to take some papers that were church business. He put his hand on my head and says to me, "You are a nice little red headed girl." I liked all but the "Red headed" part. That was the first time I ever thought of him as being a Prophet. I felt such a thrill go through me as I had never felt in my life before. My father told me it was the inspiration of the Lord, when he put his hand on me. My father said he was a Prophet of God. He was tall and straight and a nice looking man and the most beautiful man I had ever seen. I saw him and his wife, Emma, out riding. She used to ride with him. They were both dressed in blue and rode a big black horse called "Dan," I believe. I know he was a big black horse and so pretty. Brother Joseph was the nicest man riding or walking that I ever saw. I was only seven years old when he was killed, but I remember him speak in the Nauvoo Temple.

The most that I remember was in Tennessee when he was in my mother's house and the mob was after him. I was awake and up one night about 12:00 o'clock and heard someone singing. I listened and the first song was "The Pure Testimony." Joseph and Hyrum were singing it. I was in my sixth year then. My mother said she did not believe it, when I told her I got down under the table and listened to them. Then they had prayer. The next song was "Afflicted Saints of Christ Draws Near." I recollect when they sang this verse:

"Should persecution rage and flame,

Still trust in thy Redeemer's name;

In fiery trial thou shalt see,

That as thy day, they strength shall be."

That old negro, Uncle Ike, who was so cowardly before when the mob came after my father in the blacksmith shop, kept the mob away this time from Joseph and Hyrum Smith. They came and he told them they had better not come inside of that gate; that if they did come inside of that gate, some of them would get hurt. They did not come in, and later brother Joseph and Hyrum walked right out by them, but not one lifted his hand to hurt them.

My mother belonged to the Methodist Church. Brother Joseph told her, "Sister Camp, you will come into the church and be one of the best Latter Day Saints," but my mother did not believe it, but when she went to Nauvoo next time, she investigated and was baptized by Brother John Taylor.

Q. Was your mother red headed?

R. No. She had black curly hair. My grandfather on my father's side was redheaded and that is where I got my red hair. My father had black hair. My mother joined the church and was a good Latter Day Saint. After she joined the church, her son was sick with the measles. He had had them so long and was so weak that they did not know what minute he might die. One night she got tired of watching over him and thought maybe it was wrong to hold on to him, and she said, "I will just go before my Heavenly Father, and ask him if the Prophet Joseph Smith is a true Prophet, if he is, my son will be healed." She did and prayed to Him. The next morning when the negro man came in to make the fire, my brother was standing by the fireplace, he was so astonished he did not know what to do. It was a direct answer to her prayer, and was also a testimony to her. Of course, when she got to investigating, she found out that her old religion was nothing to compare with Mormonism.

"Anecdotes and Reminiscences of Her Life as Related by Grandma Ellen C. Greer," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
