Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Haight, Isaac

(May 27, 1813-September 8, 1886)

As Nauvoo policeman Haight helped protect city and Prophet; police force then disbanded because of complaints over cost.

December [1843] I was now chosen one of the [Nauvoo] city police consisting of forty chosen men to guard the city and especially Brother Joseph Smith whose life was threatened by our enemies and a strict watch had to be kept day and night all this winter.

. . . In the spring of 1844 we were released from watching Brother Joseph said he could take care of himself as some found fault about paying the police. So I went to farming as usual till about June 1.

"Autobiography of Isaac C. Haight," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 12-13.

One of forty bodyguards of the Prophet; also one of twenty to accompany Joseph to Carthage; working on the Nauvoo Temple when he first heard of martyrdom.

In December, 1843, Isaac C. Haight was chosen, one among forty trusted men, to guard the Prophet Joseph Smith and to keep a strict watch over the city of Nauvoo by night and day. In the early spring of 1844, the guard was dismissed because the Prophet thought he could protect himself.

On June 1st [1844] organized mobs began their attacks, and as a member of the Nauvoo Legion Isaac C. Haight was on duty much of the time. He was one of the twenty close friends of the Prophet who were chosen to accompany him to Carthage. Within four miles of that city the party was met by the Governor of Illinois, and they were forced to return to Nauvoo to deliver the arms of the Nauvoo Legion over to the Governor's officers.

About 2 a.m., June 27th 1844, while Isaac C. Haight was guarding the Nauvoo Temple, he was the first to be told of the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum by George Grant who had carried that sad message to the Saints in Nauvoo.

"A Brief Sketch of the Life of Isaac C. Haight," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2.

Haight participates in destruction of Nauvoo Expositor; Haight in company that accompanies Joseph and Hyrum toward Carthage.

June 1 [1844] The enemies of the Church began to rage without and hypocrites and dissenters to manifest themselves within. The Laws, Fosters, Higbees, and others got up a printing press [the Nauvoo Expositor] in the city and began to slander the Saints in the most shameful manner so that the city council considered it a nuisance and ordered the mayor to call on the police and legion to abate the nuisance. It was done according to order.

June 10 [1844] We burnt the fixtures and papers and destroyed the press. The same day the proprietors were at a meeting at Carthage to devise means to destroy our city and drive and kill the saints. This, the Saints were not disposed to submit to as the mob began to gather on every side of us, and our Lieutenant General Joseph Smith thought best for our safety to call out the Nauvoo Legion until he could get word from the governor. The legion was drilled everyday till the governor arrived at Carthage which was about the twenty-second. He ordered the legion dismissed and sent for Joseph and Hyrum to come to Carthage or he would send the militia to bring them to be tried on charge of riot in the destruction of the press of the Nauvoo Expositor. They refused to go unless the governor would protect them from the fury of the mob then gathered at Carthage. The governor then pledged his end and the honor of the state that they would be protected. Then upon the plighted faith of the Governor [Thomas Ford] and the state of Illinois they agreed to go to Carthage to be tried by those that had sworn to take their lives.

Therefore, on the morning of the 26th day they in company without about 20 of their friends started for Carthage (I was one of the number) with fearful foreboding of the snare that was laid for to effect the death of the best man that was now upon the earth. The prophet was calm as a summer morning and seemed to know or have a knowledge of the fate that awaited him. Once as we were riding along he turns to Hyrum and says, "Brother Hyrum, let us go back to Nauvoo and all die together." Thus showing that he was well aware of what would befall him. But Hyrum thought best to go on.

We, therefore, proceeded until we got in about four miles of Carthage to Brother Fellows and then we met the governor's agent with sixty armed men going to Nauvoo to demand the State arms which the State had distributed to the legion as their proportion of the arms of the State agreeable to the charter organizing the Legion.

The demand was accepted by the Lieutenant General and it was agreed that we should return to Nauvoo in company with the agent and his men and collect the arms, which we did. When we got to Nauvoo the state arms were collected as soon as possible with as little noise as could be expected under existing circumstances. Joseph and Hyrum then started for Carthage accompanied only by two or three of the brethren. The Governor forbid the others to go. It was hard to part with our Beloved Prophet into the hands of his enemies.

"Autobiography of Isaac C. Haight," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 13-14.
