Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hale, Aroet Lucius

(May 18, 1828-December 13, 1911)

In Palmyra, inquires as to character of Joseph Smith prior to coming forth of Book of Mormon; residents report his character good.

Left there in company with Elder Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten, thence to Palmyra to the home of Elder Martin Harris, thence to the Hill Cumorah. All went on to the hill and offered up our thanks to the Most High God for the records of the Nephites and other blessings. Then went about from house to house to inquire the character of Joseph Smith in previous to his receiving the book of the plates of Mormon. The answer was that his character was as good as young men in general. This was on the 30th day of May, 1835.

"Autobiography of Aroet Lucious Hale," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 1-2.

Tells of Joseph asking John F. Boynton for money; Boynton refuses to give, and apostatizes.

I, Aroet, moved to Kirtland, Ohio in 1835 with my father. There I was baptized, being nine years old, by Wilford Woodruff, into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, though a boy. I well remember many incidents that happened there, the apostasy of John F. Boynton, my dear mother's brother, and the cause of his apostasy. The Prophet Joseph Smith called on him for money. He had the money but refused. This was a turning point in his life. The Prophet wanted money to redeem land that he had bought in Jackson County, Missouri at the center stake of Zion.

"Autobiography of Aroet Lucious Hale," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 3.

Memories of the Prophet: Hale knew Joseph's enemies, who joined the mob that killed him; Joseph prophesied that if John C. Bennett did not repent of his wickedness, which included adultery, he would die friendless and impoverished, a prophecy which was fulfilled.

I became better acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith. I was in my 17th year when the Prophet Joseph [Smith] and Hyrum Smith were martyred. I well remember many incidents that happened while living in Nauvoo. I was well acquainted with the Prophet's most bitter enemies, John C. Bennett, Dr. Foster, the Higbees and Laws. They were all members of our Church. Bennett was an adulterous man. The Prophet told him of his wickedness and warned him to repent. This made him more angry and he swore vengeance against the Prophet Joseph Smith. They were finally cut off from the Church. They then went to Warsaw among the mob. They never ceased their cursed threats until they killed the Prophet Joseph and Hyrum Smith at Carthage Jail, Hancock County, Illinois. This occurrence took place on the 27th of June, 1844.

I well remember the day that the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum Smith were brought into Nauvoo. Our parents all went out to the street as the procession passed along the road. The city was in one complete scene of weeping, mourning, and lamentation after the bodies arrived at the mansion house. It was enough to break the heart of a stone, to hear Grandmother Smith and the Saints weep over the loss of their dear Prophet and Patriarch, Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Brother John Taylor was brought from Carthage on a sled on account of his wounds. He could not be brought on wheels. When Governor Ford demanded the state arms, they were surrendered to him. When Joseph and Hyrum started with the rest of the brethren to go to Carthage, Governor Ford pledged his honor and the honor of the state that Joseph should be protected back to Nauvoo.

The Prophet Joseph predicted a curse on John C. Bennett. He told him if he did not repent of his sins and sin no more, the curse of God Almighty would rest upon him, that he would die a vagabond upon the face of the earth, without friends to bury him. He told him that he stunk of women. In the year 1850, President Young was speaking about the matter. He said that he had watched the life of John C. Bennett. Bennett went to California in the great gold fever excitement, that Bennett died in one of the lowest slums of California, that he was dragged out with his boots on, put into a cart, hauled off, and dumped into a hole, a rotten mass of corruption. This prediction or prophecy came to pass as well as many others that I heard the Prophet Joseph make.

"Autobiography of Aroet Lucious Hale," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 6-7.

Remembers that Joseph baptized over 200 for the dead in Mississippi River, that he visited the Hale home, taught the doctrine of plural marriage, and prophesied to Hale's father about taking another wife.

The Nauvoo Temple was dedicated May 1, 1846. I was ordained an elder in the Church, also received my washing and anointing in the [Nauvoo] temple the same year. I will relate a few incidents that I heard and saw. The Prophet set the pattern for the baptism of the dead. He went into the Mississippi River and baptized over 200. Then the apostles and other elders went into the river and continued the same ordinance. Hundreds were baptized there, with the instructions from the Prophet Joseph to have the work done over as quick as the temple was finished, when it could be done more perfect.

Another incident worthy of note: The Prophet Joseph was visiting at our house on one occasion and spent the evening. My father was a bishop of one of the wards. With the Prophet's consent, father invited in his counselors and a few of the good old staunch brethren. Among the few was Uncle Henry Harriman, one of the first seven presidents of the seventies, and Jonathan H. Holmes, and several others of fathers old stand-by friends. This circumstance took place at my father's house, Jonathan H. Hale, bishop. This was the first time that our parents had ever heard the Prophet speak on the subject of celestial marriage.

During the evening, the Prophet spoke to Uncle Henry Harriman. Said he, "Henry, your wife Clarisa [?] is barren; she never will have any children. Upon your shoulders rests great responsibilities. You have a great work to perform in the temple of our God. You are the only Harriman that will ever join this Church." He even told him the lineage that he was of and told him that he must take another wife and raise up a family to assist him in his great work, and to honor and revere his name. The Prophet also told Aunt Clarisa [?] that if she would consent to this marriage and not try to hinder Henry, that she should share a portion of the glory that would be derived from this marriage. Uncle Henry Harriman was finally convinced that the command that the Prophet Joseph had given him was right. In a short time, he took a young woman and was sealed by the Prophet. He brought her to the valleys. They have raised a family of children. They have done a good work in the St. George temple. One son has been called on a mission. Uncle Henry Harriman lived a few years in Salt Lake City, was called to Dixie, lived in Washington near St. George a few years, then moved to Huntington and died at Huntington. The seventies built a fine monument in honor of him.

"Autobiography of Aroet Lucious Hale," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8-9.

As member of Nauvoo Legion, Hale often serenaded the Prophet; heard John C. Bennett challenge Joseph to fight sham battle; also heard Joseph preach last address to Nauvoo Legion; participated in mock funeral for Joseph and Hyrum.

I, Aroet Lucious Hale, was in my 17th year when the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum were martyred and was acquainted with them as military officers. Lieutenant General Joseph Smith was a fine-looking officer. I was a drummer boy in the Nauvoo Legion. I frequently serenaded the Prophet Joseph and was on several parades when General John C. Bennett challenged General Joseph Smith to take one of the escherts [?] and he one and fight a sham battle. General Smith declined, settling bitter enmity in that way.

I heard General [Joseph] Smith make his last address to the Nauvoo Legion June 1844. [See Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 6:497-500] It was called the "sermon on the house top" where he said that he had unsheathed his sword for the last time, that peace was taken from the earth. I was with the Nauvoo martial band at the mock funeral of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. The object was to decoy our enemies.

"Autobiography of Aroet Lucious Hale," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 9. Some grammar has been modernized.
