Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hall, Thomas

(September 1, 1816-June 8, 1894)

Gathers to Nauvoo because of letter from Joseph which confirmed a prophesy in tongues that he should; tells of helping pay for damages done to a steamboat belonging to the Prophet, and of the blessings thereby received.

At one of our fellowship meetings held at Bolton, England, in 1843, a sister prophesied by the gift of tongues that the time had come for me to gather to the body of the Church. Soon after a letter came to President Hedlock from the Prophet Joseph Smith with instructions to the effect that I should gather to the body of the Church, showing that the gift of tongues had by the sister at Bolton was of God, and that Joseph Smith was a true prophet. Part of the instructions in the prophet's letter to President Hedlock was for me to take charge of three women and their children on their voyage to Nauvoo, their husband having paid their passage to the Prophet Joseph.

We left England in January, 1844, and landed at New Orleans on the 6th of March. The Prophet's agent was sent to meet our company and instructed to try to borrow $1400 from the company to pay for repairs that had been done on a steamboat belonging to the Prophet Joseph. We were not promised money in return for the loan, but land, stock, and the current pay of a new country. A Sister Bennett, now Sister Kay, let us have two hundred sovereigns ($1000) on the terms offered. She told the names of others in the company whom she knew had money. Some loaned their money and others would not.

When my wife and I some time ago visited Brother and Sister Kay at Ogden, Utah, the latter said in a joke: "Brother Hall, I hold a note against you." Then she said: "No, Brother Hall, I got my pay, and could have had more. Brother Kay and I were talking about you yesterday and about those who lied to you. We knew them all, and we don't know of one of them who did not either die or leave the Church soon after landing at Nauvoo, while all who helped to redeem the Prophet's boat have been greatly blessed.

We arrived at Nauvoo on the 11th of April, 1844. On the 12th of April I first met the Prophet Joseph Smith at his home, being introduced by his agent, Brother Hollister. I felt as if I had known him a long time, he was so kind and courteous. God had made known to me in various ways that he was a true prophet, and I could have risked my life in defending him. He gave me some kind, fatherly counsel; he also thanked me for fulfilling the trust he had reposed in me in bringing the three families through safely on the voyage.

Thomas Hall, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 28, no. 1 (1 January 1893): 14-15.
