Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hamblin, Jacob

(April 2, 1819-August 31, 1886)

Witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Come the 24th when I arrived at Nauvoo I saw thare was a gerthein of the saints at the Stand as I drew nere I saw Mr. Sidney Rigdon [a]ddressing the congregation I listened a few minits and Said in my hart it was not the voic of the trew Sepherd.

Jacob Hamblin, "Journal 8," typescript copy, microfilm, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Present at transfiguration of Brigham Young.

At Nauvoo I found Sidney Rigdon busy among the Saints, trying to establish his claim to the presidency of the Church. He was first Counselor to the Prophet Joseph at the time of the latter's death. The Church was fourteen years old, and he claimed that it was its privilege and duty to appoint a guardian; and he wished the people to sanction his guardianship.

I was much dissatisfied with the course he was taking, and, as I could not sustain him, I felt to leave Nauvoo for a season. I went into the country, where I had left my wife and two children with my sister Melissa. . . .

On the 8th of August, 1844, I attended a general meeting of the Saints. Elder Rigdon was there, urging his claims to the presidency of the Church. His voice did not sound like the voice of the true shepherd. When he was about to call a vote of the congregation to sustain him as President of the Church, Elders Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt and Heber C. Kimball stepped into the stand.

Brigham Young remarked to the congregation: "I will manage this voting for Elder Rigdon. He does not reside here. This child" (meaning himself) "will manage this flock for a season." The voice and gestures of the man were those of the Prophet Joseph.

The people, with few exceptions, visibly saw that the mantle of the prophet Joseph had fallen upon Brigham Young. To some it seemed as though Joseph stood before them.

I arose to my feet and said to a man sitting by me, "That is the voice of the true shepherdthe chief of the Apostles."

James A. Little, Jacob Hamblin: A Narrative of His Personal Experience, as Frontiersman, Missionary to the Indians and Explorer (Salt Lake City, Utah: Juvenile Instructor Office, 1881), 19-20.
