Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Angell, Truman O.

(June 5, 1810-October 16, 1887)

Attended Sunday meeting in Kirtland where Joseph authorized the purchase of a book to keep Church records; difficulty in raising funds illustrates poverty of early Church.

The next day, Sunday [in the Fall of 1835], meeting assembled in the Temple on a loose floor which had been arranged for carpenters' benches etc., the house was partly filled, the people being seated on work benches and other things. President Joseph Smith, [Jr.,] during the meeting, arose to speak upon an order he had given to Oliver Cowdery to seek out a book for a Church Record; for such must be kept; this had been complied with, a good book had been selected and it pleased President Smith.

The book was not paid for, but was to be returned to Painesville if it did not suit; and the Prophet said he would be glad to have the Saints donate the amount, about $12.50, and make the purchase, and keep the book; it being of good paper and thoroughly well bound. A man arose near the middle of the house and said he wanted the leaves counted to see if it would not be better to buy the paper by the ream, the difference being that we might put it in a newspaper, or something of the kind. Brother Joseph spoke out and said the devil could not raise his head there, but he would know him. I note this to show the little means with which the Church was obliged to commence the history of a people destined to become great.

Truman O. Angell, "Autobiography," in Kate B. Carter, comp., Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1958-77), 10:196-97. See also "Journal of Truman O. Angell," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah.

Prophet asks Angell to build a store; he demurs, is prompted by the Spirit, and then complies; Joseph promises him "work enough for twenty men."

After the endowment, I was ordained a member of the 2nd Quorum of Seventies and the following spring I commenced making arrangements to go on a mission. While I yet had a day or two more work, and while at work, Joseph Smith, Jr., the Prophet and Seer came to me and asked me to build a store. I answered that in consequence of being a seventy I was about to go out into the vineyard to preach. "Well," he said, "Go ahead," and I continued my work. The next day I looked up and saw the First Presidency of the Church together, distant about forty rods. I dropped my head and continued my work.

At this time a voice seemed to whisper to me, "It is your duty to build that house for President Smith," and while I was meditating, I looked up and Brother Joseph Smith, Jr., was close to me. He said, "It is your duty to build that house." I answered, "I know it." Accordingly I changed my determination and yielded obedience. The numerous and continued calls to do this and that job soon plunged me in business so deep that I asked Brother Joseph if it was my calling to work at home. He said, "I'll give you work enough for twenty men." I then began work on an extensive scale and laid my plans to go ahead. Among the multiplicity of buildings under my charge, I had the supervision of finishing the second, or middle wall of the temple, including the stands, etc.

Truman O. Angell, "Autobiography," in Kate B. Carter, comp., Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1958-77), 10:197.

Joseph received the revelation regarding the construction of the Kirtland Temple; Joseph said he had seen the inside of every house built unto the Lord on this earth; when Frederick G. Williams prayed during Kirtland dedicatory services, an angel occupied his seat.

About this time Frederick G. Williams, one of President Smith's counselors, came into the temple when the following dialogue took place in my presence:

Carpenter Rolph said, "Doctor, what do you think of the House?" He answered, "It looks to me like the pattern precisely." He then related the following:

"Joseph received the word of the Lord for him to take his two counselors, [Frederick G.] Williams and [Sidney] Rigdon, and come before the Lord and He would show them the plan or model of the house to be built. We went upon our knees, called on the Lord, and the building [Kirtland Temple] appeared within viewing distance. I being the first to discover it. Then all of us viewed it together. After we had taken a good look at the exterior, the building seemed to come right over us, and the makeup of this hall seemed to coincide with what I there saw to a minutia."

Joseph was accordingly enabled to dictate to the mechanics and his counselors stood as witnesses, and this was strictly necessary in order to satisfy the spirit of unbelief in consequence of the weakness or childishness of the brethren of those days. The following are a few items which transpired about this time. One I will note:

Joseph came into the hall. The leading mechanic, John Carl, by profession a carriage builder, wanted to seat the house contrary to what Joseph had proposed. Joseph answered him that he had seen the inside of every building that had been built unto the Lord upon this earth and he hated to have to say so. Under such childlike feeling, they prepared to dedicate the lower hall. The hall was filled at an early hour in the afternoon, I being present among the rest. The dedicatory prayer was offered, Sidney Rigdon being mouth.

When about midway during the prayer, there was a glorious sensation passed through the house [Kirtland Temple]; and we, having our heads bowed in prayer, felt a sensation very elevating to the soul. At the close of the prayer, F. [Frederick] G. Williams being in the upper east standJoseph being in the speaking stand next belowrose and testified that midway during the prayer an holy angel came and seated himself in the stand. When the afternoon meeting assembled, Joseph, feeling very much elated, arose the first thing and said the personage who had appeared in the morning was the Angel Peter come to accept the dedication.

Truman O. Angell, "Autobiography," in Kate B. Carter, comp., Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1958-77), 10:198-99. See also Lyndon W. Cook, The Revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1981), 198.

Note: Joseph Smith refers to this experience and simply says "an angel" sat between Father Smith and F. G. Williams (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 2:427); Lydia Knight quotes Joseph as saying it was Jesus Christ who appeared and sat between the two men (see Susa Young Gates, Lydia Knight's History [Salt Lake City, Utah: Juvenile Instructor's Office, 1883], 38).
