Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hancock, Levi Ward

(April 7, 1803-June 10, 1882)

Joseph likens the church to a grain of mustard seed, which would grow until angels came and rested in its branches; prophesies Lyman Wight to see the Lord; casts devil out of Harvey Whitlock and evil spirit from Leman Copley; said John to tarry until Second Coming; Joseph blessed Lyman Wight; Whitlock confesses he was possessed of the devil.

The Fourth of June [1831] came and we all met in a little string of buildings under the hill near Isaac Morley's in Kirtland, Geauga County, Ohio. Then we all went to a school house on the hill about one fourth of a mile ascending nearly all the way. The building was built of logs. It was filled with slab benches. Here the elders were seated and the meeting was opened as usual. Joseph Smith began to speak, he said that the kingdom of Christ that he spoke of that was like a grain of mustard seed was now before him and some should see it put forth its branches and the angels of heaven would some day come like birds to its branches just as the Saviour had said. "Some of you shall live to see it come with great glory. Some of you must die for the testimony of this work" and he looked at Lyman White and said to him, "You shall see the Lord and meet him near the corner of the house" and laid his hands upon him and blessed him with the visions of heaven.

Joseph Smith then stepped out on the floor and said, "I now see God, and Jesus Christ at his right hand, let them kill me, I should not feel death as I am now."

Joseph put his hands on Harvey Whitlock and ordained him to the high priesthood. He turned as black as Lyman was white. His fingers were set like claws. He went around the room and showed his hands and tried to speak; his eyes were in the shape of oval O's. Hyrum Smith said, "Joseph, that is not of God." Joseph said, "Do not speak against this." "I will not believe," said Hyrum, "unless you inquire of God and he owns it." Joseph bowed his head, and in a short time got up and commanded Satan to leave Harvey, laying his hands upon his head at the same time. At that very instant an old man said to weigh two hundred and fourteen pounds sitting in the window turned a complete somersault in the house and came his back across a bench and lay helpless. Joseph told Lyman to cast Satan out. He did. The man's name was Leman Coply [Copley], formally a Quaker [Shaker]. The evil spirit left him and as quick as lightning Harvey Green fell bound and screamed like a panther. Satan was cast out of him. But immediately entered someone else. This continued all day and the greater part of the night. But to return to the meeting, Joseph said, "Now if you elders have sinned it will do you no good to preach if you have not repented. Heamon [Heman] Bassett you sit still; the Devil wants to sift you . . ." Then he ordained Jacob Scott and some others to the High Priesthood. He came to Zebidee [Zebedee] Coltrin and myself and told us that we had another calling as high as any man in the house. I was glad for that for I was so scared I would not stir without his liberty for all the world. I knew the things I had seen was not made [i.e., were not false.] . . .

After this we went down to the house and heard Harvey Whitlock say when Hyrum Smith said it was not God, he disdained him in his heart and when the Devil was cast out he was convinced it was Satan that was in him and he knew then it. I also heard Harvey Green say that he could not describe the awful feeling he experienced while in the hands of Satan.

"The Levi Hancock Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 33-34; see also "Papers of Zebedee Coltrin," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 250-51.

Joseph prophesies elders to have large congregations to preach to; David Whitmer asks if Joseph's prediction about someone seeing the Lord was fulfilled; Hancock says yes.

On June the fifth [1831] we all assembled on the hill in a field where there was a large concourse of people collected. Lyman White [Wight] spoke and gave a fine discourse.

The Prophet Joseph said that from time on the elders would have large congregations to speak to and they must soon take their departure into the regions West. When the meeting was out we went to Gilberts and Solomon sang some songs and we talked with brother Whitmer and told him what happened at the conference. He asked me if what Joseph had said was fulfilled about someone seeing the Lord. I told him I considered it so. "Do you?" said he. "Yes sir," said I. "Were you not there?" I understood him not.

"The Levi Hancock Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 34.

Joseph tells Levi about the mobbing in Hiram, Ohio, and shows where mob pulled hair from his head; Joseph promises Hancock that the Lord has a wife for him; mentions School of the Prophets; Newel Whitney defends the Prophet; Joseph chides Hancock for yielding to bad dream, and thus Hancock leaves on a mission, helps baptize some, and Joseph says the Lord will give him the credit for the goods works.

[In early May, 1832] I settled with all men there and left and went to Rome lived awhile with John Reed then went to Chagrin and stopped with Solomon for a few days when the Prophet Joseph Smith sent for me. I went and saw him again and had a conversation with him. Heard him tell about him being mobbed in Hiram and how they pulled the hair out of his head then he showed me the place where they had pulled the hair out of. He said they poured Aqafortis down him, he thought. I said, "While I was in Cleveland I heard some laughing about it, who said the devil must have gotten the better of the Lord that time. I told them I thought he did once before when they killed the Son of God and his Disciples too. I did not consider that proved him an imposter. I never saw men so much confounded. I said no more but all eyes were on me while I stayed at the house."

I found Sidney Rigdon enjoying himself better than he did when I stopped to see him on my way back. He then took me by the hand and exclaimed, "You are the favored of the Lord." He said he was chastened but hoped the Lord would be favorable to him. Joseph had now raised him on high. I was glad for him. I told Joseph how I had felt on the way. I also told him about the girl that I left and how sorry I had been that I did not tell him before I went. He said not to mind that the Lord had a girl for me that would suit me better than she would if I had married her. "I hope you will not marry soon. I want you to do some work for me." I told him I would do the work and was soon to work building his desk and room.

He [Sidney Rigdon] needed money and so I filled his hand with all the remains of my land in Rome. He said, he would give me his note for it. I told him be was welcome to it.

I was with him [Sidney Rigdon] through the translation of the Bible. I went to the school of the Prophets. Orson Hyde was with us this winter. After I finished the school room Joseph offered to let me trade out of Whitney's store. I told him I would pay for all I purchased and I did do it.

The Prophet Joseph was often in trouble. If his friends gave him money, he [was] stripped of it all by his enemies. I know for I did all I could do to hold up that good man. My heart would ache for him. He had to stand against thousands of his pretended friends seeking to overthrow him. It was terrible the abuse he suffered.

Bishop Whitney also was cursed by some when he did his best to hold up Joseph. He would suffer himself to be slandered to save the Prophet from trouble. All this I know I have witnesseth. I am bad enough but thank God I never sought to harm any man. I know it is not in my heart to wish the Prophet Joseph or any man who is his friend in any trouble.

About this time Joseph called on me to go to Rome with a hired girl by the name of Clarissa Reed, who had been living with him. I went and returned with her in about two weeks. He then said I must go with Evin Green. We started by the way of Chardon and preached by the way. The snow came and it began to get [too] cold to travel, but we went as far as we could get and returned back. Joseph talked plain to me for not pressing forward into Pennsylvania. I told him that I was to blame for I had had a [bad] dream [He said, "I have had as bad a dream] as you ever had. You do as I now tell you to and you will come out alright." He gave me to understand how the comforter would comfort the mind of man when asleep whether it meant anything or not and Satan accused good people. He said go again and we started forthwith for Pennsylvania. We went as far as Painesville and stayed the night. . . .

[They taught several and] When the time came for us to open the door to baptism, Lyman Johnson came along. We asked him to preach, he opened the door and baptized all we had labored with except two who chose to have me baptize them. Lyman returned to Kirtland and never mentioned Evin or Levi or their good works.

I asked the prophet Joseph about such a case. He said the laborer who first labored with the people would in the end get the blessing. I did not tell him what happened, for I felt the Lord, knew who had put forth the efforts.

"The Levi Hancock Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 50-52.

Joseph authorized Hancock to take his new wife on Zion's Camp march.

In October [1833] the meteors fell all night. Then I began to prophecy to the astonishment of all my father's house that God would save our friends and this is to show us what he can do. Joseph said, "We must go and see them and if necessary we would fight the mob." He said to me, "Now that you have a wife, don't say you can't go." I said my wife shan't hinder me and went and bought me a rifle and sword. I armed myself for battle. All mechanics were busily engaged in making implements of war all winter, to be prepared in the spring to travel to Missouri to replace our brethren upon their land, if there were law abiding men enough in that state to assist us.

"The Levi Hancock Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 53.

Experiences on Zion's Camp: Sylvester Smith's rebelliousness and the Prophet's rebuke; Joseph prophesies Zion's Camp to have dry weather.

On the ninth of April 1834, we had a son born near the middle of the day; Lyman White [Wight] named him Mosiah Lyman. I then began to prepare to travel [with Zion's Camp] and on the first of May bid my folks farewell and started for Portage County, some forty miles from Kirtland. Here we gathered and organized for marching. Our money was then thrown together and put in the hands of those appointed to buy our provisions. I was appointed cook for Sylvester Smith's mess. In this way we traveled being directed by the Prophet in peace until Sylvester lost the spirit of peace and became dissatisfied with John Carter and called him an old jackass and many other names which soon brought dissatisfaction in our tent. Some dared to express their feelings until Joseph rebuked them and told him [i.e., Sylvester Smith] that he was guilty of sowing the seeds of discord. He said if Joseph was a Prophet he was not afraid and would contradict him in the face of all present. Joseph said, "If I have not told you the truth then God never spoke by me," and walked off. We all said that is enough. We believed Joseph. Sylvester became more calm and acted like a saint; for sometime we had peace.

We had our morning and evening prayers. When we had got to Busyrus, a considerable size of town, in the western part of Ohio, many conjectors were formed concerning us and many questions, asked us as we were traveling. I heard one man say "It looks like the camp of Israel." Another said as he looked at us, "Well, I guess some place must have taken a Wammet." Another said, "The North has given up." We did not stop but continued on our march westward passing many places I had traveled before and held meetings in. Nothing occurred of any account until we got in Illinois when Joseph said, in our tent, "I want you to remember what I say to you. The Lord is going to give us dry weather now until we get through. He has given rains that there might be water on the prairies. You will see the movings of the Lord in our favor all the way through." It began to be very pleasant and soon we entered on the wide prairies camping and holding meetings on Sunday. Once we had many listeners from the county who listened to the preaching of Orson Hyde. Joseph Young and others of different sects who were bound to preach peace and exhorted the people to believe in God and do what is right.

"The Levi Hancock Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 53-54.

On Zion's Camp the brethren find bones of Zelph, a white Lamanite; Sylvester Smith angered by a dog, and Joseph warns him to subdue his passion; also teaches against killing.

Next morning we started on our journey in good spirits. On the way to Illinois River where we camped on the west side. In the morning many went to see the big mound about a mile below the crossing. I did not go on it but saw some bones that were brought back with a broken arrow. They were laid down by our camp. Joseph Smith addressing himself to Sylvester Smith and said, "This is what I told you and now I want to tell you that you may know what I meant. This land was called the land of desolation and Onedages [Onandagus] was the King and a good man was he. There in that mound did he bury his dead and did not dig holes as the people do now, but they brought their dirt and covered them until you see they have raised it to be about one hundred feet high. The last man buried was Zelf or Telf. He was a white Lamanite who fought with the people of Onedagus for freedom. When he was a young man he was a great warrior and had his thigh broken and never was set. It knitted together as you see on the side. He fought after it got strength until he lost every tooth in his head save one, when the Lord said he had done enough and suffered him to be killed by that arrow you took from his breast." These words he said as the camp was moving off the mounds as near as I could learn he had told them something about the mound and got them to go and see it for themselves. I then remembered what he had said a few days before while passing many mounds on our way that was left of us. Said he, "These are the bodies of wicked men who have died and are angry at us and if they can take the advantage of us they will, for if we live they will have no hope." I could not comprehend it, but supposed it was alright.

We continued our march westward until we came to the Mississippi River opposite of Louisiana and camped. The next day we crossed over and camped about one mile west of town. I had made me an Elder fife that day and played some marches on the way to the camp, being led by Sylvester Smith. As soon as we came in sight of camp a dog came, he began to bark and ran to Sylvester and tried to bite him.

It made me mad and he said he would kill that dog. Joseph said he should not, and he would whip any man who would do it. If Sylvester had a good spirit he could get along without being bit. It was by a man's being overcome with such a spirit that caused him to always try to take vengeance and seek an opportunity to do it and take life. Such spirit kept men in misery. Sylvester would not believe it. Joseph said, "If you do not get rid of that feeling you will have your flesh eaten off from you and you cannot help it." He would not believe Joseph yet.

Once after this Joseph on the same principle said, "If a man should have to fight in self-defense and kill his enemy he should say in his heart, I wish it might have been otherwise but you sought to take my life and would not let me alone and I was obliged to take yours." And said, "If you ever go to battle and are prospered over your enemies and slay them I fear you will be tempted to boast. If you should boast of your own strength I fear God will leave you."

This was in the month of June [1834] . . .

"The Levi Hancock Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 54-55.

Zion's Camp: account of finding water in the dry prairie, and of the storm at Fishing River which protected the brethren from the mob; Hancock's brother Joseph takes sick with cholera, the Prophet prays for him, and predicts a scourge on the camp.

We had now in our camp two hundred and five (205) and truly we had seen the hand of God in our favor all the way. Once in particular, when we had camped without in the middle of February. One man [Joseph Smith] took a spade and said, "Who knows but what I can find water here" and put the spade in the ground and dug a small hole and it filled with water, good water. When this was done some said it was as much of a miracle as when Moses smote the rock and water came out. But the greatest miracle in our favor was when we had got between the two fishing rivers on a high ridge by a log meeting house. We had been told that morning by a colored woman who came to the fence where we were walking that there were three hundred men who were armed and equipped to fall on us that night and cut us off. Men came riding by who would cuss and swear that before morning we would all be in hell for there was an army before and behind and death was our portion. Without enemy Jenkins Salisbury wanted Joseph to let him fight. "No," said he, "the Lord will give us a bramble to keep off the dogs this night."

In a short time it commenced thundering and the clouds arose and I went into the tent and lay down and knew no more till I found myself one third buried in water, the tent had blown down and all hands gone. I soon found they had gone to the old Sanctuary for shelter, where I also went. The lightning flashed and thunder roared one continual sound and flash so connected one could hardly hear any interval between the flash and the peal of thunder as if all the Marshall bands of drummers of the whole earth had assembled and was beating the bounds of war.

We lay on the benches dripping with water till daylight when we were called to go and discharge our pieces and load anew, which we did and to our astonishment two thirds, if not more, went off.

It was a pleasant morning. We got our breakfast and soon learned that the two branches of the fishing river were so high we could not cross over. The branch west had raised upwards of forty feet and all boats were gone. We turned our course northward about three miles and camped near an old acquaintance of some in our camp. Next day we were visited by a committee from the mob when Lyman Wright [Wight] exclaimed to them the cause of our coming and others spoke which appeared to give satisfaction. After the meeting, these of the community went away and Joseph said, "Let us help this man right up his corn." We all went into the field and straightened up the corn for our friend that the stock had laid low.

I then returned to camp in the morning. My brother Joseph had taken sick which proved to be the cholera. Joseph Smith went to pray for him and when through said that I must stand aside or I shall be smitten of the Lord. He said "a scourge must come and I cannot help it. You have murmured in your hearts" and told them to fix for moving off. I then heard the revelation which said our sacrifice was accepted for we had offered our lives as Abraham did.

"The Levi Hancock Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 56-57.

Note: For another account of finding water, see "William Cahoon, Autobiography," in Stella Shurtleff and Brent Farrington Cahoon, eds. Reynolds Cahoon and His Stalwart Sons (Salt Lake City, Utah: Paragon Press, 1960), 81-82; and "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1900," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 23, 34.

Hancock knew Joseph, whom he called "one of the most pleasing spirits"; heard him say kingdom could not be built without Apostles and Seventies, and their decisions as binding as those of First Presidency in Joseph's day.

"Said he was seventy-seven years old today, and nearly fifty years ago he was baptized after receiving the testimony of the Prophet Joseph, who received the word of the Lord and was slain by the professed followers of Him who died for his fellow man. He was familiarly acquainted with the Prophet, lived with him for three years, worked under his direction; and he was one of the most pleasing spirits he had ever been associated with. He then bore testimony that this gospel was true; the Book of Mormon was true; the Twelve were true; he heard Joseph say that this work could not be built up without Twelve Apostles and the Seventies following in their wake. Their decisions, if made in righteousness and unity, were as valid as the decision of the first presidency in the days of the Prophet, as was declared in the Doctrine and Covenants, and if there were no divisions among them their voice would be the voice of the Lord, and all Israel should say amen to it. He exhorted all the Saints to works of righteousness, and invoked the blessings of God upon them."

Conference Report, April 1880, 61.

After first meeting of Joseph and Brigham, Joseph prophesied Brigham would one day lead the Church, and that while Joseph Young was great, Brigham was greater.

I was living with Joseph Smith Jr. and had completed the translating room and had seen many new brethren, and had heard Joseph speak many things concerning them, but no observation sunk with such weight on my mind as the one that he made about Brigham Young and Joseph Young. Some time in the month of Nov. 1832, these men came to Joseph Smith in the evening and sung and prayed with us. After they had gone from there Joseph Smith said to me, "how do you like the men?" or something near it. After he had got my answer he said, "these are good men," and "there is Brigham Young, [he] is a great man and one day the whole kingdom will rest upon him; and there is the smaller one, he is a great man, but his brother [Brigham] is greater.

"Handwritten Statement by Levi Ward Hancock (1803-1882) [n.d.]," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some grammar and spelling have been modernized.

Note: Brigham first met Joseph on November 8, 1832. See Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:295-97.
