Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hancock, Solomon

(August 15, 1794-December 2, 1847)

Solomon gives $5 to the Prophet to buy food en route to Carthage, thus providing Joseph with one of his last meals.

Perhaps because of Solomon's loyalty to the Prophet, he was chosen to perform one of the last kindnesses given to Joseph Smith before his death.

Solomon's wife, Phoebe Hancock, was pregnant when once they came to Quincy, Illinois, to buy food and clothes. Solomon had promised his wife five dollars to buy clothes and other articles for the new baby, which would soon be born, and their wagon was also loaded with butter and eggs to sell in town.

But just before they arrived in Quincy, Solomon informed his wife that he felt he could not give her the five dollars after all. She was surprisedand more than a little disappointed. After all, the money was for things their baby would need.

"I'm sorry," he told her, "but I've had three strong warnings from the Spirit that I shouldn't expect to use this money for the baby."

Frustrated, Phoebe showed her husband the list of items that she had planned to buy with the money, but Solomon only told her that she should use the money from the sale of the butter and eggs to buy the most important items. She reluctantly complied, and bought all that she could with the little money she had. But she was so disappointed that on the way home she sat down on the wagon board, pulled her bonnet down to hide her face, folded her arms, and turned her back on her husband.

They had traveled only a little way when they came to a crossroads, where they were surprised to meet the Prophet Joseph Smith. To their dismay, the men with the Prophet were taking him to prison in Carthage, Illinois.

Joseph called Solomon by name and said, "Have you got five dollars?"

"Yes, I have," Solomon said.

"I knew it," Joseph responded. "I told these men we would get something to eat before we got to the Carthage jail."

Solomon gave the Prophet the five dollars, and his guards took him on his way. Phoebe wept, and asked forgiveness for wanting the money which the Prophet needed so much for food.

Soon the Prophet and his brother were killed by a mob that stormed the prison, and Solomon's and Phoebe's grief at the death of the Prophet could be assuaged, a little bit, by the knowledge that the Spirit had called on them to aid him during his last hours.

"Erastus and Francis Hancock, An Informal Family History," cited in Spencer J. Palmer, "Five Dollars for Joseph Smith," Ensign 8, no. 4 (April 1978): 67.

Note: Solomon Hancock is mentioned in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 3:225; this story, however, does not match up. Solomon and Phoebe had a son named Elijah on April 2, 1844, so it's very unlikely she was pregnant in June 1844. Apparently the person who recorded this event either placed it at the wrong time (just before the martyrdom) or with the wrong circumstance (Phoebe's pregnancy). Perhaps this counter took place earlier in the year, nearer to Elijah's birth. Or perhaps Phoebe was not pregnant but a new mother, hoping to use the money for their newborn son.
