Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Harper, John

(March 9, 1812 [or 1813]-March 28, 1863)

First saw Joseph at the landing in Nauvoo; later, when sick healed by Joseph; witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

We remained in St. Louis to the 7th [1843] of April when Bro. Snow chartered Amorant to take us to Nauvoo where we landed on the 12th of April, and we were met at the landing by the Prophet of the Lord and some of the 12 Apostles and a great number of the Saints. I was then full rewarded for all that I had passed to see with my eyes and hear with my ears a living Prophet of God and hear the sweet words of his mouth blessing us in the name of the Lord God of Israel. Conference had just come to a close; we was the first boat that had ascended the river that spring. Bro. P. P. Pratt landed the same afternoon with another company of saints in the boat Maid of Iowa. Bro. John MacCauley and I rented a house from James Twist and Br. Ruben Hadlock bought his wagon and team and brought our luggage from the landing and we went to Br. Hadlocks to spend the day. On Sunday 16th of April we attended in the grove west of the temple where we for the first time met with the Saints of Zion. Br. Joseph the Prophet presiding and Br. Hiram, Patriarch for the whole church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and quite a number of the 12 Apostles, Sidney Rigdon and Wm. Law the Prophet's Counselor. . . .

. . . In the month of December I became very bad with a violent pain in my right side, it was excruciating, I had been bad from the 26th [1843] to the evening of the 27th when through solicitation of my dear wife and the help of a cane I went out to get some of the 12 to administer to me, I came to the Mansion House where the Prophet lived. I went into the bar room and asked Br. Loren Walker if Bro. Joseph Smith was in and he said yes and he went up stairs and told him to come down; I told him that I was very sick with a pain in my side; he said sit down and he laid his hands on my head and rebuked the pain in the name of the Lord and when he took his hands off my head I was healed and went home rejoicing in the name of the God of my salvation and have never been troubled with it since that time. After the death of the Prophets it was a troublesome time we was obliged to keep guards at night and day for a good length of time. The mobbers threatened to burn our city. During these times I became desirous to be ordained and in the month of Aug. I had a very pleasant dream; I thought I was going up a very high mountain, I had got within 2 or 3 steps of the top, I tried to ascend but could not get up, I tried again but it seemed impossible, then Bro. Joseph gave his hand and took me up to the top told me to sit down, I then sat down and he laid his hands on my head and ordained me an Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints. In answer to my dream I was ordained Aug. 19th, 1844 in the office of an Elder under the hands of Father Williams and Council, and truly my heart was made to rejoice in thanks to God my Heavenly Father that I had been permitted to hold the Holy Priesthood.

. . . When the Twelve returned home the Saints was troubled to know who should lead the Church; Sidney Rigdon was there from Pittsburg and wanted to choose a guardian for the Church, but when Bro. Brigham arose on the stand I received a testimony for myself, he appeared to me as if it was Bro. Joseph and it was Joseph's voice and there the mantle of Joseph fell on Brigham. He said it was no enviable place to stand at the head of the people for at them the arrows of the enemy would be directed. But he was willing to stand where God placed him. He called a conference and we had a good time of rejoicing after our grief and trouble; . . .

"Record Made by John Harper," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Tells of a dream in which he saw Joseph and was ordained an elder by him, thus foreshadowing his actual ordination; present at and saw the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

After the death of the Prophets it was a troublesome time. We was obliged to keep guards at night and day for a good length of time; the mobbers threatened to burn our city. During these times I became desirous to be ordained, and in the month of Aug. I had a very pleasant dream. I thought I was going up a very high mountain. I had got within about 2 or 3 steps of the top. I tried to ascend, but could not get up; I tried again, but it seemed impossible. Then brother Joseph gave me his hand and took me up to the top, told me to sit down. I then sat down and he laid his hands on my head and ordained me an elder in the Church of Latter Day Saints. In answer to my dream, I was ordained Aug. 19th 1844 in the office of an Elder under the hands of Father Williams and council, and truly my heart was made to rejoice in thanks to God my Heavenly Father that I had been permitted to hold the Holy Priesthood.

. . . when the Twelve returned home the Saints was troubled to know who should lead the church. Sidney Rigdon was there from Pittsburgh, and wanted to choose a guardian for the church, but when Brother Brigham arose on the stand, I received a testimony for myself. He appeared to me as if it was Brother Joseph, and it was Joseph's voice, and there the mantle of Joseph fell on Brigham. He said it was no enviable place to stand at the head of the people, for at them the arrows of the enemy would be directed, but he was willing to stand where God placed him. He called a conference and we had a good time of rejoicing after our grief and trouble. Brigham told the Saints that all they wanted was to know what was right and they would go to the conference. The answer was yes, and they went to the October Conference. There was a number of brethren called and ordained seventies.

"History of John Harper, written by Himself," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
