Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Harris, Martha Ann Smith

(May 14, 1841-October 10, 1923)

Remembers her Grandmother Lucy Mack Smith, and Lucy's dog running errands for her; also her father and the Prophet holding her on their knees and stroking her hair; recalls the martyrdom, and viewing the dead bodies of her father and the Prophet.

Martha's earliest memories were of going to visit her grandmother, Lucy Mack Smith, and of sitting on a little stool by her side; of seeing their dog Tiger go to the store with a note in a basket and come back with whatever her grandmother had sent for; and of her father and her uncle Joseph holding her on their knees and stroking her head with their large soft hands. Her most vivid memory, however, was of the death of her father, when she was but three years old. Hyrum had passed uninjured through many dangers, but this time Mary seemed to know what had happened. Far into the night she walked the floor while little Martha, just recovering from the measles, lay and watched her.

"Won't you come to bed, Mother?"

"My dear child, go to sleep, I will come by and by."

Then after a while; "Mother, mother, come and lie down."

"Not yet, my child, not yet."

Then finally a messenger came with news of the terrible tragedy and the window dropped fainting to the floor. Later Martha was wrapped in a blanket and a man carried her a block from their home to the Mansion House and let her look at the bodies of her father and uncle.

Richard P. Harris, "Martha Ann Smith Harris," Relief Society Magazine 11, no. 1 (1 January 1924): 12.

Note: Martha Ann Smith Harris is the daughter of Hyrum and Mary Fielding Smith. She married William Jasper Harris.

Hyrum's daughter, remembers George Grant telling Mary Fielding Smith of martyrdom; speaks of Hyrum's solemn nature; remembers her mother making pants for Hyrum, and his satisfaction in receiving them.

I was born in Nauvoo, Ill., Hancock County, May 14th 1841, the youngest daughter of Hyrum Smith, Patriarch, who was martyred in Carthage Jail. I am an only sister to Joseph Fielding Smith, the only two children of Mary Fielding, his [Hyrum Smith] second wife. I was three years old when my dear father was taken from the bosom of his family and friends, when he bid them the last farewell, and he gave them the last farewell kiss.

I remember well the night that he was murdered. I had the measles and I had taken cold. It had settled on my lungs and I could not speak above my breath. I begged my dear mother to lie down to rest once. She read the Bible a while then walked again until the day began to dawn. Then there was a knock at the door. My mother asked who was there. The answer was, "George Grant." She opened the door and asked what news. He gave answer that Joseph and Hyrum were both murdered. My mother stepped back calmly exclaiming it cannot be possible can it? He answered "yes it is too true."

She fell back against the bureau. Brother Grant took her and placed her in a chair. The news flew like wildfire through the home. The crying of agony that went through that house and the anguish and sorrow that were felt can be easier felt than described, but that will never be forgotten by those who were called to pass through it.

He was a loving and affectionate father, indulgent almost to a fault.

I remember one day mother had made him a pair of pants and he was very proud of them. I saw him walk back and forth with his hands in his pockets. It was seldom that he was cheerful. He always looked serious and sober. I can remember many things about my beloved father.

I remember after my father's death how sad and sorrowful my darling mother used to look. She scarcely ever smiled again. If we could get her to laugh we thought we had accomplished quite a feat. I never saw her more than smile.

Oh how I loved my mother. I feared to displease her. I would rather burn my hand than vex my mother. I can see the sorrowful look my mother wore to this very day in my mind's eye. God bless her memory.

She worked in the temple (Nauvoo) for three weeks. I was with her all the time.

I emigrated to Salt Lake City with my widowed mother in 1848. . . .

"Statement of Martha Ann Smith Harris, Provo City, March 22, 1881," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some grammar has been modernized.
