Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Harris, Martin

(May 18, 1783-July 10, 1875)

Joseph labored on the Martin Harris farm; received 50 cents a day; was a good and jovial worker; always devoted and attentive to his prayers; Martin once gave Joseph $50 to help finance translation of Book of Mormon.

This calls to my mind a little incident or two that he [Martin Harris] related to me [Edward Stevenson] while we were on our journey from Ohio to Utah. He said that Joseph Smith, the Prophet, was very poor, and had to work by the day for his support, and that he [Harris] often gave him work on his farm, and they had hoed corn together many a day, Brother Harris paying him fifty cents per day. Joseph, he said, was good to work and jovial and they often wrestled together in sport, but the Prophet was devoted and attentive to his prayers. Brother Harris gave Joseph $50.00 on one occasion to help translate the Book of Mormon. This action on the part of Martin Harris so displeased his wife that she threatened to leave him. Martin said that he knew this to be the work of God, and that he should keep the commandments of the Lord, whatever the results might be. His wife, subsequently, partially separated from him, which he patiently endured for the Gospel's sake.

Edward Stevenson, "The Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 48, no. 25 (21 June 1886): 389.

Tells of being one of Three Witnesses: entered a grove, prayed, received no answer; removed himself; Joseph joined him, prayed together, angel came, showed plates and testified of Book of Mormon.

The Prophet Joseph Smith, and Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer and myself, went into a little grove to pray to obtain a promise that we should behold it with our natural eyes, that we could testify of it to the world. We prayed two or three times and at length an angel stood before Oliver and showed them the plates, but I had gone off by myself for I knew it was me that was keeping the angel from appearing. In my desperation I asked the Prophet seer to kneel down with me and to pray for me also that I may also see the plates, and we did kneel down and pray. Immediately, the angel stood before me and said, "Look" and when I glanced at the angel, I fell, but I stood on my feet and saw the angel turn the leaves of gold and I said, "It is enough, my Lord and my God." I then heard the voice of God say, "The book is true and translated correctly."

Ole A. Jensen, "Testimony of Martin Harris (One of the Witnesses of the Book of Mormon)," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 1-6.
