Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hatch, Lorenzo Hill

(January 4, 1826-April 20, 1910)

Tells of 1842 arrival in Nauvoo, and of purchasing farm from the Prophet.

We arrived in Nauvoo after six weeks [about mid October, 1842], having traveled 1500 miles. At the time of our arrival the Prophet was in hiding from the "writs" that were in circulation against him by accusation that was made by the state of Missouri.

Through the efforts of Governor Carlin of the state of Illinois, this excitement passed in a few weeks after our arrival, and we had the privilege of seeing and hearing the Prophet speak to the Saints. Soon after our arrival, my father bought a farm from the Prophet Joseph east of the Big Mound, six miles from the city on the east.

"Autobiography of Lorenzo Hill Hatch (1826-1846)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, 2.

Joseph prophesies Jesus not to come in forty years.

Sometime in the winter of 1843, I was ordained a priest and traveled through the city as a teacher and was blessed. I will record a prophecy that Joseph Smith delivered concerning the coming of the Savior. He said in the name of Jesus Christ that, "He will not come within forty years from this date." (Spoken 10 March, 1844.)

"Autobiography of Lorenzo Hill Hatch (1826-1846)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 3.

Joseph spoke of the beauty of the German language and Bible; said languages were confounded at Babel, and to be restored when Israel was gathered; a part of the pure language found in every language; at transfiguration of Brigham Young, remembered Joseph said the Twelve were responsible for bearing off the kingdom.

In a letter Lorenzo Hill (Hatch) wrote on the 14th of July 1906 to Elder Preston Nibley, Lorenzo told about a special cottage meeting he attended in Nauvoo:

"I attended a little cottage meeting, where were present twenty or thirty people. Apostle Orson Hyde who had just returned from Jerusalem, was present, also Apostle John Taylor. The meeting was at the house of a German neighbor. Perhaps I was an intruder but nevertheless I was at that meeting. The Prophet talked of the great beauty of the German language, also extolled the German Bible. He also spoke of the confounding of the languages at the Tower of Babel, and told how it would be restored. He said that a portion of the pure language was mixed with all the languages of the earth, and when the gospel has been preached to all the nations of the earth and Israel gathered, then it will be fulfilled where it is said, 'I will restore to my people a pure language.' He also said that there was much of the pure language in the German and English.

"I heard Joseph say that he would soon take a rest, and the responsibility of building up the Church and sending the gospel to the nations, would be required of the Twelve Apostles. Upon their shoulders, the responsibility would rest. When Sidney Rigdon laid claim to the leadership of the Church, I remembered these words, and I knew that Brigham Young was the lawful successor of Joseph Smith."

Mary Owen Heslop, "Jeremiah Hatch: The Life and Times of an Extraordinary Man," LDS Church Family History Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1996, 317-18.

Following martyrdom, while in Bristol, Vermont, received a letter championing Sidney Rigdon, but the voice of the Lord says: "Brigham Young in the man God has chosen."

I was a young man, being but 18 years old, 1500 miles from home. The question in my mind was, who would lead the Church now that the Prophet Joseph Smith was gone. About a month later a letter came from my uncle, Jeremiah Hatch who had married a daughter of Sidney Rigdon. He claimed that the Lord had called Sidney Rigdon to lead the Church. I was at the house of one of my cousins in the town of Bristol, Vermont. It was about noon. I stood in the middle of the Sitting Room reading the letter to my cousin, when a voice plain and distinct said, "Brigham Young is the man God has chosen to fill the vacancy." I so declared to my cousin. My father had gone to the Great Beyond and Brigham Young was a Father to me all the remainder of his life.

From "The Journal of Lorenzo Hill Hatch," 7; cited in Dale Hatch, "Jeremiah Hatch and Family History," LDS Family History Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
