Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hayden, Amos S.

(birth and death dates unavailable)

Hayden, a non-Latter-day Saint, tells of Joseph healing Mrs. Johnson; he explains away the miracle, saying it was the sudden mental and moral shock on Mrs. Johnson that caused the healing.

In the latter part of 1830, the founders of Mormonism began to effect a lodgment in northern Ohio. Sidney Rigdon, a preacher among the Disciples, of great eloquence and power, had joined them, and commenced preaching their doctrine. Whatever we may say of the moral character of the author of Mormonism, it cannot be denied that Joseph Smith was a man of remarkable powerover others. Added to the stupendous claim of supernatural power, conferred by the direct gift of God, he exercised an almost magnetic poweran irresistible fascinationover those with whom he came in contact. Ezra Booth, of Mantua, a Methodist preacher of much more than ordinary culture, and with strong natural abilities, in company with his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Johnson, and some other citizens of this place, visited Smith at his home in Kirtland, in 1831. Mrs. Johnson had been afflicted for some time with a lame arm, and was not at the time of the visit able to lift her hand to her head. The party visited Smith partly out of curiosity, and partly to see for themselves what there might be in the new doctrine. During the interview, the conversation turned on the subject of supernatural gifts, such as were conferred in the days of the apostles. Some one said, "Here is Mrs. Johnson with a lame arm; has God given any power to men now on the earth to cure her?" A few moments later, when the conversation had turned in another direction, Smith rose, and walking across the room, taking Mrs. Johnson by the hand, said in the most solemn and impressive manner: "Woman, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, I command thee to be made whole," and immediately left the room.

The company were awe-stricken at the infinite presumption of the man, and the calm assurance with which he spoke. The sudden mental and moral shockI know not how better to explain the well attested factelectrified the rheumatic armMrs. Johnson at once lift it up with ease, and on her return home the next day she was able to do her washing without difficulty or pain.

Amos S. Hayden, Early History of the Disciples in the Western Reserve (Cincinnati, Ohio: Chase & Hall, Publishers, 1875), 250-51.
