Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hendricks, Drusilla Dorris

(February 8, 1819-May 20, 1881)

Recalls martyrdom and transfiguration of Brigham Young, who had Joseph's voice and gestures.

The Prophets were killed on Thursday, June 27, 1844. I could well bear witness to the feelings of the brethren, who were on missions at that time for my feelings were such that I prayed the Lord to take them from me, it was more than I could stand, then the load was made lighter, according to my prayer, so that I could attend to my business.

Sister Booth and I came home together; we started Friday, June 28. We did not know that the Prophets were killed only by our feelings until we got out about six miles and met another boat. They hailed each other and then we were told who was killed, saying they had the hour and minute that he was killed. Then from the Captain to the last hand on deck came running to us with the news to see how we felt. We could not have felt worse. When we reached home everything was in mourning.

It was not long before Sidney Rigdon called a meeting in order to present his claims to the Presidency of the Church. Some of the Twelve had returned from their missions and the day the meeting was held and while it was in session, Brigham Young (President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles) and others slipped up to the stand and said nothing until Sidney Rigdon was through; he was standing near the center of the audience in a wagon, as the meeting was in the Bowery. Then Pres. Brigham Young began to speak. I jumped up to look and see if it was not Brother Joseph for surely it was his voice and gestures. Every Latter Day Saint could easily see upon whom the Priesthood descended for Brigham Young held the keys. Sidney Rigdon led off a few but where are they now? They have dwindled many in unbelief and have come to naught.

"Historical Sketch of James Hendricks & Drusilla Dorris Hendricks," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 16-17.
