Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Henrie, William

(September 11, 1799-December 18, 1883)

Joseph and Hyrum passed the Henrie home on the way to Carthage, and borrowed a horse for John Taylor to ride; quotes Joseph as saying they removed their garments before Carthage; tells of dread spirit preceding news of martyrdom; Joseph oft visited Henrie home, and was treated to baked potato, buttermilk, and pie; always blessed the Henrie home; heard Joseph's last speech; James and his brother Daniel saw the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Myra Mayall and her husband William Henrie were well acquainted with Hyrum and Joseph Smith, (the Prophet). Grandma (Myra) cooked a number of meals for them. When Joseph was taken to Carthage jail, he rode William Henrie's horse and as he passed grandpa's house the horse hintered and turned to the gate. When Joseph said to grandpa and grandma "I'm going like a lamb to the altar to be slaughtered," grandma said to him "Joseph, why did you take your garments off?" He said "because, Myra, they couldn't kill me or harm me if I had them on. (They both had them off) and we were instructed to lay them off because we have to seal our testimony to the truth of this gospel, with our blood."

On the day the Prophet and Hyrum were killed, Myra Henrie said she had never felt so low in her mind. She said it seemed like there was something terrible about to happen. Along toward evening she walked out in her yard and her neighbor came over. They both felt that feeling and tried to cheer one another up but just dusk, they could here a horse coming at a fast rate of speed. They hurried to the front gate and the horseman rode past, never slacking, his speed and called to them, "The Prophet and Hyrum have been killed."

These above stories were told to me by my Aunt Henrie Cooper. She had a most wonderful memory and was very careful to tell them in the same words her grandmother (Myra Mayall Henrie) had told them to her. Aunt Mary was her grandmothers favorite granddaughter and was old enough to remember and repeat the stories just as she heard them, before her grandmother died.

Another story she told me was one her father told, James my grandfather, the son of William became well acquainted with Joseph as he would stop and visit the Henrie family on his way to and from his own farm a little father out from the city. (I rather think it was John Taylor who rode the Henrie horse to Carthage Jail). James saw his father (William Henrie) and the Prophet wrestle sideholts for an hour at a time; and while his father could throw the Prophet frequently, Joseph would always come out ahead, but they were always good sports. While visiting at the house, his mother would give the Prophet a baked potato or a bowl of buttermilk, or perhaps a piece of pie. When he would leave he always asked God to bless them, and James declared he felt the spirit and power of God come with those blessings in so much that he knew beyond any question that he was a Prophet of God, and he loved him better than anyone he ever knew in his life.

James remembered well when the Prophet, his brother Hyrum, and Brother Taylor and Richards went to Carthage Jail. He heard the Prophet's last speech to the Nauvoo Legion. He was dressed in his uniform and it made a deep impression upon him. He and his brother Daniel were at the meeting when the mantle of Joseph fell upon Brigham Young. James said Brigham's appearance was that of Joseph Smith, and his voice was as though Joseph was standing there talking. So the Saints knew that Brigham Young was to be their leader, although other men had felt that they were the ones to be chosen.

(This James Henrie is my grandfather, and I knew him until his death 12 Feb. 1916. He was a wonderfully kind and honorable man and was a good father and family man. He used to come to our home and visit my mother and sing to us children and trot us on his knee. We loved him dearly.)

Thelma Miller Higbee, "Stories of the Association of the William Henrie Family with the Prophet Joseph Smith as Told to me by my Aunt Mary Henrie Cooper," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-2.

Met Joseph, "the most magnetic man"; Joseph sold Henrie a farm; Sister Henrie often treated Joseph to cold milk, buttermilk, baked potatoes, buns, cookies or whatever she had; memories of Joseph racing and playing with the children; Joseph borrowed a Henrie horse for ride to Carthage. Saw Brigham Young transfigured.

William and Myra belonged to the Methodist Church and when Parley P. Pratt and Samuel Smith came to their door preaching the gospel of the Latter-Day Saints of Jesus Christ, they at first were very reluctant to listen, then they met the Prophet Joseph Smith and they said he was the most magnetic man they had ever seen. They had not thought to join the Church but it seemed there was a power about the Prophet that seemed to take hold of you with both hands and draw you to him, and you knew what he said was true. They were converted and held many cottage meetings at their home between 1837 and 1843.

. . . The Prophet Joseph Smith owned three farms in a row at Nauvoo. He sold the one in the middle to William Henrie, and from that day on as he passed by their place he would always stop in and rest and chat and Myra would give him a glass of cold milk, or buttermilk or a baked potato or a bun or cookie or whatever she had handy and he would always bless the home and all those who dwelt there when he took his leave. William said you knew he was a true prophet of God because you could not be in his presence without feeling the influence and spirit of God, which seemed to flow from him almost as heat does from a stove. You could not see it, but you felt it.

. . . All of the Henrie boys were of the rugged athletic type and all were fairly big fellows. Daniel being the smallest, but he was strong and wirey. They loved to wrestle, run and jump and often did it in the less tense moments when they had time. The prophet also loved and excelled in these sports and one day Daniel related he walked up to one of their high corral gatesit came up to his chin as he measured itthen he walked back a little way, took a running jump, and cleared the gate easily. Daniel related that he often beat the Prophet racing and also at the high jump, but when the prophet thought it was his turn to win and he really tried, he could out them all.

Joseph Smith felt at home with the Henries and he never hesitated to ask for anything they had, if he needed it. In fact, it was on Daniel's horse that had been borrowed from the Henrie stable that he rode to the Carthage jail, the trip from which he never returned alive. It was said the family waved to him as he and Brother Taylor passed the door and again the prophet blessed them as he raised his hand in a gesture of farewell.

When the meeting was called to choose a new leader of the Church, William and his four sons, Daniel, James, Joseph and Samuel were all present, and they listened to the claims of all who thought they should preside at the Church's head, but when Brigham Young got up and spoke and the mantle of Joseph Smith fell upon him, they all testified that there was no question or any room left for doubt in the minds of all those present, for as Daniel said, "As he began to talk he sounded like the prophet, and he took on the appearance of the prophet until we thought it was the prophet reincarnated. We thought he had really come back to us. We were never more wide awake in our lives, and yet there was his apparition before our eyes. It was a soul stirring experience." Many years later Marian, son of James, in talking to his father about it, said "Oh, Father, I think you were just having an illusionation." James brought one fist down hard into the other hand with a bang and said "Illusihell! I saw with my own eyes and heard with my own ears. I was not asleep, or dreaming, and I was not alone. We all saw it, and heard it and felt the spirit present. We marveled over it and talked of nothing else for days."

It was the final thing that convinced Daniel that the Latter-day Saints church was true and divinely inspired. He went down and was baptized in the Mississippi river July 16, 1845 (Temple record).

Callie O. Morley, "History of William and Myra Mayall Henrie, Pioneers of 1847 and 1847," Delta, West Millard County, Utah, October 1955, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 4-5.

William joins Church in 1842, moves to Nauvoo, buys land from Joseph; with four sons is present for transfiguration of Brigham Young, an experience which caused son Daniel to obtain testimony and join Church.

William and Myra Henry were taught the gospel by Samuel Smith and Parley P. Pratt. Later they met Joseph, and William said "he was the most magnetic man they had ever seen." William was baptized on July 17, 1842, after which he went to Nauvoo. The oldest son, Daniel, did not accept the gospel at this time.

The Prophet Joseph owned three farms in Nauvoo, and sold the middle one to William Henrie, who later said, "You knew he was a true prophet of God because you could not be in his presence without feeling the influence and spirit of God which seemed to flow from him as heat does from a stove. You could not see it, but you could feel it."

William and his four sons were present on the 8th of August 1844 when Brigham Young was transfigured. This experience convinced Daniel the Church was true, and the point at which he received a testimony. He was baptized in the Mississippi River, July 1, 1845.

Rhea A. S. Anderson, "My Pioneer Heritage," 15 January 1974, 3; copies in private family possession.

Note: I took the above notes from the copy of Helene Anderson Majors, 1062 8th St., Penrose, Colorado.
