Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Heywood, Joseph L.

(April 1, 1815-October 16, 1910)

Converted upon hearing Joseph preach "by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost"; Joseph helped cut the ice for his river baptism.

I left my native state [of Massachusetts] in the spring of 1831 and became a citizen of Illinois; I spent some time in Alton and Springfield, Ill., and moved to Quincy, Adams county, Ill., in the fall of 1839. Engaging in the mercantile business in partnership with my brother-in-law, Oliver Kimball, I remained there until the fall of 1845, when I moved with my family to the city of Nauvoo, Hancock county, Ill. In December, 1842, I visited the Prophet Joseph Smith in Nauvoo, and after listening to his preaching by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, I was converted and asked for baptism the same hour. I was baptized by Elder Orson Hyde, in the Mississippi river, the Prophet Joseph assisting in cutting the ice. I was then confirmed a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints under the hands of Elders Orson Hyde, Joseph Smith and Jedediah M. Grant.

"Joseph Leland Heywood," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:646.

Heard Joseph prophesy to Stephen A. Douglas that U. S. Government was "an old granny anyhow" and could not protect her citizens.

[On August 5, 1856, Joseph L. Heywood and George A. Smith visited Senator Stephen A. Douglas in his home "situated about one third of a mile from the Capitol . . ." Heywood then records the following in his journal:]

The Senator seems much care worn with public responsibilitiesWhen I first met him on my arrival he inquired after my wife (Saripta) and asked if she was livingI was present at Carthage in the month of June 1843 when the Prophet Joseph and Mr. Douglas, then District Judge, had a conversation in relation to the treatment the Saints had received at the hands of the General Government, at which time Joseph prophesied the breaking up of the government saying "she is an old granny anyhow and could not protect its citizens and people want a sign to know whether I am a Prophet you (Judge Douglas) shall live to see these things fulfilled;" this occurred at the House of William Backenstos and I think was on the first Monday in June. I know that A. W. Babbit was present and have since been informed that William Clayton, Joseph's private secretary, was with him.

"Diary of Joseph L. Heywood, 1815-1910," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 12-13.
