Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hinman, Henry Lyman

(March 6, 1837-January 27, 1921)

Tells of Anson Call at Joseph's request seeking a judge's opinion on whether to surrender to the officers; judge in effect warned against it; Call told Emma and Reynolds Cahoon, who failed to deliver the message. Also tells of Joseph and Hyrum returning from Iowa, of Joseph asking Hyrum why young Joseph F. looked so pale, and of Joseph and Hyrum removing their garments before going to Carthage.

Cardston, Alberta, Canada

October 22nd, 1910

Mrs. Susa Y. Gates,

Salt Lake City, Utah.

Dear Sister:

In answer to your esteemed favor of the 3rd inst. relative to a statement made by Brother Anson Call, I beg to say:

As my memory serves me, in the summer of 1883 the directors of the Weber and Davis County Canal held a meeting at the mouth of Weber Canyon. After the said meeting was over Brothers Anson Call, Feramoz Little, President William R. Smith and I were waiting at the station on the Sand Ridge north of Layton awaiting the arrival of the train for Salt Lake City. While thus waiting Brother Call told the incident which I mentioned to you.

It was in 1844 when the City of Nauvoo was under martial law, just previous to the assassination of the Prophet Joseph. Brother Call was asked to come into the City and act as one of the guards. While acting in this capacity the Prophet who was in hiding at the time, requested Brother Call to come to him. When Brother Call saw the ProphetJoseph said he desired Anson Call and another man (whose name I do not recollect) to go to a judge who was holding court in a country near by and ask the said judge what, in his opinion, would be the chances of obtaining a fair trial and having justice meted out to him, in case the prophet gave himself up to the officers. The Prophet further requested that the interview be put in writing at the time it was had.

Accordingly Brother Call and the other man went to see the judge. The interview was arranged for. At the appointed time Brother Call asked the question on which the judge was to give his opinion. Brother Call stated that he had been sent by the Prophet Joseph to inquire as to the chances of a fair trial and what were his chances in case the Prophet surrendered to the officers. The judge hesitated for a moment and then said 'it would be better for one man to perish than for the whole people to be destroyed.' Brother Call was astounded at the judge's answer and asked if that was the candid opinion of the judge. The judge confirmed his previous statement. Brother Call said the Saints would never consent to having the Prophet killed.

After obtaining the written interview from the clerk who was in attendance, Brother Call and his friend left for Nauvoo.

Upon the arrival of Brother Call and companion in Nauvoo, Anson tried to locate the Prophet. In this he was unsuccessful. Finally he found Emma Smith, Reynolds Cahoon and a man named Cutler. He asked to see the Prophet but was told that he could not do so. He insisted on seeing Joseph, telling the parties that he had an important message to deliver in person. This made no impression, however. Whereupon he told his errand and produced the written interview. And he exacted a solemn promise from the parties above mentioned that they would deliver the document to the Prophet at once.

Anson Call then went back to guard duty. Next, two men were seen in a small skiff coming from the Iowa shore. When the boat reached shore, two men got out, one was the Prophet and the other the Patriarch. President Joseph F. Smith, a boy of six, was playing on the shore, and saw them land at the spot indicated on the map. They came up and went directly to the Patriarch's home, followed by the boy Joseph F., and all three went into the house. The Prophet sat on the chair in the bed room, while the Patriarch went to the inner room to wash. When he came out with a clean collar and stock on, they two went out the front door.

Early one morning, soon after this, as Brother Call was on duty as a guard at the Temple, he saw a man riding a horse at full speed and shouting "They have killed them! They have killed them!" The man was Porter Rockwell and he shouted his sentence as he rode through the streets.

Brother Call was anxious to learn if the message which he had received from the judge had ever been delivered. To this end he found Apostle Richards and asked him if the Prophet had ever received the said message. Brother Richards said "No." At this time Apostle Richards was lying on a sofa, being very much tired from the exciting scene he had just witnessed. He was so impressed with the inquiry that he got up and paced the floor exclaiming "What will happen next."

Apostle Richards asked Anson Call if he would make oath as to the obtaining of the interview in writing and also as to its disposal. Brother Call said he would. After a few days when Apostle Richards was rested somewhat Anson Call made affidavit embodying the facts above mentioned relative to the written message and its disposition. Furthermore, Brother Call said he would meet those parties entrusted with the message on the other side of the veil in the presence of the Prophet.

I trust that this will meet your wishes in the matter as it is correct according to the best of my recollection of the story as told.

Very truly yours,

(Signed) Henry L. Hinman.

[Attached to the same manuscript, is the following:]

The Prophet took the boy Joseph Fielding Smith on his knee as he waited for his brother to wash himself and change his collar. As the Patriarch passed in and out the Prophet said, "What is the matter with this boy? He looks as if there weren't a drop of blood in his body." The Patriarch answered, "Oh, the only trouble is that he lives on skim milk," which was true. The boy had never eaten anything in his life but bread and milk, yet he was strong and agile, a good swimmer and as athletic as any boy of his [age] could possibly be.

According to a story told by Sister Lucy B. Young, President John Taylor told her that the commonly accepted report in regard to the Prophet and Patriarch taking off their garments before going to Carthage [was true]. Sister Young related the story as she heard it in the presence of her daughter Mabel. President Taylor added that the Prophet's wife, Emma had urged him to take off his garments lest he be stripped and tarred and feathered. He did so, and when the Patriarch came, she told him the Prophet had taken his garments off.

"Henry Lyman Hinman to Susa Y. Gates, Oct. 22, 1910," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
