Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Holbrook, Joseph

(January 16 [or 15], 1806-November 14, 1885)

Holbrook meets the Prophet for the first time; is counseled to return to his home.

In the course of a few days, Joseph the prophet came home so that I got a chance to see him when he told me much of the work of the last days in which I hope to ever prove of great value to me. Mary Johnson, a sister of Luke and Lyman Johnson, died at the Prophet Joseph Smith, Jr.'s home, age about 15 years, which caused much gloominess at the prophet's house. Yet, I fully believe in the gospel of the kingdom which was being set up in the last days.

The prophet said, "Go and prosper and be faithful and the Lord would help me." I then took my leave of the brethren for home and found all well. [I] traveled 400 miles.

"Autobiography of Joseph Holbrook, (1806-1846)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 26.

As missionary, encounters man who knew Joseph Smith and thought him unable to write Book of Mormon, though he was honest.

May 3rd [1833] we [i.e., Holbrook and Truman O. Angell] traveled 30 miles and called a number of times, but the people were unwilling to hear of Mormonism. We took dinner in the town of Manchester where the Book of Mormon was found. The gentleman did not believe that Joseph Smith was the author of said book as he was well acquainted with him and did not know any harm of him until the Book of Mormon came forth, but he believed the Smith family were honest, industrious farmers.

"Autobiography of Joseph Holbrook (1806-1846)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 27.

Orderliness of Zion's Camp; a time of gospel instruction.

[On Zion's Camp, in May 1834] We were led by the Prophet Joseph Smith, Jr. and pitched our tents by the way as we traveled having the most perfect order in our camp, having at the sound of the bugle in the morning and evening prayers in each tent of ten men. While everyone was to be engaged in preparing food, looking after teams, etc., as they were organized and appointed [to] their several duties by the Prophet of the Lord, who was our leader.

"Autobiography of Joseph Holbrook, (1806-1846)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 31-32.

The Prophet invites the sisters to remain with the camp; threatened by mobs; Joseph said "stand still and see the salvation of God"; the elements combine to protect them; revelation in D&C 105 received; cholera attacks the camp, frightening the mob; Holbrook's wife afflicted; seventeen die.

I had the bad fortune for one of my horses to die near Jacksonville in Illinois, but I bought another one for $55.00 in cash, so I proceeded on my journey with the [Zion's] camp. When we came to the Salt River Creek in Missouri, about 50 miles west of Louisiana, we tarried for some three or four days to wash, etc. Then Brother Joseph Smith counseled those that had families to get houses for them, and for the man to go forward with the camp. So I provided a house for my family as decided and was about to leave my family as was the rest of the brethren who had wives with them. Then Brother Joseph Smith said, if the sisters were willing to undergo a siege with the camp they could all go along with it, whereupon they said they could and said they liked Brother Joseph much better than before for the privilege he gave them of continuing with the camp. At this place as at many others on the road, we had many of the brethren who united with the camp. We were often met by strangers who would interrogate us as to where we were going and what our business was, etc. Then they would often threaten us if we went further, etc. and said that we had a standard raised with "death" on one side and "blood" on the other until we were forced to raise a standard with "peace" on both sides which they could not hardly believe when they saw it for they were so prejudiced in their feelings they could not hardly believe their better senses. And thus we continued our journey.

On the 23 mile prairie below Richmond we camped between the forks of Fishing River. One fork which we crossed this evening was about up to our axletrees of our wagons. We camped about one mile west of said fork near a meeting house where we were met by many of our enemies as we had been for some days past, who swore they would send us all to hell before morning and if any were left, we should not be spared in the event to tell the story alive. And thus we were threatened on every side with mobs enough to make any man quail who had not the spirit of God upon him. But Brother Joseph the prophet said, stand still and see the salvation of God.

About sundown it began to rain like torrents with thundering and lightning and dark enough to prevent anyone from being able to find their way. While the hail flew in some degree upon the camp, a mile to the north of our camping, limbs were broken off the trees, the ground covered with leaves and the herbage destroyed which made the country desolated and prevented any harm from befalling our camp that night. To our surprise we found that the two forks of Fishing River were swollen so as to be utterly impossible to pass, being it was said 40 feet deep on each side of us about one and one-half miles. We were forced to continue on those grounds the next day, there being a home mill about one mile up of us which afforded us flour for our comfort. The next day we moved north about four miles to Brethren Coopers near a prairie.

At this place we tarried some three or four days and were visited by a delegation from our enemies, consisting of Judge [John F.] Ryland [and] Colonel Sconce of Clay County and Neil Gilliam the sheriff of Clay County in which they wished interview with our Prophet Joseph Smith which resulted in their promising protection to us in this state of Missouri, as well as our brethren whom we had come to redeem and who were driven from Jackson County the season before.

Thereupon the revelation [was] given on Fishing River, Missouri, June 22, 1834, [D&C 105] showing the mind of God concerning the redemption of Zion, etc. About this time the cholera began to make its appearance in our [Zion's] camp and my wife was one of the first that was taken down with it, but she recovered from it in a few days, being administered to by Brigham Young and others for her recovery.

We removed from here to Clay County to Brother [George] Burketts below Liberty when a number of our brethren were taken with cholera which so frightened our enemies that they did not dare come to us or have us come near them which relieved us from further danger from our enemies. The next day the camp was broken up by the order of Joseph Smith, Jr., the Prophet of God, to meet again in one week at the house of Colonel Lyman Wight. We left the camp around June 26, 1834, and traveled about six miles and west of Liberty five miles and stopped near Mr. Michael Arthur was building a grist mill and had a number of the brethren employed in and about said mill. The next day my brother Chandler and myself went out to cut some house logs but we found ourselves too weak to chop and had to return to our wagons entirely tired out. A brother Lynes Nantels [?] being present, said he lived about a mile from that place and he had rented a stable and corn crib and that we were welcome to use them if we liked. In the morning my brother's wife, Eunice Holbrook, was very sick with the cholera. We therefore thought it best to get some place as soon as possible so we removed to the stable and corn crib, although it was raining a perfect shower. By the middle of the forenoon, my brother's wife was cramping with most violent spasms for life, but Cyrus Zaddacks [?] and Carkis Branger [?] took her into the house and nursed her with the greatest attention so that in a few days she had escaped the hands of the destroyer, but some 17 of our [Zion's] camp fell victims in a few days to the cholera. I moved into the corn crib and my brother into the stable as the brethren who had been driven from Jackson County last fall had occupied all the houses in the county, it being new but few to be had.

"Autobiography of Joseph Holbrook (1806-1846)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 32-35.

Account of George Hinkle betraying the Prophet and friends into the hands of the mob at Far West.

The brethren had gathered into Far West as much as they could for safety as the whole country was filled with the mob. There arrived in sight of Far West, October 29, 1838, 5,000 Missouri militia, ordered out by Governor Lilburn W. Boggs. The next day they sent in a flag of truce south of the town. Colonel G. [George] M. Hinkle went out to meet them and a conference ensued when Hinkle agreed to deliver Joseph Smith, Jr. with the heads of the Church into their hands by strategy. That evening Joseph Smith, Jr., the Mormon prophet, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Hyrum Smith and others went out with a flag of truce to meet another from our enemies, when Colonel Hinkle, then commanding the militia of Caldwell County said to our enemies who were approaching in lines all around our flag of truce and Joseph Smith, Jr. and those that were with him. "Gentlemen, I now deliver to you Joseph Smith, Jr., the Mormon prophet. He is now in your hands as your prisoner." At this moment the lines of our enemies began to ring with the most hideous yells that the Saints ever heard and could be heard for some miles around, of their achieved and treacherous victory. It was with the greatest trouble that they could keep their enemies from shooting them down as wild beasts in their camp. There was a court martial held in which they condemned the prisoners to be shot on the public square in Far West. They still continued to take prisoners and threatened all that came into their war that they might torture them and force them to leave their religion.

"Autobiography of Joseph Holbrook (1806-1846)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 44.

In the square at Far West on Nov. 3, 1838, the Prophet and companions give fearful farewell to families and friends under shadow of mob control.

About the second day our enemies carried away our Prophet Joseph Smith, Jr., his brother Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wright and others for Jackson County under guard of their numerous arms which was one of the greatest trials I had witnessed, to see them pulled away with main strength, when their wives and children, fathers and friends clinging to them and crying and taking, as many supposed, their last look of farewell upon their Prophet, fathers upon their children, their wives and husbands all calculated to draw tears from the stoutest hardened hearts. But our enemies only continued to swear that we need not ever suppose we would see them alive again or hear their voices in our midst for they should die.

"Autobiography of Joseph Holbrook (1806-1846)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 44-45.

Joseph tells Holbrook the mob would have killed him had he not escaped; instructs him to secure corn meal and flour to sell to the Saints.

In the month of May [1839] we went to Nauvoo, then called Commerce, and saw Brother Joseph Smith, the Prophet of God and his brother Hyrum, the first time since they were taken from Far West to jail by the mob. Brother Joseph Smith said that if the mob had gotten me they would have killed me instead of taking me to prison. He also wished to know where I lived. I told him back in the country about 25 miles from this place. He asked me if I could get corn meal and flour and bring into this place so that the brethren could buy it of me as there was no one bringing any in for sale. I told him I could if I could get the money to begin with. He told me to look around and borrow the money if I could.

I borrowed $7.00 from Brother Covey for a few days and bought corn for 25 cents per bushel, shelled it, took it to the mill and from thence to Nauvoo and let the brethren have it for 50 cents per bushel. After taking two loads of meal, I bought wheat at $1.00 per hundred. This was in Hancock and McDonough counties. I was the only one engaged in the business which followed about six weeks and which kept up nearly night and day, as I got the most of going nights besides camping out on the prairie.

"Autobiography of Joseph Holbrook (1806-1846)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 50-51.

Nauvoo City Council nominates the Prophet for the presidency of the United States; Holbrook sent to campaign in Kentucky.

The council of Nauvoo nominated Joseph Smith, our prophet for a candidate for the President of the United States of America and wishing to support him in that office, I was appointed to go to Kentucky and hold forth Brother Joseph Smith's views and policy of government. I started on the 28th day of May, 1844, in company with Brother John Courthouse, my partner on that mission, with about 50 other elders to various other states of the union . . .

"Autobiography of Joseph Holbrook (1806-1846)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 60.
