Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Holbrook, S.

(birth and death dates unavailable)

In correspondence to S. D. Cowles, S. Holbrook writes about life in Nauvoo; speaks of a doctor's life, food prices, weather; reports destruction of Nauvoo Expositor and tells of martyrdom; also shares personal, family details.

July 1, 1844

Affectionate Friend:

I embrace the favorable opportunity to write a few lines unto thee which leaves me in good health & hope that it will find you the same. It has been a good while since I have heard from you and I want to hear from you soon. I get your papers once in a great while on one it said that you were studying medicine. I was glad to hear it only there was not half enuff. I would like to know all about you and the rest of the people I hear they are getting along in life. As you are studying for a Doctor I will tell you about the Doctors of this western country there is not but a few Doctors that have been through with their studies and much less a course of lectures the young students study about a year hear with some doctor and then they get them a horse and a pair of saddles bags & then mount and ride, business or no business calling everybody they see or meet. Mister or Esq. sometimes they do well and get a good business. There is a great deal of difference in the settlements of this country some of good morals & some are not but as the country grows older these doctors will go further west A doctor that has been through with his studies & understands the nature of his business can do well hear Doctor Millard is in this county he has done a good business for riding about 20 miles he charges his [?] $25 Dollars others about the same.

The weather has been very wet the most so ever known for about ten weeks corn looks very unfavorable for a crop on account of the wet weather other crops look very well.

Wheat especially people will commence chilling their wheat this week wheat [is] worth 75 cts oats 50. buck wheat 50 botatoes [sic] .50 per the bushel this is very high owing to the scarcity. Beef cattle sell for two Dollars a hundred lbs. cows for about 8 to 12 Dollars.

There is quite an excitement about the Mormons which is not over with yet I can't tell what the result will be. There was a printing press in Nauvoo which the Mormons did not like & Jo call[ed] the city authority together and passed a law that it was a nuisence and that it should be tore down that night & it was

That started a mob in an inst the mormons prepared for them and the mob was not strong a miff for the Mormons & then made application for the Mormons, & others made applications to the Governor of Illinois & he ordered out the militia to get and take Jo But when Jo found what the governor was doing he gave himself up and the arms that belong to Uncle Sam also the Governor then put him to Joseph & Hiram his Brother and said he would place a sufficient guard to keep him safe untill his trial which would a been on Saturday last. He went to Jail on Monday the guard placed the governor & a part of the guard left the Jail for Nauvoo on Thursday . And a mob marched up to the jail which the gard dare not resist & the Jail was nothing but room in some house Hiram saw them and he held the door the mob some of them went up stairs and shot down through hole shot him once through the head & once the breast died inst. Jo he jumped out of the winder and as he struck the ground they jumped on him with their knives and stabbed & shot him bad. The mob say they drive the Mormons from that state & burn Nauvoo to ashes.

I live twelve miles from Nauvoo Jo & Hiram was buried on Saturday the day of their trial the 29th day of June.

The Mormons have got to hold in (being in this western world) or else they can not have a being in this western world It is not like that you know as much or hear as mutch as I do.

There is a great many good people amongst the Mormons. The reason why Jo was killed as he was on the account of his trial being so near at and the mob knew he would give bail to any amount & would again be in Nauvoo the same old Jo. But I have said more about the Mormons than I thought I cared about the creatures. I want to hear from the folks bad when you get this set down and write a great long letter all about Uncle John Pearl and give him my respect when you see him. & Uncle Billy how he gets along & whether John has got married & whether Watson [?] has sot [?] fire to the big river or not. Tell all about it who is dead that I used to know & who has got married & I will tell you how M[?] H. Hoff gets along I still in the same place where I stopped when I come here and like country as well as ever and better. I have a small farm of one hundred twenty acres one yoke of cattle one mare & colt three cows sheep some hogs & young cattle.

[?] six Pals [?] one . . . But that is but a small portion to what I have got a small part of miteA wife Mary Ann including the whole I was married on the 19th day of March 1844 she was the daughter of Joseph Welsh a Methodist Preacher from Ohio. (She is the handsomest thing I ever see)

When you come to Iowa come to my house and make it your home until you and your wife can find some place to settle if you should come. Direct your letters & papers to the Priarie house Lee Country, Iowa. Direct your letters & papers to the Prairies house Lee Country Iowa Terr.

I must soon close my letter as time and space is getting. I must soon close my letter as time & space is getting short. Give my respects to all enquiring Friends All is well don't forget to send me some papers say two to my because they are twice as plenty with you. If you can read this yourself all is well.

Your respectfully, S. Holbrook

"S. Holbrook, to S. D. Cowles July 1, 1844," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.
