Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Ashby, Benjamin

(December 19, 1828-November 19, 1907)

Prophet asks young Ashby, who was playing in the street, to make less noise.

While in Nauvoo I was living so near to Joseph Smith that I was enabled to see him in his daily life as well as in his public administrations though at this time his life was sought and considerable of his time was spent in seclusion to avoid his enemies. Like all boys I used to play in the streets. He once spoke to me, giving me an invitation to make less noise. It was in front of his house and he was setting out in the porch talking to some gentleman and I presume, I disturbed them.

"Benjamin Ashby Autobiography," copy of holograph, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8.

Recites events of Joseph's journey to Carthage; Joseph paused and asked Hyrum what the Spirit whispered; Joseph said if he were slain, his "blood would be required of this nation."

I was in my father's garden one morning, the memorable June 1844, when he [Joseph Smith] rode past on his way to Carthage. Never shall I forget the look of deep sorrow that covered his noble countenancethat was the last time I saw him alive. He was met on the way by an officer and posse with an order from the governor for the return of the state arms and he turned back to see the order complied with. On getting into town he called Brother J. B. Noble to accompany him and with his brother Hyrum. They turned off the road, leaving the company, and took a short cut across the hills. When alone, he asked Hyrum what the spirit indicated to him. He replied that he could get no satisfactory answer. Joseph then said, "Well, if they kill me, I shall die innocent and my blood will be required of this nation, this day" near as I remember was the testimony of Brother Joseph shortly before he died. In the afternoon he went to Carthage and to his martyrdom. I sat upon the steps of my father's house on the evening of the day that he was shot until twelve o'clock and never did I hear before such an uproar and noise that seemed to pervade the very atmosphere; dogs howling, mingled with confused noises as though all the legions of the damned were in commotion.

"Benjamin Ashby Autobiography," copy of holograph, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 9-10.

Saw transfiguration of Brigham Young.

I was in the congregation when the question of succession to the leadership of the church was [illegible word] the people and I [illegible] and testify that the last time I was [illegible] the gestures and heard the sound of the voice of Joseph Smith, was when the form, voice and countenance of Brigham Young was transfigured before the congregation so that he appeared like Joseph Smith in every particular. The Lord showed the people that the mantle of Joseph had been bestowed upon Brigham.

"Benjamin Ashby Autobiography," copy of holograph, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 11.

As a twelve year old, testifies of Joseph Smith at Universalist meeting; as a boy, playing in front of Joseph's house, the Prophet asked him to be more quiet; saw Egyptian mummies; heard Joseph swear with drawn sword he would not live under mob rule; remembers martyrdom and ensuing sadness; saw martyred bodies and the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

. . . In the year 1839 or 1840 there came to Salem Erastus Snow, preaching the Gospel in its purity as revealed to Joseph Smith. My father was not a member of any denomination but attended the Universalist Church, of which my mother was a member, because as I have often heard her say they preached the love of God for his children, in contrast to the doctrine of the Orthodox Church that held to the everlasting punishment of all who did not embrace their peculiar dogmas.

Father returned home one Sunday noon saying he had been to hear a new religion, preached by a Mormon, in the Masonic hall, [he] and seemed much interested in what he had heard preached. He took down the Bible and began to read some of its passages to mother, she being confined to her bed by the birth of my sister Mary Jane. In the afternoon I attended the meeting with Father and continued to do so with the agreement that I was to attend the Sunday School, it being against mother's principles to allow her children to go from one meeting to another. But inasmuch as father went she could not reasonably object. My mind soon became enlightened upon the plan of salvation, and I firmly believed in the divinity and sacred character of the Book of Mormon, which I reada copy of which had been lent to Father by Bro. [Erastus] Snow.

One Sunday there was some questions in the Book from which we studied, concerning the ancient prophets, with scriptural texts as answers and some questions that were answered by the pupil. One of these was "Are there any prophets in these days?" which happened to come to me in turn. To the teacher's surprise I answered "Yes Sir." "False prophets, I suppose you mean?" "No, sir. True ones." "Who, pray?" was his query. "Joseph Smith," was my answer. He made some reply and passed on to the next. I heard no more of it until about two weeks after when mother called me to her and asked me what I had been saying to my teacher about Joseph Smith. I told her what had occurred. I learned that this testimony had been talked of from the minister down through all that congregation. I was about 12 years old and this was the first time I had the privilege of bearing testimony to the work of God in the latter days.

Mother, as soon as she could go out, attended the Meetings in the Masonic Hall and became convinced of the truth of the Gospel.

. . . While in Nauvoo I was living so near to Joseph Smith that I was enabled to see him in his daily life as well as in his public administrations, though at this time his life was sought and considerable of his time was spent in seclusion to avoid his enemies. Like all boys, I used to play in the streets. He once spoke to me giving me an invitation to make less noise. It was in front of his house and he was setting out in the porch talking to some gentlemen and I presume I disturbed them.

One day with my mother I visited his house. He was not in, but we spent an interesting time with his mother. She exhibited the mummies from which the Book of Abraham was taken as well as the original papyrus on which it is written. We were not privileged to enjoy his society and instructions but a few months. I was present when he made his famous speech from the frame building in front of his house where he drew his sword with a declaration never to submit to mob, but to uphold law and order and liberty of conscience as long as God would give him life.

I was in my father's garden one morning the memorable June 1844 when he road past on his way to Carthage. Never shall I forget the look of deep sorrow that covered his noble countenancethat was the last time I saw him alive. He was met on the way by an officer and posse with an order from the governor for the return of the state arms and he turned back to see the order complied with. On getting into town he called Bro. J. [Joseph] B. Noble to accompany him and with his Brother Hyrum they turned of the road leaving the company and took a short cut across the hills. When alone he asked Hyrum what the spirit indicated to him. He replied that he could get no satisfactory answer. Joseph then said, "well if they kill me, I shall die innocent and my blood will be required of this nation." This is as near as I remember the testimony of Brother Noble shortly before he died.

In the afternoon he went to Carthage and to his martyrdom.

I set upon the steps of my father's house on the evening of the day that he was shot until twelve o'clock and never did I hear before such an uproar and noise that seemed to pervade the very atmospheredogs howling, mingled with confused noises as though all the legions of the damned were in commotion.

Not dreaming of the tragedy that had been enacted that afternoon I went to bed, but at the dawn of morning the sad tale was brought to our ears and the grief and sorrow of a whole people cannot be pictured in language. For days a man woman or child could not be met but they were in tears for the loss of their beloved leaders. Soon the wagon containing the two brothers arrived in the city and passed down to the Mansion House where we visited and viewed their marred features as they lay in the habiliments of the grave.

Bro. Willard Richards was the only one of the Twelve apostles who was in Nauvoo. John Taylor, being wounded, remained in Carthage. Soon the Twelve began to return, also Sidney Rigdon, who endeavored to have himself elected as Guardian of the Church. I was present when he made his silly and boastful speech about leading the Church back to Pittsburgh and twirling the nose of Queen Victoria, &c. &c. Too foolish to be worth remembering! I did not know Rigdon when he was in the spirit of his calling and cannot say what manner of man he was, but when I knew him he had lost the favor of God and he was as dry sticks in his preaching.

I was in the congregation when the question of the succession to the leadership of the Church was before the people and I solemnly assert and testify that the last time I saw the features, the gestures and heard the sound of the voice of Joseph Smith, was when the form, voice, and countenance of Brigham Young was transfigured before the congregation so that he appeared like Joseph Smith in every particular. Thus the Lord showed the people that the mantle of Joseph had been bestowed upon Brigham.

"Autobiography of Benjamin Ashby," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar, punctuation, and spelling have been modernized.

Heard the gospel from Erastus Snow; at twelve years old, bore testimony of Joseph Smith at a Universalist meeting.

About this time, I first heard of Mormonism. My father had always attended the Universalist Meeting of which my mother was a member but, hearing that a new religion had sprung up, he went out of curiosity and was so interested with the truths portrayed by Elder Erastus Snow that he continued to attend and I soon obtained permission to accompany him. Never shall I forget the sweet influence which pervaded my soul at the sound of his voice and my mother, who was unable to leave the house, tried every means to enduce me to return to my old habits yet without success. The truths of Heaven were taking deep hold upon my young and tender mind and nothing could shake my resolution and though I was compelled to attend Sabbath School, I would leave it to go and see the Mormon Missionary. During attendance at Sabbath School the teacher happened to propound the following question from the Catechism, "Are there any prophets in these days?"

It being my turn to answer I did so in the affirmative to which he remarked that he supposed I meant false ones.

"No, true ones."

"And who pray?"

"Joseph Smith," was my rejoinder and thus, at 12 years of age did I testify for the first time of the important Mission of the Last Days.

"Writing of Benjamin Ashby (1828-1907)," typescript copy, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
