Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Horne, Joseph Jr.

(January 17, 1812 [or 1811]-April 30, 1897 [or 1836])

Tells of his conversion, of one Dr. Havard deceiving the Saints in Canada with false teachings and false appointments, and of Joseph visiting Toronto and reproving him, putting the Church in order. Wm. Law at the time considered to be a righteous man.

[Probably shortly after July 1836] I made a short visit to Kirtland, Ohio, where I was introduced to the Prophet Joseph Smith, Jr., and also many of the members of the Church. I received a Patriarchal Blessing from Joseph Smith, Sr., father of the prophet, in the house of the Lord in Kirtland, Ohio. After tarrying a few days, until Sabbath, I heard Elder Rigdon and President Hyrum Smith preach. On my return home I fell in company with a Dr. Havard, a High Priest, who said he was going to visit the various branches of the church in Canada by authority from the Prophet. I did not like the appearance of the man very well. He learned by conversation with me that the Branch in our settlement held their meetings in my house, so when we landed in Toronto he, having a horse and carriage, offered to accompany me home, to which I agreed. He told me what great things he was going to do among the Saints in Canada, [and] commenced usurping authority by calling the Saints together in a conference capacity without consulting Elder John Taylor, who was at that [time] the presiding Elder of the saints in that part of the country. At the conference he appointed the Elders [to] their field of labor. Some did not feel exactly right about it but made no objections. At this conference I became acquainted with Almond W. Babbit; he preached a discourse in the forenoon on the subject of the resurrection which I thought was the best sermon I had ever heard. He afterwards labored several months in that part of the country. His wife also came over from Kirtland and stayed at my house several weeks. She was a very good woman. A few weeks after the conference the Prophet Joseph, President Rigdon and Elders Thomas B. Marsh and John P. Green came from Kirtland to visit the various Branches of the Church in that part of the country. When he ascertained the course pursued by Dr. Havard he said it was wrong and chastised him very severely. He appointed conferences in several places all of which me and my wife attended. We was greatly blessed in hearing the instructions which he and the elders gave to the people on various subjects. They tarried at my house several days, during which time we received much good instruction from the Prophet in the family circle. After their visit of about two weeks they returned to Kirtland. During the Prophet's visit I became acquainted with Elder William Law.

As I accompanied the Prophet to the branch of the Church where he resided, he [William Law] was at that time thought to be a very good man, but in after years turned out to be a very wicked man, as the history of the Church does plainly show.

"The Journal of Joseph Horne, Junior, 1858-1861, Including His Life Summary," transcribed by Stephen D. Robison, LDS Family History Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar, spelling, and punctuation have been modernized.
