Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Horne, Mary Isabella Hales

(November 20, 1818-August 25 [or 27], 1905 [or 1906])

Tells of her first meeting with Joseph Smith, and of the Holy Ghost bearing powerful witness he was a prophet.

In July (1836) I was baptized by Orson Hyde, and ever after that our house was open for meetings, and became a home for many of the elders. In the latter part of the summer of 1837 I had the great pleasure of being introduced to, and entertaining, the beloved prophet, Joseph Smith, with Sidney Rigdon and T. B. Marsh. I said to myself, "O Lord, I thank thee for granting the desire of my girlish heart, in permitting me to associate with prophets and apostles." On shaking hands with Joseph Smith, I received the Holy Spirit in such great abundance that I felt it thrill my whole system, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet. I thought I had never beheld so lovely a countenance. Nobility and goodness were in every feature.

"Mary Hales Autobiography," in Kenneth Glyn Hales, comp., Windows: A Mormon Family (Tucson, Ariz.: Skyline Printing, 1985), 30-31; see also Woman's Exponent 11, no. 1 (1 June 1882): 1.

First meeting with Prophet in Toronto; Joseph honored the priesthood line by working with and through the local authority, which was then John Taylor; visited the local Churches and put them in order.

I first met the Prophet Joseph Smith in the fall of 1837, at my home in the town of Scarborough, Canada West.

When I first shook hands with him I was thrilled through and through and I knew that he was a Prophet of God, and that testimony never left me, but is still strong within me, and has been a monitor to me, so that I can now bear a faithful testimony to the divinity of the mission of that great man of God.

During the three days series of meetings held in a new barn which my husband had built, the Prophet made his home with us. The use of this barn became a necessity because the Methodists, who were bitterly opposed to us, refused to let their churches to the Prophet and saints.

As an example of Brother Joseph's humility, as well as his respect for authority, I mention the following: As soon as he reached Toronto, Canada, he inquired who the presiding officer was. On learning that it was the late President John Taylor, the Prophet said, "Send for him, as I desire to hold a meeting with the people." When President Taylor arrived, Brother Joseph said, "Brother Taylor, I am the Prophet Joseph. I want you to call a meeting, as I would like to talk to the saints."

While in Canada he visited all the branches of the Church, and gave the saints instructions on the organization and order of the Priesthood, respect for proper authority, corrected some of the mistranslations of the Bible, and took pleasure in answering questions pertaining to the gospel and the organization of the Church. Brother and Sister Taylor, my husband, and I enjoyed the privilege of accompanying the Prophet on these visits. . . .

"The Prophet Joseph Smith: The Testimony of Sister M. Isabella Horne," Relief Society Magazine 38, no. 3 (March 1951): 158.

Prophet says the Spirit always drew him to Sister Horne's home; she once washed his clothes; heard Sister Cleveland prophesy in tongues that he would be safe from his enemies, and he was; heard Joseph testify of First Vision and coming of Moroni.

In compliance with a revelation from the Lord commanding him to lay our grievances before the judges, governors, and even the President of the United States, the Prophet Joseph, in company with a number of the brethren, came to Quincy, and the Prophet laid the condition of the affairs of the Church before Governor Carlin.

On his return from his visit to Governor Carlin, the Prophet sent the brethren ahead on their return trip, telling them he would follow later. When he reached Lima, where they intended to remain over night, he found officers of the law awaiting him. They arrested him and brought him back to Quincy. This was Friday evening. About noon the next day the Prophet came to our house and said, "Sister Horne, the Spirit always draws me to your home." "Brother Joseph," I said, "you are always welcome. But how it is you are here when I thought you were almost home?" "Haven't you heard that I have been in court all morning?" he asked. I replied that I had not. "Well I have," he said. "I told the officers that I would be forthcoming at any hour in the morning they might name, if they would let me go, so here I am. What am I to do? They won't let me have my trial in Nauvoo, but they are going to take me to Walla Walla. I thought I should be at home by this time where my wife would look after my clothing, as it is in need of attention." "I will wash your clothing," I answered. "Indeed, Sister Horne, you do not look able to do it." I insisted, and he finally consented, as I told him my Saturday's work was all done. I prepared his clothing that afternoon, so he was ready for his journey in the morning.

Sister Cleveland, who had heard of the Prophet's arrest, came to see him, and met him at the door just as he was leaving. As she shook hands with him, she began speaking in tongues. Brother Joseph listened until she had finished, then turned to us and said, "You need have no fears for me, as Sister Cleveland says, I shall have my trial and be acquitted."

I testify that Joseph Smith was the greatest Prophet that ever lived on this earth, the Savior, only, excepted. There was a personal magnetism about him which drew all people who became acquainted with him, to him.

I feel greatly honored when I realize that I have had the privilege of personally entertaining this great man, of ministering to his temporal wants, of shaking hands with him, and listening to his voice. I heard him relate his first vision when the Father and Son appeared to him: also his receiving the Gold Plates from the Angel Moroni. This recital was given in compliance with a special request of a few particular friends in the home of Sister Walton, whose house was ever open to the saints. While he was relating the circumstances, the Prophet's countenance lighted up, and so wonderful a power accompanied his words that everybody who heard them felt his influence and power, and none could doubt the truth of his narration. I know that he was true to his trust, and that the principles that he advanced and taught are true.

"The Prophet Joseph Smith: The Testimony of Sister M. Isabella Horne," Relief Society Magazine 38, no. 3 (March 1951): 159-60.

Sheltered the Prophet when he was hiding from mobs; recalls his warm affectionate humor.

Brother Joseph and several of the brethren came to Quincy. They came to [my] house, partook of refreshments and scattered. Brother Joseph was in the best of spirits. He said laughingly: "Sister Horne, if I had a wife as small as you, when trouble came I would put her in my pocket and run."

Lyneve Wilson Kramer and Eva Durrant Wilson, "Mary Isabella Hales Horne," Ensign 12, no. 8 (August 1982): 64.
