Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hovey, Joseph Grafton

(November 17, 1812-May 6, 1868)

Hovey tells of receiving testimony of Joseph Smith and Book of Mormon, thus illustrating why early converts joined Church.

I, Joseph, for the first time bowed myself before God in secret and implored his mercy and asked him if what I had read out [of] the Book of Mormon was true and if the man, Joseph Smith, was the one who translated these marvelous records. I, Joseph, asked God for a testimony by the Holy Spirit and truly I got what I asked for and more abundantly. Therefore, my wife, Martha, and I did truly rejoice in the truth we had found in those records. We also searched the Bible daily and found that it did corroborate with the Book of Mormon. We were, therefore, born again and could see the kingdom. Hence, July 4, 1839, we were baptized with water and received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. One brother, Mr. Draper, baptized us.

"Autobiography of Joseph Grafton Hovey (1812-1847)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 13.

Account of seeing the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum following the martyrdom.

Brother Willard Richards, one of the Twelve, was the only one left to gather up the remains of our beloved Prophet and Patriarch. Brother Richards said it was by the power of God that he remained unharmed for the bullets flew in all directions. There was only one family left in the town. They expected the Mormons to come upon them. Brother Richards had great difficulty to get the corpses removed at all. Brother Richards told this family that he would give his life for theirs if they would help him to take care of the bodies. By so pleading he appeased their feelings and they assisted him so that the next day the bodies were brought to Nauvoo. A procession of several thousand people followed the bodies of the beloved Prophet and Patriarch to the Mansion House. The next day at ten o'clock the bodies could be viewed. My wife, Martha, and myself did go and view the corpse of our beloved Prophet and Patriarch. Joseph looked quite natural but Hyrum was so swollen in the face that he did not look natural. We supposed they were buried, but I know not where. The sepulcher was prepared for them but as yet they are not [entered] in there.

"Autobiography of Joseph Grafton Hovey (1812-1847)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 22.
