Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hoyt, Emily Smith

(September 1, 1806-August 11, 1893)

Describes dead martyrs; rehearses history leading up to martyrdom; was "an eye, and ear" witness to the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

We were in Nashville [Iowa] when the mob murdered Joseph and Hiram. We went to Nauvoo and saw their earthly forms which the mob had laid low. Joseph had been shot a little above the eyebrows in the center between them almost as if with a good aim his face was mild and pleasant even in death looked good. Hiram had been shot in the neck and the blood had settled rather more he was a noble looking form. The appearance of true greatness could not be denied. We returned from that melancholy scene heart sickened and sorrowful cast down but not in despair. The twelve away most of them. But returned as soon as possible. We were summoned over the river again and went to hear what was wanted. Brigham Young then President of the twelve had returned home. The people were convened in the Old Bowery where Joseph had last spoken to the people. Sidney Rigdon made a speech and claimed to have authority to lead the Church others had similar claims. None appeared reasonable to me. The last one arose. It was the then President of the Twelve, Brigham Young. He spoke to the people altogether in a different style from any of those who had preceded him. A cloud of witnesses arose after B. Y. had sat down and testified to the truth of what he had said. President B. Y. arose from his seat the second time and addressed the audience. I had been well acquainted with Joseph the latter part of his life. We had been at his home many times and Joseph, Hiram and families felt at home with us. From a place of retreat before the Ill, mob Joseph sent to S. P. [Samuel Pierce, her husband] for money to aid him in escaping for a time from the grasp of his ungodly pursuers. S. P. sent the money and they had the power in their own hands to go any place they might choose. They consulted and deliberated. Emma Joseph's wife wanted her husband and his brother Hiram to give themselves up, called them cowards, etc. Joseph said if it would save the people he was willing to be sacrificed. After everything was ready for them to get away, Joseph said he would go and give himself up to the State authorities. The Governor was pledged to protect them. Joseph said he felt that it might be, like a lamb going to the slaughter. The result of his counsel is well known. They returned and were murdered. And the Latter-day Saints apparently left without a leader. But the God of Heaven who had said it was his business to provide for his saints , sent President B. Young home just in time, and clothed him not with "the mantle of Elijah" but the spirit and power which had rested on Joseph. I was an eye, and ear, witness. The manner of reasoning, the expression of the countenance, the sound of the voice thrilled my whole soul. My own eyes had beheld Joseph's murdered body. My own hands had felt death's icy coldness on his once noble forehead. I knew that Joseph was dead. And yet I often startled and involuntarily looked at the stand to see if it was not Joseph. It was not, it was Brigham Young and if any one doubts the right of Brigham to manage affairs for the saints, all I have to say to them is this. Get the Spirit of God and know for yourselves. The Lord will provide for his own. Has the word of the Lord ever failed. The Lord will provide for his own. Br. Young will not live forever clothed with mortality. But He who rules in heaven and on earth will control all things by the counsel of his own will. Saints will live. The next summer, after Joseph and Hiram were murdered, S. P. and I went to N. H. to see our friends and fulfill the promised visit. We were accompanied nearly all the way by Claudius W. Spencer from Nauvoo he was then married.

"Reminiscences and Diaries of Emily Smith Hoyt, 1851-1893," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 20-22. Quoted by permission of Jonathan Dibble and family.

Note: Emily Smith Hoyt is a cousin to the Prophet Joseph Smith, being the daughter of Joseph's uncle Asahel and aunt Elizabeth Smith.
