Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hunter, Edward

(June 22, 1793-October 16, 1883)

Joseph stayed with Hunter when returning from Washington, D.C., in 1839; preached at a local seminary.

During the winter of 1839-40, he [Edward Hunter] was honored by a personal visit from the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was on his way back from Washington, after presenting to President Van Buren the memorial of his people's grievances, and invoking, in vain, governmental protection for the Latter-day Saints, recently driven out of Missouri. Joseph preached at the Seminary and spent several days with Mr. Hunter before proceeding westward.

In Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:229-30.

So liberal with his money in support of the Prophet and the upbuilding of the kingdom, that Joseph finally told Hunter to retain the remainder of his goods and properties for his own use.

In September, 1841, he visited Nauvoo . . . and purchased a farm and several town lots, deciding to make it his permanent place of abode. Returning to Pennsylvania, he disposed of two of his farms, and invested considerable means in merchandise, and in June, 1842, moved with his family to the bosom of the Church. He took with him seven thousand dollars in goods of different kinds, all of which he placed in the hands of the Prophet, to be used for the general advancement of the work of God. He paid out thousands of dollars in improving his property in and about Nauvoo, and furnishing many hands with employment. According to Joseph's own words, Brother Hunter assisted him, in one year, to the extent of fifteen thousand dollars. It was given cheerfully, for his soul naturally liberal, was wrapped up in his religion, for which he felt willing to make any sacrifice. Indeed, he had given so much to the Church, that Joseph finally told him he had done enough, and to reserve the rest of his property for his own use.

In Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:229-30.

With Joseph during trial before Judge Nathaniel Pope in Springfield; it was in Hunter's home that Joseph received part of the revelation on baptism for the dead.

About a year after his removal to Nauvoo he was arrested with several others on a trumped-up charge of treason and taken to Carthage for trial. No one appeared against them, and they were set at liberty. He was at the trial of the Prophet in Springfield when Judge Pope declared, after the verdict of acquittal had been rendered, that the Mormon leader should not be tormented any longer by such vexatious prosecutions. During those troublous times, when the Prophet's life was sought, he was hid up for long periods in Edward Hunter's house, and during one of these seasons of retirement he voiced under that faithful friend's roof the latter part of the revelation upon baptism for the dead.

"Edward Hunter," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:92.

Joseph sends Hunter to appeal to Governor Ford, and tells him to tell "everything good or bad you know of me."

Brother Hunter, at Joseph's request, visited Springfield to interview Governor Ford and represent matters in their proper light, and ask him to use his influence to allay the excitement and hostility which had now set in like a flood in the direction of Nauvoo and the "Mormons." Joseph's parting words to him were: "You have known me for several years; say to the governor, under oath, everything good and bad you know of me." Brother Hunter was accompanied on his errand by J. Bills and P. Lewis. They were followed for miles by officers whose intention was to arrest them, but having the promise of God's Prophet that they should accomplish their journey and return in safety, they were not overtaken, and in due time arrived at their destination.

In Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:230.

Helped care for the dead bodies of Joseph and Hyrum, heard Col. Brewer declare there was "vengeance and death" for their murderers; helped bury Joseph and Hyrum, and recalls the sorrows and fears which followed.

Brother Hunter and his companions reached Nauvoo June 27, 1844, the very day that Joseph and Hyrum Smith were murdered in Carthage jail. "Next day," says his narrative, "their bodies were brought from Carthage to Nauvoo. We formed two lines to receive them; I was placed at the extreme right, to wheel in after the bodies, and march to the Mansion. As we passed the Temple, there were crowds of mourners there, lamenting the great loss of our Prophet and Patriarch. The scene was enough to almost melt the soul of man. Mr. Brewer, myself and others took Brother Joseph's body into the Mansion House. When we went to the wagon to get the corpse, Colonel Brewer, a U. S. officer, taking up the Prophet's coat and hat, which were covered with blood and dirt, said, 'Mr. Hunter, look here; vengeance and death await the perpetrators of this deed.' At midnight Brothers Dimick B. Huntington, G. Goldsmith, William Huntington and myself carried the body of Joseph from the Mansion House to the Nauvoo House, and put him and Hyrum in one grave. Their death was hard to bear. Our hope was almost gone, not knowing then that Joseph had prepared for the Kingdom to go on, by delivering the keys to the Twelve and rolling off the burden from his shoulders on to theirs. Great sorrow prevailed in the hearts of the people. President Brigham Young and the rest of the Twelve were away."

In Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:231.
