Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Atwood, Millen

(May 24, 1817-December 17, 1890)

First meeting with Prophet dispels false notion of what a prophet is like; finds Joseph frank, open, kindly, and even jocular.

Filled with the "spirit of the gathering," though not yet baptized, Millen Atwood set out for Nauvoo, April 27, 1841. He arrived there on the 21st of May, and for the first time beheld the Prophet Joseph Smith. All his former ideas regarding the venerable appearance and solemn gravity of a prophet vanished like smoke when he came in contact with the genial, jocular leader of the Latter-day Saints, witnessed his frank, open manner, and felt the spell of his kindly influence. His disappointment was delight. He felt perfectly at home with the Prophet on conversing with him, for the first time, two days after his arrival.

"Millen Atwood," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:55.

Tells of arrival in Nauvoo, of meeting Joseph who "was free and sociable"; when asked why he hung his head, Joseph quipped that heads with not much in them stand up straight "like yours"; heard Joseph preach, and was soon baptized.

[We] arrived at the foot of the rapids 12 miles from Nauvoo on the evening of the 20, the next day at 8 o'clock arrived at Nauvoo on the 21 day of May, 1841, from Mansfield to Cincinnati is 1271 miles, this day we landed in Nauvoo stopt in old man Shirwoods house this day for the first time in my life did my eyes behold a Prophet of God I washt my body bowd before the lord in thankfulness for the preservation of my life & the sight I beheld. Saturday the 22 spent in Nauvoo beheld the prophet again. Sunday 23 Br Joseph Smith came up to see us this was the first time I ever shook hands with a prophet he was easy, free & sociable, with all, he said that he rejoist to se us being Yankees for said he I was born in the State of Vermont Br Robert Pierce was present and said to Br Joseph why don't you hold your head up as I doBr Joseph said to him havent you past by a field of wheat when it was ripe & seen some heads stand strait up as yours does & others hand down as mine does. Yes sir sais Br Pierce. Well says Br Joseph the full heads lop the empty of blasted heads with no much in them stand strait up like yours does. Joseph with all present had a good harty laugh at his expence he comforted our hearts, this day he preacht in Montrose the opposite side of the river from Nauvoo I with some of my brethren went over the river and heard Br. Joseph preach for the first time, to me it was powerful & good, remaind in Nauvoo for a few days looking about in the mean time Dockter Foster took us away out on the prairie to sell us some land, but not liking the looks of the man I told my brethren that we had better let him alone, & it proved a good thing afterwards that we did for he proved to be a shark & a traitor. I visited the hous of Br Hyram the Patriarch & Joseph brother he preacht to me the first principals and blesst be B Jospeh cam again to see us & said that we must get out of that place or we should all die, he took us out 4 miles to his farm known by the name of the Wiggings farm, they was about 30 sould of us that came from Connecticut we all joind together and bought the farm, agreed to give $3000 for it & paid part down. Br. Wiggings then living on the farm we bought the crop of him and took possession, the corner stone of the Tempel in Nauvoo was laid on the 6th of April 1841. Many labourd on the Tempel all summerI having seen & heard the Prophet preach with many others I became thourily convinst that it was the work of God & it became my duty to obey it, on the 25 of August 1841 when many was being baptized for the dead in the river by Br Joseph, this day received the remission of my sins by immersion in water was confirmed into the Church, at the waters edge, by Br. Cole.

Millen Atwood, "Reminiscences and Diary, July 1842June 1844," typescript copy, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
