Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Huntington, Oliver Boardman

(October 14, 1823-1909)

Quotes the Prophet as saying that all should keep daily journals.

I write [this journal] also for a satisfaction to myself, to look over my past life, dates and events, and to comply with a requirement, oft repeated by the prophet Joseph Smith, "That every man should keep a daily journal."

"Autobiography of Oliver B. Huntington (1823-1839)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 26.

Joseph met John the Revelator while on Zion's Camp march; the Three Nephites once protected the brethren from Missouri mobocrats.

[Friday, January 13, 1881] . . . Brother James Bird was the person that Joseph Smith told of the "Three Nephites" at Far West. As to Brother Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery's ordination to the Melchisedek Priesthood; I heard him myself, at Nauvoo some three days before he went to Carthage for the last time. The first circumstance referred to in the card or letter related to Brother [Addison] Everett by Heber C. Kimball was as follows:

While "the camp of Zion" was on the way to Missouri in 1834 Joseph was some ways ahead of the company one day, when there was seen talking with him by the roadside a man, a stranger. When the company came up there was no person with him. When at camp that night, Heber asked the Prophet who that man was; Joseph replied it was the beloved Disciple, John, who was then on his way to the ten tribes in the north.

I have heard Joseph say that "John was among the ten tribes beyond the north pole."

The matter relating to the Three Nephites was this.

The morning that the Army of Governor Boggs' exterminating order, attempted to come into Far West; Joseph the Prophet stood with the brethren behind the breast works so hastily thrown up in the night, and remarked as they were sweeping and swarming towards the beloved city; that if they came beyond a certain place, we would upon fire upon them.

The army on, near the spot designated and on a sudden, they all turned and ran pell mell back to their camp, in great fright, declaring they saw too many thousands of soldiers to think of attacking the city.

Joseph told Brother James Bird, "that he saw between them and the mob one of the Three Nephites, with a drawn sword, before he made the remark about opening fire upon them, and when the mob had returned he saw the Three Nephites near the same place armed for battle."

The hosts that the three had with them, were undoubtedly exposed, by the power of God, to the view of the mob, being the hosts of soldiers they saw and fled from.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 5-6; see also Oliver B. Huntington, "Words and Incidents of the Prophet Joseph's Life," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 2 (November 1890): 76.

Joseph promises God will bless those who contributed to the Nauvoo Temple; then prophesies that temple "will be taken from the earth."

Old Sister Huldy Barns, a wife of Heber C. Kimball, now 77 years old [told me] . . . in the temple at Nauvoo she assisted in giving endowments as long as anyone. . . . She lived with Joseph Smith in Kirtland [as] a hired girl or woman.

One day W. W. Phelps came in while Joseph was eating and showed a paper in his hand, saying to the Prophet, "Here is a list of names and paper and ran over the names and amounts, and returned the paper, saying as he did it, "They have done well and may God bless them. They will get for this what they can't buy at a grocery. In fifty years that house will be taken from the earth." This she said she heard him say, and asked W. W. Phelps one time in Salt Lake City if he remembered it. He said he did.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 6-7.

Rainbows to disappear at Second Coming.

I heard Joseph Smith say that in the year that Jesus made his second appearance there would be no rainbow.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8.

Note: Huntington also wrote: "Joseph the Seer, said in my hearing that 'in the year of Christ's coming there would be no rainbow'" (Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 22).

Faith and prayer of young boy protects Joseph from mob.

At a time when Joseph Smith was guardedday and night by his brethren from mob violence, that he might perform his necessary business labors days and get the necessary night's rest and that he should be safe; he was in [a] log house at night. Several brethren were with him and were making arrangements as to who should stand guard that night.

Joseph was listening to the prayer of a little boy in the room adjoining. The boy prayed for the Prophet, that he might be secure and safe from his enemies, the mob, that night.

When the boy had done praying, Joseph turned to his brethren and told them all to go to bed and all sleep and rest themselves that night, for God had heard and would answer that boy's prayer.

They all went to bed and slept safely until morning undisturbed.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 9; see also "The History of William Somerville"; copies in private family possession.

On Joseph prophesying that W. W. Phelps and wife would never taste of death.

Joseph once told W. W. Phelps and wife that they should never taste death.

The manner of the fulfillment of that promise is rather singular. They supposed, and so did all that knew of the promise, that they were to never die, but the Lord does business in his own way and his way is not as the way of man.

Before Brother Phelps died he lost all his judgment, lost all his mind and reason, consciousness and all sense. He knew nothing, not even his name, nor how to eat, thus being unable to taste of anything; not even death. His mind gradually dwindled, withered and dried up. His wife was killed instantly, so quickly that she had no time to taste of death. She was killed as she was dipping up a bucket of water from the ditch, a gust of wind hurled a board from a house and it struck her on the neck breaking it instantly. She never tasted of death nor even felt the blow.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 9.

God promised Joseph he could have whatever he asked for.

I heard him [Joseph Smith] say that "he could ask what he would of the Father in the name of Jesus that it would be granted" and I have no more doubt of it than I have that the mob killed him.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 10.

Joseph prophesies U. S. government to seek to destroy the Saints.

Of all the events of these days I have a . . . faithful record by preserving and keeping a complete file of the Semi-Weekly News. . . . Every true Latter-day Saint is anxious to be able to vote and thus give their voice for Constitutional rights and republican principles, for the support of the Gospel and Kingdom of God, for the whole Nation is now combined to destroy it, and this a part of the fulfillment of the prophecy of Joseph Smith as I heard it, which was "that the Government of the United States would yet resolve themselves into a mob in order to persecute and try to destroy this people, that they would do as a nation what Jackson County and Missouri had done as a county and as a state."

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 13-14.

Nonmember testifies that Joseph is a prophet because he saw the fulfillment of Joseph's prophecy concerning Judge Stephen A. Douglas.

I will relate a testimony that Joseph Smith was a prophet, which was borne by a gentile as witnessed by Brother Packard and told to us that evening, or night. He said that he was in a saloon in the Sweet Water, when gold was first found there, and a very tall lank westerner came in finely dressed in the best broadcloth and everything on him corresponding. He looked rather out of place among a lot of rough miners, and one of his old comrades meeting him asked where he got such fine clothes, or how he could afford to wear such?

The tall man replied that it was because they cost him nothing. His comrade asked how that happened.

The reply was "because Joseph Smith was a true prophet."

"What has that to do with your getting that suit of clothes?"

The tall man said, "[I] will tell you. I went into a store in Carson, an old friend of mine kept it. I was dead broke and had on next to nothing, and the storekeeper asked me why I didn't wear better clothes? I told him I'd like to."

He said for me to "pick out the best suit I could find in the store and pay him when Stephen A. Douglas was elected President." Now that occurred when Douglas was running for President of the U. S.

A little before the election I told the storekeeper I'd take two suits on them terms, but he said one was all he proposed to let me have.

The interlocutor asked how he dare take them on that condition. "Well, you, see, Joe Smith told Douglas before he thought of trying to be President that he would try it, some day and that if he used his influence against the Mormons he should never set in the President's chair, and I kept watch and kept thinking of that prophecy, just to see if Joe was a true Prophet. When I see Douglas trying to be President I knew Joe Smith was a true Prophet and that Douglas would not be elected because he had turned against the Mormons. I have watched Joe's prophecies and never seen one of them fail.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 16-17.

Wicked spirits remain in locale where wicked people live.

On an occasion when I was a boy I heard Joseph Smith say, speaking with regard to moving into old houses that other people had lived in, that had been inhabited by wicked people, they leave spirits in the house like unto themselves and as the wicked are always opposed to God and the good, we ought to dispossess the spirits of wicked persons before we move into their haunts, or else they will try and kill the most innocent and pure.

That when wicked men and women inhabit a house, invisible spirits congregate there also, that are of the same stamp as the living. Kindred spirits mingle together and the invisible look on, laugh at and enjoy the wicked sports of the living and when the living, or people in bodies, move away, the others often stay in the house having acquired a sort of right by possession and are the agents by which others that move in are afflicted.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 17; see also "Memoirs of George A. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 12-13.

Joseph speaks of the destined growth of the Church.

Sister Beebe related a prophecy that Joseph Smith uttered in the presence of her husband when he was a boy, in the house of old father Johnson in Kirtland; when all the church there could meet in a room 12 feet square or 12 by 14. Joseph was telling of the spread of the Gospel as it would be and the increase of the people of God and the persecutions that would come; and said that the Church would yet be so numerous and such a great people that the United States could send an army out to destroy them, but they would not accomplish it. This was fulfilled.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 19.

On the acquisition of worldly riches.

During the life time of Joseph Smith some one asked him how it was that some men have no trouble to make money; and other men can get nothing ahead, work as they will. Some unforeseen even takes it as fast as they get more than they need for immediate use.

He said that the one who was favored in this life with riches seemingly poured into his lap, would have a debt to settle in the next life, the other man, who could get nothing ahead in this life would find a large credit standing in his favor in the next world.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 19.

The only righteous way to build up self is to build up others first.

I heard Joseph Smith say, something like this, "Some people say that it is not right to seek to aggrandize one's own self, that self-aggrandizement is not a good principle," but said he, "I say it is a true and godlike principle; but it can be done permanently, justly and righteously in only one way or upon only one plan in order to be eternal in its durability. If any person will build up others; and permanently aggrandize others, he in turn will be aggrandized eternally, that is the only principle or plan upon which it can be done and remain forever."

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 19.

Absence from mortal body an imprisonment: one can do more with body than without.

At another time he [Joseph Smith] was speaking of works that tend to save and elevate the human family; he spoke earnestly of improving time in this life, "for," said he, "a man can do as much in this life in one year as he can do it ten years in the spirit world without the body."

Oliver B. Huntington, "Sayings of Joseph Smith," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 3 (May 1891): 366.

Interpreting Luke 16:9 on befriending the mammon of unrighteousness.

On another occasion he [Joseph Smith] was asked the meaning of the words of the Savior: "Make to yourselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that, when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations" (Luke 16:9).

His answer was this, as near as I can get the words, but the meaning I give, for I marveled when I heard him say, "that every man will fail sometime. Be charitable and liberal with your substance, for it is only a secondary consideration. You may do good to some one who is down today and who will rise and be on top of the wheel when you are down, for every man will fail some time."

He said that he would compare our existence to a wheel that was forever revolvingwe are on the outside of the wheel, and some times we are on the top and some times on the downside.

Oliver B. Huntington, "Sayings of Joseph Smith," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 3 (May 1891): 366.

Heard Joseph teach sacrifices to be restored, that we should do good even to evil men, that the spirit of invention is to rest on the Saints and that the Saints trusted Joseph to take them to peace in Nauvoo.

I heard the Prophet reply to the question: "Will there ever be any more offering of sheep and heifers and bullocks upon altars, as used to be required of Israel?"

He said: "Yes, there will; for there were never any rites, ordinances or laws in the priesthood of any gospel dispensation upon this earth but what will have to be finished and perfected in this the last dispensation of timethe dispensation of all dispensations."

Another question was, "If a person does a good act, a kindness, or perhaps a charitable act, to a very bad, wicked man, will that person receive a reward of good for that act as if he had done it to a good man?"

Joseph said, "Yes, he will receive a reward for that good act to a wicked man, as surely as if he did it to a good man, but not as quick."

These were the words of Joseph Smith, for they were so strange to me that I could never forget my thought: "It's strange that the reward should come quicker if done to a good man."

I heard him say that he hoped the spirit of invention and improvement would rest upon the Saints, as it was upon the Gentiles, for unless it did there would many useful and important inventions be lost to the world when the great destruction of nations comes. It would then probably take hundreds of years to reproduce them again among men; yes, and perhaps thousands of years before they would get back upon the earth.

When the Saints were driven from the state of Missouri it was a very surprising circumstance that we could not understand. We naturally asked ourselves the question, "Where can we find another Holy land? How or when shall we get back to the consecrated spot for the New Jerusalem, that is to be built?"

Our only hope was that as God had given us a prophet he would certainly tell us how to manage and where to go, or what to do.

Oh! what confidence we had in that man! What comfort we derived through our faith in God and Joseph Smith. How little we knew of the great future, and for that one thing I feel very thankful!

Joseph finally led us to Nauvoo. Under his all-inspiring words, we quickly resolved, "We will stay here as long as Joseph wants us tohe knows what is best."

In a few months there was quite a town built up out of as near nothing as God ever made anything.

In Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 62-63.

The U. S. Government to become a mob before the destruction of the nation.

I heard Joseph Smith make [the statement] when speaking of mobs and what they had done against the saints and of the fact that Government had taken no steps to redress those wrongsthat before the destruction of the nation it would resolve into a mob against the saints.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 19.

Adam had children before Cain, who sinned, married his niece, and lived a part from Adam.

Our first mother, Eve, had children before Cain, and she bore them in obedience to the command of God, "To multiply and replenish the earth," not because of her desires to her husband. The children before Cain, were unbelievers in the Gospel and went into another part of the world to live because of their dislike to the Gospel, and after Cain could no longer be saved by the Gospel, he went away also and married one of his brother's daughters.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 19.

On Zion's Camp, the men are tired and thirsty; Joseph calls for a shovel, digs a small well, and men and animals are watered.

[In the winter of 1890 Huntington "sat with paper and pencil" and took notes as he listened to Zera Cole give the following account from the march of Zion's Camp:] One hot day in June [1834], after an unusually long, hard day's travel, over a rolling prairies, without sufficient water laid in for the men and no water encountered for the teams, they made camp on a prairie, the end of which it was impossible to reach or even see.

After tents were pitched and the teams turned out a strong guard had to be placed to keep the animals.

Men were very quietly complaining of the location, the lack of wood, and no water to cook with, even if they had plenty of wood. Some teams were about "give-out" and a thousand other little troubles acted out if not spoken of.

The Prophet sat in his tent door watching and listening to all that could be seen or heard. At last he quietly asked for a spade.

There was no noise, no bustle, no show of greatness or power about this man who had seen the Creator of heaven and earth and had received from Him at different times unmeasured power only in keeping with circumstances, and as the spade was handed him he measured the extent of the camp with his eye and in the most convenient place for all he commenced to dig in the earth. There was no rock to split open, as with Moses of old, or he could have done that more easily or quickly. But he quietly dug a well only a few feet deep and then left it.

Presently the water began to come in, and it kept rising in the well until the mules and horses came and drank therefrom, as the water was no near the surface.

The Prophet went and sat in the door of his tent and witnessed the joy of all, even of the animals, as they quenched their thirst in this God-given supply. There was no wonder or proclamation over the matter, as Brother Cole stated it, and perhaps not a dozen in the camp witnessed it as he, Brother Cole, witnessed it, and he looked upon it as one of the greatest miracles ever performed by man as an instrument in the hands of the Great Creator.

Oliver B. Huntington, "An Incident in Zion's Camp," Juvenile Instructor 37, no. 1 (1 January 1902): 20-21. See also Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 23, 34; "William Cahoon, Autobiography," in Stella Shurtleff and Brent Farrington Cahoon, eds. Reynolds Cahoon and His Stalwart Sons (Salt Lake City, Utah: Paragon Press, 1960), 81-82.

Joseph with Oliver Cowdery and Zebedee Coltrin saw Adam and Eve in vision.

Monday, March 2nd 1885: had been copying in the tithing office and took dinner with the bishop in company with the Patriarch Zebedee Coltrin who told of the time he had with the Prophet Joseph, who invited him and Oliver Cowdery out into the fields one day and upon a very beautiful place in a grove, where the grass was thick and matted. He laid down upon his back and stretched out both arms and bade them to lay down with their heads upon his arms and see some visions which they did and saw the heaven open And in it a great golden throne and on it a man and a woman with hair as white as snow. Joseph told them that the man and woman was father Adam and Eve. They saw other things.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 25; see also "Statement of Zebedee Coltrin," Salt Lake City School of the Prophets, 11 October 1883, LDS Church Archives, 66-67.

Judge Adams a descendant of Christ.

Wednesday, Dec. 29, 1886: While visiting with [my sister] Zina she related a conversation that occurred between her and a sister "Repshere" upon events in Nauvoo, where the Prophet Joseph Smith sealed her, Sister Repshere, to a Judge Adams of Springfield, Illinois.

The Prophet stated to her (Repshere) that Judge Adams was a literal descendant of Jesus Christ. The Judge died in Nauvoo and Sister Repshere, his wife who had been married before to Repshere, died at Hill Creek, Utah.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 27.

At Far West Joseph taught the Saints a true pattern for partaking of the sacrament.

Sunday, September 4th 1887 . . . took dinner with Brother Philo Dibble, where I frequently went for sociable and enjoyable chats upon the Gospel and the great Latter Day work.

He related an event that took place in Far West, Missouri, June or July, 1838. The Prophet Joseph Smith gave the people a true pattern. A pattern of the true manner of partaking of the sacrament.

The people came together in the morning without their breakfast, to the bowery on the Public Square where there was prepared a plenty of good bread and a barrel of wine. The bread and wine was blessed, every person ate bread and drank wine as they wanted all day, when they wanted. They sat and talked, and walked and conversed upon heavenly and spiritual things as they felt like. [They] walked out on the prairie and returned to eat and drink.

No one said, "Let's go and get a drink," but with solemnity they commemorated the death and sufferings of Jesus. A part of the day Joseph was preaching in the large room on the North side of the square, while George A. Smith preached on the South side, from a wagon; no one was intoxicated during the day.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 31-32.

Joseph said Noah's ark built in what is now South Carolina.

The place or country where the ark was built was designated in my hearing by the Prophet Joseph Smith as being in or near South Carolina.

Oliver B. Huntington, "Words and Incidents of the Prophet Joseph's Life," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 10 (July 1891): 466.

Joseph advised the elders to keep daily journals.

[Joseph] was advising the Elders all to keep daily journals, "For," said he, "your journals will be sought after as history and scripture. That is the way the New Testament came, what we have of it, though much of the matter there was written by the apostles from their memory of what had been done, because they were not prompt in keeping daily journals."

Oliver B. Huntington, "Words and Incidents of the Prophet Joseph's Life," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 10 (July 1891): 466.

Joseph promises Dimick Huntington that he will have eternal life.

On one occasion while the prophet was waiting for his boots to be repaired by my brother Dimick in Nauvoo he indulged in recounting personal services rendered him by Dimick; he exhibited his gratitude and greatness of soul in this way.

He said, "Now, Dimick, in return for such acts, you may ask of me what you will and it shall be given you, even if it be to the half of my kingdom."

Dimick told it to me, and said that in thinking what he should ask for, decided he would not ask for anything that would impoverish Joseph, nor would he ask for worldly honors or goods, but made this request:

"Brother Joseph, I want that where you and your father's house are (having reference to eternity) there I and my father's house may be also."

Joseph sat in meditation but a moment, and then said, "Dimick, in the name of Jesus Christ it shall be even as you ask."

Oliver B. Huntington, "Words and Incidents of the Prophet Joseph's Life," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 10 (July 1891): 466.

Joseph explains why it is important to cleanse and dedicate old homes.

When the Saints moved to Nauvoo or Commerce, as it was then called, it might be called a deserted town, or partly so at least, as there were many empty houses, mostly built of logs that had stood so long that the mud had fallen from the spaces between them.

The Saints just driven from Missouri were glad to get such shelter as those old houses would afford, and they were all soon filled, sometimes two and three families in one house. Some houses had no floors, some no doors.

Soon the inmates became sicksickness increased until Joseph began to be alarmed and saw something very unusual in the new affliction. He looked into the matter as only a Seer and Prophet could look. He saw the trouble and where it came from. Those houses had been dens of iniquity. He instituted means to empty them again by moving the people into tents and doubling up families in better houses. My father's family he took into his own house and tent.

I once heard him say concerning houses that had been inhabited by wicked people, that before the Saints moved into them they should be thoroughly cleansed, then fumigated with brimstone and whitewash. Afterward there should be a season of prayer in the house, and it should be dedicated unto the Lord for the used they designated it.

Those old houses had been owned or occupied by wicked, unprincipled men, gamblers, outlaws, licentious robbers, etc., and those that were of the same stamp had met there for evil practices and criminal purposes and there carried on their orgies. While this was the pastime of men or women in bodies, disembodied spirits of the same ilk stood around in highest glee and in various ways manifested to one another their enjoyment of the performance of the vilest sins.

When the owners or occupants of the houses were dead, they enjoyed each other's society with their new pals in the spirit state, and when the righteous took possession of their old houses, all combined to kill the new inhabitants, and hence so much sicknessfor all evil spirits, whether in the body or out of the body, are opposed to this work and this people, and the spirits in the spirit world have means by which they can affect people on earth, and are as diligent there as here to do good or evil.

The last of these old houses doomed to destruction stood quite alone, and for a long time was occupied by one lone woman who persisted in staying there although requested to vacate. Finally Joseph told William Huntington and another brother to go and burn the houses that it might no longer be inhabited. They went without delay and removed the woman and her effects and cleansed the house by fire, but first shoved the roof down inside, as it was against the law for a man to burn even his own building that had a roof on.

Oliver B. Huntington, "Words and Incidents of the Prophet Joseph's Life," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 10 (July 1891): 467-68.

Joseph prophesies the earth's history.

On another occasion, when Joseph was sitting in Dimick's shop waiting for something, he got on a wonderful strain of relating the history of the world in the past, recounting many strange things I never had read or heard of before. When he came to the present times, he did not stop, but went on and related the principal events that will transpire in the history of the world down to the time when the angel will declare that time shall be no longer.

Although I did not see the events with my natural eyes, the vividness of their appearance to my mind was next to reality. He declared the succession of events with as great clearness as one of us can repeat the events of our past lives.

In Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 66.

Joseph promises Joseph Hancock he will catch his horse without help, the first and only time he was ever able to do so.

After the Prophet had crossed the Mississippi River to go west before his martyrdom, he went to the house of Joseph Hancock and told him where he was going, and that he wanted him to go along as a hunter to kill game for the company. Brother Hancock was a great hunter. His (Hancock's) horse was on the open prairie, and could not be caught only by several men on horseback driving it into a yard.

He replied to Joseph that he would go if he could catch his horse.

The Prophet said that if he would go right after the horse, he could catch it. Brother Hancock went out immediately and had no trouble in walking up to the horse on the broad prairie, the first and only time he ever did.

Oliver B. Huntington, "Sayings of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Young Woman's Journal 4, no. 7 (April 1893): 320.

Joseph compares himself to a lone tree, strengthened by opposition and difficulty; teaches that the devil always opposes light, including that given to great inventors and discoverers.

A lone tree, standing in an open plain receives the blasts from heaven from its early growth, which twirls, whips and bends it near to the earth; strains its roots which makes the tree send its roots deeper into the earth, thus by frequent strains it is able to endure more and more as it rises in a gradual growth higher and higher in the air, until it is grown to a full sized tree, when it is able to withstand any blast that may change to come.

This comparison I heard the Prophet Joseph Smith make, and compared himself to the lone tree, and continued the conversation to some length in that line, and in the course of his remarks upon himself, and the labors he commenced, continued in all his life and expected to pursue. Said that the work he was engaged in was designed to benefit all mankind; that it would revolutionize the systems and governments of the earth, and in proportion to the benefit this work will be to man, so the opposition to it may be expected.

It has been and will be the case that a man who develops or opens a new system for the benefit of his fellow man or mankind will meet with the opposition and enmity of the very people he is seeking to bless and improve.

"It is the same," he said, "with men whom God inspires to make inventions, improvements and discoveries for the improvement of man generally, geographically or classic. They will be opposed and persecuted by the ones their works are designed to benefit and bless. Satan will oppose everything that God introduces among men for the purpose of elevating and improving His children."

Oliver B. Huntington, "Sayings of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Young Woman's Journal 4, no. 7 (April 1893): 321.

Joseph prophesied the father of John Taylor to live and see much bloodshed.

Brother Jesse W. Fox told me of a conversation he had with President John Taylor in the early days of this territory, wherein Brother Taylor related predictions made by the Prophet Joseph Smith while hiding from his enemies, at the house of President Taylor's father in Illinois.

Joseph learned that Father Taylor was in the great battle of Waterloo against Napoleon Bonaparte when he was defeated.

"Well," said Joseph, "You will live to see war between the United States and Mexico, wherein the U. S. will acquire much territory to add to the slave holding states or portion of the Union, out of which will grow a war between the Northern and Southern States, but I shall not live to see it." He added, "When the bear of Russia lays his paw upon the British Lion, the 'winding up scene' is at hand." He did not say that Father Taylor should live to see that war.

Father Taylor lived to see the two wars and is now dead.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 34; see also "A Russian Naval Station," Juvenile Instructor 25, no. 6 (25 March 1890): 162.

Wilford Woodruff's memory of last meeting with the Twelve; Joseph transfigured before them.

President Woodruff said, in some of his remarks, that the last time that Joseph Smith, the Prophet ever met with the Quorum of the Twelve there were only nine of them present and he (Woodruff) was among them, and testified that Joseph was transfigured before them.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 44.

Joseph and Oliver overcome by the Spirit, which changed their appearance, during translation of the Book of Mormon; angels sometimes present during the translation.

Sunday, June 13, 1897: . . . I conversed with one old lady 88 years old who lived with David Whitmer when Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were translating the Book of Mormon in the upper room of the house, and she, only a girl, saw them come down from (the) translating room several times when they looked so exceedingly white and strange that she inquired of Mrs. Whitmer the cause of their unusual appearance, but Mr. Whitmer was unwilling to tell the hired girl, the true cause as it was a sacred holy event connected with a holy sacred work which was opposed and persecuted by nearly every one who heard of it.

The girl felt so strangely at seeing so strange and unusual appearance, she finally told Mrs. Whitmer that she would not stay with her until she knew the cause of the strange looks of these men.

Sister Whitmer then told her what the men were doing in the room above and that the power of God was so great in the room that they could hardly endure it; at times angels were in the room in their glory which nearly consumed them.

This satisfied the girl and opened the way to embracing the gospel. She is the mother of Stephen Bunnel of Provo, and the Bunnel family of Provo.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 49-50.

Note: The "hired girl" here referred to was Sally Heller Conrad, who later became the wife of David Edwin Bunnell, and the mother of Stephen Ithamar Bunnell, "an active Elder of the Lake View Ward, Utah county, who was born February 1, 1834, in Detroit, Michigan . . ." (Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. [Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971], 2:600). Stephen Bunnell died in Provo, Utah, on July 23, 1925 (Susan Easton Black, Membership of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, 1830-1848, 50 vols. [Provo, Utah: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1984-88]). Sally was born September 19, 1810, in Elmira, Tioga County, New York (LDS Family Search, Ancestral File), and thus would have been about 18 ½ years of age when working in the Whitmer home, for Joseph and Oliver arrived there about June 1, 1829 until the translation was completed July 1, 1829 (see J. Christopher Conkling, A Joseph Smith Chronology [Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1979], 12); she would have been almost 87 in June of 1897, when Huntington recorded the memory. She died July 23, 1903, in Provo, Utah.

According to a vision he saw, Joseph made a map for the Saints to follow in their trek to the Rocky Mountains.

Monday Sept. 27th [1897] . . . I met that day, at the Hall of Relicks, Hopkins G. Pendar an old Nauvoo Mormon, and from him learned that Joseph Smith just before he was killed, made a sketch of the future home of the saints in the Rocky Mountains, and their route or road to that country as he had seen in vision; a map or drawing of it.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 50.

Joseph raised a man from the dead.

[October 4th, 1899] That evening I spent with my niece Lucia Godfrey and related the particulars of the fact that her father once died while living with Joseph Smith and how he was raised from the dead by the Prophetthat he was in the air above and saw the whole transaction, as also the weeping and mourning of relatives.

Oliver B. Huntington, "History of the Life of Oliver B. Huntington, Written by Himself 1878-1990," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 53. For the full account of this experience, see Levi Curtis, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 12 (15 June 1892): 385-86.

Huntington contrasts two of Joseph experiences with startled horses: in one instance, they were difficult to control because others disobeyed his instructions; in the other, control was readily gained because of the obedience of the other passengers.

It was in 1842 or 1843, at Nauvoo, that Joseph Smith the Prophet had such a time with his horse, when our Sunday meetings were held in a grove, back of the printing office on the river bank.

Meeting had closed and the people were standing around in groups, or leisurely strolling towards home, when the Prophet, driving his own team, with his wife Emma and Sister Dibble occupying the back seat, started from the grounds and had gone perhaps four rods when suddenly one of the horses became wild and franticrearing and plunging, squirming from side to side.

Emma said to Sister Dibble, "Let us jump out."

Joseph said, "Sit still!"

Bystanders were attracted to the singular freaks of Joseph's most reliable team and hurried to render any assistance they could.

Sister Emma not wishing again to disturb Joseph with any remark, nudged Sister Dibble, and suggested by her looks and motions that she proposed to jump.

She obeyed and started to jump from the carriage, but received from the Prophet a short, quick reply,

"Keep still!"

Just then men were on both sides of the carriage, and out the ladies went into somebody's arms, leaving Joseph alone.

As soon as alone he turned the team this way and that wayright and left, gently touching them with the whip, to convince himself, bystanders and the horses, that he was master of the situation.

The ladies rode home in another carriage. When all were at home, the Prophet told them that he saw an animal about the size of a wildcat with terrible claws, light onto the horse that had acted so badly, and if they had done as he told them he could have managed all right, but he had no help, no one to unite with him, hence the power to disturb.

If they had confidingly done as he told them he would have had more power.

That freak reminds me of an incident I heard him relate just after he returned from the city of Washington, when President Martin Van Buren made his wonderful assertion that "Your cause is just but I can do nothing for you."

He said that he was one day riding with other gentlemen and some lady passengers in a stage coach, all closely packed inside, secure from the weather, and the driver pulled up at a tavern, tied his lines to the boot (driver's seat) and went in.

Those coaches were great cumbersome things; high tops, decked over, with railing on, where mail sacks and trunks were carried sometimes, and sometimes passengers rode up there. The driver's seat was in front so high that the top of the coach formed a little support to his back.

Almost as soon as the driver was in the house, the horses truck out on a runfour high-spirited animals with no one to guide themthey fortunately kept the road. Ladies screamed and gentlemen attempted to jump out.

The Prophet quieted them and told them all to "keep still," and he would stop the team. So up he went onto the coach and down into the driver's seathorses all the while making the best time they couldgot hold of the lines and guiding the horses gently pulled them into a trot, turned around to hunt the driver, or wait for his coming.

The people in that coach did as he told them, and he soon had the team under control.

How many men among the sixty millions of inhabitants of these United States could perform such an act even if they had the courage to undertake it.

Oliver. B. Huntington, "Words and Incidents of the Prophet Joseph's Life," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 2 (November 1890): 76-77.

Note: For the Prophet's account of the unruly horses in the stagecoach en route to Washington, see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 4:23-24.

Joseph practices law, prosecutes Missouri kidnapper; prophesies great affliction and hardship to befall Missourians, because of the harsh and unjust treatment they gave the Saints.

Joseph Smith the Prophet once undertook to plead law. I have the name of the man who was under arrest, in my journal somewhere, but it would be a job to find it, and the name matters but littlethe story of the Prophet acting as a prosecuting attorney is impressed upon my mind never to be blotted out or dimmed by time, it will be fresh while reason lasts, not so much for the law he quoted, but for the great prophecy he uttered and the divine appearance of the man while he spoke the word of the Lord.

Soon after we left Nauvoo and settled in Commerce three of our brethren were kidnapped by Missourians, taken to Missouri and starved and whipped until they were hardly able to run at all, but they managed to get away and returned home.

One of the men who did that wicked, cruel deed was found years after in disguise parading the streets of Nauvoo, and was recognized by old Father James Allred as the very man who took him forcibly from Illinois back into Missouri and there treated him worse than a . . . man should treat his dog.

The Prophet was mayor, but the kidnapper was brought before an alderman for trial and Joseph acted as prosecuting attorney. When he had just fairly started to set forth the crime that the defendant was arraigned for, he suddenly left the law and declared the word of God with regard to the state of Missouri and its inhabitants. He told what the Saints had suffered at the hands of Missouri and the injustice and cruelty of their sufferings, and he went on to tell what Missouri should be called to endure in order to pay the penalty of wrongs inflicted and for the blood of the Saints they had shed.

A portion of the words of the prophecy I will quote verbatim: "She shall drink out of the same cup, the same bitter dregs we have drunk, poured out, out, out! And that by the hand of an enemya race meaner than themselves."

All the time he was delivering the word of the Lord his face shone as if there was a light within him and his flesh was translucent.

The time occupied was considerable, for he pronounced two other very remarkable prophecies.

When he had done prophesying he stopped speaking entirely, while he wiped a flood of perspiration from his face and gave vent to his pent-up breath with a long blow, kind of a half-whistle, and after a minute or two he remarked, "Well, where that meaner race is coming from God only knows. It is not the (slaves), for they don't know enough, and are gentlemen by the side of their masters. It is not the Indians, for they are the chosen people of God and a noble race of men, but as sure as God ever spoke by me that shall come to pass."

I lived to see that prophecy literally fulfilled in the Rebellion, when every family in that part of the state that the Saints used to occupy was killed or compelled to leave their homes by the Bushwackers or Guerrillas under Quantrella generation of vipers raised mostly after that prophecy was uttered.

Oliver B. Huntington, "Words and Incidents of the Prophet Joseph's Life," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 3 (December 1890): 124-25.

Joseph knew he would be martyred before the event occurred; he went to Carthage to save the Saints.

Springville, Utah

Oct. 27th, 1890

[To] Sister Susa Gates [Editor, The Young Woman's Journal]

I have just learned from Brother Peter W. Cownover another evidence of the certainty in the Prophet's mind that he was going to Carthage to be slain as a sacrifice for the Saints.

Brother Cownover had been to Carthage in charge of prisoners arrested by the county sheriff, and when he reached that place he and the prisoners were all thrown into jail together, without judge or jury, and after they were liberated he returned to Nauvoo, and arrived just as Joseph was starting for Carthage. After usual salutations, Brother Cownover asked Joseph where he was going.

"I am going to Carthage to give myself up," was his reply.

Brother Cownover said, "If you go there they will kill you."

"I know it," replied the Prophet, "but I am going. I am going to give myself for the people, to save them."

Oliver B. Huntington, "Letter to the Editor (Susa Gates)," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 3 (December 1890): 125; see also "Philo Dibble Autobiography (1806-c. 1843)," in "Early Scenes in Church History," Four Faith Promoting Classics (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1968), 79.

The miraculous healing of Mrs. Johnson.

In the early days of this Church the whole Christian world was entirely unacquainted with the idea that miracles, visions, spirit communication and revelations from God were possiblesuch spiritual gifts were the great objection then to "Mormonism" and the elders were mobbed in those days for advocating such principles and the miracles performed by the Prophet Joseph Smith turned the hearts of those that witnessed them immediately either for or against his doctrines.

Soon after Joseph settled in Kirtland and members of the Church began to gather to that place the name of Joseph Smith and his power with God aroused every body either for good or for bad and one Mrs. Johnson who lived at the town of Hiram, 40 miles distant from Kirtland, heard of the wonderful man that could receive revelations from God, heal the sick and see angelsand he was called a prophetshe must see that prophet as she felt interested in such a man, such claims and such a power, both because she loved them and because she had a stiff arm that she wanted healed and made useful like the other, so she induced her husband John Johnson [father of Luke Johnson, one of the first Twelve Apostles] to take a journey to Kirtland to see the prophet and in an interview with him she asked the prophet to heal her arm.

Joseph asked her if she believed that God could make him instrumental in healing her arm which had been stiff a long time.

She answered that she believed her arm could be healed. The prophet only remarked that he would visit her the next day.

The next day Joseph came to Bishop N. K. Whitney's where Mr. Johnson and wife were staying and when he called in, there was a Campbellite doctor and a Methodist preacher in the roomhe took Mrs. Johnson by the hand without sitting down or standing on ceremonies, and after a very short mental prayer pronounced her arm whole in the name of Jesus Christ, and left the house immediately.

When he was gone the preacher asked if her arm was well. She immediately stretched out her arm straight, remarking at the same time "it's as well as the other."

The next day the preacher came to the house of Philo Dibble, who lived a little out of town and related what he saw and then tried to account for it upon natural principles saying that when Joseph pronounced the arm whole in the name of Jesus Christ it scared her so bad that it threw her in a heavy perspiration and relaxed the cords, and the result was that she could straighten her arm.

Brother Dibble was then a member of the Churchis still a member and living here in Springvillefrom him I gathered these truths not two weeks since.

When the knowledge of the miracle was had among the Saints some of the brethren asked the Prophet if the arm would remain sound. Joseph answered "the arm is as sound as the other and is as liable to accidents or to be hurt as the other."

Oliver B. Huntington, "To the Editor," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 5 (February 1891): 225-26.

The miraculous healing of Mrs. Johnson's arm.

Luke Johnson's father and mother lived at Hiram, 40 miles from Kirtland, and had heard of the fact that there was a Prophet at Kirtland and that he could perform miracles, heal the sick, etc.

Mrs. Johnson believed the report and asked her husband to hitch up the team and take her to Kirtland that she might get Joseph Smith to heal her arm. She had a stiff arm and had not combed her hair nor put food to her mouth with it for a very long time. Everybody that knew her, knew that she was a cripple.

Old Mr. Johnson was inclined to believe the truth and willingly took his wife to Kirtland, and while there visited at Bishop Newel K. Whitney's. Joseph was called in and Mrs. Johnson asked him to heal her arm. The Prophet looked at her and asked if she believed that God could make him instrumental in healing her arm?

She replied that "she believed her arm could be healed." Joseph said "he would come and see her the next day," and went away.

The Prophet came as stated and found in the room a Methodist preacher and a Campbellite doctor (of physic), but paid no attention to them and taking the woman by the hand stood a moment as if in mental prayer, pronounced her arm whole "in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ" aloud, then turned and walked out of the house.

As soon as he had disappeared the preacher asked her if her arm was well.

She, stretching out her arm and bending it back and forth, remarked that it was "just as well as the other." The news going abroad among the Saints, some one asked Joseph if her arm would remain well always. (Such things were not common then as now). Joseph replied that "the arm was just as subject to accidents and misfortunes as the other arm."

The next day after the miracle the Campbellite called into Philo Dibble's house and told him the facts as he had witnessed them, and Brother Dibble told me the whole circumstance a few days since.

He is 85 years old and lives here in Springville in good health for a man of that age, and as strong in the faith as he ever was.

The doctor went on to explain that there was no God in the case. He said that when Joseph pronounced the name of "Lord Jesus Christ" it frightened the woman so that it threw her into a heavy perspirationthat relaxed the muscles of the arm, and that was all there was of it. God had nothing to do with it.

Oliver B. Huntington, "Early Miracles," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 9 (June 1891): 411-12.

Joseph prophesied Saints would live in Nauvoo for only seven years, then go to Rocky Mountains.

My father was living in a good hewed log house in 1840 when one morning as the family all sat at breakfast old Father Joseph Smith, the first Patriarch of the Church and father of the Prophet Joseph, came in and sat down by the fire place, after declining to take breakfast with us, and there he sat some little time in silence looking steadily in the fire. At length he observed that we had been driven from Missouri to this place; with some passing comments, he then asked this question: "And how long, Brother Huntington, do you think we will stay here?" As he asked this question I noticed a strange, good-natured expression creep over his whole beingan air of mysterious joy.

Father answered, after just a moment's hesitation, "Well, Father Smith, I can't begin to imagine."

"We will just stay here seven years," he answered. "The Lord has told Joseph sojust seven years," he repeated. "Now this is not to be made public; I would not like to have this word go any further," said the Patriarch, who leaned and relied upon his son Joseph in all spiritual matters as much as boys generally do upon their parents for temporalities. There were then two or three minutes of perfect silence. The old gentleman with more apparent secret joy and caution in his countenance said, "And where do you think we will go to when we leave here, Brother Huntington?"

Father did not pretend to guess; unless we went back to Jackson County.

"No," said the old Patriarch, his whole being seeming to be alive with animation. "The Lord has told Joseph that when we leave here we will go into the Rocky Mountains; right into the midst of the Lamanites."

This information filled our hearts with unspeakable joy, for we knew that the Book of Mormon and this gospel had been brought to light more for the remnants of Jacob upon this continent than for the Gentiles.

Father Smith again enjoined upon us profound secrecy in this matter and I don't think it was ever uttered by one of Father Huntington's family.

The history of Nauvoo shows that we located in Nauvoo in 1839 and left it in 1846.

The Church did move to the Rocky Mountains into the midst of the Indians or Lamanitesor more properly speaking the Jewsand here expect to live until we move to the spirit land or the Lord moves us somewhere else.

Oliver B. Huntington, "Prophecy," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 7 (April 1891): 314-15.

Dimick Huntington's escape from Far West, and his rendering assistance to the Prophet's family in their escape.

I will here relate a little of [my brother] Dimick's experience in that remarkable escape from Far West.

The Prophet Joseph said to Dimick, when the army commenced to surround Far West, "You must get out of here just as quick as you can, for if you are found here they will kill you"; and he named the two other men to go with him, and told them to get out of the State by as short a route as possible.

They first went westward, passing 'Diahman . . . then north, through strange and unsettled country.

They continued north as far as they felt was necessary, and then turned east, and traveled until they came to the Mississippi River, near Burlington. They crossed the river and traveled down to Quincy, where they were led by the inspiration of God to Judge Cleveland's, four miles east of the city.

By this time it was known all over the country that the Mormons had to leave the State of Missouri. Dimick engaged Mr. Cleveland to go to Far West for his and the Prophet Joseph's families and bring them out of the State.

As an introduction of Mr. Cleveland to Emma Smith and his own family, Dimick wrote a letter; but, apprehending that Mr. Cleveland would be in danger if that letter was found on him, and feeling that search would likely be instituted, Dimick took off a cleat from the wagon-box, chiseled out a cavity in the cleat large enough for the letter, into which it was secured, and then nailed the cleat on again.

Facts proved afterwards that the letter could not have been carried openly in the wagon or on again.

In due time Joseph's family followed Dimick's family to the house of Judge John Cleveland. Dimick and his family lived in the judge's old house of earlier times, while Joseph's family was taken into the house and home with Mr. Cleveland. When my father went out of the State in May, 1839, he moved into the house with Dimick, and both families lived in one room not more than eighteen feet square.

Oliver B. Huntington, "Recollections of 'Diahman,'" Juvenile Instructor 31, no. 3 (1 February 1896): 83-84.

Joseph's prophecy that Dimick Huntington would serve a mission among the Lamanites, and its fulfillment.

A few days after Joseph arrived from Missouri, Dimick went in to see the beloved prophet, to whom he was devotedly attached. Joseph remarked to him in their conversation, "Dimick, there is a very important mission for you among the Indians."

Dimick soon went home and told his wife that Joseph had a mission for him among the Indians, and he wanted to be ready in the morning. So the poor wife was up most of the night mending and preparing his clothing for an absence of an indefinite period of time. The devoted followers of the prophet apparently had no limits to service nor bounds to possibilities.

After breakfast Dimick, with valise in hand, went to report to the prophet, and said: "Well, Brother Joseph, I am ready to go now."

"Go where?" asked the prophet.

"To the Indians," was the reply.

Joseph smiled in a lovingly, dignified way peculiar to himself, and remarked: "You are not to go now, Dimick, but after awhile you will do a great work among the Lamanites."

To go or not to go made no difference to Dimick, so long as he yielded obedience to the prophet's call.

When we came into Salt Lake Valley Dimick Huntington was the first man that learned to talk with the Indians; he was the "first man" among them and to them to the end of his life. His name among the Indians was Ne-oam-bahds, which in Ute means "Good Talk." All the tribes in the mountains gave him credit for always telling them the truth. His influence was great among all the tribes that knew him and many that knew his name only.

I traveled among various tribes and bands of Indians from here to the Sierras, and invariably found his name familiar with them.

He was interpreter for Territorial Superintendent of Indian Affairs while Brigham Young was Governor, and remained interpreter and manager of Indians for the Church until his death. . . .

Thus we see that he truly filled the mission given him by the prophet.

Oliver B. Huntington, "Recollections of 'Diahman,'" Juvenile Instructor 31, no. 3 (1 February 1896): 84-85.
