Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hyde, Marinda N. Johnson

(June 28, 1815-March 24, 1886)

Marinda's father (John Johnson) and Ezra Booth read Book of Mormon, gain testimonies and are baptized; they invite Joseph to preach, and he does; Joseph lives at Johnson home for one year, and always acted the part of a prophet.

In February of 1818, my father, in company with several families from the same place, emigrated to Hiram, Portage County, Ohio. In the winter of 1831, Ezra Booth, a Methodist minister, procured a copy of the Book of Mormon and brought it to my father's house. They sat up all night reading it, and were very much exercised over it. As soon as they heard that Joseph Smith had arrived in Kirtland, Mr. Booth and wife and my father and mother went immediately to see him. They were convinced and baptized before they returned. They invited the prophet and Elder Rigdon to accompany them home, which they did, and preached several times to crowded congregations, baptizing quite a number. I was baptized in April following [1831]. The next fall Joseph came with his family to live at my father's house. He was at that time translating the Bible, and Elder Rigdon was acting as scribe. The following spring, a mob, disguising themselves as black men, gathered and burst into his sleeping apartment one night, and dragged him from the bed where he was nursing a sick child. They also went to the house of Elder Rigdon, and took him out with Joseph into an orchard, where, after choking and beating them, they tarred and feathered them, and left them nearly dead. My father, at the first onset, started to the rescue, but was knocked down, and lay senseless for some time. Here I feel like bearing my testimony that during the whole year that Joseph was an inmate of my father's house I never saw aught in his daily life or conversation to make me doubt his divine mission.

"Marinda Hyde Autobiography," in Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall, 1877), 403-4.
