Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hyde, Orson

(January 8, 1805-November 28, 1878)

On 1832 mission with Samuel Smith, heckler falsely accuses Joseph, but is embarrassed because of his own misconduct.

When in Westfield, New York [Spring, 1832], we [Orson Hyde and Samuel Smith] preached to a crowded audience. I was speaker. After the discourse, a gentleman rose up and requested that a brief history of Joseph Smith be given to the people previous to his finding the plates. I remarked that I was not acquainted with the early history of Joseph Smith, and consequently was unable to comply with the request, but observed that his younger brother was present who might, if he felt disposed, favor them with an account of the early life of his brother.

Samuel arose and said, that as it was the early history of his own brother that they required, it might be thought that, in consequence of his near kin, his statements might not be free from partiality, and respectfully declined the task.

The gentleman who first made the request then stated that he had been acquainted with Joseph Smith from his boyhood. It was then observed that he was a suitable person to give his history. Accordingly he began to do so. He soon came to where he said Joseph did some mean act and ran away. Another gentleman in the congregation, knowing that the speaker had recently run away from his former place of abode for his mean acts and come there, here interrupted the speaker by asking him how long it was after Joseph ran away till he started? This question so discomfited the speaker that he sat down amid the hisses and uproar of the multitude. So, but little of the history of Joseph Smith was given at that meeting.

"History of Orson Hyde," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 49 (3 December 1864): 775.

Joseph prophesied Orson Hyde would go to Jerusalem and facilitate the gathering of the Jews.

Something near eight years ago [about 1832] Joseph Smith, a prophet and servant of the Most High God, did predict upon my head that I should yet go to the city of Jerusalem, and be a watchman unto the house of Israel, and perform a work there which would greatly facilitate the gathering together of that people.

"Orson Hyde," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 4 (April 1913): 55.

An elder claimed to have been ordained by an angel; Joseph rebuked him, saying that the Lord always honors his order, and once the keys are on the earth, works through those who hold those keys.

[In the Winter of 1832-1833] One Francis C. Bishop, an Elder in our church, was very anxious to be ordained a High Priest, but he was not considered a proper candidate to fill the office at that time; and his urgent solicitations to be promoted to the High Priesthood, confirmed the Saints in the opinion that he wanted a high station without meriting it, or without being called by the Spirit of God to that work. He was sent forth into the world to preach in the capacity and calling of an Elder; but he was not long out before he declared himself to be a High Priestand that he was ordained by an angel from heaven. This made much stir in the branches of the church and also in the world. But when the news of his proceedings reached the prophet Joseph, he called Bishop home forthwith. He was introduced into the school of the prophets, and there closely questioned upon his course. He said he was ordained by an angel to the High Priesthood, yet, on a more close examination, he crossed his own testimony and statementsbecame confused, and blushed with shame and guilthe fell down upon his knees and confessed that he had lied in the name of the Lordbegged to be forgiven and cried aloud for mercy. We all forgave him, but we could not give him our confidence, for he had destroyed it. Elder Sidney Rigdon was present at that meeting, and though he has since fallen, still he knows that my statements are correct. Zebedee Coltrin was also present, and many others that I might name.

Brother Joseph observed to Bishop that he knew he had lied before he confessed it; that his declarations were not only false in themselves, but they involved a false principle. An angel, said Joseph, may administer the word of the Lord unto men, and bring intelligence to them from heaven upon various subjects; but no true angel from God will ever come to ordain any man, because they have once been sent to establish the priesthood by ordaining me thereunto; and the priesthood being once established on the earth, with power to ordain others, no heavenly messenger will ever come to interfere with that power by ordaining any more. He referred to the angel that came to Cornelius and told Cornelius to send for Peter; but if there had been no Peter with keys and power to administer, the angel might have done it himself; but as there was, the angel would not interfere. Saul was directed to go to Ananias for instruction and to be administered to by him; but if there had been no Ananias with power and authority on the earth to administer in the name of Christ, the Lord might have done it himself. You may therefore know, he is either a liar or has been imposed upon in consequence of transgression by an angel of the devil, for this priesthood shall never be taken away from this church.

This testimony was delivered in an upper room, in the south-west corner of the White Store and dwelling-house, formerly occupied by Whitney and Gilbert, situate on Kirtland Flats.

Orson Hyde, "Although Dead, Yet He Speaketh," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 8, no. 9 (20 November 1846): 138-39.

Joseph predicted the destruction of the enemies of the Saints; "not to be a potsherd" left.

We do not desire to shed the blood of our enemies. We have never desired it. But our prayers should be, that the power and strength arrayed against us may be broken by the providence of God, or by the arm of his power; that they may be smitten with confusion and darkness; that the means they may adopt for their success may be providentially overruled for their overthrow; that they may be wasted away like the early frosts, and be scattered about like chaff before the wind, until, as the martyred Joseph said, just before he was murdered by Governor Ford's mob, there shall not be a potsherd of them left. This prayer should not be confined to our enemies on our immediate borders; for they are only the blind tools of a power that has decreed our overthrow; but should extend, with increased faith and zeal, to that very power that handles these tools.

Journal of Discourses, 6:13.

On the elders saving the Constitution: Joseph said "if saved" the elders would do it.

It is said that brother Joseph in his lifetime declared that the Elders of this Church should step forth at a particular time when the Constitution should be in danger, and rescue it, and save it. This may be so; but I do not recollect that he said exactly so. I believe he said something like this"that the time would come when the Constitution and the country would be in danger of an overthrow; and" said he, "if the Constitution be saved at all, it will be by the Elders of this Church." I believe this is about the language, as nearly as I can recollect it.

Journal of Discourses, 6:152 (January 3, 1858).

Saints to be tried and "thrashed."

I believe Joseph Smith once said, the next movement we made, we should be brought into the midst of the thrashing-floor; and while they are being thrashed all around, we need not be surprised if we get thrashed a little among the rest.

Journal of Discourses, 6:340 (April 6, 1854).

Zion's Camp cursed because of disobedience and murmuring; Joseph loved them still.

In the spring of 1834, a move was made from Kirtland, Ohio, to the State of Missouri, by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and many of his friends. During the journey from time to time, some murmuring and insubordination were manifest in the camp. This called out many reproofs and admonitions from the Prophet, until at length, on one beautiful day when the sun shone in all its beauty and splendor, (having failed to silence the murmurings in the camp,) he uttered in substance the following language:"Brethren, by your murmurings and complainings you have grieved the Holy Spirit. I have reproved you oftenreasoned and remonstrated with you from time to time, and you have not heeded the admonition; and now, therefore, so sure and certain as you behold yonder sun shining in the heavens, without a cloud to obstruct its rays, just so sure and certain will the destroyer lay you waste, and your carcasses shall fall and perish like rotten sheep." Only about two weeks after, the cholera broke out in camp, and the awful prediction was fully verified, to the consternation of the stoutest heart. Some eight or ten died and were buried in a night! But did the Prophet cease his anxiety for the welfare of the camp? Did he become alienated in his feelings from his friends in their hour of chastisement and tribulation? Did he turn to be their enemy because he had spoken hard things against them? No! His heart was melted with sympathyhis bosom glowed with love, compassion, and kindness; and with a zeal and fidelity that became a devoted friend in the hour of peril, he personally ministered to the sick and dying, and aided in burying the dead. Every act of his, during that severe trial, gave additional assurances to the camp that, with all their faults, he loved them still.

Journal of Discourses, 7:109-10 (July 4, 1853).

Majority of Saints never to go astray.

Now I look around this congregation, and contemplate that there are, perhaps, some ten or twelve thousand persons, and it may be more, I do not know, there is a very large number; then when I think that numerous as we are here we are but the representativesnot more than a tithing of those left behind, of the same stripe, it reminds me of the words of Joseph the Prophet, when he said, "Brethren, remember that the majority of this people will never go astray; and as long as you keep with the majority you are sure to enter the celestial kingdom."

Journal of Discourses, 13:367 (May 5, 1870).

Saints to be tried by riches.

I remember once, in Nauvoo, when we felt ourselves happy and fortunate if we could get half a bushel of meal to make mush of, the Prophet Joseph Smith, talking to some of us at the house of brother John Taylor, said"Brethren, we are pretty tight run now, but the time will come when you will have so much money that you will be weary with counting it, and you will be tried with riches;" and I sometimes think that perhaps the preface to that time has now arrived, and that the Saints will soon be tried with riches; but if riches would kill our prospects of eternal life by alienating us from the Priesthood and kingdom of God, I say it would be far better for us to remain like Lazarus, and that all our fine things should perish like the dew, and we come down to the bedrock of faith, and trust in the true and living God.

Journal of Discourses, 17:5 (February 8, 1874); see also George Q. Cannon, Journal of Discourses, 10:346.

Present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young; reasons Brigham could not mimic Joseph's stature.

I will tell you that as long as God has a Church on the earth, He will govern it. Now I will tell you a little of my feelings in relation to it. I know that when President Young returned with the Twelve to Nauvoo, he gathered them around him, and said he: "I want you to disperse among the congregation and feel the pulse of the people while I go upon the stand to speak."

We went among the congregation and President Young went on the stand. Well, he spoke; and his words went through me like electricity. "Am I mistaken?" said I, "or is it really the voice of Joseph Smith?" This is my testimony, it was not only the voice of Joseph, but there were the features, the gestures and even the stature of Joseph there before us in the person of Brigham. And though it may be said that President Young is a complete mimic, and can mimic anybody, I would like to see the man who can mimic another in stature who has about four or five inches higher than himself.every one who was inspired by the spirit of the Lord, felt it. They knew it. They realized it.

I sat myself down in the midst of the congregation, with my two wives, whom Joseph had given and sealed to me. When President Young began to speak, one of them said: "It is the voice of Joseph! It is Joseph Smith!" The exclamation of the other was,"I do not see him, where is he?["] Well the thought occurred to my mind respecting the Scripture which President Young has just quoted:"My sheep know my voice and follow me." Where is the one that recognized the voice of Joseph in President Young? Where is she? She is in the line of her duty. But where is the other? Gone where I wish she were not. The sheep of the good shepherd will follow the voice they know; but they will not follow the voice of a stranger.

Now, this manifestation of the power of the Almightyit was the power of God resting on an individual in the eyes of all the people; not only in feature and voice, but actually in stature. This is my testimony. . . . Did it require proof that Joseph was there in the person of Brigham, speaking with an angel's voice? It required no argument; with those who feared God and loved truth, it required none.

Orson Hyde, "Remarks," given 6 October 1869, Deseret News Semi-Weekly, 16 November 1869.

Account of the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

At the time our Prophet and Patriarch were killed, or at least soon afterwards, when the Twelve returned to Nauvoo, their immediate circumstances were not altogether agreeable and pleasant or profitable. But suffice it to say we had a meeting, a Conference, at which President Young was the centre of attraction. On his rising to speak, and as soon as he opened his mouth, I heard the voice of Joseph through him, and it was as familiar to me as the voice of my wife, the voice of my child, or the voice of my father. And not only the voice of Joseph did I distinctly and unmistakably hear, but I saw the very gestures of his person, the very features of his countenance, and if I mistake not, the very size of his person appeared on the stand. And it went through me with the thrill of conviction that Brigham was the man to lead this people. And from that day to the present there has not been a query or a doubt upon my mind with regard to the divinity of his appointment; I know that he was the man selected of God to fill the position he now holds.

Journal of Discourses, 19:58 (April 5, 1877).
