Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Hyde, William

(September 11, 1818-1874)

Joseph Smith and Parley Pratt stay in the Hyde home, preach in the neighborhood, and baptize.

In the year 1833 elders were preaching in different parts of the country. Sectarianism was also playing a heavy part, as there were revivals on all sides, and the motto with priestcraft seemed to be, "now or never." Early in the year 1834 Joseph Smith and Parley P. Pratt came to my father's house. They preached two or three times in the neighborhood, and conversed much in private. Before they left my oldest brother was baptized and went the same year to Missouri with Joseph Smith and many others in what was called the Zion's Camp. On the 7th of April, 1834, my father and myself were baptized, and soon after all the family were numbered in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

"The Private Journal of William Hyde," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 1.

Heard Joseph say he would no longer carry Sidney Rigdon as a counselor; remembered that remark when Sidney sought guardianship of Church.

On Thursday, August the 8th [1844], I attended a special conference in Nauvoo. Elder Rigdon addressed the assembly in the forenoon. Elder Rigdon sought, as he expressed it, the guardianship of the Church, but it was plainly manifest that the Spirit of the Lord had withdrawn from him, and that he sought that which did not belong to him. From the time the saints were driven from Missouri he had evidently been on the background, and had not walked up to his station, and on one occasion I heard Joseph Smith say that he had carried Elder Rigdon on his back long enough, and then turning to the Twelve said that if they did not help him at that time in shaking him off, the time would come when they would have it to do, and that without his, Joseph's assistance. And on Thursday, the 8th of August, was this saying of the Prophet brought home with weight to my mind.

"The Private Journal of William Hyde," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 13-14.

Note: See Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 6:49 for the Prophet's comments on Rigdon.

Tells of W. W. Phelps' dream in which he sees Joseph, who says the kingdom is going forward.

[On August 8, 1844] Elder W. W. Phelps also made some very comforting remarks. Said that Joseph was not in a situation that he could not visit the Saints. He then related a dream. Said that he saw Joseph the second night after his death, and that he looked as natural as life, and bore the same self-commanding look. Elder Phelps thought the kingdom appeared to be on wheels, and Joseph asked him why he did not speak to the drivers and have them go ahead with it. He asked Joseph if the kingdom was on wheels, and he said "yes," and told him to drive ahead. Elder Phelps then spoke to the drivers and they drove ahead. He saw the kingdom move around the temple. Joseph spoke to him as they came round and said, "You see it moves and receives no harm. Now drive across the river into Iowa." Brother Phelps replied that if they did that they would be obliged to cross Devil Creek. "Never mind Devil Creek," said Joseph, "drive ahead."

"The Private Journal of William Hyde," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 15.

When Rigdon made claims for guardianship of Church, Brigham spoke and William Hyde thought it was Joseph speaking.

President Young again arose and spoke concerning the endowments of the elders. Said that if they did not get them in the temple, they should have them if they had to receive them in the wilderness, for the devil could not cheat them out of them. He then called upon the Saints to know if they would receive the Twelve and let them stand in their place as the First Presidency of the Church in the absence of Joseph. The vote was unanimous in the affirmative. On this day it was plainly manifest that the mantle of Joseph had rested upon President Young. The voice of the same spirit by which he, Joseph, spake was this day sounded in our ears, so much so that I once, unthoughtedly, raised my head to see if it was not actually Joseph addressing the assembly. The assembly was dismissed by President Young after being blessed in the name of the Lord.

"The Private Journal of William Hyde," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 15.
