Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Illinois Democratic Press

(Nauvoo, July 1852)

News writer tells of visiting Joseph and Sidney in Nauvoo; describes Joseph and his behavior; Mother Smith took him to see the mummies and papyrus; says Mormons and their leaders not fools, but "doers."

[This news writer tells of visiting Nauvoo in 1843, shortly after the Dixon kidnapping, and then of returning in 1852. Then, with reference to the earlier visit:] . . . While in the city, we visited JOE SMITH and SIDNEY RIGDON, at their houses. The former was a fine-looking mantall, and portly, with an expressive countenance and florid complexion. We found him at first reserved; but after telling him who we were, and what was the object of our visit, he became communicative, and seemed to be pleased with the notice we paid him. One little incident occurred while we were at his house, which proved conclusively that the Prophet appreciated fully the importance of turning everything to personal account. We had not been seated more than half an hour when his mother entered the room, and informed us that in the next apartment there were some very interesting ancient records which she would be glad to show us. We accepted her invitation, when we were introduced to some half a dozen Egyptian mummies, who, we were informed, constituted the family of Pharaoh. We were then shown a large number of framed sheets of papyrus covered with hieroglyphics, which had been taken from the bandages about the mummies, and these were the "interesting records," which the old lady had invited us to see, and whichGideon likeshe undertook to explain to us. We soon found that the thread of her discourse was simply a rehearsal of the bible history of the creation and the end of man, the deluge, and the subsequent history of the Israelites. As we were all more or less familiar with this, we soon wearied of the discourse, and, to our great scandal in the good woman's estimation, begged her to excuse us from hearing more. Just as we were on the point of retiring, however, our eyes fell upon a placard, inscribed as follows: "EGYPTIAN MUMMIES AND ANCIENT RECORDS TO BE SEEN HEREPRICE 24 CENTS." Of course we paid the score without a word, and bowed ourselves out of the residence of the Prophet.

I have recalled a hundred incidents and facts which occurred while here, on that occasion, that would doubtless interest you, but I cannot crowd them into the short compass of a letter. Perhaps, should you revive the subject, on my return, I may recount them to you.

A distinguished writer observed that a man should be estimated not so much by what he knows, as by what he accomplishes. Judged by this standard, the leaders of the Mormonsthe founder of the sect, his immediate co-workers, and those upon whom his mantle fell at a time when their star seemed destined to set in disaster and blood, but who guided them safely in their wonderful exode [sic] into the wilderness, and have so shaped their subsequent movements, that seeming disaster has been turned into success, must be counted among the remarkable men of the times. It is folly to call them ignorantit is not more wise to call them fanatics and enthusiasts. These epithets may properly apply to a large number of their followers. But the leaders are men of mind, possessed of rare powers of invention, great capacity for execution, wonderful judgment and felicity in determining upon the means to a given end. Bad men they undoubtedly are, but they are not fools.

"The Mormons," New York Daily Times, 28 September 1852, 6.
