Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Ball, Jonah

(1803-April 14, 1845)

Tells of personal events; Joseph and fourteen of the brethren traveled to Springfield on business; his first meeting with Joseph Smith, who was "familiar in conversation, easy and unassuming"; heard Joseph preach; expresses love for his family.

When I came to this place [i.e., Nauvoo] Joseph Smith and about fourteen of the principal men in the Church were gone to Springfield on business of importance. The business as you will find in the papers that I am about to send. They were gone about 2 weeks. The next day after they returned home I called on the Prophet Joseph Smith. I had no one to introduce me, but having a letter from the Presidency at Kirtland, Ohio, for him, with injunction to deliver it myself, by which means I found an introduction to him. There were several persons present, and we all had a social chat. I found Joseph familiar in conversation, easy and unassuming. I found no sycophancy. There were some that came in or went out, not even taking their hats or caps off their heads. . . .

I went to hear Joseph preach on the next Sunday after he got home. He is what the Mormons represent him to be, and the stories about him are false, and his people are no common stock business; nor do the other ten thousand stories have the least foundation in truth. I send you the Times and Seasons and other papers. They tell you the things exactly as they are. This I tell you as the truth of a friend and brother. In one you will find the letter of Orson Spencer and by reading it you have the facts as they exist and I refer you to the letter, for I nor no other one can give a fairer and better view of our city, religious acts, and Prophet, then it has, and I feel to recommend it to all as truth. . . .

I am not disappointed in this work. The Kingdom which God has set up in these the last days by calling Prophets, etc. will stand and roll forth to the end. And it is what he has declared it to be, as of His own establishing, and all the cry and talk of false Prophet, delusions etc., will not stop it . . . God the Father is at the head of this work and he will sustain it and his people in spite of men or devils. But it is to be confessed that there are many who unite themselves with the Latter Day Saints that never obey the gospel, but are wicked and devilish. But remember, the net gathers of all kinds and the great God will separate them in his own time. There are no places for selling grog, people mind their own business, are hospitable & kind.

About 3 years ago only about 12 houses was in the place, now the number of inhabitants probably exceed 16,000 & daily increasing & will be in a short time, the first city in the West.

"Jonah R. Ball to Harvey Howard of Shutesbury, Mass., January, 1843," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar, spelling, and punctuation have been modernized.

Testifies of Joseph Smith; condemns false stories about him; regrets that not all the Saints are true; hears Joseph preach; tells of immigrants arriving in Nauvoo; Lucy Mack Smith gives him a history of her son, Joseph; Hyrum asks to interview Ball; Missourians kidnap Joseph but he is returned safely; sees facsimile from Brass Plates (Book of Mormon?).

I assure you what I write or have written is truth, and I am [as] certain of God's rearing up to himself a prophet in Joseph Smith as in any other person; and I do feel as sure of the revelation given by God through him, as sure and holy as any ever given in any age of the world. And I am as positive that God in these the last days reveals himself to those who call themselves Latter Day Saints. . . . I here declare and positively proclaim unto all that the ten thousand stories about Joseph Smith and the Mormonsabout their allowing and permitting all manner of evil and wickedness in the heads of the Church, is false and untrue. I know it. But say you, others say they do, and how often do we read in the papers of some evil the Mormons have been setting up? I ask you to see who it is that tells these stories, and where they come from. I have been here long enough and have been so intimate that I know them false.

It is to be regretted that although many have the name of Mormon but they are not all Saints. If you want to know exactly what we have here, you read the parable of the net cast in to the sea which gathers of all kinds and the bad were gathered with the good. But the time is not far distant when the wheat will be separated and saved. . . .

20th [May, 1843]I Went to meeting to hear the Prophet preach on the Temple floor. There were several thousand to hear him. There is no mistake the way he imparts the scriptures is beyond calculation or controversy. His text was the 1st Chapter of [2nd] Peter, he explained it as clear as the [illegible] sacrament after noon, after which I went to the Post Office. . . .

31st [May]This day about 200 Englishmen landed from one boat, Mormons, beside several from other boats which went up the river. . . .

Joseph Smith, the Prophet's father, whose name was Joseph, was born in Topsfield, Massachusetts, and when young, he moved to Tunbridge, Vt., where he became acquainted with his wife, Joseph's mother. From there they moved to New York state. . . . You will find in the papers the same account, although I had this from old Miss Smith who is very intelligent. She and Joseph have thousands of visitors from all parts, and great men of the earth. . . .

17th [June] Today had a visit or call from Hiram Smith, Joseph's brother and agreed to be interviewed. From him I learned that the Missourians had got out another warrant for Joseph Smith. I thought I would tell you about it for without doubt the papers will be filled about it and unless they are truer than general you will know nothing about it from here. Now I tell you we care but little about it here. This warrant will make about 40 that he has been tried on and never yet found guilty. What I tell you about this is correct and the fuss now again commenced will amount to nothing in the end but to the benefit of Mormonism and the good of the cause, and Joseph Smith will again come out on the top of the heap. . . .

29th [June]The Missourians kidnapped Joseph a few days ago but finally got caught themselves at last. He was returned today by a very large escort & now at this time is delivering a lecture on the stand. For the particulars see a letter I have & am a writing to J. H. Winter also he will show you the sheat on which a facsimile of the Brafs plates & engravings are.

"Jonah R. Ball to Harvey Howard of Shutesbury, Mass., May 19, 1843," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar, spelling, and punctuation have been modernized.
