Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Jacob, Norton

(August 11, 1804-January 30, 1879)

Devil opposes temple building and temple worship.

Wednesday, September 25, 1845. A delegation arrived from Quincy stating that the people were much incensed against us since those men were killed. The devil appears to be much enraged at the Saints. A pretty good sign that they are doing the will of God. I remember Brother Joseph Smith said some two years ago about the time the temple was finished, "all hell would be raised." This day the twelve and some others went to Carthage to demand their trial on a charge of high treason, and were all acquitted.

"Autobiography of Norton Jacob (1804-1847)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 15.

Present at laying of cornerstone of Nauvoo Temple, as was Thomas C. Sharp; Jacob feels this is where Sharp's envy against the Saints arose.

I [was] present at the laying of the corner stone of the Temple, a most beautiful day it was the 6th day of April 1841. There was a splendid military parade for a view of the Nauvoo Legion under the command of Lieutenant General Joseph Smith; there was also present in Command Brigadier Don Carlos Smith a noble looking young man who not long after fell a prey to the power of the destroyer. J. C. Bennet held command as Major General on that day and after he had formed the troops in the treble lines around the consecrated spot all the General and field officers gathered in within the place marked out for the walls. Not much had been excavated then except about the corners, where trenches had been run to the depth of the intended basement and filed with rough walls so as to receive the corner stones, which were cut and hewn. 'twas now about midday a countless multitude thronged around the marshalled lines filed with much wonder & curiosity to know what all this would amount to. Manny strange murmers ran through the wavering throng to see the Prophet the master spirit of the Glitering scene, mount a scaffold at the South East corner in full Military Costume accompanied by many of his fellow officers & friends! aye and some pretended friends, too. Thomas C. Sharp was there, many were detailed from the ranks to hold within the walls the loosed horses & among the rest I beheld that of T. C. Sharp while he with other visitors took his seat beside the Propheta mean hypocritical knave. I believe he here imbibed that spirit of rancor which since has so freely been manifested against the Saints, for he envied that majesty, & magnanimity to which he had not the honesty and courage to emulateafter a lecture delivered by Sydney Rigdon the South East Corner Stone was laid by Joseph as first President of the Church. The multitude now dispersed & Joseph & his fellow officers, & friends retired for refreshments. In the afternoon the other three corners were laid in due form, the South West by the "Twelve" as traveling high council abroad. The North West by the Bishop Knight, as President of the Lesser Priesthood, and I believe North E. by the Building Committee.

"Reminiscences and Journal (May 1844Jan. 1852)," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling, punctuation, and grammar has been modernized.

At conference in Michigan sent to electioneer for Joseph; hear but did not believe first report of Joseph's death; accepted later report; some felt too overcome to preach, but Jacob felt compelled to testify against this generation; in August, James J. Strang came by and made his claims with his pretended revelation, but was rejected.

By this conference Brother Moses Smith & myself were sent to Branch Co. to Preach & lecture in favor of Gen. Joseph Smith for President of the United States. Here I commenced my first preaching of the Gospel of the New and Everlasting Covenant. We continued to labor here until the first of July when we attended a State convention at Jackson for the purpose of nominating Presidential Electors. We met many of the Brethren from different parts of the State. Brother Charles O. Rich Presided. We were met on the 5th in the court House but a few of the citizens attended, a report had Inst. reached us that our Beloved Prophet Joseph & Patriarch Hiram Smith were murdered in Carthage Jail. But we did not believe the story and proceeded to nominate our Electors. When Moses Smith returned to Branch Co. I up to Garland Co. to exchange our [?] heavy two Horse for a one Horse Buggy. I returned through Jackson Co where I met with Br. Zebedee Coltrin at house of Brother [blank] where I tarried several days on the 15th we held a conference here when we receive a letter from Br. Charles C. Rich in Indiana on his way home to Nauvoo, which fully confirmed the report of the death of the Prophet. Br. Harvey Green presided at this conferenceI now returned to branch co. where my wife's mother lived also her Sister Lucretia, wife of Ebenezer Mudge. The old Lady listened with considerable interest while the others turned a deaf ear to the Gospel. I found Moses completely discomfitted by the news of the Prophet's death & he would preach very little afterwards Till another catastrophe happened him, which I will relate in due time. While I felt to proclaim with loud voice to Priest & People that the blood of the Prophet's they had slain should most assuredly be visited upon this generation

We continued laboring until about the first of August when we met with Br. H. Greene and some eight other Elders and held a conference in Florence, St. Joseph Co. While here the famous James J. Strang & Smith Brother to Moses came along with their revelation to gather the Saints to build up Voree in Wisconsin. It being a letter purporting to be written by Br. Joseph Smith & mailed in Nauvoo Just before his death. The letter carried upon its face the marks of a base forgery being written throughout in Printed characters the Postmark was back while that issued from the office was uniformly red. But above all the contents of the thing, was altogether bombastic unlike the work of God, & dishonorable to the name of Joseph Smith whose signature it bore in hand he never wroteBut named Moses & Aaron as colleagues with Strang which completely unshipped Moses and he was never good for any thing afterwards. The thing no doubt was framed by Aaron Smith & James J. Strang.

"Reminiscences and Journal (May 1844Jan. 1852)," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling, punctuation, and grammar has been modernized.
