Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Jenson, Andrew

(b. 1850)

Prophecy to Judge Douglas about aspiring to the presidency of the U.S., and its literal fulfillment.

I will now refer you to another most remarkable prophecy and its fulfillment. Among the prominent men of Illinois, who befriended the Saints when they were expelled from Missouri, was Stephen A. Douglas, afterwards know as the "Little Giant," and who became one of the great statesmen of our nation. This man continued friendly to the Saints for many years, and especially to Joseph Smith, in whose case he, as an Illinois district judge, rendered a fair and impartial decision at Monmouth, June 10, 1841, at a time when the Missourians were endeavoring to get Joseph Smith into their power. After that he and the Prophet exchanged visits, and on one occasion when Joseph dined with him in Carthage, Illinois, May 18, 1843, he listened to a lengthy explanation from the Prophet about the Missouri persecutions. Winding up the conversation, Joseph spoke of the dire effects that would flow to the nation if the United States should refuse to redress the wrongs of murder, arson and robbery committed against the Saints in Missouri and the crimes committed upon the Saints by officers of the government. Turning to Judge Douglas he said:

"You will aspire to the presidency of the United States, and if ever you turn your hand against me or the Latter-day Saints, you will feel the weight of the hand of the Almighty upon you; and you will live to see and know that I have testified the truth to you, for the conversation of this day will stick to you through life."

This remarkable prophesy concerning Judge Douglas personally has had a literal fulfillment. Judge Douglas continued to raise in prominence in the nation as long as he remained a friend to the Saints. But, finally he turned against them, and at the time the excitement ran high against the "Mormons" in 1857, and preparations were being made to send an army against the people of Utah, Judge Douglas thought he would add a little to the great popularity he had already achieved by doing the most popular thing that could be done at the time, namely, denounce the "Mormons." Hence, in a political speech which he delivered in Springfield, Ill., June 12th, 1857, and which was published in the Missouri Republican of June 18th following and partly republished with comments in the DESERET NEWS of September 2nd, 1857, Senator Douglas attacked the Saints in Utah in a most fierce and unwarranted manner, and among many other bitter expressions which he made, he called "Mormonism a loathsome, disgusting ulcer," to which he recommended that Congress apply the knife and cut it out. In the DESERET NEWS of the date mentioned, the prophecy of Joseph Smith was republished with warning remarks, directed to Mr. Douglas, who at that time, in fulfillment of Joseph's words, was already aspiring to the presidency of the United States. In the campaign of 1860 he became the candidate of the Independent Democratic party for that position. It is asserted that no man ever entered into a campaign with brighter prospects of success than did Senator Douglas on that occasion. His friends viewed him as sure to be seated in the Presidential chair, because of his great popularity. But, alas, he and his friends had reckoned without Divine interposition. He had lifted his hands against the Saints of the Most High God and denounced the people whom he knew to be innocent and whom he ought to have defended. The result was that he was sadly defeated at the election, as he only received two electoral votes against seventeen cast for Abraham Lincoln (Republican) and eleven cast for J.C. Breckenridge (Democrat).

When the result of the election became known in Utah Apostle Orson Hyde published the following in the DESERET NEWS of December 12, 1860:

Ephraim, Utah Ter., Nov. 27, 1860.

Will the Judge now acknowledge that Joseph Smith was a true Prophet? If he will not, does he recollect a certain conversation had with Mr. Smith at the house of Sheriff Backenstos, in Carthage, Illinois, in the year 1843, in which Mr. Smith said to him: "You will yet aspire to the presidency of the United States. But if you ever raise your hand, or your voice against the Latter-day Saints, you shall never be President of the United States."

Does Judge Douglas recollect that in a public speech delivered by him in the year 1857, at Springfield, Illinois, of comparing the Mormon community, then constituting the inhabitants of Utah Territory, to a "loathsome ulcer on the body politic," and of recommending the knife to be applied to cut it out?

Among other things the Judge will doubtless recollect that I was present and heard the conversation between him and Joseph Smith, at Mr. Backenstos' residence in Carthage, before alluded to.

Now Judge, what think you about Joseph Smith and Mormonism?

Orson Hyde.

A few months later, or in June, 1861, Judge Douglas died in disappointment and grief. Never has the saying of any Prophet of God been more literally and minutely fulfilled than the prediction made by the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning this man.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:161-63.

After his excommunication, Oliver remains true to his testimony, and testifies of seeing Moroni and plates.

Oliver Cowdery, after his excommunication in Far West, April 11th, 1838, engaged in law business and practiced for some years as a lawyer in Michigan, but he never denied the truth of the Book of Mormon. On the contrary, he seems to have used every opportunity he had to bear testimony of its divine origin. While in Michigan, a gentleman, on a certain occasion, addressed him as follows: "Mr. Cowdery, I see your name attached to this book. If you believe it to be true, why are you in Michigan?" The gentleman then read the names of the Three Witnesses and asked: "Mr. Cowdery, do you believe this book?" "No, sir," was the reply. "Very well," continued the gentleman, "but your name is attached to it, and you declare here (pointing to the book) that you saw an angel, and also the plates, from which the book purports to be translated; and now you say you don't believe it. Which time did you tell the truth?" Oliver Cowdery replied with emphasis, "My name is attached to that book, and what I there have said is true. I did see this; I know I saw it, and faith has nothing to do with it, as a perfect knowledge has swallowed up the faith which I had in the work, knowing, as I do, that it is true."

At a special conference held at Kanesville, Iowa, October 21st, 1848, Oliver Cowdery was present and made the following remarks:

Friends and Brethren.My name is Cowdery, Oliver Cowdery. In the early history of this Church I stood identified with her, and one in her councils. True it is that the gifts and callings of God are without repentance; not because I was better than the rest of mankind was I called; but to fulfill the purposes of God, He called me to a high and holy calling.

I wrote, with my own pen, the entire Book of Mormon (save a few pages) as it fell from the lips of the Prophet Joseph Smith, as he translated it by the gift and power of God, by the means of the Urim and Thummim, or, as it is called by that book, "holy interpreters." I beheld with my eyes, and handled with my hands, the gold plates from which it was transcribed. I also saw with my eyes and handled with my hands the "holy interpreters." That book is true. Sidney Rigdon did not write it; Mr. Spaulding did not write it; I wrote it myself as it fell from the lips of the Prophet. It contains the Everlasting Gospel, and came forth to the children of men in fulfillment of the revelations of John, where he says he saw an angel come with the Everlasting Gospel to preach to every nation, kindred, tongue and people. It contains principles of salvation; and if you, my hearers, will walk by its light and obey its precepts, you will be saved with an everlasting salvation in the kingdom of God on high. Brother Hyde has just said that it is very important that we keep and walk in the true channel, in order to avoid the sandbars. This is true. The channel is here. The holy Priesthood is here.

I was present with Joseph when an holy angel from God came down from heaven and conferred on us, or restored, the lesser or Aaronic Priesthood, and said to us, at the same time, that it should remain upon the earth while the earth stands.

I was also present with Joseph when the higher or Melchisedek Priesthood was conferred by holy angels from on high. This Priesthood we then conferred on each other, by the will and commandment of God. This Priesthood, as was then declared, is also to remain upon the earth until the last remnant of time. This holy Priesthood, or authority, we then conferred upon many, and is just as good and valid as though God had done it in person.

I laid my hands upon that manyes, I laid my right hand upon his head (pointing to Brother Hyde), and I conferred upon him this Priesthood, and he holds that Priesthood now. He was also called through me, by the prayer of faith, an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Soon afterwards Oliver Cowdery was rebaptized, but while making preparations to come to Utah, he was suddenly stricken with death in Richmond, Mo., March 3rd, 1850. Elder Phinehas H. Young, who was present when he died, testifies:

His last moments were spent in bearing testimony of the truth of the Gospel revealed through Joseph Smith, and the power of the Holy Priesthood which he had received through his administration.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:164-65.

David Whitmer ever true to his testimony as one of the Three Witnesses.

David Whitmer, who died in Richmond, Mo., Jan. 25th, 1888, was also true to his testimony until the last, although he never united himself with the Church after his excommunication in 1838. During the last few years of his life he was frequently visited by representatives of the press and many others, to whom he would always bear strong and faithful testimonies of the divinity of the Book of Mormon.

On one occasion when the report reached him that he was accused by a certain party of having denied his former testimony, he wrote the following, which was published in the Richmond (Mo.) Conservator of March 25, 1881:

Unto all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, unto whom these presents shall come:

It having been represented by one John Murphy, of Polo, Caldwell County, Missouri, that I, in a conversation with him last summer, denied my testimony as one of the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon.

To the end, therefore, that he may understand me now, if he did not then; and that the world may know the truth, I wish now, standing as it were, in the very sunset of life, and in the fear of God, once for all to make this public statement:

That I have never at any time denied that testimony or any part thereof, which has so long since been published with that book, as one of the Three Witnesses. Those who know me best, well know that I have always adhered to that testimony. And that no man may be misled or doubt my present views in regard to the same, I do again affirm the truth of all my statements as then made and published.

"He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear;" it was no delusion; what is written is written, and he that readeth let him understand . . .

In the Spirit of Christ, who hath said: "Follow thou me, for I am the life, the light and the way," I submit this statement to the world; God in whom I trust being my judge as to the sincerity of my motives and the faith and hope that is in me of eternal life.

My sincere desire is that the world may be benefited by this plain and simple statement of the truth.

And all the honor to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which is one God. Amen!

David Whitmer, Sen.

Richmond, Mo., March 19, 1881.

Three days before his death Mr. Whitmer called his family and some friends to his bedside and addressing himself to the attending physician, said:

"Dr. Buchanan, I want you to say whether or not I am in my right mind, before I give my dying testimony."

The doctor answered: "Yes, you are in your right mind, for I have just had a conversation with you."

He then addressed himself to all around his bedside in these words: "Now you must all be faithful in Christ, I want to say to you all, the Bible and the record of the Nephites (Book of Mormon) is true, so you can say that you have heard me bear my testimony on my death-bed. All be faithful in Christ, and your reward will be according to your works. God bless you all. My trust is in Christ forever, worlds without end. Amen."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:165-66.

Martin Harris remains true to his testimony as one of the Three Witnesses.

Martin Harris also absented himself from the Church for many years, but was always true to his testimony in regard to the Book of Mormon. He finally emigrated to Utah, arriving in Salt Lake City, August 30th, 1870, in care of Elder Edward Stevenson. He located in Smithfield, Cache County, and later in Clarkston, where he died July 10th, 1875, being nearly ninety-three years of age.

A few hours before his death, when prostrated with great weakness, Bishop Simon Smith came into his room; Martin Harris stretched forth his hands to salute him and said, "Bishop, I am going." The Bishop told him that he had something of importance to tell him in relation to the Book of Mormon, which was to be published in the Spanish language, by the request of Indians in Central America. Upon hearing this, Martin Harris brightened up, his pulsation improved, and, although very weak, he began to talk as he had formerly done previous to his sickness. He conversed for about two hours, and it seemed that the mere mention of the Book of Mormon put new life into him.

It will also be remembered that Martin Harris, soon after his arrival in Utah, spoke to a large congregation of Saints and strangers in the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City, where he bore a faithful testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:166-67.
