Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Johnson, Joel Hills

(March 23, 1802-February 27, 1846)

Describes first meeting with Prophet, who says he is a "great, green, lubberly fellow"; they conversed freely; Johnson went to Kirtland and made bricks for the temple.

Having lost my health and property (as before mentioned) in 1827 and 28 and not being able to do any labor and having but little means to sustain my family, it was thought best for me to stay at home and not travel; and I was appointed to preside over the Church at Amherst and labor what I could in its vicinity until the Lord should open my way for further usefulness I attended the conference held in the town of Orange in Ohio in the month of October where I first beheld the face of the Prophet and Seer, Joseph Smith. When I was introduced to him, he laid his hands upon my shoulder and said unto me, "I suppose you think that I am a great, green, lubberly fellow."

His expression was an exact representation of his person, being large and tall, and not a particle of beard about his face. I conversed with him very freely upon many subjects relative to his mission and received much instruction and was highly edified and blessed of the Lord during the conference and returned home rejoicing.

. . . I then went to Kirtland and being counseled by President Joseph Smith, I made a purchase of land and moved my family to Kirtland about the last of July [1834] and commenced making brick for the House of the Lord, then to be built in that place; in which business I labored until the 25th of September of the same year. But the brick was not used for that purpose because the Church concluded to build the house of stone.

"Selections from the Autobiography of Joel Hills Johnson, (1802-1868)" typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 4-5.

Johnson was present when the Word of Wisdom was revealed, and he both heard Joseph and Hyrum teach that "hot drinks" were coffee and tea.

I was with Joseph Smith, the Prophet, when the Word of Wisdom [D&C 89] was given by revelation from the Lord, February 27, 1833, and, I think, I am the only man now living who was present.

I was then thirty one years of age, and had used tobacco somewhat extravagantly for fifteen years. I always used some strong drink, and tea and coffee.

I knew that God had spoken and condemned the use of these things, and, being determined to live by every word that proceeded from His mouth, I laid them all aside, and have not used them since.

I well remember that, soon after the publication of the Word of Wisdom, the same excuse was made, by some of the people, for drinking tea and coffee that is now madethat hot drinks did not mean tea and coffee.

On a Sabbath day, in the July [1833] following the giving of the revelation, when both Joseph and Hyrum Smith were in the stand, the Prophet said to the Saints:

"I understand that some of the people are excusing themselves in using tea and coffee, because the Lord only said 'hot drinks' in the revelation of the Word of Wisdom."

"The Lord was showing us what was good for man to eat and drink. Now, what do we drink when we take our meals?"

"Tea and coffee. Is it not?"

"Yes; tea and coffee."

"Then, they are what the Lord meant when He said 'hot drinks.'"

Brother Hyrum Smith spoke to the same effect.

Joel Hills Johnson, Voice from the Mountains, Being a Testimony of the Truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as Revealed by the Lord to Joseph Smith Jr. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Juvenile Instructor, 1881), 12-13.

Johnson knew the Prophet for thirteen years; testifies "he was a man of sterling worth . . . naturally affectionate and kind."

I became acquainted with Joseph Smith, Jr., at the October conference held by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, October 6, 1831.

I was with him, more or less, in public, in private, in council and in all the associations of life.

I had many business transactions with him.

This intercourse continued about thirteen years, and it gave me, probably, as good an opportunity to understand his character, as was had by any man now living. I was often present when the word of the Lord came from His mouth, and was written down by his scribe.

I knew, and now know, that it was the word of the Lord to all men, whether they receive it or not.

He was a man of sterling worth.

He was naturally affectionate and kind.

His reputation was good among all who were acquainted with him; but among those who knew him not, his name was cast out as evil.

Like many of the ancient Saints, his life was sought from the time he announced to the world that the Lord had spoken to him.

"Thus saith the Lord," has never been received by any people, except saints, with pleasure.

Joel Hills Johnson, Voice from the Mountains, Being a Testimony of the Truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as Revealed by the Lord to Joseph Smith Jr. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Juvenile Instructor, 1881), 13.

First met Joseph in 1831; later counseled by Joseph to come to Kirtland to help buy out "obnoxious individuals"; recalls martyrdom.

I attended the first October Conference of the Church, it was held in Orange Township, Ohio, Oct. 25, 1831, where I first beheld the face of the Prophet Joseph and heard the words of life from his mouth which filled my heart with joy and thanks to God.

. . . In July 1833 President Smith counseled me to move to Kirtland and buy out certain obnoxious individuals, which I did. I was there when the foundation of the Temple was laid, and built a sawmill for its benefit.

. . . I was eight miles from Carthage when Hyrum, and Joseph Smith were slain on the memorable 27th of June 1844.

"Life of Joel H. Johnson," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
