Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Johnson, Luke S.

(November 3, 1807-December 9, 1861)

Prophet heals Mrs. Johnson; Joseph lives in Johnson home while translating Bible.

Soon after Joseph Smith moved from the state of New York, my father, mother and Ezra Booth, a Methodist Minister, went to Kirtland to investigate "Mormonism." My mother had been laboring under an attack of chronic rheumatism in the shoulder, so that she could not raise her hand to her head for about two years; the prophet laid hands upon her, and she was healed immediately.

My father was satisfied in regard to the truth of "Mormonism," and was baptized by Joseph Smith, Jr., in the winter of 1830-1, and furnished him and his family a home, while he translated a portion of the Bible.

"History of Luke Johnson," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 53 (31 December 1864): 834; see also "Philo Dibble Autobiography (1806-c. 1843)," in "Early Scenes in Church History," Four Faith Promoting Classics (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1968), 79.

Gives account of the March, 1832 mobbing of Joseph and Sidney, which occurred at his home: mob take Joseph by night, tar and feather them; with one strong leg kick, Joseph sends one mobber sprawling into the street; John Johnson (Luke's father) has his collar-bone broken but immediately healed; tells fate of three of the mobocrats.

[On the 24th of March, 1832] while Joseph was yet at my father's, a mob of forty or fifty came to his house, a few entered his room in the middle of the night, and Carnot Mason dragged Joseph out of bed by the hair of his head; he was then seized by as many as could get hold of him, and taken about forty rods from the house, stretched on a board, and tantalized in the most insulting and brutal manner; they tore off the few night clothes that he had on, for the purpose of emasculating him, and had Dr. Dennison there to perform the operation; but when the Dr. saw the Prophet stripped and stretched on the plank, his heart failed him, and he refused to operate. The mob then scratched his body all over, saying, "Damn you, this is the way the Holy Ghost falls upon you." And in attempting to force open his jaws, they broke one of his front teeth to pour a vial of some obnoxious drug into his mouth.

The mob became divided, and did not succeed, but poured tar over him, and then stuck feathers in it and left him, and went to an old brickyard to wash themselves and bury their filthy clothes. At this place a vial was dropped, the contents of which ran out and killed the grass. About the same time part of the mob went to the house that Sidney Rigdon occupied, and dragged him out, and besmeared him with tar and feathers. My father, hearing the outcry of the family, went to the door, but finding it held by someone on the outside, he called for his gun, when those who held the door left; he pursued, and was knocked down; his collarbone was broken; he was taken back to the house, and hands laid upon him by David Whitmer and immediately healed. A few minutes after this accident, we heard the voice of Joseph calling for a blanket; some person handed him one, and he came in, the tar trickling down his face; his wife was very much alarmed, supposing it to be blood, until he came near enough to see that it was tar. My mother got some lard, and rubbed it upon him to get the tar off, which they succeeded in removing.

Waste, who was the strongest man on the Western Reserve, had boasted that he could take Joseph out alone. At the time they were taking him out of the house, Waste had hold of one foot, Joseph drew up his leg and gave him a kick, which sent him sprawling in the street. He afterwards said the prophet was the most powerful man he ever had hold of in his life.

Soon after this persecution, Mason had an attack of the spinal affection. Fullars, one of the mobocrats, died of the cholera in Cleveland. Dr. Dennison was sent to the penitentiary for ten years, and died before the term expired.

"History of Luke Johnson," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 53 (31 December 1864): 835.

Note: The Prophet's account of this experience is in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:261-65.

Joseph and all eleven witnesses testify of Book of Mormon.

At a conference in Orange, Cuyahoga County, Ohio, I was ordained a high priest by Joseph Smith. At this conference the eleven witnesses to the Book of Mormon, with uplifted hands, bore their solemn testimony to the truth of that book, as did also the Prophet Joseph.

"History of Luke Johnson," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 53 (31 December 1864): 835.

Baptist minister provokes Joseph, who "boxed his ears"; minister swears out writ against Joseph; Joseph swears out writ against the minister, who chooses to pay and leave town.

A Baptist Clergyman from the state of New York, who had been acquainted with the Prophet Joseph in his early life, called upon him and staid [stayed] all night. Joseph made the minister welcome, and treated him hospitably and respectfully; but, when breakfast was over next morning, he called Joseph a hypocrite, a liar, an imposter and a false prophet, and called upon him to repent. Joseph boxed his ears with both hands, and, turning his face towards the door, kicked him into the street. He immediately went before a magistrate, and swore out a writ against Joseph for assault and battery. I saw the operation, and followed the minister into the squire's office, and demanded a writ for his apprehension, for provoking an assault; the clerk filling up the writ I called for firstthe minister, fearing trouble, paid for his writ and withdrew without it, and made his way post haste for Cuyahoga County; I followed him on horseback, making him travel pretty lively until he got a few rods over the line when I overtook him and said, "Sir, you are lucky to have got over the line, and out of my jurisdiction, or I should have arrested you."

"History of Luke Johnson," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 1 (7 January 1865): 5.

Johnson arrests Joseph to protect him from more serious arrest; Joseph is grateful.

January 12th, 1838, I learned that Sheriff Kimball was about to arrest Joseph Smith, on a charge of illegal banking, and knowing that it would cost him an expensive lawsuit, and perhaps end in imprisonment, I went to the French farm, where he then resided, and arrested him on an execution for his person, in the absence of property to pay a judgment of $50, which I had in my possession at the time, which prevented Kimball from arresting him. Joseph settled the execution, and thanked me for my interference, and started that evening for Missouri: this was the last time I ever saw the Prophet.

"History of Luke Johnson," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 1 (7 January 1865): 5-6.
