Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Johnson, Philo

(December 6, 1814-April 3, 1894)

On first meeting with Joseph, receives instructions on where to go to set up hatter's business; made hats for Joseph and Hyrum; joined Nauvoo Legion; heard Joseph preach; present in Nauvoo for Joseph's final arrest; saw dead bodies of Joseph and Hyrum.

[Philo Johnson] moved from there [Conn.] to Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois, in the year 1842. He arrived at this place on the 11 of June. This was the first time that he saw the Prophet Joseph Smith. He shook hands with him and gave him some instructions where to go to settle and to commence his business as Hatter. He seemed to be pleased with his trade, for such a business was much needed in the City. The Prophet assisted him in getting a stock of fur & lambs' wool to make hats. He went to live in one of Hyrum Smith's houses, as an office. This was located on Kimball Street. He made hats in this house four years and supplied Joseph and Hyrum Smith with all their hats; and also Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball and Parley P. Pratt and others of the Twelve Apostles with all their wool and fur hats. He made about 1,000 hats in this City. He was a member of the Nauvoo Legion; he trained and drilled many days under the command of Joseph Smith the Prophet as our General. He will here remark that he was a noble looking General when on horseback in parade giving commands to the Legion which numbered all enrolled 3,000 men. He belonged to the Guard of Nauvoo, and was called out about once a week to stand guard at the suburbs of the City to keep out the intruders and mobs that sought the lives of the First Presidency of the Church. He heard the Prophet Joseph preach many times. He said the Church would yet go to the Rocky Mountains and there become a great people. He was present when the officers arrested Joseph and Hyrum Smith the last time in Nauvoo, and saw them start with them to Carthage. And all of the brethren that was present said they were afraid that they would not ever see them alive again. They looked to us downcast and pale.

I worked on the Temple in Nauvoo about one year laying rock and brick. He helped to finish it, and received his endowments in it.

. . . He was present in Nauvoo when Joseph and Hyrum was brought home dead. Their corpses was laid in the Hall of the Mansion House in state when about 20,000 Saints passed through and viewed the last remains, and stout-hearted men and women could be heard to weep like children for a lost mother, so great was their love for them.

Untitled manuscript, 18 April 1894, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
