Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Jones, Jacob

(April 26, 1833-March 17, 1926)

As a nine-year-old boy met Joseph.

Jacob Jones was a lad of but some nine years when he first became acquainted with Joseph Smith. This association with the Mormon Prophet was to be one of the highlights of his life, an era he was to recall often in his later years.

Helen D. O'Conner, "Jacob JonesBiography of a Pioneer," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Was eleven at time of martyrdom, remembers seeing crowd accompany Joseph and Hyrum to Carthage; mob stole his father's cows; present at transfiguration of Brigham Young; remembers Joseph speaking in tongues to Indians, and that Joseph had sense of humor and joked; Joseph a wrestler, friendly and shook hands with everyone; heard Joseph prophesy Saints would go West, but he would not go with them.

I am now 92 years old and remember the Prophet Joseph Smith very well. I was 11 years old when he and his brother, Hyrum, were killed. We lived in the edge of Nauvoo on the road to Carthage, and I remember well when the crowd passed our house with those two good innocent men to take them to Carthage Jail. I also remember well that we saw them bring their bodies back after they had been martyred. I tell you it was very sad for us all. There was a terrible sight of mourning.

I'll never forget the mob that drove us out of Nauvoo. They were awful mean and cruel to us. They took the good cows and calves from my father, drove them away and we never got a thing for them. Brother Pendleton, the grandfather of Sister Schwendiman, who lived five miles below Nauvooa splendid blacksmith who made the best plowsgave up his farm and all they gave him for it was an old shotgun.

Just before we had to leave Nauvoo, my father took me into the Temple and I well remember most everything about the Temple. I remember Sidney Rigdon, and I was present at the meeting when the Mantle of the Prophet fell upon President Brigham Young. When Brigham Young began to speak, we all felt that he was the chosen one to succeed the Prophet Joseph. You could just feel that he was the divinely appointed leader to lead this people.

At one time the Prophet Joseph spoke to a group of Indians who had come to see him about the Book of Mormon, and he spoke to them in their own language, although he never had learned it. And he did many wonderful things that an ordinary man cannot do.

The Prophet weighed about 150 pounds, had nice brown hair, was always jovial and could crack a joke. He could sing well and loved music, loved to dance and would leave a meal at any time to wrestle with anyone. He was nimble as a cat and he was fond of us boys and would often play with us. Anyone could not help but love him and he loved everybody. He always shook hands with all, even the babes. He had a very fine gray horse that he always rode whenever there was a parade.

My wife, Emma Jones, was named after Emma Smith, the wife of the Prophet.

I heard the Prophet prophesy, when standing on a high platform, that this church and people would go to Utah; but he would not lead them, but would go like a lamb to the slaughter. Those were very trying times.

For over 80 years now, I have studied about the Prophet Joseph Smith and I know him as well as I know anybody, and I now bear my testimony, and I certainly know what I am talking about; that Joseph Smith is in very deed a prophet of the living God; that this is the only true church on the earth today; and that the Gospel which God revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith is true.

(Signed) Jacob Jones

"Testimony of Jacob Jones," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
