Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Kartchner, William Decatur

(May 4, 1820-May 14, 1892)

Because of his baptism, his brother John was angered and offended; Kartchner went to Nauvoo to see the Prophet, who comforted and consoled him; was later appointed by Joseph to join others in a western expedition to find a place for the Saints to settle in the Rocky Mountains.

The spring of 1843, John [Kartchner, his brother] and myself put in our crops at our old place and all seemed well until the 7th of May. Thomas Nelson told me there were two Mormon Elders at the Free Settlement 10 miles below. I saddled my horse and rode down, stayed all night and was baptized on the 8th of May, 1843. My brother John heard of it before I returned home and met me at our gate and asked me if I had been baptized by them damned Mormons. I answered in the affirmativehe damned me and the Mormons. I tried to pacify him to no purpose. This was our first disturbance and that which was formerly my whole delight for my future home was now loathsome. I bore it one month, during which time my whole faculties was exercised in prayer and study which led me to flee to the Church for peace and safety, which I did in June. I went straight to the Prophet's house, had an interview which was very agreeable and consoling. I worked on the Temple sometime and was baptized in the river for my father and other dead relatives. I returned home in November, and in December took my blacksmith tools in a small wagon, drawn by my favorite mule; located on Bear Creek, put up in a hickory log shop and worked the winter 20 miles below Nauvoo.

"William Decatur Kartchner," in Kate B. Carter, comp. Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1958-77), 6:335.

Note: Tells of being sick with rheumatism, and therefore confined to bed, thus not being able to see the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum during the two days they were being shown in the Nauvoo Mansion; then tells that he was one of those whom Joseph had selected to go and investigate the Rocky Mountains, and find a place for the Saints to reside in. (See Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage, 6:336.)
