Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Kempton, Jerome Bonaparte

(October 13, 1820-May 1899)

One of Joseph's bodyguards; under the press of mob persecutions, he sometimes imagined life facing fantasies, which demonstrate the strength of his conviction supporting the Prophet; present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young, where his wife was so overcome that she fainted and had to be carried out.

Jerome served as a bodyguard for Joseph Smith when called upon to do so and was also a member of the Nauvoo Legion.

. . . Under the emotional influence of the continued persecution of the followers of Joseph Smith, Jerome testified to some imagined illusions when he was young.

According to the recollections of his daughter, Harriet, Jerome "liked to recall one time when the Prophet (Joseph Smith) was riding with a few of his faithful guards along a little used road when they came face to face with a mob of vicious men who greatly outnumbered the little band of Mormons. The guards were greatly excited but Joseph remained calm. The vicious gang was yelling and swearing. Just before they reached the Mormons, they turned their horses and fled back in the direction they had come.

Later a member of the mob said that as they approached the little band, whom they expected to destroy, the eyes of the Mormons grew larger and larger and finally looked like huge balls of fire which covered their whole heads and thus frightened the members of the mob away. Another time the members of the mob claimed they saw armies in the clouds behind and above the Prophet and his men." These so called early testimonies prove Jerome's commitment to the church at that period of his life.

. . . (During the meeting held on August 8, 1844,) Brigham Young spoke in favor of sustaining the Quorum of the Twelve as the Presidency of the church. He said, "I do not ask you to take my counsel or advice alone, but every one of you act for yourselves." Jerome and Maria [his wife] were present at the meeting where Brigham Young's voice and looks, as he stood speaking to the people, seemed to take on the appearance of the Prophet. Everyone saw it, heard it and felt the spirit of the Prophet. "The resemblance was so real that Maria fainted and had to be carried out." They trusted Brigham Young and accepted him as their divinely appointed leader, President and spiritual guide with the other Apostles.

In Margarite Kimpton Stevens and Jan Stevens Lockard, Kempton/Kimpton Families: Life and Lineage of Jerome B. Kempton, Stevenson's Genealogy Center, Provo, Utah, 27-28.
