Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Kesler, Frederick

(January 20, 1816 [or 1818]-June 12, 1899 [or 1900])

Heard Joseph tell of the mobbing in Hiram, Ohio, when mob thought they had killed him.

Bishop F. Kelser said that Bishop Burton expressed the opinion that was entertained by the people generally, that Joseph's life could not be taken, although the speaker heard the Prophet say differently, and yet he could hardly believe. On one occasion, at a meeting held near the Temple in Nauvoo, Joseph arose to make a few remarks, and he related the incident of the mob knocking one of his front teeth out in their successful effort to pour acquifortis down his throat. His spirit, he said, left his body, and hovered over it in the air, and returned after it was over. They supposed they had killed him, but he had to come back and take his body. "The time has been, brethren," he said, "when my life could not be taken, but now my work is done. I roll the burden and the keys of the Kingdom upon the shoulders of the Twelve Apostles. I have climbed the hill of life, and now I look over. My life now is the same as any other man's. I am going to rest."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:35.

First met Joseph in 1839; often saw Abraham papyrus; saw Joseph deposit records in cornerstone of temple.

Frederick Kelser. Born Jan. 20, 1816, in Meadville, Crawford County, Pennsylvannia; was left an orphan at the age of 5 years; I served 5 years at mill building; went to Iowa in the spring of 1835; built the first flowering mills known in Iowa, Kansas and Nebraska; have built mills in 10 different states; first became acquainted with Joseph Smith, the Prophet, in 1839, and was intimately acquainted with him from that time until his martyrdom; often viewed the record of Abraham, which was written by his own hand on parchment in Egyptian characters, which record was in the possession of the Prophet; was present when the Prophet deposited the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon; was baptized in June 1840, in Nauvoo; assisted in building the Nauvoo Temple, and received my endowments therein; moved from Nauvoo in the spring of 1846; built the ferry boat at Council Bluffs; arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 1, 1851; was appointed a bishop April 6, 1856; am the father of 15 sons and 15 daughters; this picture taken on my 70th birthday; presented to my daughter Clara Olivia Kesler.

(signed) F. Kesler

"A Statement on the Back of One of the Photographs of Bishop Frederick Kesler, Given by Him to His Daughter Clara Olivia Kesler," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Saw Abrahamic parchments in Joseph's possession; also present when Joseph placed original manuscript of Book of Mormon in cornerstone of Nauvoo House.

[Kesler] became acquainted with Joseph Smith, the Prophet, in 1839, and was intimately acquainted with him from that time until his martyrdom. He often viewed the records of Abraham, which were in the possession of the Prophet. These were written by Abraham's own hand on parchment in Egyptian characters. Too, he was present when the Prophet deposited the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon.

In "Reminiscences, by Donnette Smith Kesler, The Wife of Alonzo Pratt Kesler," Elbert C. Kirkham Company, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1952, multilithed, 91.

Searches out Joseph Smith, impressed by the Latter-day Saints; last time he saw Joseph he was on Jo Duncan, rode by and blessed the Legion.

During the summer of 1839 Kesler first became aware of the Latter-day Saints: "This strange people as I thought they may be were located in a place called Commerce, a place 20 miles distant from where I lived." Intrigued, he soon journeyed to their community and introduced himself to Joseph Smith and other leading men. He was "Greatly surprised in finding them a very intelligent people and that they believed in and taught the same doctrine and principles that were taught by Christ and His apostles, and all their doctrines were founded on the Bible." Overwhelmed and inspired, the Keslers were baptized in the Mississippi River at Nauvoo, Illinois, in June 1840. Although residing in the Augusta Branch of the church in Iowa, Kesler continued to make frequent visits to Nauvoo and became "quite intimate with . . . [Joseph Smith] as well as with his aged Father, Mother, Brothers and Sisters." At the conference held in Nauvoo in April 1842 Kesler was ordained an elder and by the following September had ventured east on his first Mormon mission.

Two years later, after his return to Iowa, Kesler was called to Nauvoo with thirty others to protect Joseph Smith from mob violence.

"On landing from the steamer in Nauvoo we were met and escorted by a Band of Music to the Head Quarters of the Nauvoo Legion. After congratulations we were assigned to quarters where we were made as comfortable as possible. The last time I saw our great leader and Prophet he passed by our quarters; he was on his favorite black horseJo [Duncan] and was dressed in his military costume. As he passed he bowed and said "God bless you, by brethren."

Kimberly Day, "Frederick Kesler, Utah Craftsman," Utah Historical Quarterly 56, no. 1 (winter 1988): 57-58. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.
