Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Kimball, Heber C.

(June 14, 1801-June 22, 1862)

Tells of organization of first high council in this dispensation.

During my stay here [Kirtland] and on the 17th February 1834, a general council of twenty four High Priests assembled at the house of Joseph Smith jr., by revelation, and proceeded to organize the High Council of the Church of Christ, which was to consist of twelve High Priests. The number composing the council who voted in the name of and for the church in appointing these councilors were forty three, as follows; nine high priests, seventeen elders, four priests, and thirteen members. During this time I received much precious instruction concerning the order of the kingdom.

Heber C. Kimball, "Extracts from H. C. Kimball's Journal," Times and Seasons 6, no. 1 (15 January 1845): 771.

Because of rebellious spirit in Zion's Camp Joseph prophesies misfortune and difficulty to befall camp; in fulfillment, camp horses founder; Joseph promises that horses of those who humble themselves will be restored to health, and it is so.

This night a spy from the enemy attempted to get into our camp but was stopped by the guard. We had our sentinels or guards appointed every night, on account of spies continually harassing us. On this evening there was quite a difficulty between some of the brethren and Sylvester Smith, on occasion of which brother Joseph was called to decide the matter. Finding quite a rebellious spirit in Sylvester Smith, and to some extent in others, he said that they would meet with misfortunes, difficulties and hindrances, "and you will know it before you leave this place"; exhorting them to humble themselves before the Lord and become united, that they might not be scourged. A very singular occurrence took place that night, and the next day concerning our teams. On the following morning when we arose we found almost every horse in the camp so badly foundered that we could scarce lead them a few rods to the water. The brethren then deeply realized the effects of discord. When brother Joseph learned the fact he exclaimed to the brethren, that for a witness that God overruled and had his eye upon them, that all those who would humble themselves before the Lord, should know that the hand of God was in this misfortune, and their horses should be restored to health immediately, and by twelve o'clock the same day the horses were as nimble as ever, with the exception of one of Sylvester Smith's which soon afterwards died.

Heber C. Kimball, "Extracts from H. C. Kimball's Journal," Times and Seasons 6, no. 1 (15 January 1845): 772.

On Zion's Camp the brethren find skeletal remains of a man with an arrow lodged in his ribs; Joseph inquires of God, sees vision, learns they are the remains of a Lamanites named Zelph, who fought in last great battle between Lamanites and Nephites.

On Tuesday the 3rd [of June, 1834], we went up, several of us, with Joseph Smith jr. to the top of a mound on the bank of the Illinois river, which was several hundred feet above the river, and from the summit of which we had a pleasant view of the surrounding country: we could overlook the tops of the trees, on to the meadow or prairie on each side the river as far as our eyes could extend, which was one of the most pleasant scenes I ever beheld. On the top of this mound there was the appearance of three altars, which had been built of stone, one above another, according to the ancient order; and the ground was strewn over with human bones. This caused in us very peculiar feelings, to see the bones of our fellow creatures scattered in this manner, who had been slain in ages past. We felt prompted to dig down into the mound, and sending for a shovel and hoe, we proceeded to move away the earth. At about one foot deep we discovered the skeleton of a man, almost entire; and between two of his ribs we found an Indian arrow, which had evidently been the cause of his death. We took the leg and thigh bones and carried them along with us to Clay county. All four appeared sound. Elder Brigham Young has yet the arrow in his possession. It is a common thing to find bones thus drenching upon the earth in this country.

The same day, we pursued our journey.While on our way we felt anxious to know who the person was who had been killed by that arrow. It was made known to Joseph that he had been an officer who fell in battle, in the last destruction among the Lamanites, and his name was Zelph. This caused us to rejoice much, to think that God was so mindful of us as to show these things to his servant. Brother Joseph had enquired of the Lord and it was made known in a vision.

"Extracts from H. C. Kimball's Journal," Times and Seasons 6, no. 2 (4 February 1845): 788; see also Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 46-47.

Joseph prophesies scourge to visit Zion's Camp; warns against unchristian conduct; gives specific warning to Sylvester Smith.

This day, June 3rd [1834], while we were refreshing ourselves and teams, about the middle of the day, Brother Joseph got up in a wagon and said, that he would deliver a prophecy. After giving the brethren much good advice, exhorting them to faithfulness and humility, he said, the Lord had told him that there would a scourge come upon the camp, in consequences of the fractious and unruly spirits that appeared among them and they should die like sheep with the rot; still if they would repent and humble themselves before the Lord, the scourge in a great measure might be turned away; but, as the Lord lives, this camp will suffer for giving way to their unruly temper, which afterwards actually did take place to the sorrow of the brethren.

The same day when we had got within one mile of the Snye, we came to a very beautiful little town called Atlas. Here we found honey for the first time on our journey, that we could buy; we purchased about two thirds of a barrel. We went down to the Snye and crossed over that night in a ferry boat. We camped for the night on the bank of the Snye. There was a great excitement in the country through which we had passed, and also ahead of us; the mob threatened to stop us. Guns were fired in almost all directions through the night.Brother Joseph did not sleep much, if any, but was through the camp, pretty much during the night.

We pursued our journey on the 4th [of June, 1834], and camped on the bank of the Mississippi River. Here we were somewhat afflicted and the enemy threatened much that we should not cross over the river out of Illinois into Missouri. It took us two days to cross the river, as we had but one ferry boat, and the river was one mile and a half wide. While some were crossing many others spent their time in hunting and fishing, & c. When we had got over, we camped about one mile back from the little town of Louisiana, in a beautiful oak grove, which is immediately on the bank of the river. At this place there was some feelings of hostility manifested again by Sylvester Smith, in consequence of a dog growling at him while he was marching his company up to the camp, he being the last that came over the river. The next morning Brother Joseph said that he would descend to the spirit that was manifested by some of the brethren, to let them see the folly of their wickedness. He rose up and commenced speaking, by saying, "if any man insults me, or abuses me, I will stand in my own defense at the expense of my life; and if a dog growl at me, I will let him know that I am his master." At this moment Sylvester Smith, who had just returned from where he had turned out his horses to feed, came up, and hearing Brother Joseph make those remarks, said, "If that dog bites me, I'll kill him." Brother Joseph turned to Sylvester and said, "If you kill that dog, I'll whip you," and then went on to show the brethren how wicked and unchristian like such conduct appeared before the eyes of truth and justice.

"Extracts from H. C. Kimball's Journal," Times and Seasons 6, no. 2 (4 February 1845): 788-89.

Joseph warns brethren on Zion's Camp that because of discord, a curse will come, and he can not prevent it.

Here Brother Thayre was taken sick with the cholera, and also Brother Hayes. We left them there, and also Brother Hancock who had been taken with the cholera during the storm. Brother Joseph called the camp together, and told us that in consequence of the disobedience of some who had not been willing to listen to his words, but had been rebellious, God had decreed that sickness should come upon us, and we should die like sheep with the rot; and said he, "I am sorry, but I cannot help it." When he spoke these things it pierced me like a dart, having a testimony that so it would be. In the afternoon of this day, we began to receive the revelation known as the "Fishing River revelation." (D&C 105, given June 22, 1834; see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 2:108-11).

"Extracts from H. C. Kimball's Journal," Times and Seasons 6, no. 3 (15 February 1845): 804.

The first time Joseph heard someone speak in tongues Brigham was the speaker; Joseph confirmed it was a divine gift, and then spoke himself in tongues.

We received the gift of tongues and interpretation a few days after we were baptized. The brethren who brought the Gospel to us belonged to the first Branch of the Church that received the gift of tongues, and the Branch at Mendon was the next. Brothers Brigham and Joseph Young and myself went of Kirtland, with my horses and wagon, to visit the Prophet, a distance of three hundred miles. We saw Brother Joseph Smith and had a glorious time; during which Brother Brigham spoke in tongues before Brother Joseph, it being the first time he had heard any one speak in tongues; he testified that the gift was from God, and spoke in tongues himself. Soon the gift of tongues became general in the Church in Kirtland. We had a precious season and returned with a blessing in our souls.

"Heber C. Kimball Journal," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 34 (20 August 1864): 535; see also Helen Mar Whitney, "Life's Incidents," Woman's Exponent 9, no. 5 (1 August 1880): 39.

Joseph sued; Heber's wagon his conveyance for five successive days.

Joseph was sued before a magistrate's court in Painesville on a vexatious suit. I carried him from Kirtland to Painesville, with four or five others, in my wagon every morning for five days, and brought them back in the evening. We were often waylaid, but managed to elude our enemies by rapid driving and taking different roads. Esq. Bissell defended the Prophet.

"Heber C. Kimball Journal," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 34 (20 August 1864): 535.

While on Zion's Camp Col. Sconce of the Missouri Militia comes to the camp; Sconce seized with "a trembling'; listens to Joseph speak, and is mollified, and he and his men speak in favor of the Mormons. Some of the brethren stricken with cholera.

On the 21st [of June, 1834] Colonel Sconce and two other leading men from Ray County came to see us, desiring to know what our intentions were, "for," said he, "I see that there is an almighty power that protects this people, for I started from Richmond, Ray County, with a company of armed men, having a fixed determination to destroy you, but was kept back by the storm and was not able to reach you." When he came into camp he was seized with such a trembling that he was obliged to sit down in order to compose himself. When he desired to know what our intentions were, Brother Joseph arose and began to speak; and the power of God rested upon him. He gave a relation of the sufferings of our people in Jackson County, and also many of our persecutions and what we had suffered from our enemies for our religion; and that we had come one thousand miles to assist our brethren, to bring them clothing, and to reinstate them upon their own lands; that we had no intentions to molest or injure any people, but only to administer to the wants of our afflicted brethren; and that the evil reports which were circulated about us were false, and were circulated by our enemies to get us destroyed.

After he had finished speaking, the power of which melted them into compassion, they arose and offered him their hands, and said they would use their influence to allay the excitement which everywhere prevailed against us. They accordingly went forth and rode day and night to pacify the people. They wept because they saw we were an afflicted people, and that our intentions were pure.

The next day the sheriff of that county, named Neil Gilliam, came to deliver a short address to us. We formed into companies and marched into a grove a little distance from the camp, and there formed ourselves into a circle, and sat down upon the ground. Previous to Mr. Gilliam's address he (Gilliam) said, "I have heard much concerning Joseph Smith, and I have been informed that he is in your camp; if he is here I would like to see him." Brother Joseph arose and said "I am the man." This was the first time he was made known during the journey of one thousand miles. Mr. Gilliam then arose and gave us some instructions concerning the manners and customs of the people, their disposition, etc., and what course we should take in order to gain their favor and protection.

. . . Here Brothers Ezra Thayer and Thomas Hayes were taken sick with the cholera. We left them there, and also Brother Joseph Hancock, who had been taken with the cholera during the storm, and who was the first person attacked with it. Brother Joseph called the camp together, and told us that in consequence of the disobedience of some who had not been willing to listen to his words, but had been rebellious, God had decreed that sickness should come upon us, and we should die like sheep with the rot; and said he, "I am sorry, but I cannot help it." When he spake these things it pierced me like a dart, having a testimony that so it would be.

Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 53-56.

The scourge (cholera) on Zion's Camp a punishment because of disobedience; repentance could modify, but not avert, the calamity.

During our journey there was murmuring and complaining, and in some instances there was rebellion in the camp against the counsels of President Smith who prophesied that the Lord had prepared a scourge for the camp, and that the destroyer should be in our midst, and many should die like sheep with the rot; he further said, "Repentance may modify the calamity, but not altogether avert it; the members of the camp will be scourged for their wickedness."

"Heber C. Kimball Journal," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 34 (20 August 1864): 536.

The Lord told Joseph Zion's Camp was an acceptable offering; brethren return home.

On the 22d, Brother Joseph received a revelation, saying that the Lord had accepted our offering even as he accepted that of Abraham, therefore he had a great blessing laid up in store for us, and an endowment for all, and those who had families might return home, and those who had no families should tarry until the Lord said they should go.

"Heber C. Kimball Journal," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 35 (27 August 1864): 551.

Heber's simple story about the faith of his daughter touches Joseph to tears.

A certain number were appointed to speak at each meeting. On one occasion I was called upon to speak on the principle of faith. Several brethren spoke before me, and quoted every passage mentioned in the Scriptures on the subject. I referred to an original circumstance which took place in my family. My daughter had broken a saucer; her mother promised her a whipping, when she returned from a visit on which she was just starting; she went out under an apple tree and prayed that her mother's heart might be softened, and when she returned she might not whip her; although her mother was very punctual when she made a promise to her children to fulfill it, yet when she returned she had no disposition to chastise her child. Afterwards the child told her mother that she had prayed to God that she might not whip her.

Joseph wept like a child on hearing this simple narrative and its application.

"Heber C. Kimball Journal," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 36 (3 September 1864): 568.

Joseph calls Heber to mission in England; fearful, Heber asks that Brigham join him; John F. Boynton ridiculed him for going, but others encouraged and blessed him; set apart and blessed by the presidency to do a great work.

On Sunday, the 4th day of June, 1837, the Prophet Joseph came to me, while I was seated in front of the stand, above the sacrament table, on the Melchizedek side of the Temple, in Kirtland, and whispering to me, said, "Brother Heber, the Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me: 'Let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim my Gospel, and open the door of salvation to that nation.'"

Feeling my weakness to go upon such an errand, I asked the Prophet if Brother Brigham might go with me. He replied that he wanted Brother Brigham to stay with him, for he had something else for him to do. The idea of such a mission was almost more than I could bear up under. I was almost ready to sink under the burden which was placed upon me.

However, all these considerations did not deter me from the path of duty; the moment I understood the will of my Heavenly Father, I felt a determination to go at all hazards, believing that He would support me by His almighty power, and endow me with every qualification that I needed; and although my family was dear to me, and I should have to leave them almost destitute, I felt that the cause of truth, the Gospel of Christ, outweighed every other consideration.

At this time many faltered in their faith; even some of the Twelve were in rebellion against the Prophet of God. John F. Boynton said to me, "If you are such a fool as to go at the call of the fallen prophet, Joseph Smith, I will not help you a dime, and if you are cast on Van Dieman's land, I will not make an effort to help you." Lyman E. Johnson said he did not want me to go on my mission, but if I was determined to go, he would help me all he could; he took his cloak from off his back and put it on mine; which was the first cloak I ever had.

Brothers Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith, Sen., Brigham Young, Newel K. Whitney and others said, "Go and do as the Prophet has told you, and you shall prosper and be blessed with power to do a glorious work." Hyrum, seeing the condition of the Church, when he talked about my mission, wept like a little child; he was continually blessing and encouraging me, and pouring out his soul in prophecies upon my head; he said: "Go, and you shall prosper as not many have prospered.'"

The Presidency laid their hands on me and set me apart to preside over the mission, and conferred great blessings upon my head; said that God would make me mighty in that nation in winning souls unto Him; angels should accompany me and bear me up, that my feet should never slip; that I should be mightily blessed and prove a source of salvation to thousands, not only in England but America.

Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 103-5.

Note: For a companion account, see "Vilate Kimball Autobiography," in Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall, 1877), 113.

En route to British mission, Heber dreams of Joseph, who gives comfort and directions.

While crossing the sea I dreamed that the Prophet Joseph came to me while I was standing upon the forecastle of the ship, and said, "Brother Heber, here is a rod (putting it into my hands) with which you are to guide the ship; while you hold this rod, you shall prosper and there shall be no obstacles thrown before you, but what you shall have power to over come, and the hand of God shall be with you;" after this I discovered every kind of obstruction would be placed before the trip to stop its progress, but the bow being sharp, the obstacles were compelled to move out one side like a bulrush, and when the ship would come to a mountain, it would plow its course right through, as though it was in water. This rod which Joseph gave me was about three and a half feet in length. His appearance was just as natural as I ever beheld him in the flesh he blessed me and disappeared.

"Heber C. Kimball Journal," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 38 (17 September 1864): 599.

Tells of evening meeting on the day he first met Joseph; Brigham and Joseph spoke in Adamic tongue.

"We saw brother Joseph Smith and had a glorious time; during which Brother Brigham spoke in tongues before Joseph, this being the first time he had heard anyone speak in tongues. He rose up and testified that the gift was from God, and then the gift fell upon him and he spoke in tongues himself. He afterwards declared it was the pure, or Adamic language that he spoke. Soon after this the gift of tongues commenced in the Church at Kirtland generally. We had a precious season and returned with a blessing in our souls."

Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 28-29.

Joseph, Oliver, and others see John the Beloved during dedication of Kirtland Temple.

While these things [i.e., the endowment of the First Presidency and the Twelve] were being attended to the beloved disciple John was seen in our midst by the Prophet Joseph, Oliver Cowdery and others. After this all the quorums arose in order, together with the three Presidencies; and the Twelve then presented themselves separately and individually before the First Presidency, with hands uplifted towards heaven, and asked of God whatever they felt to desire; and after each individual petition the whole of the quorums answered aloud Amen! Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna! To God and the Lamb, forever and ever, amen and amen!

Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 92.

During dedication of Kirtland temple, Joseph sees Twelve on missions; they struggle, and are weary; Jesus stands in their midst but they do not see Him; he also sees Father Adam open the gate to the celestial kingdom.

He [Joseph Smith] saw the Twelve going forth, and they appeared to be in a far distant land. After some time they unexpectedly met together, apparently in great tribulation, their clothes all ragged, and their knees and feet sore. They formed into a circle, and all stood with their eyes fixed upon the ground. The Savior appeared and stood in their midst and wept over them, and wanted to show Himself to them, but they did not discover Him. He [Joseph] saw until they had accomplished their work, and arrived at the gate of the celestial city; there Father Adam stood and opened the gate to them, and as they entered he embraced them one by one and kissed them. He then led them to the throne of God, and then the Savior embraced each one of them and kissed them, and crowned each one of them in the presence of God. He saw that they all had beautiful heads of hair and all looked alike. The impression this vision left on Brother Joseph's mind was of so acute a nature, that he never could refrain from weeping while rehearsing it.

Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 93-94; see also Helen Mar Whitney, "Life Incidents," Woman's Exponent 9, no. 17 (1 February 1881): 190.

Note: The Prophet records this vision in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 2:381, but here Heber adds the doctrinal detail that Father Adam was also in the vision, and that Adam admitted them into the Kingdom, and then led them into the presence of God. See also Journal of Discourses, 9:41.

On first seeing site of Nauvoo, Heber prophesied it was "not a long abiding home" for the Saints; Rigdon offended, but Joseph was amused.

Heber's first visit to Commerce was on Sunday, the 12th of May [1839]. On the 25th he again went up the river, with several others of the Twelve, and spent the day in council with Joseph and the brethren. While on the water, standing by the railing of the boat, gazing in admiration at the beautiful site of Nauvoo, Heber observed: "It is a very pretty place, but not a long abiding home for the Saints."

This remark was carried to the ears of Elder Rigdon and his family, who were comfortably quartered in a nice stone house built by Dr. Isaac Galland, from whom the Saints had purchased some of their lands. Heber's reputation as a prophet was by this time pretty well established in Israel, and Sidney who had had about as much persecution as he could stand, and was in nowise hankering after a repetition of the Missouri scenes, was considerably alarmed at his words, dreading their prophetic potency. At the council, which was held at the house of the Prophet Joseph, Sidney remarked that he had some feelings against Elder Kimball, and then, referring to the prediction of the latter in relation to the city of the Saints, said, petulantly:

"I should suppose that Elder Kimball had passed through sufferings and privations and mobbings and drivings enough, to learn to prophesy good concerning Israel."

With a mixture of meekness and humor, Heber replied:

"President Rigdon, I'll prophesy good concerning you all the timeif you can get it."

The retort amused Joseph, who laughed heartily with the brethren, and Elder Rigdon yielded the point.

Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 256-57; see also "Heber C. Kimball Journal," in Helen Mar Whitney, "Life Incidents," Women's Exponent 9, no. 3 (1 July 1880): 18.

Joseph confides in Heber, and tells of a face to face confrontation with Satan which occurred in Far West.

One day while visiting Joseph, he took me for a walk by the river side, when he requested me to relate the occurrence at Brother Bozier's. After I had done so, I also told him of our vision of the evil spirits in England, on the opening of the Gospel to that people. He then gave me a relation of many contests that he had had with Satan, and his power that had been manifested from time to time since the commencement of bringing forth the Book of Mormon. I will relate one circumstance that took place at Far West, in a house that Joseph had purchased, which had been formerly occupied as a public house by some wicked people. A short time after he got into it, one of his children was taken very sick; he laid his hands upon the child, when it got better; as soon as he went out of doors, the child was taken sick again; he again laid his hands upon it, so that it again recovered. This occurred several times, when Joseph inquired of the Lord what it all meant; then he had an open vision, and saw the devil in person, who contended with Joseph, face to face, for some time. He said it was his house, it belonged to him, and Joseph had no right there. Then Joseph rebuked Satan in the name of the Lord, and he departed and touched the child no more.

Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 258-59; see also Isabella M. Johnson, "Isaac Russell," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Heber tells Joseph he was attacked by evil spirits, and Joseph rejoiced, for it was an evidence the brethren were making inroads against Satan and the work progressing.

One day . . . my father [Heber C. Kimball] was visiting the Prophet. In his diary he says: "He took me a walk by the river side and requested me to relate the occurrence at the Bozier house. I did so, and also told him the vision of evil spirits in England on the opening of the Gospel to that people. After I had done this, I asked what all these things meant and whether or no there was anything wrong in me. "No Brother Heber, at that time when you were in England, you was then nigh unto the Lord. There was only a vail between you and Him, but you could not see Him. When I heard it, it gave me great joy, for I then knew that the work of God had taken root in the land; it was this that caused the Devil to make a struggle to kill you." Joseph then said, the nearer a person approaches the Lord, a greater power would be manifest by the Devil to prevent the accomplishment of the purposes of God. He than gave me a relation of many contests that he had had with Satan, and his power had been made manifest from time to time since the commencement of bringing forth the Book of Mormon."

Helen Mar Whitney, "Heber C. Kimball Journal," in "Life Incidents," Woman's Exponent 9, no. 3 (1 July 1880): 18; see also Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 131-32.

William E. McLellin challenges Heber's faith; Heber testifies of Joseph Smith.

Among the mob who surrounded the brethren [in Missouri] were men who had once professed to be beloved brethren. They had piloted the mobs into the city, two of the first Twelve Apostles and two of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon and many others were led by Neil Gillium, a white man who was painted and styled himself the "Delaware Chief." A portion of the troops were also painted like Indians. They pointed their guns upon the brethren and swore they would blow out their brains, although they were disarmed and helpless. William E. McLellin wanted to know where Heber C. Kimball was, when someone pointed him out as he was sitting on the ground. He came up to him and said: "Brother Heber, what do you think of Joseph Smith the fallen prophet now? Has he not led you blindfolded long enough; look and see yourself, poor, your family stripped and robbed and your brethren in the same fix, are you satisfied with Joseph?" He replied, "Yes, I am more satisfied with him, a hundred fold, than ever I was before, for I see you in the very position that he foretold you would be in; a Judas to betray your brethren, if you did not forsake your adultery, lying and abominations. Where are you and Hinkle and scores of others; have you not betrayed Joseph and his brethren into the hands of the mob, as Judas did Jesus? Yes, verily you have; I tell you Mormonism is true, and Joseph is a true prophet of the living God, and you with all others who turn therefrom will be d___d and go to h__l and Judas will rule over you."

Helen Mar Whitney, "Early Reminiscences," Woman's Exponent 9, no. 1 (1 June 1880): 5.

Rising from his sick-bed, Joseph crosses the river to Montrose and heals many; Elijah Fordham miraculously healed; gives handkerchief to Wilford Woodruff, commissions him to act in his name; others are healed by Wilford's administration.

July 22nd [1839], the Prophet Joseph arose from his bed of sickness, when the power of God rested upon him, and he went forth administering to the sick. He commenced with the sick in his own house, then visited those who were camping in tents in his own door yard, commanding the sick in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to arise from their beds and be whole; when they were healed according to his words. He then went from house to house, and from tent to tent, upon the bank of the river, healing the sick by the power of Israel's God, as he went among them. He did not miss a single house, wagon or tent, and continued this work up to "the upper stone house," where he crossed the river in a boat, accompanied by Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, John Taylor and myself, and landed at Montrose. He then walked into the cabin of Brother Brigham Young, who was lying very sick, and commanded him in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to arise and be made whole. He arose, healed of his sickness, and then accompanied Joseph and his brethren of the Twelve, and went into the house of Brother Elijah Fordham, who was insensible, and considered by his family and friends to be in the hands of death. Joseph stepped to his bedside, looked him in the eye for a minute without speaking, then took him by the hand and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to arise from his bed and walk. Brother Fordham immediately leaped out of his bed, threw off all his poultices and bandages, dressed himself, called for a bowl of bread and milk, which he ate, and then followed us into the street. We then went into the house of Joseph B. Noble, who was also very sick, and he was healed in the same manner.

Joseph spoke with the voice and power of God.

When he had healed all the sick by the power given unto him he went down to the ferry boat, when a stranger rode up almost breathless, and said that he had heard that Joseph Smith was raising the dead, and healing all of the sick, and his wife begged him to ride up and get Mr. Smith to go down and heal her twin children, about three months old. Joseph replied, "I cannot go, but will send someone." In a few minutes he said to Elder Woodruff, "You go and heal those children, and take this pocket handkerchief, and when you administer to them, wipe their faces with it, and they shall recover." Brother Woodruff did as he was commanded, and the children were healed.

The mob spirits, when they saw men whom they thought were dying, arise from their beds, and pray for others, stood paralyzed with fear; yet those same men would have killed Joseph and his brethren if they had had an opportunity. Joseph recrossed the river to his own home and I returned to mine, rejoicing in the mercies and goodness of God. This was a day never to be forgotten by the Saints; nor by the wicked; for they saw the power of God manifest in the flesh.

Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 262-64.

At Adam-ondi-Ahman Joseph shows Heber, Brigham, and others place where Adam offered sacrifices.

[At Adam-ondi-Ahman] The Prophet Joseph called upon Brother Brigham, myself and others, saying, "Brethren, come, go along with me, and I will show you something." He led us a short distance to a place where were the ruins of three altars built of stone, one above the other, and one standing a little back of the other, like unto the pulpits in the Kirtland Temple, representing the order of three grades of Priesthood; "There," said Joseph, "is the place where Adam offered up sacrifice after he was cast out of the garden." The altar stood at the highest point of the bluff. I went and examined the place several times while I remained there.

Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 209-10.

Joseph requests Heber to preach, and tell of his mission; the Saints are uplifted.

Sunday, July 29th [1838] I met Joseph, Sidney and Hyrum on the public square, as they started for Adam-ondi-Ahman, Joseph requested me to preach to the Saints and give them a history of my mission, saying it would revive their spirits and do them good, which I did, although I was hardly able to stand. I related many things respecting my mission and travels, which were gladly received by them, whose hearts were cheered by the recital, while many of the elders were stirred up to diligence and expressed a great desire to accompany me when I should return to England.

Helen Mar Whitney, "Heber C. Kimball Journal," Woman's Exponent 10, no. 2 (15 June 1881): 9.

On mission in England, Heber sees Queen Victoria, as Joseph had prophesied.

It seems that prior to starting on this mission, Heber had been promised by the Prophet that he should see the Queen of England. The fulfillment occurred as follows: On the 26th of January [1841] Victoria opened the British Parliament. Apostles Kimball and Woodruff, with Dr. Copeland and several other friends, started out for the purpose of witnessing the royal pageant. Arriving at St. James' Park at 10 a.m., they beheld an immense concourse of people, extending in two unbroken lines from Buckingham Palace to the House of Lords. It was estimated that from three to four hundred thousand people were assembled. Through the courtesy of one of the Queen's life-guardsand no small favor was it on that day. Heber and his party succeeded in getting a place in the front line, past which the grand procession was to move. The royal cortege passed within ten feet of where they stood, so that they obtained a fair view of Her Majesty, both going to and returning from the Houses of Parliament. The Queen sat in a gorgeous state carriage, drawn by eight cream-colored horses, richly caparisoned. At her left hand sat Albert, the Prince Consort. Following were six carriages, each drawn by six horses, containing members of the royal family, lords and nobles.

Says Heber: "We saw her, as the Prophet Joseph had told us. She made a low bow to us, and we returned the compliment. She looked pleasant, small of stature, with blue eyes, an innocent looking woman. Prince Albert is a fine looking man. All things went on pleasantly. No accidents."

Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 304-5.

When Joseph introduced principle of plural marriage, he asked Heber that his wife Vilate be Joseph as a plural wife; in a great test of faith, Heber and Vilate prove faithful.

A startling innovation, a test designed to try, as never before, the faith and integrity of God's people now came upon them. Not in the shape of fire and sword, nor toilsome pilgrimage, nor pestilence, nor wealth, nor poverty. Ah! no; something far different from these, and far more difficult to bear.

A grand and glorious principle had been revealed, and for years had slumbered in the breast of God's Prophet, awaiting the time when, with safety to himself and the Church, it might be confided to the sacred keeping of a chosen few. That time had now come. An angel with a flaming sword descended from the courts of glory and, confronting the Prophet, commanded him in the name of the Lord to establish the principle so long concealed from the knowledge of the Saints and of the worldthat of plural marriage.

Well knew the youthful Prophet the danger of his task. Well knew he the peril and penalty of disobedience. Fearing God, not man, he bowed to the inevitable, and laid his lifeaye, was it not so?upon the altar of duty and devotion.

Among those to whom Joseph confided this great secret, even before it was committed to writing, was his bosom friend, Heber C. Kimball. Well knowing the integrity of his heart, so many times tested and found true, he felt that he ran no risk in opening to Heber's eyes the treasured mysteries of his mighty soul.

But why careful, among so many friends, to select only a few as the recipients of such a favor? Would not the Saints have died to a man in defense of their ProphetGod's seer and revelator? Alas, none knew so well as Joseph the frailty of man, the inherent weakness and wickedness of the human heart.

"Many men," said he, "will say, 'I will never forsake you, but will stand by you at all times.' But the moment you teach them some of the mysteries of the kingdom of God that are retained in the heavens, and are to be revealed to the children of men when they are prepared for them, they will be the first to stone you and put you to death."

"It was this same principle that crucified the Lord Jesus Christ, and will cause the people to kill the prophets in this generation."

What! would even the Saints have so done? Did not some of those who were Saints then, so do?

Had not Joseph said many timesare not men now living who heard him say: "Would to God, brethren, I could tell you who I am! Would to God I could tell you what I know! But you would call it blasphemy, and there are men upon this stand who would want to take my life."

"If the Church, said he, "knew all the commandments, one-half they would reject through prejudice and ignorance."

No wonder, then, that he should choose his confidants, for their sakes no less than his own. For these also are Joseph's words:

"When God offers a blessing, or knowledge to a man, and he refuses to receive it, he will be damned."

Revelation is ever the iconoclast of tradition, and such is the bigotry of man, his natural hatred of the new and strange, as opposed to his personal interests or private views, that the very lives of those whose mission is to introduce and establish new doctrines, though designed as a blessing to humanity, are ever in danger from those whose traditions would thus be uprooted and destroyed.

Joseph was not a coward. It was he who said that a coward could not be saved in the kingdom of God. But neither was he lacking in caution, especially when warned of the Lord of the necessity for its exercise. Therefore, was he now revealing, to a chosen few, whom God had prepared to receive what he should tell them, one of the grand principles of the everlasting Gospel, "unlawful to be uttered" to the multitude, yet one day to be thundered from the house-tops in the ears of all living, with many other mighty truths locked in the treasure house of future time, of which eternity still holds the key.

Before he would trust even Heber with the full secret, however, he put him to a test which few men would have been able to bear.

It was no less than a requirement for him to surrender his wife, his beloved Vilate, and give her to Joseph in marriage!

The astounding revelation well-nigh paralyzed him. He could hardly believe he had heard aright. Yet Joseph was solemnly in earnest. His next impulse was to spurn the proposition, and perhaps at that terrible moment a vague suspicion of the Prophet's motive and the divinity of the revelation, shot like a poisoned arrow through his soul.

But only for a moment, if at all, was such a thought, such a suspicion entertained. He knew Joseph too well, as a man, a friend, a brother, a servant of God, to doubt his truth or the divine origin of the behest he had made. No, Joseph was God's Prophet, His mouthpiece and oracle, and so long as he was so, his words were as the words of the Eternal One to Heber C. Kimball. His heart-strings might be torn, his feelings crucified and sawn asunder, but so long as his faith in God and the Priesthood remained, heaven helping him, he would try and do as he was told. Such, now, was his superhuman resolve.

Three days he fasted and wept and prayed. Then, with a broken and a bleeding heart, but with soul selfmastered for the sacrifice, he led his darling wife to the Prophet's house and presented her to Joseph.

It was enoughthe heavens accepted the sacrifice. The will for the deed was taken, and "accounted unto him for righteousness." Joseph wept at this proof of devotion, and embracing Heber, told him that was all that the Lord required. He had proved him, as a child of Abraham, that he would "do the works of Abraham," holding back nothing, but laying all upon the altar for God's glory.

The Prophet joined the hands of the heroic and devoted pair, and then and there, by virtue of the sealing power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, Heber and Vilate Kimball were made husband and wife for all eternity.

Heber's crucial test was in part over. Vilate's trial was yet to come. The principle of celestial marriage was now known to them, so far as their own eternal covenant was concerned, but the doctrine of plurality of wives which it involves, was yet to be revealed. How Heber and Vilate received and embraced this feature of the principle is thus tenderly told by their daughter Helen:

"My mother often told me that she could not doubt the plural order of marriage was of God, for the Lord had revealed it to her in answer to prayer.

"In Nauvoo, shortly after his return from England, my father, among others of his brethren, was taught the plural wife doctrine, and was told by Joseph, the Prophet, three times, to go and take a certain woman as his wife; but not till he commanded him in the name of the Lord did he obey. At the same time Joseph told him not to divulge this secret, not even to my mother, for fear that she would not receive it; for his life was in constant jeopardy, not only from outside influences and enemies, who were seeking some plea to take him back to Missouri, but from false brethren who had crept like snakes into his bosom and then betrayed him.

"My father realized the situation fully, and the love and reverence he bore for the Prophet were so great that he would sooner have laid down his life than have betrayed him. This was one of the greatest tests of his faith he had ever experienced. The thought of deceiving the kind and faithful wife of his youth, whom he loved with all his heart, and who with him had borne so patiently their separations, and all the trials and sacrifices they had been called to endure, was more than he felt able to bear.

"He realized not only the addition of trouble and perplexity that such a step must bring upon him, but his sorrow and misery were increased by the thought of my mother hearing of it from some other source, which would no doubt separate them, and he shrank from the thought of such a thing, or of causing her any unhappiness. Finally he was so tried that he went to Joseph and told him how he feltthat he was fearful if he took such a step he could not stand, but would be overcome. The Prophet, full of sympathy for him, went and inquired of the Lord. His answer was, 'Tell him to go and do as he has been commanded, and if I see that there is any danger of his apostatizing, I will take him to myself.'

"The fact that he had to be commanded three times to do this thing shows that the trial must have been extra-ordinary, for he was a man who, from the first, had yielded implicit obedience to every requirement of the Prophet.

"When first hearing the principle taught, believing that he would be called upon to enter into it, he had thought of two elderly ladies named Pitkin, great friends of my mother's who, he believed, would cause her little, if any, unhappiness. But the woman he was commanded to take was an English lady named Sarah Noon, nearer my mother's age, who came over with the company of Saints in the same ship in which father and Brother Brigham returned from Europe. She had been married and was the mother of two little girls, but left her husband on account of his drunken and dissolute habits. Father was told to take her as his wife and provide for her and her children, and he did so.

"My mother had noticed a change in his manner and appearance, and when she inquired the cause, he tried to evade her questions. At last he promised he would tell her after a while, if she would only wait. This trouble so worked upon his mind that his anxious and haggard looks betrayed him daily and hourly, and finally his misery became so unbearable that it was impossible to control his feelings. He became sick in body, but his mental wretchedness was too great to allow of his retiring, and he would walk the floor till nearly morning, and sometimes the agony of his mind was so terrible that he would wring his hands and weep like a child, and beseech the Lord to be merciful and reveal to her this principle, for he himself could not break his vow of secrecy.

"The anguish of their hearts was indescribable, and when she found it was useless to beseech him longer, she retired to her room and bowed before the Lord and poured out her soul in prayer to Him who hath said: 'If any lack wisdom let him ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not.' My father's heart was raised at the same time in supplication. While pleading as one would plead for life, the vision of her mind was opened, and, as darkness flees before the morning sun, so did her sorrow and the groveling things of earth vanish away.

"Before her was illustrated the order of celestial marriage, in all its beauty and glory, together with the great exaltation and honor it would confer upon her in that immortal and celestial sphere, if she would accept it and stand in her place by her husband's side. She also saw the woman he had taken to wife, and contemplated with joy the vast and boundless love and union which this order would bring about as well as the increase of her husband's kingdoms, and the power and glory extending throughout the eternities, worlds without end.

"With a countenance beaming with joy, for she was filled with the Spirit of God, she returned to my father, saying: 'Heber, what you kept from me the Lord has shown me.' She told me she never saw so happy a man as father was when she described the vision and told him she was satisfied and knew it was from God.

"She covenanted to stand by him and honor the principle, which covenant she faithfully kept, and though her trials were often heavy and grevious to bear, she knew that father was also being tried, and her integrity was unflinching to the end. She gave my father many wives, and they always found in my mother a faithful friend."

Helen also refers in her narrative to the sensation caused in Nauvoo, one Sabbath morning, prior to the return of the Twelve from England, by a sermon of the Prophet's on "the restoration of all things," in which it was hinted that the patriarchal or plural order of marriage, as practiced by the ancients, would some day again be established. The excitement created by the bare suggestion was such that Joseph deemed it wisdom, in the afternoon, to modify his statement by saying that possibly the Spirit had made the time seem nearer than it really was, when such things would be restored.

These facts serve to show something of the nature and extent of the sacrifice made by the Saints, in accepting this principle, and likewise the pure, lofty, religious motives actuating both men and women who could thus heroically embrace a doctrine against whichas is generally the case with the gospel's higher principlestheir traditions and preconceived notions instinctively rebelled.

Soon after the revelation was given a golden link was forged whereby the houses of Heber and Joseph were indissolubly and forever joined. Helen Mar, the eldest daughter of Heber Chase and Vilate Murray Kimball, was given to the Prophet in the holy bonds of celestial marriage.

Footnotes

Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 321-28.

Heber sings in choir which gives the Prophet a New Year's serenade; Joseph blesses them for their music.

The first New Year's eve after the Prophet moved into the mansion, our choir, under the leadership of Stephen Goddard, to which I became a member some time previous, gave them a serenade.

We met at our usual place of practice, on the hill near the temple, and although the night was unfavorable, being dark and rainy, we, nothing daunted, started out between twelve and one o'clock, we struck up and sang the New Year's hymn. The inmates were highly gratified and the Prophet came out and invited us to come in; but being late, we declined. After singing one or two anthems he pronounced his blessing upon the orchestra and choir, which repaid the brethren and sisters for all their trouble.

In Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 11, no. 12 (15 November 1882): 90.

On a mission to promote the Prophet's candidacy for the presidency, Heber tells of a conversation between two judges about the Prophet as a candidate.

The following is from another letter dated June 4th [1844]. Father [Heber C. Kimball] says: "We went this morning to see Judge Samplehe is from Alton, Illinois. He appeared friendly while with him. There was another judge came in. Said he, 'Joe Smith has sent out fifty of his smartest men to preach hisdoctrine and to electioneer for him.' Said he had heard some of them preach and they were smart men. Judge Sample asked him if he had ever seen Joseph Smith. He answered he never had. 'Judge, he is a smart man,' said Sample. 'I have one of his "views" which is very good.' Said he, 'These men are some of his (Smith's) society.' 'Ah, indeed, are they? Will Smith get any votes in Illinois?' Said Judge Sample, 'They go strong in the west for him,' . . . It is all politics in the east. Congress has spent three days on it, but it seems all stuff to me. I cannot take any pleasure in these things any more than I can in the religion of the sects.

In Helen Mar Whitney, "Heber C. Kimball Letters, 1844," Woman's Exponent 11, no. 13 (1 December 1882): 98.

Joseph gave all the priesthood and keys he held to the Twelve.

[President Brigham Young] has the same authority that brother Joseph had. That authority was in the Twelve, and since brother Joseph stepped behind the veil, brother Brigham is his lawful successor. I bear testimony of what brother Joseph said on the stand at Nauvoo, and I presume hundreds here can bear witness of the same. Said he, "These men that are set here behind me on this stand, I have conferred upon them all the power, Priesthood, and authority that God ever conferred upon me." There are hundreds present this day who heard him utter words to that effect, more than once.

Journal of Discourses, 1:206 (October 8, 1852); see also George Q. Cannon, Journal of Discourses, 23:362-63.

Joseph: "Yankee doodle do it."

Now let us go to work, every one of us, and pull together, and put means into the hands of the Trustee-in-trust, pay up our tithing, and then if we have a surplus which we do not want to put out to usury now, put it in the hands of the Trustee-in-trust. Go to work, not only next spring, but now make preparations, and let us build a temple. What say you? I do not want you to say yes, unless you calculate to do it, but, as brother Joseph used to say, "Yankee doodle do it." Now go to work, and do the thing right up, and when next fall comes to pass, let us see the walls of the temple erected, and the roof on it. What say you?

Journal of Discourses, 1:357 (November 14, 1852).

Joseph laid foundation; others to build thereon.

When Jesus lived on the earth, he ordained and organized a Quorum of Twelve Apostles, and said to them, "I have laid the foundation, and you must build the house." Joseph Smith did the same; he made choice of Twelve Apostles, and ordained them, and said, "I have laid the foundation, and you may build upon it, you may rear the house;" and these very persons are the ones who will lead you through into the celestial world, and they will be at your head all the time.

Journal of Discourses, 3:20-21 (April 18, 1852).

Joseph exercised faith to believe his revelations.

I have heard Joseph say many times, that he was much tempted about the revelations the Lord gave through himit seemed to be so impossible for them to be fulfilled. I do not profess to be a Prophet; but I know that every man and woman can be, if they live for it. To enjoy this blessing they must walk in the channel of the Priesthood, being subject to the order and government of heaven; . . .

Journal of Discourses, 3:112 (March 19, 1854); see also Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 391-92.

Joseph's vision of war, bloodshed; war to be poured out in America, Europe, Asia, and isles of sea.

Three days before the Prophet Joseph started for Carthage, I well remember his telling us we should see the fulfillment of the words of Jesus upon the earth, where he says the father shall be against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother-in-law against the daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law against the mother-in-law; and when a man's enemies shall be those of his own household.

The Prophet stood in his own house when he told several of us of the night the visions of heaven were opened to him, in which he saw the American continent drenched in blood, and he saw nation rising up against nation. He also saw the father shed the blood of the son, and the son the blood of the father; the mother put to death the daughter, and the daughter the mother; and natural affection forsook the hearts of the wicked; for he saw that the Spirit of God should be withdrawn from the inhabitants of the earth, in consequence of which there should be blood upon the face of the whole earth, except among the people of the Most High. The Prophet gazed upon the scene his vision presented, until his heart sickened, and he besought the Lord to close it up again.

When we hear of war in foreign landswhen we hear of the revolutions among nations afar off, we necessarily infer that distresses incident to war and the hottest of the battle will not come nigh unto us. It is natural for man to make favorable conclusions as to his own safety, when danger threatens, but the Prophet saw in the vision, that war and distress of nations will not only occur in Europe, in Asia, and in the islands of the sea, but he saw it upon the American Continentin the region of country where he first introduced the doctrine of the Son of God; so we may look for calamity in our own borders, in our own nation, as well as in the nations of foreign climes.

Journal of Discourses, 2:147 (April 2, 1854); see also Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 8:325.

Complainers not to be exalted.

No man or woman has taken a proper stephas pursued a course that is according to the mind and will of God, but what it is for his or her exaltation in his kingdom. Suppose they have pursued a right course, and suffered a little in doing so, and then complain about it, will they enter into their exaltation? I tell you, No. Joseph said they would not, and brother Brigham has said they will not, and God has said they will not.

Journal of Discourses, 6:325 (April 6, 1854).

Joseph got nervous before speaking to the Saints

I recollect often hearing brother Joseph say that many times his legs trembled like Belshazzar's when he got up to speak before the world, and before the Saints

Journal of Discourses, 2:220 (September 17, 1854).

Many healed at Montrose.

As to the circumstance brother Grant was speaking of in Montrose, I was with brother Joseph, and so was brother Brigham and many others, and hundreds were healed, and leaped out of their beds, and followed us. If you do not believe it, call on many of those that were sick nigh unto death at that time, and are now living in these valleys, enjoying good health. How many sick have been healed in old England?

. . . I wanted to bear testimony, in connection with brother Grant, of the truth of his statements with regard to the healing power of God manifested in Montrose, for I went with the Prophet, and am an eye-witness. Has not this Gospel the same power it had eighteen hundred years ago? It has, for God has renewed it unto us, and conveyed it to us through Joseph Smith, by the ministration of an angel.

Journal of Discourses, 2:233-34 (December 17, 1854); see also Jedediah M. Grant, Journal of Discourses, 2:232.

The closer we live celestial law, the greater the opposition.

When I related to brother Joseph the view I had of certain evil spirits in England, he said, that the closer we observe the celestial law, the more opposition we shall meet.

Journal of Discourses, 3:261 (June 10, 1855).

Saints warned to care for grain.

You have been warned before hand, and that by revelation from God through Joseph Smith, and afterward through brother Brigham who is our Prophet, you have been warned, time and time again, to take care of your grain. In future build yourselves good store-houses and save your grain for a time of famine, and sickness, and death upon the nations of the wicked, to get rid of the evil doers. I have noticed those predictions, I have reflected upon them ever since they were told us.

Journal of Discourses, 3:227 (March 2, 1856); see also Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, 4:339.

Heber attacked by evil spirits; Joseph says it is an evidence the work is true; he then tells of his own contests with the devil.

[Heber C. Kimball spoke of his missionary service in England, and of he and his companions being attacked by evil spirits while there.] The next morning I was so weak that I could scarcely stand, so great was the effect that those spirits had upon me. I wrote a few words to my wife about the matter, and brother Joseph called upon her for the letter and said, "It was a choice jewel, and a testimony that the Gospel was planted in a strange land."

When I returned home I called upon bother Joseph, and we walked down the bank of the river. He there told me what contests he had had with the devil; he told me that he had contests with the devil, face to face. He also told me how he was handled and afflicted by the devil, and said, he had known circumstances where Elder Rigdon was pulled out of bed three times in one night. After all this some persons will say to me, that there are no evil spirits. I tell you they are thicker than the "Mormons" are in this country, but the Lord has said that there are more for us than there can be against us. "Who are they," says one? Righteous men who have been upon the earth.

Journal of Discourses, 3:229-30 (March 2, 1856).

Loss of confidence in church leaders leads to apostasy.

I will give you a key which brother Joseph Smith used to give in Nauvoo. He said, that the very step of apostasy commenced with losing confidence in the leaders of this Church and kingdom, and that whenever you discerned that spirit, you might know that it would lead the possessor of it on the road of apostasy.

Journal of Discourses, 3:270 (March 23, 1856).

Modern prophets descendants of ancient prophets.

Now, I will refer to brother Brigham, brother Heber, brother Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Bishop N. K. Whitney, and lots of other men. Brother Joseph actually saw those men in vision; he saw us in a day when we were all together. We have been separated by marriage and thrown apart; but he saw the day when we all came out of one stock, and that was out of the aristocracy. Yes, we came directly down through the Prophets, and not only us, but lots of othersthe whole Smith race. I could remember probably twenty or thirty that Joseph mentioned came down through that channel.

My father's father and his brothers intermixed by marriage with the Smiths, and uncle John Smith was baptized in Nauvoo for upwards of twenty of my kindred. They mixed up in marriage, and in that way the names became changed; for they were the old veterans.

There is another thing that brother Joseph saidviz., that we were positively heirs of the Priesthood; for he had seen us as such in his vision; yes, just as much so as my children are that have been born since I received my endowment. Our fathers were heirs to that Priesthood, which was handed down from father to son, and we came through that lineage. . . .

Joseph told us these things, and I know them to be true. I know them by the revelations of Jesus Christ, and so do a great many men. We are and we were heirs when we were called and ordained to the Apostleship: we were of that class; yes, we were the sons and daughters of those that came down through that lineage.

Journal of Discourses, 5:215-16 (September 6, 1856).

Volumes of Nephite records in Cumorah; Jackson County site of Eden and New Jerusalem.

Brother Mills mentioned in his song, that crossing the Plains with hand-carts was one of the greatest events that ever transpired in this Church. I will admit that it is an important event, successfully testing another method for gathering Israel, but its importance is small in comparison with the visitation of the angel of God to the Prophet Joseph, and with the reception of the sacred records from the hand of Moroni at the hill Cumorah.

How does it compare with the vision that Joseph and others had, when they went into a cave in the hill Cumorah, and saw more records than ten men could carry? There were books piled up on tables, book upon book. Those records this people will yet have, if they accept of the Book of Mormon and observe its precepts, and keep the commandments.

Again, how does it contrast with Joseph's being sent forth with his brethren to search out a location in Jackson County, where the New Jerusalem will be built, where our Father and our God planted the first garden on this earth, and where the New Jerusalem will come to when it comes down from heaven?

I mention these few things by way of contrast with the hand-cart operation; they are events that I have heard Joseph speak of, time and time again.

Journal of Discourses, 4:105-6 (September 28, 1856).

Joseph taught righteousness, reproved wrongdoing.

Brother Joseph Smith many a time said to brother Brigham and myself, and to others, that he was a representative of God to us, to teach and direct us and reprove the wrong doers. He has past behind the veil, but there never will a person in this dispensation enter into the celestial glory without his approbation.

Journal of Discourses, 4:119 (October 5, 1856).

Joseph working for the benefit of the Saints even after death and while in the spirit world.

(President Jedediah M. Grant was quite sick, and could hardly speak. Heber C. Kimball laid hands on his head and blessed him, that his lungs might breathe easier. ) In two or three minutes he raised himself up and talked for about an hour as busily as he could, telling me what he had seen and what he understood, until I was afraid he would weary himself, when I arose and left him.

He said to me, brother Heber, I have been into the spirit world two nights in succession, and, of all the dreads that ever came across me, the worst was to have to again return to my body, through I had to do it. But O, says he, the order and government that were there! When in the spirit world, I saw the order of righteous men and women; beheld them organized in their several grades, and there appeared to be no obstruction to my vision; I could see every man and woman in their grade and order. I looked to see whether there was any disorder there, but there was none; neither could I see any death nor any darkness, disorder or confusion. He said that the people he there saw were organized in family capacities; and when he looked at them he saw grade after grade, and all were organized and in perfect harmony. He would mention one item after another and say, "Why, it is just as brother Brigham says it is; it is just as he has told us many a time."

That is a testimony as to the truth of what brother Brigham teaches us, and I know it is true, from what little light I have.

He saw the righteous gathered together in the spirit world, and there were no wicked spirits among them. He saw his wife; she was the first person that came to him. He saw many that he knew, but did not have conversation with any except his wife Caroline. She came to him, and he said that she looked beautiful and had their little child, that died on the Plains, in her arms, and said, "Mr. Grant, here is little Margaret; you know that the wolves ate her up, but it did not hurt her; here she is all right."

"To my astonishment," he said, "when I looked at families there was a deficiency in some, there was a lack, for I saw families that would not be permitted to come and dwell together, because they had not honored their calling here."

He asked his wife Caroline where Joseph and Hyrum and Father Smith and others were; she replied, "they have gone away ahead, to perform and transact business for us." The same as when brother Brigham and his brethren left Winter Quarters and came here to

Journal of Discourses, 4:135-36 (December 4, 1856).

Chatburn, England, dedicated by ancient prophets; their blessings fell upon Heber C. Kimball.

Nearly twenty years ago, I was in a place in England in which I felt very curious; but I did not know at the time what it meant. I went through a town called Chatburn, beyond Clithero. Before I went there, some persons told me that there was no use in my going, and asked me what I wanted to go to Chatburn for, saying it was the worst place in the country; for the sectarian priests had preached there faithfully thirty years without making any impression. Notwithstanding that, I went, and preached once, and baptized twenty-five persons, where the priests had not been able to do a thing.

I went through the streets of that town feeling as I never before felt in my life. My hair would rise on my head as I walked through the streets, and I did not then know what was the matter with me. I pulled off my hat, and felt that I wanted to pull off my shoes, and I did not know what to think of it.

When I returned, I mentioned the circumstance to brother Joseph, who said, "Did you not understand it? That is a place where some of the old Prophets traveled and dedicated that land, and their blessing fell upon you."

Journal of Discourses, 5:22 (April 6, 1857); see also Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, 5:22; 6:190; Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 186-87.

People to gather to Zion by hundreds and thousands.

Our Carrying Company is only in its infancy, but it will prepare the way; and the day will come when people will gather here by hundreds and by thousands,yea, fifty thousand in a year; and very many will come trudging along with their bundles under their arms. I have heard brother Joseph, brother Brigham, and several other men say that it will be so; and I know it will, because they have said it. Many of you will venture to say that you believe it; but I know that it is true, and it will surely come to pass.

Journal of Discourses, 5:23 (April 6, 1857).

Joseph's difficulty in controlling the Saints, and then letting them do as they pleased.

I have heard Brother Brigham say that a Bishop now has more influence over his Ward than Joseph had over the Church in his day. Joseph could not so thoroughly control this people, for they were wild like bulls; but when he could not make them do what he wanted them to, he suffered them to do what they pleased.

Journal of Discourses, 4:333 (May 31, 1857).

Joseph approves of Heber's interpretation of "potter's clay."

I frequently talk about the clay in the hands of the potter. The Lord said to Jeremiah, "I will show you a thing that I cannot tell you. Go down to the potter's house, and I will be there, but you shall not see me; and I will make that potter mar a vessel." Jeremiah went down to the potter's house, and the Lord showed him the very thing he had promised; for the potter undertook to make a vessel, and the clay marred in his hands, and he cut it off the wheel and threw it into the mill; "and now," says he, "take it out again and shape it into a ball, and turn it into a vessel of honor." He did that very thing, though it is not written. The Scriptures say that out of the same lump he made a vessel first unto dishonor, and then unto honor.

I used to preach upon that in Nauvoo, and Joseph said it was the true interpretation.

Journal of Discourses, 5:273 (September 27, 1857).

Joseph never to sheath his sword again.

Joseph, when he was in Nauvoo, on the house top, drew his sword from the sheath and said it never should be sheathed again. Brother Brigham has said the same, and brother Heber will back him in it, and so will every officer in the kingdom of God.

Journal of Discourses, 6:37 (November 8, 1857).

Joseph laid the foundation, others to build thereon.

[Joseph Smith] . . . said many a time while he was living, "I am laying the foundation, and you, Brother Brigham, and your brethren the Twelve Apostles, with those who are connected with you in the holy Priesthood, will rear a great and mighty fabric upon it; you will bear off the kingdom." And so it will be.

Journal of Discourses, 11:95 (April 31, 1859).

Joseph compares himself to a rough stone.

Joseph Smith, in his day, used a similar comparison when speaking of men who are polished. He compared them to a smoothly-polished stone, which, when set to rolling, would lose all its fine polish, and turn up marred and bruised, without even leaving a line to mark its course. On the other hand, set a stone to rolling that is unpolished and rough from the mountain side, and it will do great execution in its course, and leave a visible path behind it, and become smoother as it rolls. Joseph compared himself to a rough stone. What is the use of polishing stones for building purposes before they are taken out of the mountains?

Journal of Discourses, 7:347-48 (January 1, 1860).

Joseph commanded to seek redress from government.

[The Lord] told the Prophet at one time to go forth with his brethren and importune for redress at the feet of the Governors and the Judges, and finally to the President of the United States, to give them the privilege of redressing their wrongs. The Lord then said, if they will not redress your wrongs, I will come out of my hiding-place, and in my hot displeasure I will vex those unjust judges that are placed at the head of the nation, and I will cut them off from the face of the earth, and I will appoint their portion to be with the hypocrites and with the unbelievers.

Journal of Discourses, 8:240 (November 25, 1860).

Heber and Brigham to sit in millennial council.

I heard Joseph say twice that brother Brigham and I should be in that council in Jerusalem, when there should be a uniting of the two divisions of God's government.

Journal of Discourses, 9:27 (April 7, 1861).

If Saints seek first the kingdom, abundance will follow.

For years I heard Joseph tell the people to put in their means to help, and he, under the direction of the Almighty, would push forward the work and make the people rich. But Joseph could not do it, for the people were not filled with the Spirit of revelation, but if the people would partake of the same attributes as the man who stands at their head, which they can do by living the religion of Jesus Christ, they will prosper abundantly.

Journal of Discourses, 9:266 (October 7, 1861).

Heber counseled to seek the Spirit.

When I was sent to England twenty-five years ago, I felt myself one of the very weakest of God's servants. I asked Joseph what I should say when I got there; he told me to go to the Lord and he would guide me, and speak through me by the same Spirit that dictated him. He also told brother Brigham when he got there he would know all about it. My experience is, the more I preach upon the first principles of the Gospel, the more I discovered limbs and branches of the subject I had never seen, leading to the fountain of life.

Journal of Discourses, 10:46-47 (May 4, 1862).

By advancing in knowledge God obtained godhood.

Joseph the Prophet said that our heavenly Father went on from one degree of knowledge to another until he obtained the knowledge that made him God. So also will it be with us, we shall have to advance from one degree of faith to another until we get that knowledge that will prepare us for exaltation in our Father's kingdom.

Journal of Discourses, 9:371 (February 9, 1862).

Joseph instructed Saints to work together, not independently; to give their all to build up Zion, and that if faithful, an endowment would be given them.

In regard to those independent companies [of Saints crossing the plains, which Brigham Young had previously] alluded to, I really do not know whether I would lead them or not. I know that the first company that I was gathered with, of which President Young has spoken to-day [see JD 10:19-23], and which embraced nearly all the male members there were in the Church, brother Joseph said, come brethren, bring your money with you and bring all you have. We gathered brethren from Nova Scotia and from all the States where we had any, and then we traveled forty miles in an independent condition, that is, every man had his money in his pocket and was calculating to have, but when we got to Portage, Joseph called upon that independent company and organized it with captains of hundreds, of fifties and tens, with officers to lead and control them. Then he nominated and we accepted a pay-master and treasurer, and every officer necessary to a permanent organization. Then he said, Brethren, I want you to come together, and bring your money with you. I do not want any donations, but I want every one to bring every cent he has got. Some had not any, some had a hundred dollars; some had a shilling, and the brethren handed over what they had to the pay-master. We were then taught that we should be subject to the law and government of God.

. . . This course of obedience is the one we have to take. Talk about building up the kingdom of God on the earth, how can you do it except you go to work with your might to practice as well as preach, and labor and toil with all your might by day and by night, and by this means every man in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will become independent. I was reflecting upon these things when brother Joseph brought things to terms. Then if we are ready to do as we are told, to follow the counsel of the servants of God, won't our offerings be accepted? I say they will.

When we went on that journey, Joseph told us there was an endowment laid up for us; for what? Because we had done just as we were told; and I can bear testimony that we received that endowment.

Journal of Discourses, 10:76 (October 6, 1862).

Joseph gives Heber a choice: get education or serve mission chooses mission and blessed; those who sought money lost the faith.

I recollect when we returned from our mission to Missouri, Joseph said, "Now, brethren, it is a good time to get property; now is the time for you to get rich." Well, it was one of the most trying times the Church ever saw. Most of the Twelve went into speculation, and half of them turned away. I went to Joseph and asked what I had best do, and he replied that it was a good time to get an education, or, said he, you may go a preaching, just as you please, and God will bless you in either. I went out preaching, and also some others, and some went to speculating, and we have never seen them since, excepting one or two of them. It was so with the ancient Apostles. When Jesus was crucified his disciples said, "Come, brethren, let us go a fishing," and off they went fishing. But they did not make much till Jesus came along by the sea side, made a fire and broiled some fish, and when he asked them if they had any meat, they answered him, No. Then he said unto them, cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find.

Journal of Discourses, 10:77-78 (October 6, 1862).

Must advance from one degree of knowledge to another to be saved.

Joseph the Prophet said that our heavenly Father went from one degree of knowledge to another until he obtained the knowledge that made him God. So will it be with us, we shall have to advance from one degree of faith to another until we get that knowledge that will prepare us for exaltation in our Father's kingdom.

"Remarks, President Heber C. Kimball, Feb. 9, 1862," Deseret News, 5 November 1862, 1.

Heber and Brigham acted as bodyguards to the Prophet in days of persecution.

We could not stay in Kirtland to make a permanent home there, although we succeeded in building a temple, and in it received our blessings from the Almighty. Here is President Young, myself and others that used to lie upon Joseph's floor every night to preserve his life from his enemies, and that too among the Presbyterians, Baptists, Methodists and devils, and there are a great many men and women who know it. We had to flee and leave all we had behind; brother Joseph, brother Brigham and many others, father Smith among the number, and some of us had to watch while Luke Johnson helped the old man out of the window.

"Remarks, President Heber C. Kimball, Feb. 9, 1862," Deseret News, 5 November 1862, 1.

Says Jesus wore woolen garments when he appeared to the Prophet Joseph, as did Peter, who also had a key in his hand.

Some of you have got an idea that wool will not do; but let me inform you that when Peter came and sat in the Temple in Kirtland and, he had on a neat woolen garment, nicely adjusted around the neck. What do sheep wear next the goat skin? Wool, of course. What do goats wear? Hair, for that is their nature. These are facts that are apparent to all who will look.

To return to the subject of the garments of the holy priesthood, I will say that the ones which Jesus had on when he appeared to the Prophet Joseph was neat and clean, and Peter had on the same kind, and he also had a key in his hand. John also came and administered unto Joseph Smith, and remember that Peter, James and John hold the keys pertaining to their dispensation and pertaining to this, and they came and conferred their priesthood and authority upon Joseph the Seer, which is for the gathering together of all who seek the way of life.

"Remarks, President Heber C. Kimball, Feb. 9, 1862," Deseret News, 5 November 1862, 1.

Joseph worked in stone quarry for Kirtland Temple.

We went and performed that journey [i.e., Zion's Camp], traveled two thousand miles in a little over three months. We walked forty miles per day when we were not hindered, we walked the entire journey there and back. Such as were designated by the Lord were permitted to return home to their families, but the single men were told by the Prophet to go and preach the Gospel in the country round about. When we arrived in Kirtland, Joseph said, "Come, brethren, let us go into the stone-quarry and work for the Lord." And the Prophet went himself, in his tow frock and tow breeches, and worked at quarrying stone like the rest of us.

Journal of Discourses, 10:165 (April 6, 1863).

Because Saints lacked faith, Joseph could not tell them more.

To refer again to what I know, what I have seen and experienced in my travels and my associations with the Prophet of the living God, I will remark that you have here with you a few of us that have traveled with him from the beginning, and we know his trials and sufferings, and we know that the greatest torment he had and the greatest mental suffering was because this people would not live up to their privileges. There were many things he desired to reveal that we have not learned yet, but he could not do it. He said sometimes that he felt pressed upon and as though he were pent up in an acorn shell, and all because the people did not and would not prepare themselves to receive the rich treasures of wisdom and knowledge that he had to impart. He could have revealed a great many things that we could not receive because we lacked that diligence and faithfulness that were necessary to entitle us to those choice things of the kingdom. He revealed the doctrine of celestial marriage, and the abuse of this holy principle caused many to stumble and fall away from the Church of the living God, but that was their own fault and they have nobody else to blame.

Journal of Discourses, 10:166-67 (April 6, 1863); see also Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, 10:233-34.

Joseph sent early missionaries without purse or scrip.

We went to preach without purse or scrip, and there were men around who were ever ready to strip our families of what little they did possess; some of them are now dead. We went forth almost sick unto death to preach the Gospel, and when we called on the brethren in Kirtland they would not give us a cent, because we were sick and looked pale and they said it was because the curse of God was upon us. They will have to reap the reward of that some day, while those who were kind to us will be rewarded of the Lord and be blessed with an exaltation in the kingdom of our God if they continue faithful. It was designed once in Nauvoo to raise a subscription for us, but Joseph said, "You shall not have a cent of it; you must go and make your own way;" but now the time is come when the Gospel is to be preached to all nations, and that, too, more quickly than it has ever been before, and it is the word of the Lord that we shall sustain the ministry at home.

Journal of Discourses, 10:168 (April 6, 1863).

Because Saints lacked faith, Joseph remained a sealed book.

There are quite a number of this congregation who knew Joseph Smith the Prophet, and he used to say in Nauvoo that when he came before the people he felt as though he were enclosed in an iron case, his mind was closed by the influences that were thrown around him; he was curtailed in his wishes and desires to do good; there was no room for him to expand, hence he could not make use of the revelations of God as he would have done; there was no room in the hearts of the people to receive the glorious truths of the Gospel that God revealed to him.

Journal of Discourses, 10:233-34 (June 27, 1863); see also Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, 10:166-67.

After death, must pass sentinels to enter presence of God.

I do not believe that we can emerge right into the presence of God, although we may see him, not in the flesh, but we can in the Spirit, if he touches the eyes of our understanding; but we cannot see him with these bodies of flesh. Joseph always told us that we would have to pass by sentinels that are placed between us and our Father and God. Then, of course, we are conducted along from this probation to other probations, or from one dispensation to another, by those who conducted those dispensations.

Journal of Discourses, 6:63 (November 22, 1863).

Witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

. . . in a grove some little distance east of the Temple . . . I was among the number that was obliged to stand, it being impossible for half of the congregation to be seated . . . I can bear witness, with hundreds of others who stood that day under the sound of Brigham's voice, of the wonderful and startling effect that it had upon us. If Joseph had risen from the dead and stood before them, it could hardly have made a deeper or more lasting impression. It was the very voice of Joseph himself. This was repeatedly spoken of by the Latter day Saints. And surely it was a most powerful and convincing testimony to them that he was the man, instead of Sidney Rigdon, that was destined to become the "great leader," and upon whose shoulders the mantle of Joseph had fallen.

In Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes in Nauvoo after the Martyrdom of the Prophet and Patriarch," Woman's Exponent 11, no. 17 (1 February 1883): 130.
