Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Kimball, Lucy Walker

(April 30, 1826-October 1, 1910)

Upon arrival in Nauvoo, Lucy's family is introduced to and dines with the Prophet and his family; her sick mother invited to spend a few days at the Prophet's home.

In the spring of 1841, father took his family to Nauvoo. My brother met us with an invitation to dinner, which we gladly accepted and were introduced to the Prophet and his wife, Emma, and the dear children who in after years I learned to love as my own brothers, and Julia, an adopted daughter, as my sister. During the summer mother was taken with chills and fever. At length, one after another of the children were attacked with the same disease until all were in a helpless condition. Mother was invited to spend a few days at the Prophet's house, they thinking a change would benefit her. But she could not be content away from her afflicted family. At her earnest solicitation, they sent her home to her family by placing a bed in a sleigh, as the summer had passed and it was now good sleighing; they covered her closely with blankets and, beside, sent many comforts to those at home, as they had often done during her stay.

My mother lingered until January, 1842, then passed away.

"Lucy Walker Kimball," in Lyman Omer Littlefield, "Reminiscences of Latter-day Saints" (Logan, Utah: The Utah Journal Co., 1888), 42-43.

Upon the death of Sister Walker, the Prophet counseled that the Walker children be placed with friends; offers his own home as a home to the Walkers; Lucy remembers Joseph and Emma for their kindness.

My father's health seemed to give way under this heavy affliction [i.e., the death of his wife, and the responsibility for ten children.] The Prophet came to our rescue. He said: "If you remain here, Brother Walker, you will soon follow your wife. You must have a change of scene, a change of climate. You have just such a family as I could love. My house shall be their home. I will adopt them as my own. For the present I would advise you to sell your effects, place the little ones with some kind friends, and the four eldest shall come to my house and be received and treated as my own children, and if I find the others are not content or not treated right, I will bring them home and keep them until you return." I wrung my hands in the agony of despair at the thought of being broken up as a family, and being separated from the loved ones. But said the Prophet, "My home shall be your home, eternally yours." I understood him not. However, my father sought to comfort us by saying two years would soon pass away, then with renewed health he hoped to return and make us a home where we might be together again.

Soon after he left, my sister Lydia, aged 8 years and 11 months, was attacked with brain fever. We had visited her several times and found that all that was done did not relieve her sufferings, and when we told the Prophet how very sick she was, he told the boys to put a bed in the carriage and he went with them. He told the family that they must excuse him, but he was under the greatest obligation to look after her welfare and had come to take her to his own house where he could see to her himself. He took her in his arms from the carriage and baptized her in the Mississippi River; but in a few days she too passed away. Everything that could be done was done. But she was to join her dear mother in the spirit world, and we were left more lonely than before.

Here allow me to say that our own father and mother could scarcely have done more or manifested greater solicitude for her recovery than did the Prophet and his wife Emma. They watched with us by her bedside and when all was over, accompanied us to her last resting place beside her mother. One after another were brought home until all the younger members of the family were there except the baby. Judge Adams and wife, of Springfield, Illinois, came to Nauvoo and desired one of the girls to live with them. We reluctantly consented for sister Jane to return with them, where she had a pleasant home until after their death, when she returned to Nauvoo.

"Lucy Walker Kimball," in Lyman O. Littlefield, "Reminiscences of Latter-day Saints" (Logan, Utah: The Utah Journal Co., 1888), 43-44.

Walker children treated as part of the Prophet's family; after the arrest at Dixon, Lorin Walker, who also lived with the Prophet, rode off to help free him from the officers.

My brother William married Miss Olive Hovey Farr, in the fall of 1843. They boarded at the mansion six months, then went to housekeeping and took the children with him. I begged the privilege of going with them! I thought it too great a task for his wife to assume so great a responsibility. The Prophet and his wife introduced us as their sons and daughters. Every privilege was accorded us in the home. Every pleasure within reach was ours. He often referred to Brother Lorin as his "Edwin." He was indeed his confidential and trusted friend. He was ever by his side; arm in arm they walked and conversed freely on various subjects. He was with him when he was arrested at Dixon by Wilson and Reynolds, who were determined to take him down the river into Missouri, but were foiled in this attempt. It was in this case "Uncle Billy" Rogers as he was familiarly called, made himself conspicuous in his defense; declared, with an oath, that they could not come there and kidnap a man and take him away in that manner. He said he would be dd if Smith should not have fair play. They were forced to take him through the state by way of Nauvoo. Brother Lorin hurried on home, brought his favorite horse Charley, and met him on foot, weary and covered with dust. He warmly embraced him, mounted his horse, and rode into Nauvoo. As they drew near the city, the people turned out en mass to greet him. Brother Lorin went with him to Springfield to attend his trial, and had the exquisite pleasure of seeing him acquitted.

"Lucy Walker Kimball," in Lyman O. Littlefield, "Reminiscences of Latter-day Saints" (Logan, Utah: The Utah Journal Co., 1888), 43-44.

Joseph takes in her brother; tells of meeting Joseph and his family; Joseph invites Walker family to live with him, and they do; tells of the kidnapping at Dixon, and of Joseph receiving the promise that he should live 5 more years; says she heard Joseph say he expected to seal his testimony with his blood; Joseph takes Lucy as plural wife, though she struggles through the decision; tells of her feelings and of the events at the martyrdom.

I will state here, however, that my father and second brother Loren, in the spring of 1840, [went] to attend conference and secure a home. At this conference Orson Hyde was called to go to Jerusalem. My father and brother called on the Prophet, in course of conversation, who said, "why not leave this boy with me until you return with your family?" He consented with the understanding that he would return and help him through harvesting. But when the time came the Prophet told him to write to father, to hire someone in his stead, and at this expense, as he could not part with him. In the spring of 41, father took his family to Nauvoo. My brother met us with an invitation to dinner, which we gladly accepted, and [we] were introduced to the Prophet and his wife, Emma, and the dear children who in after years, I learned to love as my own brothers, and Julia an adopted daughter, as my sister. During the summer mother was taken very sick with chills and fever, at length one after another was attacked with the same disease until all were in a helpless condition. Mother was urged to spend a few days at the Prophet's home, they believing a change would benefit her. But she could not be content away from her afflicted family. At her earnest solicitation they sent her home to her family by placing a bed in a sleigh, as the summer had passed and it was now good sleighing, covered her closely with blankets and beside, sent many comforts to those at home, as they had often done during her stay. . . .

[Then comes an account of the death of Lucy's mother, leaving behind 10 children, the youngest not yet 2.]

My father's health seemed to give away under this heavy affliction. The Prophet came to the rescue. He said, "if you remain here Brother Walker [you] will soon follow your wife. You must have a change of scene, a change of climate. You have just such a family as I could love. My house shall be their house. For the present. I would advise you to sell your effects, place the little ones with kind friends, and the four eldest shall come to my house and be received and treated as my own children, and if I find they, the little ones, are not content, or not treated right, I will bring them home and keep them until you return. I ring my hands in the agony of despair at the thought of being broken up as a family and being separated from the little ones. But," said the Prophet, "My home shall be your home eternallyYours," I understand him not. However, my father sought to comfort us by saying, two years would soon pass, when with renewed health he hoped to return and make us a home where we might be together again. Soon after he left, my sister Lydia, who was 8 years and 11 months old, was stricken with brain fever. We had visited here several times, in fact every week he would say "boys you can have the carriage today, take the girls to see how the children are." When we came in sight of the houses, we could not restrain our emotion, the tears rained down our faces all the while we were with themThe people often said they wished we would calm ourselves in their presence or not come to see them, as it made them discontented, but when we told the prophet how very sick Lydia was, he told the boys William, Loren, and Sis. Catharine to put a bed into the carriage and he went with them. And said to the family in charge, "you must excuse me but I am under the greatest obligations to look to her welfare and have come to take her home with me, where I can look after her myself." Instead of taking her into the house he told the boys to drive to the Mississippi River, then took her in his arms and baptized her, then brought in Sister Emma, noble woman that she was, helped change her clothingand all that loving hearts and willing hands could do was done. But a few days only she lingered, then joined her dear mother in the spirit world and we were left more lonely than before. Here let me say that our own father and mother could scarcely have manifest greater solicitude for the recovery than did the Prophet and his wife, Emma. They accompanied us to her last resting place beside her mother. One after another of the children were brought home until all the younger members except the baby was there. Judge Adams and wife of Springfield, Illinois, took great fancy to sister Jane and begged us to let them take her to their beautiful home as they had no little children. Very reluctantly we consented and she had a pleasant home until death claimed them both. The Judge died first, his wife soon followed, broken hearted.

Brother William married Miss Olive Farr and they remained at the mansion until he prepared a home, he then took the younger children with him and kept them until father returned. Sister Catharine and I went with them also, for a time, thinking it too much responsibility for the newly wedded wife. The Prophet and his wife introduced us as their sons and daughters, every privilege was accorded us in the home, every pleasure within reach was ours. He often referred to Bro. Loren as his "Edwin." He was indeed his confidential and trusted friend. He was ever by his side. Arm in arm they walked and conversed freely on various subjects of interests.

[Loren Walker] was with him when he was arrested at Dixon by Wilson and Reynolds, who were determined to take him down the river into Missouri, but were foiled in this attempt.

It was in this case "Uncle Billy" Roggers as he was familiarly called, made himself conspicuous in his defense, declared with an oath, that they could not come there and kidnap a man and take him away in that manner. [He] said he "would be d-d if Smith should not have fair play." They were forced to take him through the State by way of Nauvoo. Brother Loren hurried on home, brought his favorite horse Charley, and met him on foot, weary and covered with dust, [Joseph] warmly embraced him, mounted his horse and rode into Nauvoo. As they drew near the City the people turned out enmass to greet him. Brother Loren went with him to Springfield to attend his trial, and had the exquisite pleasure of seeing him acquitted. At the time he crossed the river and was actively making arrangements to go beyond the Rocky Mountains, he said "I have the promise of life for five years if I listen to the voice of the Spirit," but when Emma and some of his brethren besought him to return, he said, "if my life is worth nothing to you, it is worth nothing to me." He well knew it was in the program that he must sacrifice his life for the principles God had revealed through him. Death had no terror for him, although life was dear I have heard him say he expected to seal his testimony with his blood. He anticipated great joy in meeting his parents and friends beyond the grave. He often referred to the feelings that should exist between husband and wives, that they, his wives, should be his bosom companions, the nearest and dearest objects on earth in every sense of the word. He said men must beware how they treat their wives. They were given them for a holy purpose that the myriads of spirits waiting for tabernacles might have pure and healthy bodies. He also said many would awake in the morning of the resurrection sadly disappointed; for they, by transgression, would have neither wives nor children, for they surely would be taken from them, and given to those who had proven themselves worthy. And he said, a woman would have her choice, this was a privilege that could not be denied her.

In the year 1842, President Joseph Smith sought an interview with me, and said: "I have a message for you. I have been commanded of God to take another wife, and you are the woman." My astonishment knew no bounds. This announcement was indeed a thunderbolt to me. He asked me if I believed him to be a Prophet of God. "Most assuredly I do," I replied. He fully explained to me the principle of plural or celestial marriage. Said this principle was again to be restored for the benefit of the human family, that it would prove an everlasting blessing to my father's house, and form a chain that could never be broken, worlds without end." What have you to say?" he said. "If you will pray sincerely for light and understanding in relation thereto, you shall receive a testimony of the correctness of this principle." I thought I prayed sincerely, but was so unwilling to consider the matter favorably that I fear I did not pray in faith for light. Gross darkness instead of light took possession of my mind. I was tempted and tortured beyond endurance until life was undesirable. Oh that the grave would kindly receive me that I might find rest on the bosom of my dear mother." WhyWhy should I be chosen from among thy daughters, Father? I am only a child in years and experience. No mother to counsel; no father near to tell me what to do, in this trying hour. Oh let this bitter cup pass." And thus I prayed in the agony of my soul.

The Prophet discerned my sorrow. He saw how unhappy I was, and sought an opportunity of again speaking to me on this subject, and said: "Although I cannot under existing circumstances, acknowledge you as my wife, the time is near, when we will go beyond the Rocky Mountains and there you will be acknowledged and honored as my wife." He also said, "this principle will yet be believed in and practiced by the righteous. I have faltering words to offer, it is a command of God to you. I will give you until tomorrow to decide this matter. If you reject this message the gate will be closed forever against you." This aroused every drop of scotch in my veins; for a few moments I stood fearless before him and looked him in the eye. I felt at this moment that I was called to place myself upon the altar a living sacrifice, perhaps to brook the world in disgrace and incur the displeasure and contempt of my youthful companions. All my dreams of happiness [were] blown to the four winds, this was too much, the thought was unbearable, for as yet, no shadow had crossed my path, aside from the death of my dear mother and sister. The future to me had seemed one bright cloudless day. I had been speechless, but at last found utterance and said: Although you are a Prophet of God, you could not induce me to take a step of so great importance unless I knew that God approved my course. I would rather die. I have tried to pray but received no comfort, no light," and emphatically forbid him speaking again to me on this subject, every feeling of my soul revolted against it. Said I, "The same God who sent this message is the Being I have worshipped since my early childhood, and He must manifest His will to me." He walked across the room, returned and stood before me, with the most beautiful expression of countenance and said "God Almighty bless you. You shall have a manifestation of the will of God concerning you; a testimony that you can never deny. I will tell you what it shall be. It shall be that peace and joy that you never knew." Oh, how earnest I prayed for these words to be fulfilled. It was near dawn after another sleepless night. While on my knees in fervent supplication, my room became filled with a holy influence. To me it was in comparison like the brilliant sunshine bursting through the darkest cloud.

The words of the Prophet were indeed fulfilled. My soul was filled with a calm sweet peace that I never knew. Supreme happiness took possession of my whole being and I received a powerful and irresistible testimony of the truth of the marriage covenant called "Celestial or plural marriage." Which has been like an anchor to my soul through all the temptations and trials of life. I felt that I must go out into the morning air and give vent to the joy and gratitude that filled my soul. As I descended the stairs, Prest. Smith opened the door below, took me by the hand and said: "Thank God, you have the testimony. I too, have prayed." He led me to a chair, placed his hands upon my head, and blessed me with every blessing my heart could possibly desire. On the first day of May, 1843, I consented to become the wife of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and was sealed to him for time and all eternity, at his own home by Elder Wm. Clayton, on whom he conferred the authority. Today I have but one regret which is that I have not been a more worthy representative of the principle of plural marriage and that I have not lived a more perfect life. I also state that Emma Smith was present and did consent to Eliza and Emily Partridge, also Maria and Sarah Lawrence being sealed to her husband. This I have from his own lips, also the testimony of her niece.

Hyrum's eldest daughter, my brother Lorin's wife, said, to me, that Aunt Emma told her this, as well as the young ladies themselves, with whom I was on most intimate terms. Instead of jealousy I was delighted that they too, had accepted that order of marriage. I have witness her kindness toward these young ladies on different occasions. She certainly knew that he lived with them as his wives. But there came a time when she denied this, and fell into darkness. [She] denied this to her sons and caused them to turn against the revelations their father had receivedalthough young Joseph himself acknowledged to Oliver Huntington with whom he was on intimate terms in their boyhood days, and others that he knew his father has more wives than his mother. No one can possible feel more deeply to regret than I do, the course taken by the sons of President Joseph Smith, knowing that they have been misinformed. That it is through prejudice, through yielding to popular opinion that they have been misled. They might [be] heirs to their father's priesthood if they would take the proper steps, and honor the principles of salvation revealed through him, they might be called to occupy prominent positions in this dispensation to aid in forwarding the great work of redemption and aid in bringing in this dispensation to aid in forwarding the great work o redemption and aid in bringing every honest soul of every nation to a knowledge of the Gospel of the Son of God. O, that they had eyes to see and ears to hear the sound of the Gospel, and walk in the footsteps of their illustrious father. Knowing as I do that he was the grandest personage that has stood upon the earth since the days of our Savior. It would be impossible to be associated with him and not consider this fact. O, that God would in His boundless mercy. His matchless charity, withdraw the curtain and let but one ray from His magnificent countenance shine upon them, that like Saul of Tarsus, they might turn to God and become His apostlesin very deed, that they might also accept the testimonies given by those whose lives have been pure and spotless, who have sought to establish eternal principles, that will exalt the human race in the presence of God. How gladly we would have them in our midst, did they come in at the door as it [is] essential.

There are many who affect surprise that there is no issue from asserted plural marriages with the Prophet, could they but realize the hazardous life he lived, yet after that revelation was given, they would comprehend the reason. He was harassed and hounded and lived in constant fear of being betrayed by those who ought to have been true to him.

After his cruel martyrdom, the question with me was"what will be my destiny now?" At the earnest solicitation of Gen. Don Carlos Smith's widow, some time prior to Pres. Smith's death, Pres. Smith consented to me making my home with her, and she was as an elder sister to me. We had just retired on the night of 27th of June, when there came a loud rap at the door below. "News," I cried, and fled down stairs opened the door. A messenger quietly said "Joseph and Hyrum have been murdered." I seemed paralyzed with terror, had no power to speak or move. Agnes [Coolbrith Smith, widow of Don Carlos] called out "what is the news?" Receiving no answer, she came rushing down to learn the awful truth. When at length we returned to our chamber and on our bended knees poured out the anguish of our souls to that God who holds the destinies of his children in his own hands, for a time it seemed utterly impossible that He would allow His prophet to be slain by his foes.

Why not? His only begotten Son offered his life as a sacrifice. What did Joseph say when he gave himself up, at the solicitation of those who pled he would not forsake his flock: "If my life is worth nothing to you, it is worth nothing to me." He well knew what his destiny was when he gave up the plan of flying to the Rocky Mountains. How we pled that the Father would, as he had done fifty times before, save him from his foes. But he gave his life cheerfully to save the people. He had often said he would not die a natural death but by the hands of his enemies, that he made every preparation for this great sacrifice we well knew, as we called to mind his own words. Yet we felt unprepared for the blow, when it came. Never was such a night spent since the crucifixion of our Savior. The dogs barked, the cattle bellowed and all creation was astir. We kept by the open windows with our arms around each other, until the dawn, witnessing the terrible commotion and calling to mind His prophetic words. My soul sickens as I recall the anguish of the whole people as they crowded around his lifeless body and that of his noble brother Hyrum who was so true to him. How the world applauded at the awful deed. These words still ring in my ears, "Your cause is just, but we can do nothing for you."

. . . I have recently received a death notice of Robert Lomas who died in his 88th year at Bellvue who boasted of organizing and leading the raid to take the life of the Prophet; he is lauded to the skies, famous, etc.

"A Brief Biographical Sketch of the Life and Labors of Lucy Walker Kimball," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling, punctuation, and grammar have been modernized.

Testifies of Joseph Smith, and says she is grateful to have heard his voice.

Most gladly will I join with the remaining few whose privilege it was to be personally acquainted with the Prophet of the 19th Century, those who have looked with admiration upon his noble countenance, and listened to his prophetic utterances.

As the one hundredth anniversary of his birth draws near, our thoughts revert to his early manhood and boyhood and we marvel the wonderful work he accomplished during his brief life. From the time God heard his humble prayer, and suffered him in a vision to behold His face, Satan with all his hosts was arrayed against him. Contempt, reproach and ridicule were poured in black profusion o'er his youthful head as if to blast the bud of characterto wither reputation, ere it could be strengthened by maturing years. But what availed the malice of the world with him? He'd seen a heavenly vision, and heard the voice of the eternal god who cannot lie; and all the powers of darkness, speaking through the human tongue, could never teach him to unknow what he authentically knew. "His eyes had seen, his ears had heard, he'd felt the power of the Great Eternal One." Oh, how grateful am I that I listened to his voice, which, through earnest prayer and supplication, brought to my inmost soul the power of the Holy Spirit, and became the voice of God to me.

I rejoice in the onward march of the restored Gospelestablished by and through the Prophet of God for the redemption of the human race.

Lucy Walker Kimball, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 548-49.
