Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Barlow, Israel

(September 13, 1806-November 1, 1883)

Felt honored to help the Prophet, even in holding his stirrup or the bridle of his horse.

Israel was also a close friend and bodyguard of the Prophet Joseph Smith who was only nine months older than Israel. He said years later that it was "much pleasure to do anything for him. [I] felt it an honor to hold his stirrup or bridle of his horse" as the Prophet mounted.

Ora Haven Barlow, The Israel Barlow Story and Mormon Mores (Salt Lake City, Utah: Publishers Press, 1968), 24.

Israel's brother became a steward to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Jonathan Watson [Barlow] was the third child of Jonathan given the name of "Jonathan," although he was usually called Watson during his life. In 1838 this brother of Israel became a steward to the Prophet Joseph Smith in Missouri.

Ora Haven Barlow, The Israel Barlow Story and Mormon Mores (Salt Lake City, Utah: Publishers Press, 1968), 60.

Account of Barlow's first meeting the Prophet; he had heard of him and wanted to meet him, feeling certain that in doing so, he would know if Joseph was a prophet.

[Pages 96-97 of The Israel Barlow Story recount Samuel Smith's June 30, 1830, setting apart as a missionary, and of his subsequent taking of the Book of Mormon to John P. Greene, from whence it went to the Youngs. Then:] All of these Young brothers were close friends of Israel Barlow and his mother's family. No doubt they were friends before they became Mormons. . . .

There is little evidence that Brigham and Joseph at this time were instrumental in converting the Barlow family of Mendon. In fact, there is some tradition, oral and written information, to the contrary. For at this time two Mormon Elders, names unknown, visited the Barlow family in Mendon and told them about the restored gospel. No doubt the Book of Mormon was purchased and read, and the life of the young latter-day Prophet discussed, for Israel has been quoted by his son, Israel II, as having said, "If I could just see this Joseph Smith I think I could detect if he is a prophet." Israel was to make that opportunity come about, for Israel II also said that shortly thereafter his father drove in a buggy 200 miles and visited with the Prophet for a few days. After he talked with him two or three hours he said he knew that he was a Prophet of God.

Ora Haven Barlow, The Israel Barlow Story and Mormon Mores (Salt Lake City, Utah: Publishers Press, 1968), 97-98.

Note: Another version of this story reads: "I shall see this man and know for myself if he is a prophet" (see Ora Haven Barlow, The Israel Barlow Story and Mormon Mores [Salt Lake City, Utah: Publishers Press, 1968], 119).

Saw Joseph and Oliver after they had had a powerful spiritual experience; Oliver seemed weak, and Joseph said Oliver was not so used to it as he was.

The following Wednesday, 30 March 1836, at Kirtland was an important day in the life of Israel Barlow. He was a bodyguard, at times, of the Prophet who visited often in the Barlow home and spoke freely to Israel, Watson and other members of the family. It was, perhaps, just about dusk of that mid-week day when Israel, on his horse, was passing the Kirtland Temple and saw the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery coming out of the temple door and down the walk to the east. Israel drew up at the gate to speak to them. He was greatly impressed for the Prophet had on, so he thought, a very white suit while that of Oliver was black. Oliver was leaning heavily on the arm of Joseph and as he neared the gate Israel noticed that Oliver seemed very pale. At the same time he also noticed that Joseph's suit was not white but also black. Joseph, addressing Israel, said, "Brother Barlow, Oliver has just been blessed with a great manifestation and he is not used to this as I am, so it has been almost too much for him."

. . . In another version of this story the Prophet is said to have added to Israel, that they had just seen a heavenly vision and that on the next Sunday, April 3, he [Joseph] would deliver the "greatest sermon of my life."

Ora Haven Barlow, The Israel Barlow Story and Mormon Mores (Salt Lake City, Utah: Publishers Press, 1968), 113-14.

Note: For a comparable experience, see Philo Dibble, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 10 (15 May 1892): 303-4.

Joseph sends Israel on an errand, foretelling all that will happen: he should deliver a message, accept the hospitality of his hosts, dine with them, and at sundown saddle his horse and ride, following the promptings of the Spirit. When Barlow returned to Nauvoo, Joseph knew all that had happened.

My grandfather, Israel Barlow, was a very trusted bodyguard to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Shortly before the martyrdom (the exact date not being available), the Prophet called upon him and requested that he make a journey of many miles on horseback and deliver a message from the Prophet to a certain man who lived in a neighborhood of enemies to the Prophet and to the Latter-day Saints. He was asked to make special observations of what he might see and hear while on this mission.

It was a hazardous time in the history of the Church and the Prophet was constantly in jeopardy, not only from enemies without but within the Church. The Prophet told him to leave on this errand on a certain day early in the morning and ride to a certain man's home and there deliver the message. He was instructed to accept of their hospitality, which the Prophet Joseph assured him they would extend to him. "But," said the Prophet, "let them put your horse up for you and eat supper with them, but when it becomes sundown saddle your horse and leave. They will be insistent and try to persuade you to remain overnight, but if you value your life do not stay, but leave, and listen to the direction of the Spirit."

He left promptly at sundown and rode along the country road until it became dark. Just before he came to the river bridge, a voice said to grandfather, "Ride faster." He sped up his horse and the voice repeated again, and with more emphasis, "Ride faster." And again he increased the speed of the animal when the voice said to him, "Ride for your life." He then sped for all the animal's strength. As the horse's feet clattered across the bridge he could hear the mob, which had gathered in the brush to intercept him, cursing at the top of their voices. He had crossed the bridge but a short distance when the voice said to him: "Turn to the right," and he turned his horse off the road into the brush toward the river. There he stood in silence as the mob, who had mounted their horses, came racing over the bridge at break-neck speed, and down the road they went, supposedly after him.

After they had gone by he wound his way from the river's edge to the bed of the stream, and on through the willows. In the darkness he made his way along the river in the opposite direction from which the mob had expected him to go. Finally when he thought it was safe, several miles away, he emerged from the river and made his way over the country back into Nauvoo, just as the day was breaking.

There he saw the Prophet Joseph walking up and down the street in front of his home. As grandfather approached and alighted from his horse, he began to tell the Prophet of his experience. The Prophet stopped him and told him he need not tell him for he already knew. The Prophet told him that he had been up all night waiting for his return, and stated, "I saw it all; you have no need to tell me." Thereupon the Prophet laid his hand upon grandfather's shoulder and gave him a blessing and said: "Thee and thine shall never want."

Ora Haven Barlow, The Israel Barlow Story and Mormon Mores (Salt Lake City, Utah: Publishers Press, 1968), 194-95.

Note: Barlow family tradition and historical memoranda indicate the Prophet let Israel borrow his rifle shortly before the martyrdom and that this occurred following Israel's return from the mission here described, at which time Joseph also blessed him with the promise that he would always have descendants in the Church. "In a recent visit to 'Uncle Joe' (Joseph S. Barlow, one of Israel's descendants) in February, 1967, he was asked about these two items but he indicated that he had not heard of them in connection with this mission Israel undertook for the Prophet" (Ora Haven Barlow, The Israel Barlow Story and Mormon Mores [Salt Lake City, Utah: Publishers Press, 1968], 195).

Joseph told Israel to buy a whip on his next trip to town; he did so, and use of the whip later saved him from plunging down the quarry to his injury or death.

Upon another occasion my grandfather was assisting in the building of the Temple at Nauvoo and was driving a pair of beautiful high-spirited black mares. One day while backing his wagon in at the quarry which was down by the river's edge, the Prophet came over to him and said: "Israel, on your next trip, stop and buy yourself a buggy whip," to which grandfather assented. On his next trip up town he bought a buggy whip and returned for another load of rock. Backing the team in this time, he attempted to stop them as usual by saying, "Whoa," to which they paid no attention, but kept backing until Israel, in excitement, [he] was compelled to use the whip which the Prophet had told him to buy. The horses jumped forward and the wagon stopped right at the edge of the quarry, beyond which they would have plunged below.

Grandfather frequently told this story as an illustration of what obedience means. Grandfather accepted everything the Prophet Joseph Smith told him and never questioned "why?" Some would call this blind obedience, but not so. Israel Barlow knew full well the divine calling of the Prophet and bore that testimony to the day of his death.

Told by Joseph S. Barlow, and cited in Ora Haven Barlow, The Israel Barlow Story and Mormon Mores (Salt Lake City, Utah: Publishers Press, 1968), 195-96.
