Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Kimball, Mary Ellen

(b. October 5, 1818)

First meet Joseph in 1843; also saw him on the way to Carthage; Joseph stopped for a drink, and told Brother Rosecrans he loved him.

I first met the Prophet in the fall of 1843, at meeting, on the Temple ground. I believed him to be a true Prophet of God, and have never had a doubt, but feel more positive daily. I heard him preach often, and was highly gratified with his teaching.

I was never intimately acquainted with him, as our family lived five miles out of the city of Nauvoo, that is my mother and stepfather, Joseph Dunlap. But I spent a part of my time in the city at the house of Sister Clawson, mother of Bishop Hyrum Clawson.

The last time I saw the Prophet he was on his way to Carthage Jail. Himself and his brother Hyrum were on horseback, also Brothers John Taylor and Willard Richards. They stopped opposite Sister Clawson's house, at the house of Brother Rosecrans. We were on the porch. The streets of Nauvoo were narrow, and we could hear every word he said. He asked for a drink of water. They all took a drink. Some few remarks passed between them which I do not remember; but one sentence I well remember: after bidding good-bye, he said to Brother Rosecrans, "if I never see you again, or if I never come back, remember that I love you." This went through me like electricity. I went in the house and threw myself on the bed and wept like a whipped child. And why this grief for a person I had never spoken to in my life, I could not tell. I knew he was a servant of God, and only think of the danger he was in! and how deeply he felt it, for I could see that he looked pale!

But what could I do only pour out my soul in fervent prayer to our Father that He would take him under His kind care and protection as He had hitherto done; for in over 30 cases, he, the Prophet, had been liberated and set free, and why not as this time? But his enemies had ripened in wickedness and he in goodness.

Mary Ellen Kimball, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 16 (15 August 1892): 490-91.
