Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Kimball, Vilate Murray

(June 1, 1806-October 22, 1867)

Vilate Kimball tells of divine manifestations in the heavens on the night that Joseph received the plates from Moroni.

Here I will relate a marvelous incident, of date previous to our entering the Church.

On the night of the 22nd of September, 1827, while living in the town of Mendon, after we retired to bed, John P. Green, who was then a traveling Reformed Methodist preacher, living within one hundred steps of our house, came and called my husband to come out and see the sight in the heavens. Heber awoke me, and Sister Fanny Young (sister of Brigham), who was living with us, and we all went out-of- doors.

It was one of the most beautiful starlit nights so clear we could see to pick up a pin. We looked to the eastern horizon, and beheld a white smoke arise towards the heavens. As it ascended, it formed into a belt, and made a noise like the rushing wind, and continued southwest, forming a regular bow, dipping in the western horizon.

After the bow had formed, it began to widen out, growing transparent, of a bluish cast. It grew wide enough to contain twelve men abreast. In this bow an army moved, commencing from the east and marching to the west. They continued moving until they reached the western horizon. They moved in platoons, and walked so close the rear ranks trod in the steps of their file leaders, until the whole bow was literally crowded with soldiers.

We could distinctly see the muskets, bayonets and knapsacks of the men, who wore caps and feathers like those used by the American soldiers in the last war with Great Britain. We also saw their officers with their swords and equipage, and heard the clashing and jingling of their instruments of war, and could discern the form and features of the men. The most profound order existed throughout the entire army. When the foremost man stepped, every man stepped at the same time. We could hear their steps.

When the front rank reached the western horizon, a battle ensued, as we could hear the report of the arms, and the rush.

None can judge of our feelings as we beheld this army of spirits as plainly as ever armies of men were seen in the flesh. Every hair of our heads seemed alive.

We gazed upon this scenery for hours, until it began to disappear.

After we became acquainted with Mormonism, we learned that this took place the same evening that Joseph Smith received the records of the Book of Mormon from the angel Moroni, who had held those records in his possession.

Father Young, and John P. Green's wife (Brigham's sister Rhoda), were also witnesses of this marvelous scene. Frightened at what we saw, I said, "Father Young, what does all this mean?" He answered, "Why it is one of the signs of the coming of the Son of Man."

The next night a similar scene was beheld in the west, by the neighbors, representing armies of men engaged in battle.

"Vilate Kimball Autobiography (1806-1837)," in Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall, 1877), 107-9.

Spirit whispers to Joseph to send Heber on mission to England; Heber, confined to bed because of injured back, receives blessing from Joseph, is healed instantly.

One day while Heber was seated in the front stand in the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet Joseph opened the door and came and whispered in his ear, "Brother Heber, the Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me, let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim the gospel, and open the door of salvation." . . .

A short time previous to my husband's starting [for his first mission to England], he was prostrated on his bed from a stitch in his back, which suddenly seized him while chopping and drawing wood for his family, so that he could not stir a limb without exclaiming, from the severeness of the pain. Joseph Smith hearing of it came to see him, bringing Oliver Cowdery and Bishop Partridge with him. They prayed for and blessed him, Joseph being mouth, beseeching God to raise him up, and etc. He [Joseph Smith] then took him by the right hand and said, "Brother Heber, I take you by your right hand, in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and by virtue of the holy priesthood vested in me, I command you, in the name of Jesus Christ, to rise, and be thou made whole." He arose from his bed, put on his clothes, and started with them, and went up to the [Kirtland] temple, and felt no more of the pain afterwards.

"Vilate Kimball Autobiography (1806-1837)," in Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall, 1877), 113; see also Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945), 106.
