Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

King, Thomas Rice

(March 13, 1813-February 5, 1879)

Hid Joseph from mob in his home; also helped him cross the river to avoid mob; Joseph put his arm around King's neck and said "I have found another true friend" and then said he would take him to the Rockies where they would "eat fish and get fat"; again helped Joseph escape the mob; saw martyred bodies of Joseph and Hyrum.

[Sometime during or after the Summer of 1843] . . . brother Joseph the Prophet came to my house being hunted so hard by his enemies the mob that he could not remain at home with out falling into their hands. After staying in the neighborhood some days he came to me one evening about dusk & asked me if I could take them across the river. O. P. Rockwell was with him at the time. I said I could. We took a bye way down to the river by the old Apple orchard where they remained until I went up to the town (Montrose) to obtain a skiff to cross with. I found the town full of strangers (mobocrats) but after a little maneuvering I found a chance to speak to captain Davis unobserved. He gave me the keys & told me where to find the skiff & oars & said he must not be seen going to the skiff himself as he was being closely watched. After a little delay I managed to get away unobserved, & crossing then our landing near the little red house near the old printing office. Joseph went to Bishop Whitney, & from this home by some back way. About 2 O' clock A.M. we started back. O. P. Rockwell did not go back with me but A. M. Lyman did. As we came down the river to start back Brother Hyrum & several others came down to see us off.

We arrived home alright about 4 o'clock A.M. Bro. Joseph & A. M. Lyman went to Father Smith's but before they left me bro. Joseph put his arm around my neck & said "I have found another true friend & I will yet take you to the Rocky mountains where we will eat fish & get fat." The next day brother Joseph with some others were at my house. We discovered some horsemen coming very fast. We had barely time to escape to the corn field when they went up to the door & enquired for Joseph Smith. But the sisters knew nothing about him & they went [on to] Father Smith's. But meeting with no better success there [then follows an illegible line] Joseph considering it not safe to stay longer where he was went that night to the Island but I did not join with him. Some time about the 20th of June 1844 brother Joseph came again to our neighborhood & stoped at brother William Jordan's at this time it was arranged that Joseph should go north & his horse was brought over the river for his journey and I went at night thinking by morning he would be in safe retreat but Leaving the next day I heard that he had gone back to Nauvoo & gave himself up into the hands of his enemies. I cannot express the feelings I had at the time. The next time I saw brother Joseph he and brother Hyrum's bodies lay in state at the mansion house having been martyred for the testimony they bore.

Thomas Rice King, Genealogy of the King Family, Utah Territory, 1877, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 4-5. Spelling, punctuation, and grammar have been modernized.
