Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Kingsbury, Joseph Corroden

(May 2, 1812-October 15, 1898)

Ordained an elder by Joseph Smith; later, in Nauvoo, was employed as a clerk in Joseph's store; represented Joseph Smith in mock marriage ceremony.

I was about 18 or 19 years of age when I first heard of the new Revelation that was brought fourth by Joseph Smith Jr. from God, the BOOK OF MORMON.

I went to live with Newel K. Whitney in Kirtland, (9 miles from Painsville) who was one that embraced this new revelation & being here I gladly embraced the opportunity of going to meetings and believing all their testimonies. I went in obedience to the Command of God and was baptized on 15 Jan. 1832 by Elder Burr Riggs.

I remained in the service of Newel K. Whitney as a Clerk in his Store and endeavoring to do all I could to build up the Kingdom of and Cause of God which was the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. But the world gave us the name Mormons. And when some of the Elders were in council with President Joseph Smith Jr. the Lord gave a revelation to build a House unto His Name and when the Cornerstones were laid there were 24 Elders called upon to attend to the laying them, it being the 23 July 1833 the very day in the morning, I was ordained an Elder under the hands of President Joseph Smith, Jr. who was and is the President of the whole Church.

I remained with the Church here in Kirtland (where the Lord commanded His House to be built) in service of Newel K. Whitney endeavoring to do all I could for the Church and on the 18th day of Feb. 1835 I received a Patriarchal Blessing under the hands of Father Joseph Smith Sr. as follows: [Then follows the blessing]

. . . [tells of his marriage and birth of first son] I now sought diligently to obtain a livelihood & being blessed of the Lord we prospered both spiritually and temporally and the Fall of 1841 we moved over the river to Nauvoo (which was Commerce) and was employed in Joseph Smith's Store under the direction of Bishop Newel K. Whitney until the Fall of 1842.

On the 10th day of October my wife died after a severe sickness of 3 months and being delivered of a Son the same day of her death, which lived 13 hours. His name is Newel. . . .

. . . And on 29 April 1843, according to Pres. Joseph Smith and Council, I agreed to stand by Sarah Ann Whitney as though I was supposed to be her husband & pretended marriage for the purpose of shielding them from the enemy. (She was the wife of the Prophet Joseph Smith) [we held a] mock ceremony of marriage before the enemy and for the purpose of bringing about the purposes of God in these last days & as spoken by the mouth of the ProphetsIsaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and also Joseph Smith and Sarah Ann should receive a great glory, honor, and eternal life and I also receive a great glory . . .

"History of Joseph Corroden Kingsbury, Copied from his own handwriting in his little books where he kept his diary by his granddaughter Roselia Meservy Watson, As written by his own hand 1846, 1847, 1849, 1850 and later," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-2. Spelling, punctuation, and grammar have been modernized.
