Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Kirtland Council Minute Book

Joseph sees ancient councils in vision; Peter presided; counselors were obliged to speak according to the evidence and as the Spirit directed, and none were to scorn the guilty.

Brother Joseph then said he would show the order of Councils in ancient days as shown to him by visionthe law by which to govern the Council in the Church of Christ. Jerusalem was the seat of the Church Council in ancient days. The apostle Peter was the President of the Council and held the keys of the Kingdom of God on the earth [and was] appointed to this office by the voice of the Savior and acknowledged in it by the voice of the Church. He had two men appointed as Counselors with him, and in case Peter was absent, his Counselors could transact business or either one of them. The President could also transact business alone. It was not the order of heaven in ancient councils to plead for and against the guilty as in our judicial Court (so called) but that every counselor when he arose to speak, should speak precisely according to evidence and according to the Spirit of the Lord; that no counselor should attempt to scorn the guilty when his quilt

was manifest. That the person accused before the High Council had the right to one half the members of the council to plead his cause, in order that his case might be fairly presented before the president that a decision might be rendered according to truth and righteousness . . . Brother Joseph said that this organization was an ensample to the High Priests in their councils abroad . . . It was then voted by all present that they desired to come under the present order of things which they all considered to be the will of God."

Kirtland Council Minute Book, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 29-38. Also published as Fred C. Collier and William S. Harwell, Kirtland Council Minute Book (Salt Lake City, Utah: Collier's Publishing Co., 1996).

Account of Joseph receiving revelation now in D&C 88.

[Kirtland, 27 December 1832] . . . Brother Joseph arose and said, to receive revelation and the blessing of Heaven it was necessary to have our minds on God and exercise faith and become of one heart and one mind. Therefore he recommended all present to pray separately and vocally to the Lord for [Him] to reveal His will unto us concerning the upbuilding of Zion and for the benefit of the saints and for the duty and employment of the Elders. Accordingly we all bowed down before the Lord, after which each one arose and spoke in his turn his feelings and determination to keep the commandments of God. And then [he] proceeded to receive a revelation [i.e., D&C 88] concerning the duty [not legible] of our above stated. [At] 9 o'clock P.M., the revelation not being finished, the conference adjourned and commenced by prayer [and] thus proceeded to receive the residue of the above revelation. And it being finished and there being no further business before [the council], the conference closed the meeting by prayer, in harmony with the brethren and gratitude to our Heavenly Father for the great manifestation of His Holy Spirit during the setting of the conference.

F. G. Williams Clerk of Conference

In Fred C. Collier and William S. Harwell, Kirtland Council Minute Book (Salt Lake City, Utah: Collier's Publishing Co., 1996), 3-4.
