Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Kirtland Elders Quorum Record

Joseph's inspired instructions banish spirit of darkness; some then speak in tongues, 6 February 1836.

They [i.e., the First Presidency] gave us some instructions and left us. President Beman spake to the assembly: several spoke and there seemed to be a cloud of darkness in the room. Pres. O[liver] Cowdery & H[yrum]. Smith came and gave some instructions and the cloud was broken and some shouted, Hosanna and others spake with tongues. The first president (J. Smith jun) returned and reprimanded us for our evil deeds which was the cause of our darkness.

He prophesied saying this night the key is turned to the nations; and the angel John is about commencing his mission to prophesy before kings, and rulers, nations tongues and people.

In Lyndon W. Cook and Milton V. Backman Jr. Kirtland Elder's Quorum Record 1836-1841 (Provo, Utah: Grandin Book Co., 1985), 6-7.

Note: Backman and Cook observe: "This reference to the Apostle John is not found in the Diary of Joseph Smith. See Revelation 10:10-11, and D&C 77:14." They also point out that on this same date, in the Diary of Joseph Smith, Joseph records the following: " . . . while I was in the east room with the Bishops quorums, I felt by the spirit that something was wrong in the quorum of Elders in the west roomand I immediately requested President O. Cowdery and H. Smith to go in and see what was the matterThe quorum of Elders had not observed the order which I have given them and were reminded of it by President Carlos Smith and mildly requested to observe order and continue in prayer and requestedsome of them replied that they had a teacher of their own and did not wish to be troubled by others. This caused the spirit of the Lord to withdraw. This interrupted the meeting and this quorum lost their blessings in great measure" (In Lyndon W. Cook and Milton V. Backman Jr. Kirtland Elder's Quorum Record 1836-1841 [Provo, Utah: Grandin Book Co., 1985], 7).

Anointings necessary to attend solemn assembly; prophesies that without greater unity, Saints would suffer.

Joseph Smith Jr. made some remarks and Notified the Elders that the Solemn Assembly was to be called on the 6th of April and also that those Elders who were not anointed must be anointed before that time. [He] also prophesied that unless the church acts in greater union than they had for the winter past it should be scourged until they should feel it four fold to that of the dispersion of Zion.

In Lyndon W. Cook and Milton V. Backman Jr. Kirtland Elder's Quorum Record 1836-1841 (Provo, Utah: Grandin Book Co., 1985), 26.

Note: In compiling the Kirtland Elder's Quorum Record Book, Cook and Backman note that "the Prophet's remarks refer to a second solemn assembly planned for the 6th of April, 1837. Worthy brethren who were unable to attend the solemn assembly the previous year were invited to participate in certain purifying ordinances preparatory to receiving a spiritual endowment of power. These ordinances consisted of (1) washing 'head to foot' in soap and water, (2) washing in clear water and perfumed whiskey, (3) having one's head anointed with consecrated oil and receiving a blessing by the spirit of prophesy, (4) having the anointing blessing sealed with uplifted hands (solemn prayer, a sealing prayer, and the hosanna shout), and (5) washing of faces and feet and partaking of the Lord's Supper" (In Lyndon W. Cook and Milton V. Backman Jr. Kirtland Elder's Quorum Record 1836-1841 [Provo, Utah: Grandin Book Co., 1985], 26).
