Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Knapp, Stephen Boughton

(1822-1914)

A non-member of the Church who, as a young boy living in Michigan heard Joseph Smith, Father Smith, Sydney Rigdon and Martin Harris preach; remembers Saints setting up tents in commons before gathering with main body; says Joseph did not preach polygamy nor practice polygamy; Mormons were "fine people."

When I was about five years old I was sent to school, in a log school house, with a Dutch fireplace with stone back and a stick chimney, in one end, where we used four feet wood and a fourth of a cord to fire in winter and filled it with brush in the summer. When I was old enough to work, I went to school for three months only in winter and then from one mile and a quarter to 2 ½ miles. Thus it was that I passed the first twelve years of my life in the wilds of Michigan. My parents sold their farm, and bought another in the town of Commerce, west of Orchard Lake and moved there in 1837, into the Mormon settlement. I attended school winters in a Mormon school house and Mormon meeting on Sundays, for three years, until they sold out and moved to Masury, [Missouri] their Promised Land. There was their rendersvoo [rendezvous], or gathering place where they gathered together each summer to make final arrangements, and wait for their Prophet to come and lead them through to the Promised Land, and to whom they turned over all of their cash. I saw three such gatherings, and camps, and the commons in front of our house covered with their tents and covered wagons. I have seen and heard preach Joseph Smith, his Father, Sydney Rigdon, Martin Harris and others of Joseph's prophets and heard them talk their unknown tongue, and learned some of it myself, by watching out, etc.

There were some fine people and neighbors in that neighborhood and they never preached or practiced Polygamy at that time or under Joseph Smith's rule.

Stephen Boughton Knapp, "Memorandum, April, 1905," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-2.
