Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Barney, Edson

(June 30, 1806-February 2, 1905 [or 1906])

At Zion's Camp, Joseph predicted a curse would follow if contention did not cease; camp stricken with cholera.

Going up with Zion's Camp [Joseph] made a prediction that if they (the members of the camp) did not quit their jarring and contentions, some of them would die off like rotten sheep; and it was fulfilled to the letter. There were 13 died of the cholera in the camp, and he then called the brethren together and said there would not another one die, and no more deaths occurred.

The cholera that started in that camp, spread over the country, so that as we went back home the various towns we passed through, were afflicted with it, and it still continued to the eastern country.

Edson Barney, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 8 (15 April 1892): 256.

Was present when Joseph received D&C 75; member of Zion's Camp; ordained a seventy by Joseph, who prophesied upon his head many things which came true; studied Hebrew at the School of Prophets.

I was present at a conference held at Amherst January 25, 1832 and saw the Prophet Joseph Smith receive a revelation which is published as Section 75 of the Doctrine and Covenants. On March 19, 1833, my son Olney Ammon was born. On May 10, 1834, I with my brother Royal and about 200 others, started for the state of Missouri to fulfill a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith to redeem the land of Jackson County. On the 22nd of June, on Fishing River, Missouri, the Prophet received a revelation (see Doc. & Cov. Sec. 105). . . .

In the spring of 1835 I was ordained a member of the first Quorum of Seventy by Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer and received many promises which I have seen fulfilled.

[Tells of going to the Kirtland Temple: "I studied the Hebrew language and received an endowment in the Temple equal to the one received at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost." Later, went on mission, served as member of Nauvoo Legion and went out on mission to declare Joseph Smith's views on government, and then of the martyrdom.]

"Biographical Sketch of Edson Barney," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
