Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Knight, Joseph Sr.

(November 3, 1772-February 2, 1847)

Tells of Joseph's poverty during translation process, of the loss of 116 pages, of his in-laws being opposed to the translation, of his helping provide means such as buying paper to translate; Oliver arrived to be Joseph's scribe in April, 1829; in the spring of 1803 Knight to Joseph to Manchester; meets Martin Harris, who was selling copies of the Book of Mormon, and who asked Joseph for a revelation, or "Commandment."

Now when he began to translate he was poor and was put to it for provisions and had no one to write for him but his wife, and his wife. The next spring Oliver Cowdery, a young man from Palmyra, came to see old Mr. Smith, Joseph's father, about this work and he sent him down to Pennsylvania to write for him and he wrote 116 pages of the first part of the Book of Mormon. And about this time came Martin wanted to go home about some business and he wanted to take the writings with him, but Joseph put him off. But he urged him by fair promises that he would be careful and he would return it again. But he being free with it, some person got hold of it and kept it so that he never could obtain it again. Therefore Joseph lost his privilege for a while. But after repenting he again received the privilege of translating again, as in Book of Covenants page 164 [D&C 10:3]

Now he could not translate but little, being poor and [having] nobody to write [as scribe] for him but his wife and she could not do much and take care of her house and he being poor and [having] no means to live but work. His wife's father and family were all against him and would not help him. He and his wife came up to see me the first of the winter 1828 and told me his case. But I was not in easy circumstances and I did not know what it might amount to and my wife and family [were] all against me about helping him. But I let him have some little provisions and some few things out of the storea pair of shoes and three dollars in money to help him a little. In January his father and Samuel [Smith] came from Manchester to my house when I was busy drawing lumber. I told him they had traveled far enough. I would go with my sleigh and take them down tomorrow. I went down and found them well and they were glad to see us. We conversed about many things. In the morning I gave the old man a half a dollar and Joseph a little money to buy paper to translate, I having but little with me. The old gentleman told me to come and see him once in a while as I could. I went home followed teaming till the last of March, the sleighing being good. I told my wife I must go down and see Joseph again. "Why do you go so soon, for," said she. "Come go and see." And she went with me. Next morning we went down and found them well and were glad to see us. Joseph talked with us about his translating and some revelations he had received and from that time my wife began to believe and continued a full believer until she died and that was the 7th day of August, 1831.

In the spring of 1829 Oliver Cowdery, a young man from Palmyra, went to see old Mr. Smith about the Book that Joseph had found. And he told him about it and advised him to go down to Pennsylvania and see for himself and to write for Joseph. He went down and received a revelation concerning the work and he was convinced of the truth of the work and he agreed to write for him till it was done. Now Joseph and Oliver came up to see me if I could help him to some provisions, [they] having no way to buy any. But I was [gone] to Catskill. But when I came home my folks told me what Joseph wanted. But I had engaged to go to Catskill again the next day and I went again and I bought a barrel of Mackerel and some lined paper for writing. And when I came home I bought some nine or ten bushels of grain and five or six bushels [of potatoes] and a pound of tea, and I went down to see him and they were in want. Joseph and Oliver were gone to see if they could find a place to work for provisions, but found none. They returned home and found me there with provisions, and they were glad for they were out. Their family consisted of four, Joseph and wife, Oliver and his [Joseph's[ brother Samuel. Then they went to work and had provisions enough to last till the translation was done. Then he agreed with Martin Harris to print. They therefore agreed with e. Grandin to Print five thousand copies which were printed and bound at Palmyra in the Spring of 1830.

Now in the Spring of 1830 I went with my team and took Joseph out to Manchester to his father. When we were on our way he told me that there must be a church formed but [he] did not tell when. Now when we got near to his father's we saw a man some eighty rods before us run across the street with a bundle in his hand. "There," says Joseph, "there is Martin going across the road with some thing in his hand." Says I, "how could you know him [from] so far?" Says he, "I believe it is him," and when we came up it was martin with a bunch of [Books of Mormon]. He came to us and after compliments he said, "The books will not sell for nobody wants them." Joseph said, "I think they will sell well." Said [Martin] "I want a commandment." "Why," said Joseph, "fulfill what you have got." "But," said he, "I must have a commandment [i.e., revelation]." Joseph put him off. But he insisted three or four times, [saying] he must have a commandment.

In Dean C. Jesse, "Joseph Knight's Recollection of Early Mormon History," BYU Studies 17, no. 4 (winter 1976): 35-36.

In kindness, Joseph gives Brother Knight a cane and instructs that he pass it to namesake descendants.

One day the Prophet saw his elderly friend hobbling along without a cane. The Prophet approached him and, putting his arm around him, pressed Father Knight's fingers onto the top of his cane and said, "Brother Knight, you need this cane more than I do." The Prophet then told him to keep it as long as he needed it, and then to pass it on to descendants with the first name Joseph. The cane has been passed down through several descendants until the present day.

Susan Easton Black, Who's Who in the Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1997), 167.
