Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Knight, Joseph Jr.

(b. June 22, 1808)

Knight's father hired Joseph, who was "the best hand he ever hired"; in 1827 Joseph told Knight family of Book of Mormon; Joseph used Father Knight's wagon to obtain the plates; in June, 1830, Joseph was tried twice for disorderly preaching, and twice acquitted.

My father bought three farms on the Susquehanna River, in Broome County, New York. In 1827, he hired Joseph Smith, Jr. Joseph and I worked and slept together. My father said that Joseph was the best hand he ever hired. We found him a boy of truth. He was about twenty-one years of age.

I think it was in November, 1827, he made known to my father and me that he had seen a vision, that a personage had appeared to him and told him where there was a gold book of ancient date buried, and if he would follow the directions of the angel he could get it. We were told it in secret. My father and I believed what he told us. I think we were the first after his father's family.

At last he got the plates, and rode in my father's wagon and carried them home.

Joseph then commenced to translate the plates. Father and I often went to see him, to carry him some things to live upon. After many trials and troubles, he got the plates translated. By this time, my mother and many of my relations believed.

Joseph and Oliver came to Colesville, in May, 1830, where we lived, and Oliver baptized my father's family, and a few of my relatives. When we were going from the water, we were met by many of our neighbors, who pointed at us and asked if we had been washing our sheep. Before Joseph could confirm us, he was taken by the officers to Chenango County for trial, for saying that the Book of Mormon was a revelation from God.

My father employed two lawyers to plead for him, and they cleared him. That night our wagons were turned over and wood piled on them, and some sunk in the water. Rails were piled against our doors, and chains sunk in the stream, and a great deal of mischief done. Before Joseph got to my father's house, he was taken again to be tried in Broome County. Father employed the same lawyers, who cleared him there.

Four weeks passed before Joseph could get a chance to confirm us. Then we had the greatest time I ever saw. The house was filled with the Holy Ghost, which rested upon us.

Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 5-6; see also "Joseph Knight Jr.," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Knight, La Fayette

(b. ca. 1820)

Gives description of Joseph, tells of being in his house, of chatting with him, and of seeing the mummies which contained writings of Abraham.

Mr. Joseph Smith is a man of a very firm enterprising, and piercing countenance and his whole mien and character is very commanding. If phrenology is correct, he has good perceptive faculties, tolerably good intellectual, small moral, and large animal propensities, if my reckoning is right. He has a very decent good looking house, comfortable furnished and well finished for the accommodation of a person in easy circumstances. I went into his house and had a comfortable chat with him, and then examined the four mummies one of which his Mother told me was King Orritus, on whose breast was found the writing of Abraham. It being as they say, the astronomy taught by him. I saw the plates, examined them, and they are, really they are something worth looking at.

"Extracts from a Letter Written by LaFayette Knight, from Carthage, Ill., Dec. 21, 1843," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 3.
