Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Knight, Lydia Goldthwaite Bailey

(1812-1884)

Heard Joseph preach in 1833, and joined Church; deserted by her first husband, Lydia later married Newel K. Knight, their marriage being the first ceremony performed by Joseph; arriving at Kirtland, she paid $50 to help release the Prophet from jail; later she received a prophetic blessing from him; once, when sick, healed by usage of Joseph's handkerchief; present at organization of Relief Society; remembers martyrdom.

Lydia Knight was born in 1812, in Sutton, Warceslter County, Mass. For eight happy years she lived in this happy home. Her father was Jerse Goldthwait. She had five sisters and six brothers.

The years passed on and at the age of fifteen Lydia was sent away to boarding school. Here she met a youth named Calvin Bailey, and in the fall of 1828 the young couple were married. But the marriage was not a happy one. Her husband became a drunkard and finally deserted her. The only course open was to return to her parents home, taking her little girl with her. Six months after her return home a baby boy was born to her, but died almost at birth.

A year passed away, and in January 1833, her little girl was taken ill and died. Lydia's life seemed bleak and desolate. She grieved constantly over the death of the little daughter she loved so devotedly.

Finally a Mr. Nickerson, a friend of the Goldthwait's persuaded Lydia to go with him to his home in Mount Pleasant, Canada. He and his wife were so kind to Lydia that she forgot to a degree her loneliness and grief. While she was visiting with the Nickerson's the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon visited with their friends.

Lydia listened with fervent feeling to the prophet's testimony and was among the first to believe and be baptized in this vicinity.

A few days after her baptism the gift of tongues was manifested through her. She rose up in a meeting and her mouth was filled with the praise of God and his glory.

Before leaving Canada the Prophet blessed Lydia with the following words:

"Sister Lydia, great are your blessings. The Lord your Savior loves you and will overrule all your past sorrows. Let your heart be comforted. You shall yet be a savior to your father's house. Be faithful and endure unto the end and all will be well with you."

Lydia remained in Canada until the summer of 1834, when she returned again to her father's home in western New York.

But as is often the case her father and mother could not see the beauty of the gospel. So Lydia again was lonely and sad. So in the spring of 1835 with the permission and aid of her parents she decided to go to Kirtland, the gathering place of the saints.

When Lydia reached Kirtland the prophet was being held a prisoner. Lydia gave her all, about fifty dollars to help pay his fines and release him from prison.

That fall the Prophet's brother Hyrum requested Lydia to come to his home and live. She complied with his request and spent a happy useful winter here.

During this time she met Newel Knight and later married him. The Prophet Joseph Smith, himself, performed the marriage ceremony. This was the first marriage ceremony ever performed by the prophet.

Newel and Lydia, at the request of Hyrum, remained in this home* during the remainder of the winter. When spring came they longed to go to their own home, but had no money. The prophet entered and asked them if they had money to go to their western home. Newel replied that they were rather cramped for means. The prophet left the house but returned almost immediately and gave Lydia about twice the amount she had given to help free the prophet. They left and made their home in Colesville where a branch of the church was organized. Newel was put in as presiding elder of the branch.

[Continues, by telling of the settling and building of Nauvoo.] Lydia was finally stricken with the fever too. One day she called her husband to her and asked him to go to the prophet and ask for a handkerchief. He lay it over her head saying: "Here Lydia is a handkerchief." She however, received no benefit from it, but grew steadily worse. Finally Newel seeing she was all but gone hurried away but soon returned with another handkerchief. "Here Lydia is a handkerchief from the Prophet Joseph. The one I brought before was not from him. I hated so to bother him. But he sent this one and says Your Heavenly Father shall heal you."

Lydia was immediately healed and went about her household tasks as usual. Her babe was also immediately healed from the dreaded fever.

Finally health was restored to the struggling village. Newel, at the request of the Prophet built a mill, and later a log cabin was erected for his family.

In Oct. 1840, another son was born to Lydia, and two years later another son blessed their home.

When the Relief Society was organized in 1842, by the Prophet, Lydia was enrolled as one of the first members.

In 1844 persecutions were again heaped upon the saints. Among these troublesome times another baby girl was born to Lydia in June. The tiny one was called Lydia after her mother.

June 27, 1844, the Prophet and Brother Hyrum were brutally murdered. Their remains were brought back to Nauvoo for burial, but Lydia was too weak and grief stricken to attend the services. They had both been among her closest friends. . . .

"Lydia Knight's Life, Written by her Great Granddaughter, Wilma S. Hawkins," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: It may well be that the newlyweds stayed in the home of Father and Mother Smith, not Hyrum. Following the marriage ceremony, the Prophet's father, extended "a hearty invitation to remain with his family during the Winter, and not attempt to set up housekeeping until they removed to their western home. They gladly accepted his offer, and spent several busy, happy months in this pleasant home" (Susa Young Gates, Lydia Knight's History [Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor's Office, 1883], 29-32). The marriage itself was conducted in Hyrum's home (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 2:320).

Visited by Joseph and Sidney; description of Joseph; hears Joseph preach, sees a "shining glow . . . from every feature"; Joseph testified of restoration; Lydia baptized; Joseph promises gift of tongues; Joseph promised Lydia she would be a Savior to her father's house.

One day in October, 1833, a wagonload of people stopped at the door of Freeman Nickerson's home. They had with them two strange menJoseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon. Although so remote from the States, rumors of a new prophet and a "golden bible" had reached Mount Pleasant, Brunt County, Ontario, Canada, and had been wondered over and commented upon.

Freeman had been told that his parents had joined the new church, and he was rather disgusted with the news. His father was indeed full of the gospel he had embraced, and was so anxious for the eternal welfare of his sons in Canada that he had hitched up his carriage, gone on a visit to Kirtland, Ohio, and prevailed upon the Prophet Joseph Smith and Elder Sidney Rigdon to accompany him on a visit to his sons, Moses and Freeman, in Mount Pleasant.

"Well, Father," said Freeman, when told who the two strangers were, "I will welcome them for your sake. But I would just about as soon you had brought a nest of vipers and turned them loose upon us."

Moses and Freeman were wealthy merchants and men of influence in Mount Pleasant. On the evening of the arrival, after the bustle of welcome and a warm supper were over, everyone was too tired to talk, so all retired to rest.

Next morning many were the curious glances that I cast at this strange man who dared to call himself a prophet. I saw a tall, well-built form, with the carriage of an Apollo; brown hair, handsome blue eyes, which seemed to dive down to the innermost thoughts with their sharp, penetrating gaze; a striking countenance, and with manners at once majestic yet gentle, dignified yet exceedingly pleasant.

Elder Rigdon was a middle-aged man of medium height, stout and quite good-looking, but without the noble grandeur that was so distinguishing a mark of the Prophet.

The Elders were very wise. They said nothing about their views or doctrines, but waited patiently until some one should express an interest.

As evening drew near, Mr. Nickerson became anxious to hear something of the newcomer's faith.

"Oh," said he to his wife, "just let him talk; I'll silence him, if he undertakes to talk about the Bible. I guess I know as much about the scriptures as he does."

As soon as supper was over, he invited his visitors and family to go upstairs to the parlor, where he said they would have some talk. "Now Mr. Smith," he said, "I wish you and Mr. Rigdon to speak freely. Say what you wish and tell us what you believe. We will listen."

Turning to his wife, he whispered, "Now you'll see how I shall shut him up."

The Prophet commenced by relating the scenes of his early life. He told how the angel visited him, of his finding the plates and the translation of them, and gave a short account of the matter contained in the Book of Mormon.

As the speaker continued his wonderful narrative, I was listening and watching him intently. I saw his face become white and a shining glow seemed to beam from every feature.

As his story progressed, he would often allude to passages of scripture. Then Mr. Nickerson would speak up and endeavor to confound him. But the attempt was soon acknowledged even by himself to be futile.

The Prophet bore a faithful testimony that the priesthood was again restored to the earth, and that God and His Son had conferred upon him the keys of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods. He stated that the last dispensation had come, and the words of Jesus were now in force: "Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned."

Elder Rigdon spoke after the Prophet ceased. He related some of his early experiences, and told those present that he had received a testimony for himself of the truth of what Joseph had said. "God," said Elder Rigdon, "is no respecter of persons, but will give to all that ask of Him a knowledge of the things Joseph Smith has declared unto you, whether they are true or false, of God or of man."

After both men were through speaking, many questions were asked by all present, for information. The listeners were honest-hearted people, and when truth is told to such they are constrained to accept and believe.

"And is this, then," said Mr. Nickerson, "the curious religion the newspapers tell so much about? Why, if what you have said is not good sound sense, then I don't know what sense is."

A feeling of agreeable disappointment was felt by Mr. Nickerson and family, that these strange men were so different from the various representations of them.

Next day, notice was sent out that there would be public preaching in the Nickerson Brothers' new store-house. A large and attentive audience was present. Elder Sidney Rigdon spoke to the people with great clarity on the first principles of the gospel, and closed with a strong testimony to the truth of so-called "Mormonism."

The Prophet then arose and poured forth a golden stream of words, many of which were verily pearls without price, setting forth the restoration of the gospel and the great work that had commenced on the earth. With power he exhorted everyone who was present to seek for the truth of his and his companion's words from the source of all light, all truth, and all religion, and a knowledge of the truth of the same should surely follow.

Great was the excitement among the peaceful dwellers in Mount Pleasant.

The day following, a meeting was again held, and after it was over the Prophet baptized twelve persons, including myself, Mr. Nickerson and all of his household. I, who was always sober and full of reflection, received the glad message with trembling joy. I was filled with a bright, peaceful influence and was full of gratitude that God had spared me to hear and accept His glorious gospel. As a lonely girl, I had thought of death and its rest with a longing heart. But here was lifelife eternal. After I was baptized, I was constrained to cry aloud, "Glory to God in the highest. Thanks be to His holy name that I have lived to see this day and be a partaker of this great blessing."

In the evening, the new members of the Church assembled in Mr. Nickerson's house for confirmation. God bestowed His Spirit very freely, and the Prophet gave much valuable instruction.

Two more persons came to the Prophet and requested baptism at the meeting the next day. It was attended to and a branch of the Church was organized. Freeman Nickerson was ordained as the presiding elder.

That evening (the seventh day the Prophet had been there) the family were all seated around the wide, old-fashioned fireplace in the parlor, listening to the Prophet's words and full of rejoicing.

"I would be so glad if someone who had been baptized could receive the gift of tongues as the ancient saints did and speak to us," said Moses Nickerson.

"If one of you will rise up and open your mouth it shall be filled, and you shall speak in tongues," replied the Prophet.

Everyone then turned, as by a common instinct, to me and said with one voice, "Sister Lydia, rise up."

And then the great glory of God was manifested to this weak but trusting girl. I was enveloped as with a flame, and, unable longer to retain my seat, I arose and my mouth was filled with the praises of God and His glory. The spirit of tongues was upon me, and I was clothed in a shining light, so bright that all present saw it with great distinctness above the light of the fire and the candles.

While the visitors were preparing for their departure, Joseph paced back and forth in the sitting room, in deep study. Finally he spoke up and said, "I have been pondering on Sister Lydia's lonely condition, and wondering why it is that she has passed through so much sorrow and affliction and is thus separated from all her relatives. I now understand it. The Lord suffered it even as He allowed Joseph of old to be afflicted, who was sold by his brethren as a slave into a far country, and through that became a savior to his father's house and country."

Turning to me, he continued, "Sister Lydia, great are your blessings. The Lord, your Savior, loves you and will overrule all your past sorrows and afflictions for good unto you. You shall yet be a Savior to your father's house."

Immediately after that the party set out, and left behind many warm and faithful friends. The good work continued, and numbers came forward and were baptized.

Susa Young Gates, Lydia Knight's History (Salt Lake City, Utah: Juvenile Instructor's Office, 1883), 14-23.
