Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Knight, Newel

(September 13, 1800-January 11, 1847)

Knight's description of the boy prophet: never one to lose, but always kind, maintaining goodwill.

The business in which my father was engaged often required him to have hired help, and among the many he from time to time employed was a young man by the name of Joseph Smith, Jun., to whom I was particularly attached. His noble deportment, his faithfulness and his kind address, could not fail to win the esteem of those who had the pleasure of his acquaintance. One thing I will mention, which seemed to be a peculiar characteristic with him in all his boyish sports and amusements; I never knew any one to gain advantage over him, and yet he was always kind and kept the goodwill of his playmates.

"Newel Knight's Journal," in "Scraps of Biography," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 47.

Joseph visits Colesville, mob destroys dam used for baptismal font; arrested for preaching the Book of Mormon, chased by mob, but the Constable helps Joseph escape; tried, acquitted, and immediately arrested again; tried in Broome County, of casting evil spirit out of Newel Knight; acquitted; Joseph again escapes the mob.

On the first day of June, 1830, the first conference was held by the Church, at Fayette, New York. Our number consisted of about thirty, besides many others who came to learn of our principles, or were already believers, but had not been baptized.

Soon after conference Joseph Smith came to Colesville to make us a visit. There were many in our neighborhood who believed and were anxiously waiting for an opportunity to be baptized. Meeting was appointed for the Sabbath, and on Saturday afternoon we erected a dam across a stream which was close by, with the intention of baptizing those who applied on Sunday. But during the night a mob collected and tore away the dam.

Early on Monday morning we were on the alert, and before our enemies were aware of it, Oliver Cowdery proceeded to baptize Emma Smith, Hezekiah Peck and wife, Joseph Knight and wife, Levi Hall, Polly Knight and Julia Stringham. But before the baptism was entirely finished, the mob began to collect again. We retired to my father's house, and the mob, which numbered about fifty, surrounded the house, raging with anger, and apparently wishing to commit violence against us. So violent and troublesome were they that the brethren were obliged to leave my father's house, and they succeeded in reaching mine. The mob, who soon found where they had gone, followed them and it was only by great prudence on our part and help from our Heavenly Father that they were kept from laying violent hands upon us.

A meeting had been appointed for the evening to confirm those who had been baptized in the morning. The time appointed had arrived, and our friends had nearly all collected together, when, to our great surprise and sorrow, the constable came and arrested Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., on a warrant charging him with being a disorderly person, and of setting the country in an uproar by preaching the Book of Mormon.

The constable, soon after he had arrested Joseph, told him that the plan of those who had got out the warrant for his arrest was to get him into the hands of the mob who were now lying in ambush for him, and that he, the constable, was determined to save Joseph from them, as he found him to be a different person to what he had been represented. This proved true, for they had not proceeded far from the house when the wagon in which Joseph and the constable were riding was surrounded by the mob, who seemed only to await some signal from the constable. But to their great discomfiture, he gave the horses the whip and was soon out of their reach.

As the constable was driving briskly along, one of the wagon wheels came off, which accident left them almost in the hands of the mob who had pursued them closely. But the constable was an expert man and managed to get the wheel on again before the mob overtook him, and soon left them in the rear once more.

He drove on to the town of South Bainbridge, Chenango County, where he lodged Joseph in an upper room of a tavern; and in order that all might be safe for himself and Joseph, he slept during the night with his feet against the door, and kept a loaded gun by him (Joseph occupied a bed in the same room), and declared that if they were unlawfully molested he would fight for Joseph and defend him to the utmost of his ability.

On the following day a court was convened for the purpose of investigating the charges which had been made against Joseph Smith, Jun. On account of the many scandalous reports which had been put in circulation, a great excitement prevailed. My father, Joseph Knight, Sen., did not let the opportunity pass of doing all in his power to assist this persecuted boy. He went to two of his neighbors, James Davidson and John Reid, Esqs., respectable farmers who were well versed in the laws of their country, and retained them in behalf of Joseph during his trial.

The trial commenced among a crowded multitude of spectators. Among the witnesses called up against Joseph was one Josiah Stoal, a gentleman for whom Joseph formerly worked. He was examined as follows:

Question"Did not the prisoner, Joseph Smith, have a horse from you?"

Answer"Yes."

Q."Did he not go to you and tell you an angel had appeared unto him and told him to get the horse from you?"

A."No, he told me no such thing."

Q."Well, how did he get the horse from you?"

A."He bought it from me the same as any other man would do."

Q."Have you had your pay?"

A."That is not your business."

The question being repeated, the witness replied, "I hold his note for the price of the horse, which I consider as good as the money; for I am well acquainted with Joseph Smith, Jun., and know him to be honest, and, if he wishes, I am ready to let him have another horse on the same terms."

Mr. Jonathan Thompson was next called and examined.

Question"Has not the prisoner, Joseph Smith, Jun., had a yoke of oxen of you?"

Answer"Yes."

Q."Did he not obtain them from you by telling you that he had had a revelation to the effect that he was to have them?"

A."No, he did not mention a word of the kind concerning the oxen; he purchased them the same as any other man would."

After several more similar attempts the court was detained for a time in order that two young ladies, daughters of Josiah Stoal, with whom Joseph had at times kept company, might be sent for, in order, if possible, to elicit something from them which could be made a pretext against Joseph.

The young ladies came and were each examined as to his character and conduct in general, but in particular as to his behavior towards them in public and private. They both bore such testimony in Joseph's favor as to leave his enemies without a cause for complaint. Several attempts were made to prove something against Joseph, and even circumstances which were alleged to have taken place in Broome County were brought forward. But these Joseph's lawyers would not admit against him, in consequence of which his persecutors managed to detain the court until they had succeeded in obtaining a warrant from Broome County. This warrant they served upon him at the very moment he had been acquitted by the court.

The constable who served this second warrant upon Joseph had no sooner arrested him than he began to abuse him. So heartless was he that, although Joseph had been kept all day in court without anything to eat since the morning, he hurried him off to Broome County, a distance of about fifteen miles, before allowing him to eat. The constable took him to a tavern where were gathered a number of men who used every means to abuse, ridicule, and insult him. They spit upon him, pointed their fingers at him, saying, "Prophesy! prophesy!" Thus did they imitate those who crucified the Savior of mankind, not knowing what they did.

The tavern was but a short distance from Joseph's own house. He wished to spend the night with his wife, offering to give any bail desired for his appearance. But this was denied him. He applied for something to eat. The constable ordered him some crusts of bread and some water, which was the only fare he received that night. At length he retired to bed. The constable made him lie next to the wall. He then laid himself down, threw his arms around Joseph, as if fearing that he intended to escape; and in this manner was Joseph compelled to spend the night.

Next day he was brought before the magistrate's court of Colesville, Broome County, and placed on trial. His friends and lawyers were again at his side, and his former persecutors were arrayed against him with the rage and fury of demons visible upon their countenances, and manifested in their actions. Many witnesses were again examined, some of whom swore to the most palpable falsehoods, just as those had done who appeared against him the previous day. But they contradicted themselves so plainly that the court would not admit their testimony. Others were called who showed by their zeal that they were willing to prove anything against him. But all they could do was to tell some things that they had heard somebody else say about him.

They proceeded for a considerable time in this frivolous and vexatious manner, when finally I was called upon and examined by Lawyer Seymour, who had been sent for specially for this occasion. One lawyer, Burch, was also retained on the prosecution. But Mr. Seymour seemed to be a more zealous Presbyterian, and seemed more anxious and determined that the people should not be deluded by any one professing godliness and not denying the power thereof.

As soon as I had been sworn, Mr. Seymour proceeded to interrogate me as follows:

Question"Did the prisoner, Joseph Smith, Jun., cast the devil out of you?"

Answer"No, sir."

Question"Why, have you not had the devil cast out of you?"

Answer"Yes, sir."

Question"And had not Joseph Smith some hand in it being done?"

Answer"Yes, sir."

Question"And did he not cast him out of you?"

Answer"No, sir. It was done by the power of God, and Joseph Smith was the instrument in the hands of God on this occasion. He commanded him to come out of me in the name of Jesus Christ."

Question"And are you sure it was the devil?"

Answer"Yes, sir."

Question"Did you see him after he was cast out of you?"

Answer"Yes sir, I saw him."

Question"Pray, what did he look like?"

(Here one of the lawyers on the part of the defense told me I need not answer that question.) I replied: "I believe, I need not answer you that question, but I will do it if I am allowed to ask you one, and you can answer it. Do you, Mr. Seymour, understand the things of the Spirit?"

"No," answered Mr. Seymour. "I do not pretend to such big things."

"Well, then," I replied, "it will be of no use for me to tell you what the devil looked like, for it was a spiritual sight and spiritually discerned, and, of course, you would not understand it were I to tell you of it."

The lawyer dropped his head, while the loud laugh of the audience proclaimed his discomfiture.

Mr. Seymour now addressed the court and in a long and violent harangue endeavored to blacken the character of Joseph, and bring him in guilty of the charges preferred against him.

Messrs. Davidson and Reid followed on Joseph's behalf. They held forth in true colors the nature of the prosecution, the malignity of intention, and the apparent disposition of the prosecution to persecute their client rather than to do him justice. They took up the different arguments that had been brought forward by the lawyers for the prosecution, and having shown their utter futility and misapplication they proceeded to scrutinize the evidence which had been adduced, and each in his turn thanked God that he had been engaged in so good a cause as that of defending a man whose character stood so well the test of such a strict investigation.

In fact these men, although not regular lawyers, were, upon this occasion, able to put to silence their opponents, and convince the court that Joseph Smith, Jun., was innocent. They spoke like men inspired of God, while those who were arrayed against Joseph trembled under the sound of their voices and shook before them as criminals before the bar of justice. Disappointment and shame were depicted on the faces of the assembled multitude, who now began to learn that nothing could be sustained against Joseph.

The constable, who had arrested Joseph and treated him in so cruel and heartless a manner, came forward and apologized and asked his forgiveness for the ill-treatment he had given him. So much was this man changed that he told Joseph the mob had resolved if the court acquitted him that they would take him, tar and feather him, and ride him on a rail; and further, that if Joseph wished, he would lead him out another way, so that he could escape in safety.

After all the efforts of the people and court to sustain the charges brought against Joseph proved an entire failure, he was discharged and succeeded in making good his escape from the mob through the instrumentality of his new friend, the constable.

After a few days the Prophet, accompanied by Oliver Cowdery, came to my house, intending to confirm those who had been baptized. These servants of God had scarcely arrived when the mob began to collect, and so violent were they that it was thought best for Joseph and Oliver to make their escape lest they should suffer at the hands of our enemies. They left without taking any refreshment, the mob closely pursuing them, and it was ofttimes as much as Joseph and Oliver could do to escape them. However, by traveling all night, excepting a short time when they were forced to lie down and rest themselves under a tree, alternately watching and sleeping, they managed to get beyond the reach of their pursuers.

"Newel Knight's Journal," in "Scraps of Biography," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 52-61; see also Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 7-13.

Retells events leading to receipt of D&C 27, dealing with the sacrament.

In the beginning of August, 1830, I, in company with my wife, went to make a visit to Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., who then resided at Harmony, Pennsylvania. We found him and his wife well, and in good spirits. We had a happy meeting. It truly gave me joy to again behold his face. As neither Emma, the wife of Joseph Smith, nor my wife had been confirmed, we concluded to attend to that holy ordinance at this time, and also to partake of the sacrament before we should leave for home. In order to prepare for this, Brother Joseph set out to procure some wine for the occasion. But he had gone only a short distance when he was met by a heavenly messenger who informed him that it did not matter what the Saints ate and drank when they partook of the sacrament, but that they should not purchase wine or strong drink from their enemies.

In obedience to this revelation, we prepared some wine of our own make and held our meeting, consisting of only five persons namely, Joseph Smith and wife, John Whitmer, and myself and wife. We partook of the sacrament, after which we confirmed the two sisters into the Church, and spent the evening in a glorious manner. The Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon us. We praised the God of Israel and rejoiced exceedingly.

In Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 13; see also "Newel Knight's Journal," in "Scraps of Biography," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 62-63.

Hiram Page receives and shares false revelations; Joseph stays up all night working to correct him; inquires of the Lord and receives D&C 28.

About the last of August, 1830, I took my team and wagon to Harmony to move Joseph and his family to Fayette, New York. After arranging my affairs at home, I again set out for Fayette to attend our second conference, which had been appointed to be held at Father Whitmer's, where Joseph then resided. On my arrival I found Brother Joseph in great distress of mind on account of Hiram Page, who had managed to get up some dissension of feeling among the brethren by giving revelations concerning the government of the Church and other matters which he claimed to have received through the medium of a stone he possessed. He had quite a roll of papers full of these revelations, and many in the Church were led astray by them. Even Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmer family had given heed to them, although they were in contradiction to the New Testament and the revelations of these last days. Joseph was perplexed and scarcely knew how to meet this new exigency. That night I occupied the same room that he did, and the greater part of the night was spent in prayer and supplication. After much labor with these brethren, they were convinced of their error and confessed the same, renouncing the revelations as not being of God, but acknowledging that Satan had conspired to overthrow their belief in the true plan of salvation. In consequence of these things, Joseph inquired of the Lord before conference commenced and received a revelation in which the Lord explicitly stated His mind and will concerning the receiving of revelation. (See D&C 28.)

During this time we had much of the power of God manifested among us, and it was wonderful to witness the wisdom that Joseph displayed on this occasion, for truly God gave unto him great wisdom and power, and it seems to me that none who saw him administer righteousness under such trying circumstances could doubt that the Lord was with him. He acted not with the wisdom of man, but with the wisdom of God. The Holy Ghost came upon us and filled our hearts with unspeakable joy. Before this memorable conference closed, three other revelations besides the one already mentioned were received from God by our prophet, and we were made to rejoice exceedingly in His goodness.

Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 13; see also "Newel Knight's Journal," in "Scraps of Biography," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 64-65.

Knight tells of visits from the prophet, in which he testified of his experiences, including receiving the plates and being persecuted; Joseph's statements were "honest and plain"; Joseph was often delivered from persecution by divine warning.

During this time [circa 1826] we were frequently visited by my young friend, Joseph Smith, who would entertain us with accounts of the wonderful things which had happened to him. It was evident to me that great things were about to be accomplished through himthat the Lord was about to use him as an instrument in His hands to bring to pass the great and mighty work of the last days. This chosen instrument told us of God's manifestations to him, of the discovery and receiving of the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, of his persecutions for the gospel's sake, and many other items of his eventful life.

So honest and plain were all his statements that there was no room for any misgivings with me on the subject. Besides, I found by reading and searching the Bible, that there would be a great falling away from the gospel as preached and established by Jesus and His apostles, that in the last days God would set His hand again to restore that which was lost. Then why should anyone persecute this boy? I could not. Yet, to my certain knowledge, many did; and those who professed to be preacher's of the gospel, were often his vilest persecutors; and notwithstanding they all professed to doubt the reality of his having the plates of which be had spoken, yet so eager were they to get them from him, that it was only by the Lord, or a kind angel, warning him from time to time of the pursuit of his enemies, that he was enabled to preserve the sacred records. In fact, it seemed very much like it was with Joseph and Mary, the mother of Jesus, being warned of God to flee from place to place, to save the young child; so has Joseph Smith been warned many times, and then barely escaped his pursuers. Of this I can bear a faithful testimony.

"Newel Knight's Journal," in "Scraps of Biography," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 48-49.

Because of a blessing from the Prophet, an otherwise frail Sister Knight gives birth to a son.

On the 14th of October, my wife bore me a son. She had never before given birth to a living child, and the doctors who had attended her before, had said it was impossible that she should. But Brother Joseph blessed her and said she should have the desire of her heart. She never doubted the prophet's words, and as soon as her son was born she desired him to be called Samuel, for she said she had asked him from the Lord. My wife soon recovered from her sickness.

"Newel Knight's Journal," in "Scraps of Biography," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 73.

Missouri mobocrats gather and promise to stop "Joe Smith" and Zion's Camp.

At the meeting a report was circulated that an army of our brethren was coming to help us, and to go into Jackson County by force. All kinds of strange stories were set afloat, and a small party, with [Samuel C.] Owens and [James] Campbell at their head, went directly to Independence to collect an army to go and prevent their entering Clay County. Campbell swore, while adjusting his pistols in the holsters, "The eagles and turkey buzzards shall eat my flesh if I do not fix Joe Smith and his [Zion's Camp] army, so that their skins will not hold shucks, before two days are past."

"Newel Knight's Journal," in "Scraps of Biography," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 92.

Joseph performs marriage ceremony for Newel Knight and Lydia Goldthwaite; it is the first marriage he performed.

On the 24th of November I was united in the holy bonds of matrimony with Lydia Goldthwaite [Goldthwaite] by the Prophet Joseph, this being the first marriage ceremony that he ever performed.

"Newel Knight's Journal," in "Scraps of Biography," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 94.

Note: The Prophet mentions this marriage ceremony in his history, but makes no mention of it being the first he ever performed (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 2:320).

Knight moves to Commerce (Nauvoo) and Joseph advises him to build a grist mill; he does.

I soon selected a piece of ground and commenced to build a home for myself, but before many days had passed I was advised by Brother Joseph to assist in the erection of a flouring mill, so that the Saints might thereby be benefited. I therefore ceased my own operations and began the new labor to which I had been assigned. From that time until I left Nauvoo with the Saints to find a home in the barren wilds of Western America, I was engaged more or less in the building and working of grist and saw mills for the benefit of the Saints.

"Newel Knight's Journal," in "Scraps of Biography," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 101.

Joseph casts evil spirit from Newel Knight, who is lifted up, and who later sees a vision of Jesus.

In the Spring of 1830 the Prophet honored me with a visit. It was an event long to be remembered. In order that my children may come to a knowledge of what transpired I make an extract from Joseph Smith's journal.

During this month of April, I went on a visit to the residence of Mr. Joseph Knight, of Colesville, Broome county, New York, with whom and his family I had been for some time acquainted, and whose name I had previously mentioned as having been so kind and thoughtful towards us while translating the Book of Mormon. Mr. Knight and his family were Universalists, but were willing to reason with me upon my religious views, and were, as usual, friendly and hospitable. We held several meetings in the neighborhood; we had many friends, and some enemies. Our meetings were well attended, and many began to pray fervently to Almighty God, that He would give them wisdom to understand the truth.

Amongst those who attended our meetings regularly, was Newel Knight, son of Joseph Knight. He and I had many serious conversations on the important subject of man's eternal salvation. We had got into the habit of praying much at our meetings, and Newel had said that he would try and take up his cross, and pray vocally during meeting; but when we again met together, he rather excused himself. I tried to prevail upon him, making use of the figure, supposing that he should get into a mud-hole, would he not try to help himself out? And I further said that we were willing now to help him out of the mud-hole. He replied, that provided he had got into a mud-hole through carelessness, he would rather wait and get out himself, than to have others help him; and so he would wait until he could get into the woods by himself, and there he would pray. Accordingly, he deferred praying until next morning, when he retired into the woods; where, according to his own account afterwards, he made several attempts to pray, but could scarcely do so, feeling that he had not done his duty, in refusing to pray in the presence of others. He began to feel uneasy, and continued to feel worse both in mind and body, until, upon reaching his own house, his appearance was such as to alarm his wife very much. He requested her to go and bring me to him. I went and found him suffering very much in his mind, and his body acted upon in a very strange manner; his visage and limbs distorted and twisted in every shape and appearance possible to imagine; and finally he was caught up off the floor of the apartment, and tossed about most fearfully.

His situation was soon made known to his neighbors and relatives and in a short time as many as eight or nine grown persons had got together to witness the scene. After he had thus suffered for a time, I succeeded in getting hold of him by the hand, when almost immediately he spoke to me, and with great earnestness requested me to cast the devil out of him, saying that he knew he was in him, and that he also knew that I could cast him out.

I replied, "If you know that I can, it shall be done," and then almost unconsciously I rebuked the devil, and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to depart from him; when immediately Newel spoke out and said that he saw the devil leave him and vanish from his sight. This was the first miracle which was done in the Church, or by any member of it; and it was done, not by man, nor by the power of man, but it was done by God, and by the power of godliness; therefore, let the honor and the praise, the dominion and the glory, be ascribed to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen.

This scene was now entirely changed, for as soon as the devil had departed from our friend his countenance became natural, his distortions of body ceased, and almost immediately the Spirit of the Lord descended upon him, and the visions of eternity were opened to his view. So soon as consciousness returned, his bodily weakness was such that we were obliged to lay him upon his bed, and wait upon him for some time. He afterwards related his experience as follows:

I now began to feel a most pleasing sensation resting on me, and immediately the visions of heaven were opened to my view. I felt myself attracted upward, and remained for some time enwrapt in contemplation, insomuch that I knew not what was going on in the room. By and by, I felt some weight pressing upon my shoulder and the side of my head, which served to recall me to a sense of my situation, and I found that the Spirit of the Lord had actually caught me up off the floor, and that my shoulder and head were pressing against the beams. [Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:81-83] I saw heaven opened and beheld the Lord Jesus Christ seated at the right hand of the Majesty on Highand this is my testimony, it was not a dream but a vision like the vision of Stephen who on the day of his martyrdom had a similar view. On the 1st of June 1830 I was baptized by David Whitmer into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and soon after I was ordained to the office of an Elder.

"Autobiography and Journal of Newel Knight, 1800-1847," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Joseph blesses Knight's wife, Sally; she gives birth to a son.

In April 1832 I started for Ohio and landed in the Township of Thompson in the month of June, soon after, the following revelation was given to me in Kirtland in the state of Ohio [Then follows D&C 54:1-10, though the date given there is June, 1831]

On the third day of July I took passage with the Colesville company at Wellsville in the State of Ohio, and arrived at Saint Louis on [illegible] the 13th . . .

October the 14th my Eldest son Samuel was born. Sally's health was very poor, she was naturally a feeble woman, and having passed through many afflictions her sufferings were severe.previous to Samuel's birth she had been unfortunate, and the Doctors had told her she could not live and give birth to a living child, the Prophet Joseph while on a visit to my house blessed her and promised her the desire of her heart. We (she?) never doubted Joseph's word, and when her son was born, she blessed him, and desired to have him named Samuel, for she had asked him of the Lord.

On January the 22nd and 23rd 1833 a General Conference was held at my house where much business was transacted. [See Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:323-24]I was employed as president of the Branch the most of my timeOn the 10th of February a Solemn Assembly was called, wherein all the inhabitants of Zion renewed their covenants and agreed to walk in all the commandments of the Lord blameless.

"Autobiography and Journal of Newel Knight, 1800-1847," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Bishop Partridge and Charles Allen tarred and feathered by mob; night of the falling stars; arrival of Zion's Camp in Missouri (1834); death of his wife, Sally.

On the 20th day of July [1833] the great Jackson County Mob destroyed brother W. Phelps House and Printing Office, to his and the Churches damage, more than six thousand dollars.Tarred and feathered Bishop Partridge and brother Charles Allen and beat a number with Thongs and Hickory sticks.On the 23rd a mob met again when the principal Elders signed a pledge to leave the county the next yearOn the 13th of October following the mob destroyed a large number of Houses in what was called the Timber (?) Settlement Branch. Shortly after a Battle was fought in which several mobocrats were killed, some of the brethren were wounded and some of them killed, in the forepart of November the most the Church were driven acrofs the Missouri river, from their possession houseless and pennyless into Clay County, on the north side of the Missouri river. On the night of the 13th of November there was a splendid scene in the Heavens. An innumerable shower of stars were dancing about in every direction, with the velocity of lightning and continued to do so for about ten hours. many people supposed the day of Judgment had commenced. on the first day of January 1834 there was a Conference held in Clay County at which several Elders were sent to confer with President Joseph Smith at Kirtland, at this conference it was decided to petition the Governor to reinstate us in our possessions in Jackson County, Mo. accordingly the petition was circulated, letters written to Kirtland so that all might be ready, accordingly President Joseph Smith with one hundred and five brethren appeared in Clay County, Mo.but the Lord gave a revelation setting forth the fact that Zion could not be redeemed then, but that the principal Elders must go to Kirtland, and there be endowed with power from on high, the House of the Lord at Kirtland had already been commenced before President Joseph Smith left Clay County, he organized the high Council of Zion, and I was one of that number.

On the 15th of September 1834 Sally Knight fell a martyr to the faith of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. She was born in 1801 her Father was a proud man and possessed considerable mechanical ability he was also a lover of music and played well on several different kinds of instruments. In early life she was afflicted with sickness and fever sores, this she bore with patience and meekness, she was an excellent singer and held a place in the Choir of the Universalist Church, an[d] was much respected until she embraced the Gospel when her relative the Priests and people did all in their power to turn her away from the truth , but to no purpose. She cheerfully bade adieu to all her Father's House except a younger sister and journeyed west in obedience to the commandments of God, she was an intelligent and agreeable companion, beloved by her husband and the saints who knew her. She lived the life of a true saint and died in full hope of a glorious resurrection with the just.

In the Spring of 1835 I prepared my affairs to leave for Kirtland where I arrived in the month of may. I began to labor on the House of the Lord, for I considered this to be of the greatest importance at the present time it is a long time since the Lord had a House on the Earth, the saints are labouring diligently with prayerful hearts to see this new House of the Lord for the last days finished, where they can receive their first endowment from on high as promised.I continued to labour until fall.In the month of October while I was boarding at brother . . . [there is a gap in the manuscript at this point]

"Autobiography and Journal of Newel Knight, 1800-1847," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Heard Joseph teach of the divine order of family organization.

I, by request of the Prophet Joseph Smith, in the Spring of 1844 went to Burlington and bought a flat Boat load of grain, the demand being so great for this, and to avoid the necessity for the brethren at work on the Temple to procure provisions elsewhere, I took passage on the Maid of Iowa, and ascended the Iowa river. I stopped at Wappelo and bought a large quantity of grain, the steamboat returning I put on board as much grain as I could get sacked and in readiness. I made arrangements to have the balance conveyed on a flat boat, the water being very high enabled me to unload the grain from the steamboat in at the upper door of my mill,as soon as this grain was secured, I again ascended the river and in a few days returned with a large flat boat loaded with grain. I now concluded I had sufficient to meet all necessary demands, until harvest. about this time Sister Betsey, my brother Joseph's wife paid us a visit, I will here state that in my greatest difficulties my father and brother Joseph lived near by. I tried in vain to get assistance from themDuring the past winter the order of family organizations, was set forth by brother Joseph the prophet, therefore all the saints were strictly enjoined to set their families in order,I had for a long time felt the necessity of my father's House or family being properly organized, I requested Fathers Cutler and Cahoon, they having been appointed to teach this duty to the Saints, by the Prophet Joseph to hold a meeting at my Father's House which they did to the edification of us all.My brother Joseph was not present he having moved to La Harpe a distance of twenty miles, in the spring of the previous year.I had made him good offers to induce him to assist me in putting my mill in operation, so that he might have an interest in the City and be where he could enjoy and be blest with knowledge and intelligence in common with the Saints, as it flowed from the lips of our beloved Prophet. I very much regretted his absence from our family interviews. . . .

"Autobiography and Journal of Newel Knight, 1800-1847," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Tells of martyrdom, and of helping to prepare martyred bodies for burial.

. . . 20th of June. Our enemies are still on the alert, and from appearances the chief men in the Government are neither innocent nor ignorant of what is taking placeon the 27th our beloved Prophet and Patriarch were murdered in cold blood in Carthage Jail.on the 28th their bodies were brought into Nauvoo. Whilst assisting in preparing their bodies for burial, my feelings were so deeply impressed, by the sad sight before me, that I was scarcely able to perform this last duty to the remains of those who had been so near and dear to me in life. The feelings of the entire community were also very much wrought upon by the sad sight, and likewise to see their beloved wives and children thus bereft of kind Husbands and Fathersshall copy from those that have written and were eyewitnesses to the horrible murderfrom the "Times and Seasons" Page 598 and 599. [Then follows "Two Minutes in Jail" by Willard Richards, Times and Seasons 5:598-99.]

"Autobiography and Journal of Newel Knight, 1800-1847," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

One year following martyrdom, visited Carthage Jail, saw blood stains and bullet marks on walls; recalls prophesy of Joseph, given during time of sickness, that day would come when word would go forth from Nauvoo that it was a healthy place; Knight saw its fulfillment.

July 28th 1845, just one year one month and one day have elapsed since our beloved Prophet and Patriarch fell martyrs to the cause of truth.I this day visited the jail and viewed the place where they were so cowardly and cruelly murdered, also visited the room where the murder took place. Their blood still stains the floor, and the holes in the walls are yet visible, notwithstanding the many efforts made to erase the "former and conceal the latter" and is a bold testimony against the nation that has winked at the tragedy. Language fails me to express my feelings, or paint the scene.

While blessings are bestowed upon us as a people, there has been less sickness in this city, than at any previous season since the Saints began to settle here, and in fact there is less than at any place from which we have intelligence in all the surrounding country. In this the words of our martyred prophet are verily fulfilled, for at a time when sickness prevailed to so great an extent, that there were not well persons enough to take care of the sick, our prophet Joseph exhorted the brethren and sister to be faithful and put their trust in God, and all their afflictions should work for them an exceeding and eternal weight of glory, and the time would come that it should be said, and the report should go forth that Nauvoo is a healthy place. thousands can now bear testimony of the fulfillment of this prophecy, and many of the brethren who at that time lay sick in tents, having the year before been deprived of all their rights as citizens by the State of Missouri and had barely escaped with their lives, are now in good circumstances, surrounded by the blessings of life, health and plenty. As to my self, I have laboured hard and through the blessings of my Heavenly father hope soon to see my family comfortably situated. My mills are in prosperous condition, and if Brother Benjamin Clapp wants [?] my house according to contract by the first of September, I shall then have the satisfaction of seeing my family well provided for.

"Autobiography and Journal of Newel Knight, 1800-1847," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
