Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Knight, Samuel Eli

(b. October 14, 1832)

Even as a child remembers the Prophet being betrayed by George M. Hinkle into the hands of the Missourians.

My first distinct remembrance of the Prophet Joseph Smith was when he, accompanied by others of the brethren, passed by my father's door in Far West, Caldwell County, Missouri, on the day when Col. George M. Hinkle betrayed Brother Joseph and others of the leaders of the Church by leading them into the ambush of Gen. Lucas and the body of mobbers under his command.

Though but a child, I felt keen sorrow on seeing the Prophet and other good men going towards the quarters of the party of mobbers which had come against Far West. This sorrow was enhanced of course by the weeping of my father's family and others of the Saints.

My recollections from that time till the martyrdom produced upon my mind the most profoundly reverential feelings toward the Prophet Joseph.

Samuel Knight, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 20 (15 October 1892): 641.

Born because of an inspired blessing Joseph had given his mother.

Born of American parents, Newel Knight, and Sally Coburn, he was a child of promisethe only living child of his mother, through a blessing by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

"Sketch of Samuel Knight," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Present when the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum were returned to Nauvoo; also saw the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

I was present at the Mansion when the remains of the Prophet and of his brother, the Patriarch, arrived from Carthage.

I was present at the meeting where Elder Sidney Rigdon asserted his claim to take charge of the Church. And, though but a lad, was greatly startled by hearing what was to me the familiar voice of the Prophet Joseph Smith, whom but a couple of months before I had seen dead. I mounted, in my surprise, one of the seats, looked in the direction of the speaker, and saw the face of the Prophet Joseph and continued to hear his voice. A never-to-be-forgotten impression was made on my mind by this event, for I found it to be Brother Brigham Young defending the authority of the Twelve Apostles of the Church in the absence, by death, of its President.

Samuel Knight, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 20 (15 October 1892): 641.
