Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Lambert, Charles

(August 30, 1816-May 2, 1892)

Tells of first meeting the Prophet, transacting business with him; of seeing Joseph speak with Indians; heard Joseph's last sermon; tells of being embraced and blessed by the Prophet.

The day after I arrived as I had some business to transact with the Prophet Joseph. I went and had an interview with him and William Clayton. I felt good.

. . . I was present when the Prophet was talking to some Indians that had come to see him. I attended his weekly meetings regularly, [and] never missed. I appreciate the instruction I received. . . .

. . . At that time [during a visit to Carthage] the blood of Joseph and Hyrum marked the floor. I saw it. The Sherif was with me to show me. I worked on the Temple by day at night was guarding the City. Our living was poor . . .

. . . I was present when the Prophet preached his last sermon from the house top near the Mansion. It was a frame building put up to the Square and a place floored over for him to stand on I do not think it was ever taken down. It was too powerful. He called on the thunder and lightening, then angels for to witness, and going through the motions, drawing his sword if so and so was done it should not be sheathed again until vengeance was taken on the wicked. There was a tall man standing behind me sobbing and crying. When I turned around to look at him [he] said he would never fight against the Mormons more, no never. He was a stranger to me. The Prophet used to hold meetings in a log house of his sometimes twice a week I do not remember missing one when I had a chance. At one of these he said he wished he had a people that he could reveal to them what the Lord had shown to him, but one thing I will say, there are thousands of Spirits that have been waiting to come forth in this day and generation their proper channel is through the Priesthood . . .

. . . I think it was on or about the 6th of May 1844 the Prophet Joseph came up to the Temple and clasping his arms around me and lifted me of my feet then said "the Lord bless thee, and I bless thee, and I bless thee in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ." It went through my whole system like fire. Then he turned to those around and said "the Lord bless the whole of you, and peace be with you." After the twelve left we were very much harassed, driving our brethren from their homes, burning their houses, stealing their cattle [which] made it hard for some.

"Autobiography of Charles Lambert (1816-1892)," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 8-16. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.
