Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Lambert, Mary Alice Cannon

(December 9, 1828-September 7, 1920)

Recognized the Prophet the moment she saw him, and never thereafter doubted his prophetic calling.

I first saw Joseph Smith in the spring of 1843. When the boat in which we came up the Mississippi River reached the landing at Nauvoo, several of the leading brethren were there to meet the company of Saints that had come on it. Among those brethren was the Prophet Joseph Smith. I knew him the instant my eyes rested upon him, and at that moment I received my testimony that he was a Prophet of God, for I never had such a feeling for mortal man as thrilled my being when my eyes first rested upon Joseph Smith. He was not pointed out to me. I knew him from all the other men, and, child that I was (I was only fourteen) I knew that I saw a Prophet of God.

Mary Alice Cannon Lambert, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 554.

Met at dock by the Prophet on arriving at Nauvoo; helped as well by Aunt Leonora Cannon.

Nauvoo was finally reached in April, 1843, seven months after the departure from England. A cordial greeting by the Prophet Joseph smith and a hearty welcome from Aunt Leonora Taylor and family helped to reconcile them, and the peaceful home obtained in Nauvoo was all the more appreciated because of the difficulties experienced on the way.

"My Mother: Mary Alice Cannon Lambert, Pioneer of Nauvoo, Ill., and a Utah Pioneer of 1849," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The power of Joseph's personality and presence; in Nauvoo quarry, he blessed the brethren; her husband was "thrilled from head to foot" by that blessing.

Many, many times between the time I reached Nauvoo and his martyrdom, I heard him preach. The love the Saints had for him was inexpressible. They would willingly have laid down their lives for him. If he was to talk, every task would be laid aside that they might listen to his words. He was not an ordinary man. Saints and sinners alike felt and recognized a power and influence which he carried with him. It was impossible to meet him and not be impressed by the strength of his personality and influence.

In May, 1844, he went to the stone shops where the men were working on the Nauvoo Temple and blessed them, each man by the power of his priesthood. Brother Lambert (whom I afterward married) he gathered right in his arms and blessed, and it was ever his testimony that he was thrilled from head to foot by that blessing.

Mary C. Lambert, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 554.

Memories of the martyrdom; spirit of unrest descended on the Saints, and it proved to be a premonition of Joseph's death.

I well remember the night of the Prophet's death. The spirit of unrest was upon all, man and animal, in the city of Nauvoo. Why, we did not know, but we could not rest. My father was on guard. No one in the house had slept, the dogs were noisy, and even the chickens were awake.

About 3 o'clock the news of the martyrdom was brought to us, and we realized what had kept us awake. And oh, the mourning in the land! The grief felt was beyond expressionmen, women and children, we were all stunned by the blow.

Mary C. Lambert, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 554.
