Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Barney, Lewis

(September 8, 1808-November 5, 1894)

Barney seeks advice about moving to Nauvoo; Joseph instructs those in Barney's branch to stay where they are.

The brethren wishing to be more intimately acquainted with the Prophet wanted to sell out and move to Nauvoo. To this I was opposed. So I went to Nauvoo to see the Prophet Joseph Smith in relation to this matter. I laid the case before him, he advised not to sell. I told him that they would not believe me and I wished he would put it on paper, which he did. So I took the letter, went back and presented it to the branch, but they still persisted in selling and going to Nauvoo in opposition to the instruction of brother Joseph Smith the Prophet.

"Autobiography of Lewis Barney," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 18-19.

Barney loans Joseph two hundred dollars.

One day being in company with Joseph and several others, Joseph said he needed a little money and if he had it, he could put it to a better use than any other person in the world. I said nothing to him about it but went home and got $200.00 and went to Joseph's store. Joseph not being present and I being acquainted with Lyman Wight, said to him, "I have a little money for brother Joseph that I wish to let him have."

Brother Wight said, "Let me take it and I will hand it to him."

I told him to write me a receipt for it. While he was writing the receipt Brother Joseph stepped in.

I said, "Brother Joseph, I have some money for you. I was about to let Brother Wight have for you."

Joseph said, "I am the man to take it." So I handed him the $200.00 for which he gave me his note payable 6 months after date.

"Autobiography of Lewis Barney," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 22-23.

Tells of moving to Nauvoo and meeting the Prophet and his family; describes their character; tells of Joseph's interest in finishing the temple, and of working on it; also recounts the events surrounding the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

At Nauvoo we met with the Prophet Joseph Smith, his father, mother and sisters, whom we found to be kind hearted, charitable, sociable and reliable in all their dealings and business. The great wonder is how any one knowing them could have feelings of hatred or malice against them. . . .

The Lord came out in a Revelation requiring the Saints forthwith to commence a Temple . . . Arrangements were made by the Prophet and leading men of the Church to push the work on the Temple by tithing the Saints every tenth day, leaving a day to work in making improvements and to procure food and clothing for the women and children, many of whom knew not where the next meal would come from. I have visited families that would say at meal times, "Come set down and have a little. This is the best, and all we have, and where the next will come from I can't tell . . ."

The Prophet Joseph Smith was very anxious to have the Temple pushed a head as fast as possible lest he should be slain before he would have the privilege of conferring the Keys of the kingdom on the twelve apostles and others.

. . . As a natural result [of the martyrdom] the Saints after the loss of their Beloved Prophet were somewhat thrown into confusion, not having the necessary experience to enable them to know and understand who to look for a leader. The Saints would gather together in squads and consult with each other as to who should be the leader of the Church; reflections of a serious nature were in everyone's mind, some saying the best we can do is to stick to the biggest lump. In the mean time, as soon as Sidney Rigdon heard the tidings of the Death of the Prophet he, with all speed, left Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and came flying to Nauvoo. He gathered the weeping Saints to lay before them the necessity of choosing a guardian to take care of them until they should come of age, saying, "you are now 14 years old and have the privilege to choose a guardian to look after the interests of the Church." It seemed the majority of the Saints had forgotten or overlooked the time the Prophet, in the presence of the whole body of Saints in time of Conference took hold of his coat with both hands and shook himself all over from head to feet saying, "I this day shake Sidney Rigdon off of my shoulders as my Counselor. He is no more my Counselor. I will Carry him no longer. But if the Church wishes to carry him they can do so." [See Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 6:49] Sidney Rigdon held two or three meetings and got all things ready for a vote to be called to see if the Saints was willing to sustain him as their guardian, Parley P. Pratt one of the Twelve was busy working in his garden and paid little or no attention to Sidney Rigdon until he was notified that Sidney was about to call a vote of the Saints to manifest their feelings in relation to his being their guardian. Parley, on receiving this information dropped his hoe and come to the meeting. He walked on the stand barefoot, his pants rolled up above his ankles, and his shirt sleeves half way to his elbows. He soon put a stop to the plan Sidney was laying to ensnare the saints.

The next day President Brigham Young arrived in Nauvoo with some of the other apostles from a mission to the Eastern States. He called a meeting and invited Sidney Rigdon to the stand and in the presence of the assembled thousands of the Saints [and] said to Sidney, "Now if you have anything to say you have the opportunity and you can take the stand." But Sidney declined and kept his seat: President Young then arose and took the stand. His voice and words were the familiar voice and words of our martyred prophet. So much so that the whole congregation was fully satisfied that the mantle of the Prophet Joseph had fallen on him. Some of the Saints really believed it was in reality the Prophet himself. Well do I remember the feelings that possessed my breast at that time. I knew it was Brigham Young and being familiar with the countenance, voice and the manner of speech of the Prophet Joseph Smith I also knew the mantle of the prophet had fallen on Brigham. It was marvelous, and a miracle wrought by the Power of God in the sight and hearing of the Whole multitude that they might never doubt that Brigham was the Chosen leader of the church. Having this assurance the Saints were prepared to pay strict heed to his Council

"Lewis Barney Reminiscences (ca. 1888)," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling and grammar have been modernized. Some words have also been added to aid readability.
