Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Lambson, Alfred Boaz

(August 27, 1820-February 26, 1905)

In Lambson's first meeting with Joseph Smith, Joseph prophesies Lambson will not go to Oregon as he had planned; Joseph a "superior" man and a great teacher.

I thought I was a bigger infidel than Robert Ingersoll, and read the Bible for spite, the better to find fault with. . . .

[Yet] Something kept drawing me west, farther and farther west. With St. Louis as my objective point, I went to Nauvoo to visit my uncle. I put up at the Mansion House, curious to see the Prophet and was sitting watching for him to enter. Presently, he came in and sat down. Lorin Walker put a towel about the Prophet's shoulders and dressed his hair for him, after which he got up and came over to me, lifting me bodily out of the chair, and asked: "Young man, where are you from and where are you going?" I told him where I hailed from and that I was bound for St. Louis to join a fur company going to Oregon, to which he said: "When you join a fur company at St. Louis to go to Oregon, I will take Nauvoo on my back and carry it across the Mississippi, and set it down in Iowa," adding, "I have use for you."

The Prophet made a deep impression upon me; I felt that he was superior to any man I had ever seen. In fact, if any other man had asked me those questions I should have very soon told him it was none of his businessbut what use the Prophet could have for me I could not see.

I fell sick with the ague and did not recover in time to go with the fur company, but continued in Nauvoo with an increasing interest in Joseph Smith and what he had to say. I heard him preach many times and I have not forgotten today (Nov. 28, 1904) the things he preached. He went further in explaining matters and made them clearer to me than any other man. He spoke with thrilling and marvelous power for good which I shall never forget to my dying day.

The Prophet was a large man, broad-shouldered and heavy-set. There are no pictures that do justice to him.

"Alfred Boaz Lambson," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 6 (July 1915): 147-48.

Note: Col. Robert G. Ingersoll, a self announced agnostic, made a career in the latter half of the nineteenth century debating with clergy and others on religious themes, most of which he considered silly superstitions. He thought Gods was a man-made invention, Jesus often less inspiring than Confuscius and others, hell an invention of fear-filled clerics and an "infamous lie," Moses a man of more mistakes than inspiration, the existence of an after life uncertain and unprovable, and religion in general a flight from accepting responsibility for self. See, for example, The Complete Lectures of Col. R. G. Ingersoll (Chicago: Rhodes & McClure, 1897, 1900).

Note: That Joseph did "have use" for Alfred B. Lambson is illustrated in a letter which Lambson, a wheelwright, wrote telling of his experiences crossing the plains: "On one occasion with the organized help of the camp, and one or two skilled assistants, under my direction, we measured , cut, welded and set eighty-five tires in one day" (see "Reminiscences, by Donnette Smith Kesler, The Wife of Alonzo Pratt Kesler," Elbert C. Kirkham Company, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1952, multilithed, 103).

An alternate, and likely less reliable account of first meeting with the Prophet Joseph when en route "to Alaska"; Lambson gets sick the following morning, and is unable to go.

Grandfather Alfred Boaz Lambson had three wives. He met the first, Melissa, in Nauvoo when he was on his way to Alaska with a party of trappers. They put up at the Mansion House over night. While resting, the Prophet Joseph Smith entered the waiting room, and welcomed the men.

Turning to Grandfather, he asked, "And where may you be bound?"

"I am going to Alaska after furs," he answered.

The Prophet smiled and said, "When you go to Alaska, I will pick up the city of Nauvoo and set it on the other side of the river." Then he bade them good night.

In the morning Grandfather was very ill with chills and fever, and his party, being in a hurry, traveled on without him, and he remained in Nauvoo.

"Reminiscences, by Donnette Smith Kesler, the Wife of Alonzo Pratt Kesler," Elbert C. Kirkham Company, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1952, multilithed, 100.
