Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Lamoreaux, Andrew Losey [Sosey]

(October 17, 1812-June 13 [or 18], 1855)

Joseph prophesied Lamoreaux would go on mission to France, learn a foreign language, do much good, but die as a martyr before returning to his familyand so it all occurred.

[The following is quoted from a letter written by Elder Erastus Snow to Elder George A. Smith, written on September 3, 1865:] I have just learned from the family of the late Andrew L. Lamoreaux that Joseph Smith, during his tour to Washington in 1839, stopped with them in Dayton, Ohio, and before leaving laid his hands on Elder Lamoreaux and blessed him, and prophesied upon his head, that he would go on a mission to France, learn another tongue and do much good, but that he would not return to his family, as he would fall by the way as a martyr. The Prophet wept, as he blessed him and told him these things, adding that it was pressed upon him and he could not refrain from giving utterance to it. Elder Lamoreaux talked with his family about it when he left them in 1852, and endeavored to persuade them that this was not the time and mission upon which he should fall, but to believe that he would at this time be permitted to return again. When the "Luminary" [a periodical published in the interest of the Church in St. Louis] brought the tiding of his death, they exclaimed, "Surely, Brother Joseph was a Prophet, for all his words have come to pass." Thinking this incident should not be lost, I have penned it from the mouth of his eldest daughter and submit it to you and would add that his excessive labor and toil in providing for the company under his charge during the hot weather in June, in the unhealthy climate of St. Louis, predisposed him to that terrible scourge that laid him low, and thus he fell a sacrifice for his brethren.

In Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 3:666.

Note: On returning from the French Mission in 1855 Elder Lamoreaux stopped in St. Louis, where at a camp of the Saints, he spent his energies in instructing and counseling the saints under his charge. On the evening of June 10th he addressed the congregation in a large church. Having suffered with diarrhea for several days, he remarked that the usual remedies had not worked. He continued to worsen, and was overtaken by cramps which caused a steady decline until he died of what was called the Asiatic cholera.
