Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Laub, George

(October 15, 1814-November 14, 1880)

Laub works at the Prophet's house; then summarizes some of Joseph's teachings, as he heard them.

I then was in the city [Nauvoo] for five weeks without work. I desired to labor, then I got into work at the prophets house with Coledg, a joiner. I worked for him sometime then I joined on my own hand and found constant work after that time.

Now we were taught from the mouth of the prophet from sabbath to sabbath by the mouth of the Prophet and he spoke with great power and much assurance and expounded the scriptures to us in sure speeches that it could not be misunderstood . He also told us the will of the Lord concerning our present state and this was as nourishing to my soul as the food was and is to the hungry man. He told us how to walk before the Lord and how to lead a happy life, exhorting us to obey council to these words. Also to add works to our faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, brotherly kindness, and charity, with all to make our calling and election sure; for if these things abound in us we will neither be barren nor unfruitful and our spirits bore and do bare witness of his teachings that they are from God and they are true.

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 7; see also Eugene England, ed., "George Laub's Nauvoo Journal," BYU Studies 18, no. 2 (winter 1978): 157-58.

Gives his summation of the King Follett Discourse (given April 6, 1844): In premortal grand council plans laid to create this earth; Jesus was then accepted to be the Redeemer; Satan proposed to save all; spirits "self-existing"; Jesus does that which he had seen his Father do; elements are eternal, and nothing was created of nothing.

First of all, or in the beginning, the great Elohim in the Hebrew meaning the God of all Gods, called a Grand Council and counseled to form that planet on which we do now dwell. They spoke and earth from chaos sprang by their workmanship. Chaos being made into element. They saw till time should be no more and they spoke concerning redemption of this world and formed limited circumstances concerning the redemption. Jesus Christ being the greater light or of more intelligence, for he loved righteousness and hated iniquity, he being the Elder Brother presented himself for to come and redeem this world as it was his right by inheritance. He stated he could save all those who did not sin against the Holy Ghost and they would obey the code of laws that were given. But their circumstances were that all who would sin against the Holy Ghost should have no forgiveness neither in this world or in the world to come, for they strove against light and knowledge after they tasted of the good things of the world to come. They should not have any forgiveness in the world to come because they had a knowledge of the things of the world to come and were not willing to abide of the laws of the world to come. Therefore they can have no forgiveness there, but must be most miserable of all and never can be renewed again (referred to Hebrews Ch. 6).

But Satan, or Lucifer, being the next heir and had allotted to him great power and authority even prince of power of the air. He spake immediately and boasted of himself saying "send me I can save all" and [he] sinned against the Holy Ghost because he accused his brethren and was hurled from the counsel for striving to break the law immediately. There was a warfare with Satan and the gods and they hurled Satan out of his place and all them that would not keep the sayings of the council. But he himself being one of the councilors would not keep the first estate for he was one of the sons of perdition and consequently all the sons of perdition become devils.

How came spirits? Why they are and were self existing as all eternity and our spirits are as eternal as the very God is himself and that we choose tabernacles for ourselves that we might be exalted equal with God himself and therefore, Jesus Christ spoke in this manner; I do as my Father before me did. Well what did the Father do? Why he went and took a body and went to redeem a world in the flesh and had power to lay down his life and to take it up again and this is the way we become heirs with God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. But those who die without the obedience of the gospel here will have to obey it in the world of spirits for so long as they do not obey they will be miserable and as if they were in torment of fire and brimstone. Thus is the signification of torment and as there are many mansions in my Father's house or in other words many worlds in my Father's world, I will go and prepare a place for you that where I am ye may also come. For we are to go from glory to glory and as one is raised to a higher, so the next under him may take his degree and so to take the exaltation through the regular channel. When we get to where Jesus is, he will be just as far ahead of us again in exaltation.

Thus as one star differs from another, so does one glory differ from another. And our bodies are in like fashion as He is Himself and Jesus Christ likewise. But says the English translation, in the beginning God created all things out of nothing, but there was never anything yet that was made of nothing. Shame to such logic. The word in the Hebrew is thus; when the Gods counseled together they rolled this earth in existence.

This is the theme of the word, beginning, and the word, hell, signifies spirits [and] prison of spirits. But the murderers are as if they were in a burning place as if it were fire and brimstone. This is the signification of hell burning with fire and brimstone and all these that are not adopted into the kingdom by baptism are in some degree punished according to their works, for their conscience are gnawing them because they know not what will become of them. Till someone in the flesh, till someone proximates for them and pays the utmost farthing for them, they may live in the spirit according to what men do for them in the flesh. Thus they are to live according to God in the spirit for what men do for them in the flesh, or else why are we baptized for the dead if the dead rise not at all. For if we are planted to gather in the likeness of his death and burial, then shall we rise again in the likeness of his resurrection and buried in baptism, put under the water in the liquid grave and thus do we become saviors on Mount Zion.

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 9-11.

Joseph Smith the witness by whom the gospel to be taught to the world; false prophets also to arise; Joseph chosen in the grand council to head the last dispensation; Joseph "that great prophet" (mentioned in John 1:21).

Matthew 24:14, the original translation of Matthew reads thus: and I will send you another witness and he shall preach this gospel to all nations to the ends of the world. But woe to that man or woman who shall lift up his or their hands against God's witness for they are raising their arm against the power of God and they will be cursed. But in these times in the last days there will [be] many false prophets arise and false teachers and deceive many, they shall have many followers by their deceit. They strive to get power and by their pernicious ways lead off many. For Brother Joseph Smith was chosen for the last dispensation, or seventh dispensation, the time the Grand Council set in heaven to organize this world. Joseph was chosen for the last and greatest prophet to lay the foundation of God's work, therefore the Jews asked John the Baptist if he was Elias or Jesus or that great prophet that was to come. And the Devil, or Lucifer, also organized his kingdom in apostacy to overthrow gods and he became a Son of Perdition.

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 11-12.

Interprets John 14: "in my Father's kingdom are many kingdoms"; faithful dead to teach the gospel to those in the "prison of spirits"; dead must also receive ordinances of salvation.

In my Fathers kingdom are many kingdoms or worlds or in my Fathers house are many mansions. I will go to prepare a place for you, and according to your works you shall be rewarded. These who will not obey the gospel will go to the world of spirits there to stay till they have paid the utmost farthing or till some person pays their debts they owe. Now all those who die in the faith go to the prison of spirits to preach to the dead in body but they are alive in spirit and those spirits preach to the spirits that they may live according to God in the flesh. Spirit and men do minister for the flesh and angels bare the glad tidings to the spirits and they are made happy by these means. Therefore those who are baptized for their dead are the saviours on Mount Zion.

They must receive their washings and their annointings for their dead, the same as for themselves till they are connected to the ones in the dispensation before us and trace their lineage to connect the priesthood again. And if any man preaches any other gospel then this and the baptism for the remission of sins and the laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost, let him be anathematized or accursed the curse of God shall be upon him or them.

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 12.

Concerning the resurrection: a change must occur, for resurrected bodies have no blood; even Jesus could not take blood into the presence of the Father.

Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God or the kingdom that God inhabits. But the flesh without the blood and the spirit of God flowing in the veins in the stead of the blood for blood is the part of the body that causes corruption, therefore, we must be changed in the twinkling of an eye or have to lay down these tabernacles and leave the blood [and] vanish away. Therefore Jesus Christ left his blood to atone for the sins of the world that he might ascend into the presence of the Father for God dwells in flaming flames and he is a consuming fire. He will consume all that is unclean and unholy and we could not abide his presence unless pure spirits in us, for the blood is the corruptible part of the tabernacles. For the resurrection of the dead is devised to take away corruption and make man perfect or in the glory which he was created for the body is sown in corruption and raised in incorruption, then we will be able to go in the presence of God. Brother Joseph Smith was sent to remind the world of sin of righteousness and of a judgment that was to come, but this is that of what John says in his 14th chapter but he says of sin of righteousness and of a judgment to come to reprove the world. This is wrong translated, for to remind [the world] is the correct way.

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 12.

Those who reject gospel need a Redeemer; gives meaning of certain names in Hebrew; in building tower of Babel, people sought to reach City of Enoch, not heaven.

Now concerning these who know the gospel and do not obey but fight against it will be shut up in prison under condemnation and shall not be visited till many days hence (Isaiah 24th chapter). Then some person has to redeem them by making a forfeit of some payment for them. Now the name of Adam in Hebrew signifies read earth, [?] Cain signifies possession, Abel denotes sorrow, [and] Elohim signifies God. Now the history of Josephus on speaking of angels came down and took themselves wives of the daughters of men (see Genesis 6:1-2). These were resurrected bodies violated their laws. Now in the days of Noah there was a man the name of Nimrod, he being the first one that sought after as of himself. After the flood God commanded the people to spread over the earth but they would not and stayed upon the high lands for fear of another deluge. But Nimrod rose up and said he could withstand God. He said come let us build a tower higher then the water can raise and I will go up and fight this God. This is the account Josephus tells us, but God confounded their language and they were obliged to scatter abroad over the land.

Now Babylon signifies confusion. Now Joseph, another to come [to] Moab. Do the father lay with the daughter? Ammon denotes one of a kinsfolk; Isaac denotes laughter, for when the angel told Abraham that they should have a son, Sarah laughed. Jacob do weakness and Israel strength.

Again 2 Corinthians 5:1, a house not made with corruptible hands for there is not anything made without hands as a building. Now I will tell the story of the designs of building the tower of Babel. It was designed to go to the city of Enoch for the veil was not yet so great that it hid it from their sight so they concluded to go to the city of Enoch. For God gave him place above the impure air for he could breath a pure air and him and his city was taken, for God provided a better place for him. For they were pure in heart for it is the pure in heart that causes the Zion to be. And the time will come that Enoch and this city will come again to meet our city and his people our people and the air will be pure and the Lord will be in our midst forever.

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 13-14.

Defines the unity of the Godhead as "oneness"; Holy Ghost yet to take upon himself a body.

The scripture says I and my Father are one and again, that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one (1 John 5:7). But these three agree in the same thing. So did the Savior pray to the Father; I pray not for the world but for those whom ye gave me out of the world that we might be one or to say be of one mind in the unity of the faith.

But everyone being a different or separate person and so is God and Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost separate persons. But they all agree in one or the self same thing. But the Holy Ghost is yet a spiritual body, and waiting to take to himself a body as the Savior did or as God did or the gods before them took bodies. For the Savior says the works that my Father did do I also and these are the works. He took himself a body and then laid down his life that he might take it up again and the scriptures say those who will obey the commandments shall be heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. We then also took bodies to lay them down and take them up again, and the spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that we are the children of God and if children then heirs, and of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ if so be that we suffer with him in the flesh that we may be also glorified together (see Romans 8:16-17).

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 15-16.

Note: On the doctrine that the Holy Ghost will one day receive a body, Franklin D. Richards records in his writings the following: "Joseph also said that the Holy Ghost is now in a state of probation which if he should perform in righteousness he may pass through the same as a similar course of things that the Son has" (in Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, Words of Joseph Smith [Provo, Utah: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1980], 245).

Laub tells of joy in meeting the Prophet; rejoices in progress on Nauvoo Temple.

I landed in the city on the 9th of May, [1843] having then endured 19 days journey by water and by land which was a joyful home to me. And longing to see the prophet I then had the opportunity of striking glad hands with him and my heart leaped in me for joy for I had greater affection towards him then for any person on the earth. I viewed the temple, then I remembered my night vision I had when yet in the eastern countries seeing the temple in the same form as it really was, and the city the same.

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 17.

Joseph rescued from his enemies by an inspired dream; faced the 42nd illegal lawsuit; Sidney Rigdon instrumental in serving false writ against Joseph, who then wants to rid himself of Sidney; Hyrum pleads in Sidney's behalf.

After having been in the city not over 40 days till brother Joseph and his wife were going to visit her relations about 70 miles up the Mississippi River. All being peace at home save a few false brethren who sought to overthrow or destroy his happiness, who gave notice to his enemies of Missouri and the plan was then devised to take him to Missouri and kill him. There was a man named Harmon Wilson who followed him under the pretense of an old writ took him. But the Lord was with him that night and told him what to do so he escaped the hands of his enemies and brought them to shame and confounded them that they were in fear and great trouble of themselves. He then told us that was the forty-second suit brought against him falsely and he always was cleared by the law of the land.

But there was writ after writ served on him but always under false pretense, so at length Brother [Sidney] Rigdon was accused of some of the cause of his troubles which caused a conference to be called and Joseph told us he did not want him for his councilor anymore. That if the people put him there they might, but he said I will shake him off (and shook hands on them words with Rigdon). And so the voice of the people put him in again through the mercy plead by brother Hyrum Smith.

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 17-18.

Tells of events leading to martyrdom: Joseph saw in vision that if press of Nauvoo Expositor not destroyed, blood of the Saints would flow; Joseph cursed his enemies; was illegally taken to Carthage, having announced that it would be to his death.

But Brother Joseph called a meeting at his own house and told us that God showed to him in an open vision in daylight that if he did not destroy that printing press that it would cause the blood of the Saints to flow in the streets and by this was that evil destroyed. And I write what I know and seen and heard for myself; then there was a writ served again and the mob was gathering around and threats breathed against us in all quarters by our enemies. And for our security Brother Joseph being Lieutenant General of the state's army, called out the [Nauvoo] legion and we were on our guard for about 15 days while our enemies was striving to find some law to arrest Joseph, but they got false writs and false witnesses to draw us out of the city.

Brother Joseph called the city counsel together and asked them if they would stand by him. He also told them if they did, or would not, he would leave then and go where he could raise up a people that would stand by him. He also called the legion together and got up on the house and asked them if they would stand by him if the governor of the State Illinois would turn mobocrat. This he asked thrice in succession and the voices were unanimous, he said it is enough. He then related their designs; the enemy was to kill him. He then told us many things concerning their hellish designs and there was a man [by] the name of Joseph Jackson who was seeking deeply for his life and told us that Jackson told him he had killed four men previous to that. He then cursed him in the name of the Lord for his evil designs and it was but a few days till he gave himself and Hyrum his brother to be tried by the law for the writ demanded Hyrum also. They were two innocent men and always lived above the law of the land and the enemy knew this and hated them greatly. They were taken out to Carthage and committed of jail without a trial, contrary to law or justice.

But Joseph told us before he went there that he would be slain there but said he, they will slay an innocent man and while he was in jail the mob came on and said the law will not reach him, but powder and lead or balls will. So the two brothers fell martyr in the prison and at the prison walls by four balls being shot in each of them while [Willard] Richards escaped unhurt and John Taylor received four balls also but was not killed. These two last were two of the twelve apostles of Latter-day Saints. The governor [Thomas Ford] was in our city about the same time the death happened; so ended the lives of two as good men as ever trod upon this earth save one, Jesus Christ. And perhaps I may say more of them at some further period.

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 18-20.

As Joseph left for Carthage, he told the brethren to obey the commandments; also told the officer that the Nauvoo Legionnaires were too good for this world.

But the time our Prophets Joseph and Hyrum were taken out to their slaughter, Brother Joseph told us we should take good care of ourselves; that we were good boys and should obey the commandments. This was about the last words he spoke unto us to keep the commandments of the Lord. He then told the officer that his boys was only in one fault and that was, they were too good, too pure to live in this ungodly generation and so bade us take care of ourselves and farewell. I was well acquainted with these men. I loved them better then my own life and would it been any gain to save their lives, I would have forfeited my own for them. I mourned their lives thirty days . . .

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 21-22.

Joseph prophesied that if made ruler of this nation, he would preserve liberty, that if Missouri did not redress wrongs against the Saints they would be destroyed "by a meaner people than themselves."

Now I will relate some of the prophecies that I heard our beloved Brother Joseph Smith declare while filled with the spirit of the living God in the name of Jesus Christ that if they put him in for ruler of this nation, he would save them and set them at liberty, but if they refused they shall and will be swept off that there will not be any more than a grease spot of them left.

Also, while filled with the spirit he prophesied in the name of Jesus Christ that if the Missourians would not redress the wrongs of the Saints that the red hot wrath of Almighty God would be poured out upon them and the rulers of this nation also and the Missourians should be destroyed of a meaner people than themselves. This now we can see, cities on fire all over the United States which plainly fills this prophecy since that I heard him declare that prophesy. This they refused to give him the rule of the nations and refused to redress the wrongs of the Missourians, but killed the man of God.

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 30-31.

Laub's remembrances of Joseph's last speech to the Nauvoo Legion; quoted mobster Joseph Jackson, who sought Joseph's blood.

Now I will relate a few words of his last address to the Nauvoo Legion while upon a small building across the street opposite his dwelling. Thus, he spoke concerning some of the brethren [who were] a whining, and he was sorry to see such proceedings. He addressed us with a lengthy discourse. I cannot remember all, but he told us that there were some men who were seeking his life with all schemes that could be devised and if they do kill me they will shed innocent blood. He spoke concerning Joseph Jackson by relating some of Jackson's secret wickedness which he drew out of him and then said he [i.e., Jackson], "Now Goddamn your soul if you tell on me, I will kill you for you told me nothing, and I never told any other person besides you. And he told me that he had murdered four men and made cat fish meat of them and the engagement of making bogus money and other wicked things thus he stated that he was now colleague with the mob."

"George Laub Autobiography," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 31.

After the martyrdom, heard Rigdon's claim for Guardianship of the Church, and witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young on August 8, 1844.

Now after the death of Brothers Joseph and Hyrum, Sidney Rigdon having a mission appointed him by Joseph [went] to Pittsburgh before [Joseph's] death. Now after [Joseph's] death Sidney came in all the haste to him in Nauvoo from Pittsburgh to claim the presidency of the Church, him not knowing that Joseph sent him out of the way to get rid of him. Now when he returned to Nauvoo he called all the people together to choose them a Guardian, as he expressed himself. "Now," said he, "the Church is fourteen years old and it [is] the duty of the Church to choose a Guardian." [Sidney] preached there for two days on the subject of guardianism and the Lord's ways not [being] as man's ways, "but as the heavens are higher than the earth so are the Lord's ways higher than man's ways," etc. Just about the time that the vote was to be taken for him to be President and Guardian, but as the Lord would have the Twelve to come home and I felt to praise God to see Brother Brigham Young walk upon the stand then . . .

Now when President Young arose to address the congregation his voice was the voice of Brother Joseph and his face appeared as Joseph's face, and should I not have seen his face but [simply] heard his voice I should have declared that it was Joseph.

Eugene England, ed. "George Laub's Nauvoo Journal," BYU Studies 18, no. 2 (winter 1978): 166.
