Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Layton, Christopher

(March 8, 1821-August 7, 1898)

Tells of first meeting the Prophet, who met he and his fellow travelers at dock in Nauvoo and blessed them; also tells of Joseph giving he and John Marriott 2.5 acres of land, and prophesying they would live to be able to buy out their oppressors.

[He tells of sailing from England, and on April 12, 1843]: How rejoiced we were when we were safely across! And there stood our Prophet on the banks of the river to welcome us! As he heartily grasped our hands, the fervently spoken words, "God bless you," sank deep into our hearts, giving us a feeling of peace such as we had never known before. The Saints had congregated in front of the old post office building to gladly welcome us to this land and the beautiful city of Nauvoo, where the hospitalities of their homes were kindly offered us. Brother Philemon C. Merrill took my wife and me home with him; his wife Cyrena gave me the first cup of milk I had in Nauvoo. Brother Merrill and Brother Sam Price were so good to us and treated me so well that I never want to forget them. On the following day the Prophet Joseph Smith called to see us and blessed us. After staying with Brother and Sister Merrill a few days my wife, who was still sick, and I went home with Jacob Butterfield.

. . . Brother [John] Marriott and I went in with some more of the brethren to build a house each, but as we thought we were not fairly dealt with and were not satisfied with the apportionment of community property, we drew out and told Joseph about it. After counseling and instructing us he gave us two and a half acres of land each and said, "You shall live to see the day when you can buy out everyone who has oppressed you." This prophecy has come true, as has all that noble man ever uttered concerning me.

In Myron W. McIntyre and Noel R. Barton, eds., Christopher Layton (Salt Lake City, Utah: Publishers Press, by Christopher Layton Family Organization, 1966), 11.

Joseph prophesies he will be protected from the mob, and that the Missourians can not kill him.

Our prophet was at this time passing through severe trials and persecutions, but he was unruffled in his calm dignity. His faith was so strong that he knew no fear, and at one time when he was told by his friends that the mob was after him, he calmly replied, "Do not be alarmed; I have no fear and shall not flee. I will find friends and the Missourians cannot slay me, I tell you in the name of Israel's God."

John Q. Cannon, ed. Autobiography of Christopher Layton (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Deseret News, 1911), 11.

In a letter to his parents-in-law, Layton testifies of the gospel, of what the Prophet was teaching, and sends a copy of his wife's patriarchal blessing; asks for names of wife's father and mother, in order to baptize them for the dead; urges them to accept gospel.

March 9, 1844

DEAR FATHER AND MOTHER: It is with pleasure that we write a few lines unto you, hoping to find you well as it leaves us at this time, and we are both living happily together, rejoicing in the Lord and we hope you will make yourselves happy about us. We never wish to come to England again to live, but if we had means we would gladly cross the sea and fetch you here, for our fathers could get a living easier here than they can in England; and if you will obey the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Lord shall open a way for you to come, for there is a great many aged people come here, older than any of you, and the Lord blesses them for so doing. The Prophet preached at the Temple on the 8th of March in the morning and one of the Twelve in the afternoon. The news was glorious; they said the Saints were thirsting after holiness and living in unity of the spirit; there never was such a cry for holiness as there is at this present time; there are a great many of them say they are willing to do whatever the Lord commands them, and the work of God is prospering all round; the Prophet is revealing glorious things, and he wishes the brethren would get to the Temple on the 8th of March in the morning to receive power from on high; after they have received it they will come to England with great power; the gospel will then prove a savor of life unto life to all that believe and a savor of death to all that believe not, but we hope you will all believe it and obey.

It is customary in this country for the Saints to receive their patriarchal blessings when they get here, and we have received ours and send them for you to read. The two blessings will be literally fulfilled upon us inasmuch as we are faithful and keep the commandments of God; give our love to Father and Mother Layton; we wish for them to read this letter and have a copy of the blessings, if they desire it. We sent a letter to them three weeks ago by post; we intend to send this by Mrs. Fielding and one to Brother and Sister Martin. Brother S________ has not the means to come at present.

Dear Mother, I would be glad if you would favor me in sending me word of the names of your father and mother so that I may be baptized for them and claim them at the first resurrection, for we that come into this Church have not only to save ourselves but our dead friends; but if you will come in this covenant, it will cause our hearts to rejoice, and yours will rejoice when meeting those that have long slept in the dust. I hope my dear father will not let the world see this letter, for it is only for our friends and the Saints. . . .

C. and M. LAYTON

In Myron W. McIntyre and Noel R. Barton, eds., Christopher Layton (Salt Lake City, Utah: Publishers Press, by Christopher Layton Family Organization, 1966), 15-16.

Joseph says he is willing to die for the people; the feelings of woe at the martyrdom.

. . . During the months of May and June [1844] the life of the Prophet Joseph was harassed. But the work of the Church was still carried on in Nauvoo, for in May missionaries were set apart for a mission to England and the apostles were scattered over the Eastern States. On the sixteenth of June Brother Joseph preached to the assembled Saints in the grove east of the Temple, while the rain fell heavily, from the Revelations of St. John the Divine. After the city had been declared under martial law, the Legion was drawn up in front of the Mansion House and the Prophet, standing upon the framework of a building opposite, addressed them. He asked us if we loved him, if we would stand by him and sustain the laws of our country? And we all answered, "Yes, yes." Then he said he was content; he would die for us. "I love you, my brethren; greater love hath no man than that he lay down his life for his friends; you have stood by me in the hour of trouble, and I am willing to sacrifice my life for your preservation." Then drawing his sword, "call God and angels to witness that this people shall have their legal rights or my blood shall be spilt upon the ground . . . and my body consigned to the tomb, but if there is one drop of blood shed on this occasion, the sword shall never again be sheathed until Christ comes to reign over the earth . . . Peace shall be taken from the land which permits these crimes against the Saints to go unavenged . . . May god bless you forever and ever." And we all answered, "Amen."

On the twentieth of June Brother Joseph sent word to all the apostles to return home immediately; and on the twenty-fourth he, with seventeen others, went to Carthage. At this time I was living at Big Mound, an English settlement about eight miles from Nauvoo, and there, while engaged in putting in sod corn, I heard of the Prophet's and Hyrum's death. The next morning I started to Carthage with those who went after the bodies. We met them on the road, Dr. Richards having dressed the wound of John Taylor and started for Nauvoo with Joseph's and Hyrum's bodies.

The wailing of the Saints when they saw the martyrs was terrible. Ten thousand people were addressed by Apostle Richards, who admonished them to keep the peace and trust to the law for a remedy for the awful crimes which had been committed and, if the law failed, to call upon God in heaven to avenge our wrongs. The bodies were placed in coffins, the funeral was held, while deep grief filled our hearts and sorrow rested heavily upon us, a stricken people. The woe of the Saints cannot be described. Our Prophet and Patriarch dead, only two of the apostles with us and one of them supposed to be dying, and all this time we were in constant expectation of an attack by the mob army. Our enemies were sure now that they had destroyed the gospel work, but it still lives, and will live, for it is the eternal work of God, and I here bear my testimony that I know that Joseph Smith, who established it, was a Prophet, holy and pure.

In Myron W. McIntyre and Noel R. Barton, eds., Christopher Layton (Salt Lake City, Utah: Publishers Press, by Christopher Layton Family Organization, 1966), 19-20.
