Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Leany, William

(December 19, 1815-December 29, 1891)

Arrives at Nauvoo, hears Prophet preach and introduce Congressman Goforth to the people.

I said I got to Nauvoo about the 3rd of July, 1843 and was just in time to see the return of the Prophet Joseph Smith from Dixon where he had been kidnapped and I heard him preach, and he introduced to the people the Honorable W. G. Goforth, an old Congressman from St. Clare County, Illinois who had come to Nauvoo to see the prophet and the Mormons. This same senator was the one who introduced in Congress a resolution to exonerate General Jackson from all blame for his martial law and for arresting a certain citizen who was accessory to a certain Judge Hall of a Court, fining him one thousand dollars.

"Autobiography of William Leany," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 9.

Heard one of Joseph's first sermons on celestial marriage; also saw Joseph point his finger at William Marks and old Father Cole, saying that if he revealed to them what he knew, they would cut his throat.

"[I heard the gospel preached] in the year 1834 and started for Missouri in 1835 and got so badly crippled and so [illegible] that I did not get to the church until in Nauvoo in 1843 (?) there I heard the prophet preach one of his first sermons to prepare us for celestial marriage when he turned right about face and pointed into the faces of pres. Wm. Marks, and Father Cole and said if he were to talk of the great thingsGod had in store for all who would keep his commandments they would be the first to cut his throat and turned [motioning?] to the [illegible] part his left hand on the head of Pres. PPP and said he would (illegible words) and say strange things had happened in Nauvoo and I . . ."

"Autobiography of William Leany," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 3.

Note: The handwriting is so faint and unclear the original is difficult to read, but the portions I have included in italics are accurate.
