Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Lee, John Doyle

(September 6, 1812-March 23, 1877)

Joseph said the Twelve could not remember all his instructions, but when needed, the Spirit would give them remembrance.

Winter Quarters, Tues., Feb. 16th, 1847 . . . [President Brigham Young said:] Brother Joseph [Smith] said that he had taught the Twelve all he knew concerning the order of the Kingdom but the difficulty was that they could not remember it as he could then, but when it was necessary they would not be at a loss for understanding, and I bear record of the truth of his words before God this day, that I always had an understanding and everything was brought to mind just as he taught them to us. All the ordinances of the Temple and building of the altar etc. came to me just right when they were to be done; . . .

Charles Kelley, ed., Journals of John D. Lee 1846-47 and 1859 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Printing Company, 1938), 81-82.

Note: Because of John D. Lee's involvement in the Mountain Meadows Massacre, some may worry about his credibility. Most of the materials taken from his journal and quoted herein were written prior to massacre, which occurred in 1857. His diaries, as they relate to Joseph Smith, appear historically sound in what they report.

In vision Joseph saw common ancestor of himself, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and others.

Winter Quarters, Omaha Nation, Wed., 17th [Feb.], 1847 . . . President [Heber C.] Kimball addressed the multitude. [He] said that on account of Brother Brigham's ill health [he] placed me as his representative to instruct you today. I am his brother and we are both heirs to the priesthood. How did we know it? Joseph had a vision and saw and traced back our bloods to the royal family.

Charles Kelley, ed., Journals of John D. Lee 1846-47 and 1859 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Printing Company, 1938), 91.

Brigham Young's vision in which he sees Joseph, and is instructed to tell the brethren to be patient and seek the Spirit, which always guides aright.

Winter Quarters, Omaha Nation, Sunday, Feb. 28th, '47 . . . President [Brigham Young] related his vision which he had while sick. . . . He saw Joseph [Smith] sitting in a splendid mansion. On coming up to him [he] embraced [him] in his arms and kissed him three times. [Brigham] asked him if he would return to the earth soon. He answered in the negative. He then asked the liberty of staying with him as he had long been deprived of his society. Joseph relied, "you must return back and comfort the brethren, for I know their anxiety to learn their duty concerning the law of adoption and seal of the covenant. Tell them to be patient and not to grieve the Holy Spirit, but to live so as always [to] have the whisperings of the Spirit and that will guide aright." This he impressed upon me three times and as I turned from him I went into the dark.

Charles Kelley, ed., Journals of John D. Lee 1846-47 and 1859 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Printing Company, 1938), 104-5.

Joseph prophesied Amasa Lyman to go on mission to the great men of the earth

Wed., March 14th, 1860 . . . I here conversed with Elder A. Lyman, one of the Twelve Apostles. . . . He and brother Dame were preparing to leave on their mission to England. The mission had been appointed Elder Lyman 22 years ago by the Prophet Joseph to preach to the great men of the earth.

Robert G. Cleland and Juanita Brooks, eds. A Mormon Chronicle: The Diaries of John D. Lee, 1848-1877 (Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press, 1983), 1:243.

Joseph: on the importance of a clear conscience

Tuesday, Nov. 22nd, 1870 . . . Joseph the Prophet once said that he would rather have every man on earth against him then to have his conscience accuse him.

Robert G. Cleland and Juanita Brooks, eds. A Mormon Chronicle: The Diaries of John D. Lee, 1848-1877 (Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press, 1983), 2:147.

Note: The spirit of what Joseph is here quoted as saying is also captured in a statement of Hyrum Smith, wherein he said: "A man is safe as long as he says what he knows to be true" (cited in Osborne J. P. Widtsoe, "Hyrum Smith, Patriarch," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 2, [April 1911]: 61).

Joseph prophesied that eventually all nations would rise up against Zion.

Friday, April 18, 1873 . . . While reading the injustice of the nation, the sayings of the Prophet Joseph Smith came forcibly into my mind. When the first mob came against us in Missouri, we thought it an awful thing that a mob should be suffered to rob and pillage our goods without being brought to justice in a land of equal rights and boasted liberty. But the Prophet said that this was only a drop in the bucket to what it would be. It was now only a settlement mob, but the time would be when it [would] grow a county, from that to a state and then to states, then the nation and finally all nations will come up against Zion. Know ye then, that the end of the wicked is and the redemption of Zion is at hand . . .

Robert G. Cleland and Juanita Brooks, eds. A Mormon Chronicle: The Diaries of John D. Lee, 1848-1877 (Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press, 1983), 2:235.

Joseph taught that he received the priesthood from Peter, James, and John.

Joseph Smith declared that he was called of God and given power and authority from heaven to do God's will; that he had received the keys of the Holy Priesthood from the apostles Peter, James and John, and had been dedicated, set apart and anointed as the prophet, seer and revelator; sent to open the dispensation of fullness of time, according to the word of the apostles; . . .

John D. Lee, Mormonism Unveiled (St. Louis, Mo.: N. D. Thompson & Co., 1881), 76.

Physical description of the Prophet.

Joseph Smith was a most extraordinary man; he was rather large in stature, some six feet two inches in height, well built though a little stoop shouldered, prominent and well-developed features, a Roman nose, light chestnut hair, upper lip full and rather protruding, chin broad and square, and eagle eye, and on the whole there was something in his manner and appearance that was bewitching and winning; his countenance was that of a plain, honest man, full of benevolence and philanthropy and void of deceit or hypocrisy. He was resolute and firm of purpose, strong as most men in physical power, and all who saw were forced to admire him, as he then looked and existed.

John D. Lee, Mormonism Unveiled (St. Louis, Mo.: N. D. Thompson & Co., 1881), 76.

Joseph's prowess as a wrestler demonstrated; Sidney Rigdon objects to the wrestling, and Joseph chides Sidney, who thus learned never to countermand an order from the Prophet.

In the sports of the day, such as wrestling, etc., he was over an average. Very few of the Saints had the strength needed to throw the Prophet in a fair tussel; in every gathering he was a welcome guest, and always added to the amusement of the people, instead of dampening their ardor. During the time that we were camping at Adam-ondi-Ahman, waiting to see what would be the result of the quarrel between our Church and the Gentiles, one Sunday morning (it had rained heavily the night before and the air was cold) the men were shivering over a few fire-brands feeling out of sorts and quite cast down. The Prophet came up while the brethren were moping around, and caught first one and then another and shook them up, and said, "Get out of here, and wrestle, jump, run, do anything but mope around; warm yourselves up; this inactivity will not do for soldiers." The words of the Prophet put life and energy into the men. A ring was soon formed, according to the custom of the people. The Prophet stepped into the ring, ready for a tussel with any comer. Several went into the ring to try their strength, but each one was thrown by the Prophet, until he had thrown several of the stoutest of the men present. Then he stepped out of the ring and took a man by the arm and led him in to take his place, and so it continuedthe men who were thrown retiring in favor of the successful one. A man would keep the ring so long as he threw his adversary. The style of wrestling varied with the desires of the parties. The Eastern men, or Yankees, used square hold, or collar and elbow; those from the Middle States side hold, and the Southern and Western men used breeches hold and old Indian hug or back hold. If a man was hurt he stood it without a murmur; it was considered cowardly and childish to whine when thrown down or hurt in the fall.

While the sport was at its height Sidney Rigdon, the mouthpiece of the Prophet, rushed into the ring, sword in hand, and said that he would not suffer a lot of men to break the Sabbath day in that manner. For a moment all were silent, then one of the brethren, with more presence of mind than the others, said to the Prophet, "Brother Joseph, we want you to clear us from blame, for we formed the ring by your request. You told us to wrestle, and now Brother Rigdon is bringing us to account for it."

The Prophet walked into the ring and said, as he made a motion with his hand: "Brother Sidney, you had better go out of here and let the boys alone; they are amusing themselves according to my orders. You are an old man. You go and get ready for meeting and let the boys alone." Just then catching Rigdon off his guard, as quick as a flash he knocked the sword from Rigdon's hand, then caught him by the shoulder, and said: "Now, old man, you must go out, or I will throw you down." Rigdon was as large a man as the Prophet, but not so tall. The prospect of a tussel between the Prophet and the mouthpiece of the Prophet, was fun for all but Rigdon, who pulled back like a craw-fish, but the resistance was useless, the Prophet dragged him from the ring, bareheaded, and tore Rigdon's fine pulpit coat from the collar to the waist; then he turned to the men and said: "Go in, boys, and have your fun. You shall never have it to say that I got you into any trouble that I did not get you out of."

Rigdon complained about the loss of his hat and the tearing of his coat. The Prophet said to him: "You were out of your place. Always keep your place and you will not suffer; but you got a little out of your place and you have suffered for it. You have no one to blame but yourself." After that Rigdon never countermanded the orders of the Prophet, to my knowledgehe knew who was the boss.

John D. Lee, Mormonism Unveiled (St. Louis, Mo.: N. D. Thompson & Co., 1881), 76-78.

Brother Haun disobeys Joseph counsel, thus leading to Haun's Mill massacre; Joseph, for his part, discerns Haun's true intent.

The morning after the battle of Crooked River, [Brother] Haun came to Far West to consult with the Prophet concerning the policy of the removal of the settlers on Log Creek to the fortified camps. Col. [Lyman] Wight and myself were standing by when the Prophet said to him: "Move in, by all means, if you wish to save your lives." Haun replied that if the settlers left their homes all of their property would be lost, and the Gentiles would burn their houses and other buildings. The Prophet said: " You had much better lose your property than your lives, one can be replaced, the other cannot be restored; but there is no need of your losing either if you will only do as you are commanded." Haun said that he considered the best plan was for all of the settlers to move into and around the mill, and use the blacksmith's shop and other buildings as a fort in case of attack; in this way he thought they would be perfectly safe. "You are at liberty to do so if you think best," said the Prophet. Haun then departed, well satisfied that he had carried his point.

The Prophet turned to Col. Wight and said: "That man did not come for counsel, but to induce me to tell him to do as he pleased; which I did. Had I commanded them to move in here and leave their property, they would have called me a tyrant. I wish they were here for their own safety. I am confident that we will soon learn that they have been butchered in a fearful manner."

John D. Lee, Mormonism Unveiled (St. Louis, Mo.: N. D. Thompson & Co., 1881), 78-79.
