Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Leishman, Catherine Thomas

(March 17, 1834-1927)

Lands with family at Nauvoo in 1843, and Joseph discerns her father's desire to meet him; the Prophet helps them find a home, and warns her father against overbuilding; she schooled with the Prophet's children, remembers the martyrdom, and the transfiguration of Brigham Young, which she thought was the return of the Prophet as a resurrected being.

I, Catherine Thomas, was born March 17th, 1834, the youngest of the twelve children. At the age of nine years, with my father and most of our family, some of the older children having married and remained in Mississippi, moved to Nauvoo, in 1843. We landed there in the night time on the Steamer MENDOTA which once during our voyage came near being wrecked. But the Captain (not of our faith) being very alarmed, granted the Saints permission to hold prayer meeting. The Lord heard their prayers, good results followed and all were saved. This was at a place called the Rapids in the Mississippi River nearly a day's journey from Nauvoo, which place we were so anxious to see.

My brother was an artist and left many beautiful paintings in the boat and never recovered them. Some were portraits of our own family. He afterwards helped to paint the Martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

We all ate breakfast at the landing, but father said he would fast until he had seen the Prophet Joseph, to whose place he started. When within two blocks of the house the Prophet, seeing father, crossed the street and gave his hand saying, "How are you Brother?" father saying, "I do not know you," the Prophet then said, "I am the man you are looking for," all the time holding father's hand. Father then put a piece of gold in the Prophet's hand. Joseph said, "God bless you brother, you shall never want for bread." He never did. The Prophet then said, "Bring your family down to my house," but father, thanking him, said that owing to our long journey I must first get a place where we can set ourselves in order.

Then the Prophet told him he had an empty house which father rented at once. We remained at the Prophet's house until we bought a home of our own, near where the Prophet lived. All of these things were a strong testimony to my father which lasted him until his death in September 1867, aged 87 years.

Once while father was building a storehouse for the purpose of merchandizing, the Prophet said, "Brother, I fear you are building too extensive," which proved to be true for trouble soon began. The Saints were persecuted and driven and our store and nearly all of our possessions were left behind.

The next year, 1844, the Prophet was martyred in the Carthage Jail. That memorable day was the saddest of all days for the Saints. I was then about 12 years of age and was a living witness to these trying scenes.

I have heard the Prophet speak many times. I have played and also gone to school with his children. I saw the men bring the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum, his brother, home after they were killed and I looked upon their dead faces as they lay in their coffins and was a witness to all the trying scenes that followed. The Saints were now as a flock without a shepherd. Apostles and missionaries were called home. The Saints were soon called to the Temple and the great question as to who should be their Leader was settled. Then Brigham Young was chosen to fill the vacancy of our beloved Prophet. I saw Brigham Young rise to take his place as President of our Church and testify the he appeared to me and others to be Joseph the Prophet himself in person and voice, and I exclaimed "Oh, the Prophet Joseph is resurrected." My sister Rachel said "No, that is Brother Brigham Young."

"Catherine Thomas Leishman, Autobiographical Sketch," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
