Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Lewis, David

(b. May 5, 1818)

Knew Joseph before Church was organized, at which time he said he heard Joseph announce that he would die for the Church; present at the organization of the Church, and baptized one month later by Joseph; Joseph was inspired to know Lewis would be preserved on journey home following the baptism; also, he knew of Joseph's work in translating Bok of Mormon while it was transpiring; remembers Joseph's anxiety about building Kirtland Temple; went on mission, and according to a prophecy by a prophetess, was instrumental in introducing gospel to Buffalo, New York.

My name is David Lewis. I am the son of Lemuel and Weighty Selecta (Stanton) Lewis and was born at Saranc, Clinton County, New York, May 5, 1818.

The first time I ever saw the Prophet Joseph he was speaking concerning his mission; that was two years before the organization of the Church. He said: "I am come to die for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,"* He lived at that time in Fayette, N. Y., at the place where the Church was organized. ** I never lived in Pennsylvania, but passed through there while on my mission with Brother Henry H. Jacobs. I lived with my parents 4 miles from where the Church was organized. When I was 8 years old my father had left Clinton County and located in Western New York. I was at the meeting where the Church was organized, April 6, 1830. When I went to meeting to be baptized about a month after the Church was organized I remember I had two miles to go down the road and to follow a cow trail through low lands.

My recollection is that I was baptized in a small stream. The Prophet baptized me. I don't remember where the town of Colesville was, nor Waterloo. The size of the house where the Church was organized was, I should judge, about 14' by 16. It had no floor except dirt. The village was a very small one, just a little place; I think it was on level ground.

("Do you remember hearing of Fayette?" was propounded by one of the brethren). Yes, sir, that's the place I was trying to think of, that's where the Church was first organized. The question was here asked, "David, are you tired?" He replied, "No, I never get tired of talking about the church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." It seems to me that at the organization of the Church Joseph first laid his hands upon Oliver Cowdery and ordained him, and then Oliver ordained Joseph. How I came to be present at the organization of the Church was, I had spoken to Joseph, about a week before that about being baptized. Joseph told me to ask my father and mother and if possible get their consent. I went home and asked my mother if she was willing that I join the Church. She answered, "What church?" I said, "Joseph's church." She said, "Yes David, you can do that if you please, but David the whole world is against them, including all the good ministers." I said, "I like the way Joseph speaks, he preaches baptism for the remission of sins, the laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost, etc." I just went up there to see Joseph; I used to often go over to see Joseph. I cannot tell what Joseph was doing at the time of the organization of the church, excepting that he was engaged in general church work and translating the Book of Mormon. He always wore a white shirt with a ruffle on the breast about 2 inches wide. Just before entering the house in which the Church was organized I heard Joseph say "Come let us organize the Church." He laid his hands upon the head of everybody present and confirmed them members of the Church.*** There were present at that meeting besides myself Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Peter Whitmer jun., and Samuel H. Smith. The Sacrament was administered upon that occasion for the first time. I attended meeting regularly every Sunday at that place until we moved to Kirtland. I was baptized on my 12th birthday which was May 5, 1830 just 29 days after the organization of the Church. Before leaving home for the purpose of being baptized I promised my mother that I would come right home as soon as the ceremony was performed. After the ceremony there was quite a severe thunderstorm, and Joseph asked me to remain under shelter until the storm had passed. I told him of the promise I had made to my mother. Joseph said, "You better stay till the rain is over." I said, "I have to go, Joseph, and I must go to keep my promise with my mother." Joseph then shook hands with me and asked the Lord to bless me, and he promised me that the Lord would be with me, and would take me safely home to my mother. On the way home I ran up against a big elm tree I was frightened and thought I was lost. I cried in my fright, but soon I thought of the Prophet's words, that the Lord would guide me home in safety to my mother. I thereupon knelt down and asked the Lord to take me safely to my home and to be a lamp to my feet and a guide to my pathway. Suddenly a light appeared which resembled the light of a coal oil lamp. I started for home and the light went ahead of me directly on the path where I walked. This light kept moving before me until I reached my home. My mother who was looking out for me saw it also and it lit up her window with its rays, it went around the back door of the house and stopped there. My mother opened the door and just as soon as the door was opened the light went out. I afterwards told Joseph about the light guiding me home. He said, "David, I knew that you would get lost in the woods and that the Lord would guide you home."

When we left Fayette we went with the body of the Church to Kirtland. My father with his team moved with the rest of us. My best recollection is that we traveled all the way by land. I do not remember seeing any houses in Kirtland till after we goat there. Joseph seemed to be more anxious at that time about starting a Temple than anything else.

At the age of 14 years if I recollect correctly I was called to go on a mission with Brother Henry Jacobs to the east. One day while walking by the bank of a river we saw some men pull a women out of the water, she was apparently dead. Bro. Jacobs placed his hands upon her and commanded her in the name of Jesus Christ to return to life. She immediately sprang to her feet and on learning who we were and of our doctrines she requested baptism at our hands. Brother Jacobs baptized this women there and then and she was confirmed just as soon as she came out of the water. In the confirmation of this sister as soon as Brother Jacobs said, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost" she started to speak in tongues. Brother Jacobs had the interpretation thereof which was a blessing upon us and upon the labors of our mission. When she stopped speaking in tongues she said, "This child," pointing to me, "will be a medium of opening the doors to you in the city of Buffalo, and when you get to the city of New York you shall be instrumental in working a mighty miracle in confirmation of the divinity of the work in which you are engaged as Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints."

When we arrived in buffalo we met two Sectarian preachers. Brother Jacobs turned to them and said, "We are two Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ." One of them said, "We have just put two of your Elders out of the city." He referred to elders Sylvester B. Stoddard and David Pettegrew. Brother Jacobs said "That makes no difference to us. Will you open your doors to us to preach the Gospel, to myself and partner?" "Where is your partner?" interrogated the preacher. "Here he is" said Brother Jacobs, putting his hand on my shoulder." The preacher said, "You don't mean to say that that boy can preach," and Brother Jacobs replied, "Yes he can if you but open your doors to him."

Finally an agreement was entered into between us by which we were to go and hear them preach in the forenoon and they would come and hear "the boy" preach in the afternoon. We went to their house of worship in the forenoon. The old preacher got up, he stammered and stuttered, but could not make a sensible talk, and failing in their purpose to preach to us they dismissed the meeting and pointing to me they said, addressing the congregation, "This little boy will preach the gospel to you in the afternoon" and invited all to come and hear me.

In the afternoon we again met in the same building. An old man was carried into the meeting. He had not walked for 8 years the meeting was opened and I commenced addressing the congregation, taking for my text the Savior's commission to his Apostles, "Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel, etc." I preached on this text for 1 hour and a quarter. Words came to me just as fast as I could give utterance to them. Joseph had told me not to think of what a I would say and I should have words given me to confound the wise and none should gain say or resist me.

The old man who was carried into the meeting stood up and said, "Young man, I you have the power of this Priesthood as you have preached, I want you to heal me." I looked at him and said, "What is the matter with you?" He said, "I have been 8 years that I have not been able to put my foot to the floor, if you have power I want you to heal me." I looked at him, and I said, "Stretch forth your right foot, sir;" he did so and I said again, "Stretch forth your left." He obeyed. Then I said, "Be ye made whole every whit. He jumped up and said, "I am a well man." The old preacher then came forward and said, "If you will preach this evening we will make an appointment to come and hear you." We said we would.

In the evening we met again and Brother Jacobs spoke from the text, "Repent and be baptized every one of you," etc. When Bro. Jacobs got through preaching all who wanted baptism were requested to stand up. Among those who responded by arising was the preacher, who had recently mobbed the brethren out of town. He asked for baptism there 17 others who arose and wanted to be baptized the next morning. Accordingly next morning we baptized 17, including the preacher, who was ordained an Elder and set apart to preside over a branch of the church which we there and then organized.

We were two years on that mission. We preached the gospel during these two years, all the way from Kirtland and around to the city of Buffalo and around to New York, if I am not mistaken. Brother Henry Jacobs was my companion all the time and when we returned to Kirtland the Temple was completed to the top of the first floor or there abouts.

"Testimony Taken in the presence of Andrew Jenson, Hiram B. Clawson, Martin S. Lindsay, Stokey Anderson and M. Minerva Jenson, Historian's Office September 10, 1908," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some changes in grammar, punctuation, and spelling have been modernized.

Note: In the left hand margin of this typescript, next to the third and fourth paragraphs, Andrew Jenson has written: "This statement was afterwards proven to be untrue," and signed "Andrew Jenson."

*Lewis's memory is faulty: Prior to the organization of the Church Joseph knew he would organize it, but he did not know the full name of the Church until some years after the Church was organized.

**This too shows faulty memory: Two years before the Church was organized, Joseph and Emma lived with Emma's parents in Harmony, PA. He did spend time at the Whitmer Farm between June 1 and July 1, 1829, while translating the Book of Mormon.

***This too seems unlikely, as they had not yet been baptized.
