Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Lightner, Mary Elizabeth Rollins

(April 9, 1818-December 17, 1913)

Newel K. Whitney introduced the Prophet to the Rollins family; young Mary meets him, is blessed by him, and he gives her the copy of the Book of Mormon.

Before or about the time I finished the last chapter [of the Book of Mormon], the Prophet Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland, and moved into a part of Newel K. Whitney's house (Uncle Algernon's partner in the Mercantile Business), while waiting for his goods to be put in order. Brother Whitney brought the Prophet Joseph to our house and introduced him to the older ones of the family (I was not in at the time.) In looking around he saw the Book of Mormon on the shelf, and asked how that book came to be there. He said, "I sent that book to Brother Morley." Uncle told him how his niece had obtained it. He asked, "Where is your niece?" I was sent for; when he saw me he looked at me so earnestly, I felt almost afraid. After a moment or two he came and put his hands on my head and gave me a great blessing, the first I ever received, and made me a present of the book, and said he would give Brother Morley another. He came in time to rebuke the evil spirits, and set the church in order. We all felt that he was a man of God, for he spoke with power, and as one having authority in very deed.

Mary Lightner, "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 17 (July 1926): 194-95.

Lightners move close to Nauvoo; the Prophet, tearful, prophesied that if the left the Church they would encounter great sorrow, suffering property loss, sickness, loss of children, and that Mary would have to work harder than ever before; Joseph sought to baptize Mr. Lightner, who refused; Joseph prophesied he would never be baptized, unless it was immediately before he died.

My husband could get no work, and I commenced teaching painting to Julia Murdock Smith, to Steven Mark's daughter; and to Sarah Ann Whitney. I also procured a lot a block below the Prophet Joseph Smith's mansion; but as we could get no more work in Nauvoo. Mr. Lightner found a job cutting cord wood, 15 miles up the river, at a place called Pontusuc. He got a little log room with a floor made of logs split in two, and very rough. The Prophet Joseph, on learning that we were going to leave there, felt very sad, and while the tears ran down his cheeks, he prophesied that if we attempted to leave the Church we would have plenty of sorrow; for we would make property on the right hand and lose it on the left, we would have sickness on sickness, and lose our children, and that I would have to work harder than I ever dreamed of; and, "At last when you are worn out, and almost ready to die, you will get back to the Church." I thought these were hard sayings and felt to doubt them. But the sequel proved them true. Before leaving Nauvoo on the 4th of July there was a general parade of the Legion; about noon Emma came to me to borrow my dining table, as the officers were to dine with her, and the Prophet Joseph came also, he said the Lord commanded him to baptize us that day. Emma asked, "Why is this? They have always been good members in the Church, and another thing, dinner will be ready soon and you certainly won't go in those clothes?" "No," he told us, and he wanted us to be ready by the time he was, for he would not wait for dinner; as we lived on the bank of the river, we were soon ready. Brother Henry and wife, Aunt Gilbert and myself were baptized and confirmed. The Prophet Joseph tried hard to get Mr. Lightner to go into the water, but he said he did not feel worthy, but would, some other time. Joseph said to me that he never would be baptized, unless it was a few moments before he died.

It was with sorrowful feeling that I went to Pontusuc to live, but by my taking in sewing we made out to live, and that was all. A lady called on me and asked me if we had a cow. I said, "No." She said if I would let her have my bedstead she would give me a cow and two pigs. I gladly accepted her offer, and slept on the floor until we could nail up a substitute. In a short time George was taken sick and died. I was alone with him at the time; my husband had gone to a neighbor's for assistance. An old lady helped me dress him, and Mr. Lightner had to make the coffin, as he was the only carpenter in the place. The two men that dug the grave, and a little girl, were all that went to help bury my darling. I felt that the Prophet's words were beginning to be fulfilled.

Mary Lightner, "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 17 (July 1926): 202-3.

At first meeting of Prophet with the Kirtland Saints Joseph announced that the Savior was present; later an angel came, commanding the practice of plural marriage; Joseph had several wives, she being one; she tells of her conversation with Joseph, and of how she gained a testimony of the principle of plural marriage.

The Smith family was driven from New York, and a small church had been organized. Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer, and Ziba Peterson were members. Well, I being anxious, though young, to learn about the plates from those who knew all about it, my mother and I went up to the Smith family the next night after they came to Kirtland. As I went in, there were two or three others present. They were all there, from the old gentleman and his wife to all the sons and daughters. As we stood there talking to them, Joseph and Martin Harris came in. Joseph looked around very solemnly. It was the first time some of them had ever seen him.

Said he, "There are enough here to hold a little meeting." They got a board and put it across two chairs to make seats. Martin Harris sat on a little box at Joseph's feet. They sang and prayed. Joseph got up and began to speak to us. As he began to speak very solemnly and very earnestly, all at once his countenance changed and he stood mute. Those who looked at him that day said there was a search light within him, over every part of his body. I never saw anything like it on the earth. I could not take my eyes off him; he got so white that anyone who saw him would have thought he was transparent. I remember I thought I could almost see the cheek bones through the flesh. I have been through many changes since but that is photographed on my brain. I shall remember it and see in my mind's eye as long as I remain upon the earth.

He stood some moments. He looked over the congregation as if to pierce every heart. He said, "Do you know who has been in your midst?" One of the Smiths said an angel of the Lord. Martin Harris said, "It was our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ." Joseph put his hand down on Martin and said: "God revealed that to you. Brethren and sisters, the Spirit of God has been here. The Savior has been in your midst this night and I want you to remember it. There is a veil over your eyes for you could not endure to look upon Him. You must be fed with milk, not with strong meat. I want you to remember this as if it were the last thing that escaped my lips. He has given all of you to me and has sealed you up to everlasting life that where he is, you may be also. And if you are tempted of Satan say, 'Get behind me, Satan.'"

These words are figured upon my brain and I never took my eye off his countenance. Then he knelt down and prayed. I have never heard anything like it before or since. I felt that he was talking to the Lord and that power rested down upon the congregation. Every soul felt it. The spirit rested upon us in every fiber of our bodies, and we received a sermon from the lips of the representative of God.

Much has come and gone from me through the powers and vicissitudes of this Church. I have been in almost every mob. I have been driven about and told I would be shot and had a gun pointed at me, but I stayed with the Church until it was driven from Nauvoo. The words of the Prophet that had been revealed to him always have been with me from the beginning to the end of the gospel. Every principle that has been given in the Church by the prophet is true. I know whereon I stand, I know what I believe, I know what I know and I know what I testify to you is the living truth. As I expect to meet it at the bar of the eternal Jehovah, it is true. And when you stand before the bar you will know. He preached polygamy and he not only preached it, but he practiced it. I am a living witness to it. It was given to him before he gave it to the Church. An angel came to him and the last time he came with a drawn sword in his hand and told Joseph if he did not go into that principle, he would slay him. Joseph said he talked to him soberly about it, and told him it was an abomination and quoted scripture to him. He said in the Book of Mormon it was an abomination in the eyes of the Lord, and they were to adhere to these things except the Lord speak. I am the first being that the revelation [D&C 132] was given to him for and I was one thousand miles away in Missouri, for we went up to Jackson County in 1841 [i.e.1831].

I was there in all the tribulations and trials. I have been in the houses that have been stoned. The rocks have been thrown criss-cross in every direction. I have seen the brethren shot and ruined for life. I saw the first martyr dead and a more heavenly corpse I never saw or expect to see on the face of the earth. His face was so happy. I have seen our bishop tarred and feathered in the streets of Missouri. They took off his shirt and covered him with tar and then took a pillow and turned the feathers over him. I looked at him and thought if ever man was counted worthy to be a martyr, he was. His life proved it for he lived an upright and honorable life and was beloved by the prophet while he lived and after he died the prophet honored him. Two of his sisters were Joseph's wives. Emma took them by the hand and gave them to Joseph.

I asked him if Emma knew about me, and he said, "Emma thinks the world of you." I was not sealed to him until I had a witness. I had been dreaming for a number of years I was his wife. I thought I was a great sinner. I prayed to God to take it from me for I felt it was a sin; but when Joseph sent for me he told me all of these things. "Well," said I, "don't you think it was an angel of the devil that told you these things?" Said he, "No, it was an angel of God. God Almighty showed me the difference between an angel of light and Satan's angels. The angel came to me three times between the years of 1834 and 1842 and said I was to obey that principle or he would slay me." "But," said he, "they called me a false and fallen prophet but I am more in favor with my God this day than I ever was in all my life before. I know that I shall be saved in the Kingdom of God. I have the oath of God upon it and God cannot lie; all that he gives me I shall take with me for I have that authority and that power conferred upon me."

Well, I talked with him for a long time and finally I told him I would never be sealed to him until I had a witness. Said he, "You shall have a witness." Said I, "If God told you that, why does he not tell me?" He asked me if I was going to be a traitor. "I have never told a mortal and shall never tell a mortal I had such a talk from a married man," said I. "Well," said he, "pray earnestly for the angel said to me you should have a witness." Well, Brigham Young was with me. He said if I had a witness he wanted to know it. "Why should I tell you?" said I. "Well," said he, "I want to know for myself." Said he, "Do you know what Joseph said? Since we left the office the angel appeared to him and told him he was well pleased with him and that you should have a witness."

I made it a subject of prayer and I worried about it because I did not dare to speak to a living being except Brigham Young. I went out and got between three haystacks where no one could see me. As I knelt down I thought, why not pray as Moses did? He prayed with his hands raised. When his hands were raised, Israel was victorious, but when they were not raised, the Philistines were victorious. I lifted my hands and I have heard Joseph say the angels covered their faces. I knelt down and if ever a poor mortal prayed, I did. A few nights after that an angel of the Lord came to me and if ever a thrill went through a mortal, it went through me. I gazed upon the clothes and figure but the eyes were like lightning. They pierced me from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet. I was frightened almost to death for a moment. I tried to waken my aunt, but I could not. The angel leaned over me and the light was very great, although it was night. When my aunt woke up she said she had seen a figure in white robes pass from our bed to my mother's bed and pass out of the window.

Joseph came up the next Sabbath. He said, "Have you had a witness yet?" "No." "Well," said he, "the angel expressly told me you should have." Said I, "I have not had a witness, but I have seen something I have never seen before. I saw an angel and I was frightened almost to death. I did not speak." He studied a while and put his elbows on his knees and his face in his hands. He looked up and said, "How could you have been such a coward?" Said I, "I was weak." "Did you think to say, 'Father, help me?" "No." "Well, if you had just said that, your mouth would have been opened for that was an angel of the living God. He came to you with more knowledge, intelligence, and light than I have ever dared to reveal." I said, "If that was an angel of light, why did he not speak to me?" "You covered your face and for this reason the angel was insulted." Said I, "Will it ever come again?" He thought a moment and then said, "No, not the same one, but if you are faithful you shall see greater things than that." And then he gave me three signs of what would take place in my own family, although my husband was far away from me at the time. Every work came true. I went forward and was sealed to him. Brigham Young performed the sealing, and Heber C. Kimball the blessing. I know he had six wives and I have known some of them from childhood up. I knew he had three children. They told me. I think two are living today but they are not known as his children as they go by other names.

"Mary Elizabeth Lightner, Address at Brigham Young University,

April 14, 1905," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 1-3.

She heard Joseph say that he rolled the kingdom of his shoulders onto those of the Twelve; Joseph asked the Lord to take him, and knew he must seal his testimony with his blood.

These are things I can testify to as the living truth, and I have told it to the Josephites. There is a great deal said about this church and the Josephites. I never knew of Joseph appointing him [i.e., Joseph Smith III] to be the prophet. I have never known him to say it, and I have known the boy ever since he was twelve years of age. I heard Joseph say this: "I have rolled this kingdom off of my shoulders onto the shoulders of the Twelve and they can carry out this work and build up His kingdom." Said he, "I am tired. I have been mobbed, I have suffered so much from outsiders and from my own family. Some of the brethren think they can carry out this work better than I can, far better. I have asked the Lord to take me away. I have to seal my testimony to this generation with my blood. I have to do it for this work will never progress until I am gone for the testimony is of no force until the testator is dead. People little know who I am when they talk about me, and they never will know until they see me weighed in the balance in the Kingdom of God. Then they will know who I am, and see me as I am. I dare not tell them and they do not know me." These words were spoken with such power that they penetrated the heart of every soul that believed on him.

"Mary Elizabeth Lightner, Address at Brigham Young University,

April 14, 1905," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 3.

Joseph taught that persecution always follows the Saints, and is thus a sign of the true church.

Now about these JosephitesI have not a word to say about Joseph [Smith III]. He is doing a great work in the first principles. He does not believe in endowments; he does not believe in some other things; and he does not recognize this Church as the true church. But we have one criterion to go by. Joseph said, "The servant cannot be greater than the Master. If they persecute me they will persecute you." Has his son Joseph ever been persecuted? Have they been whipped and murdered in cold blood? They can go into the world as members of the re-organized church. They do not believe the right one took Joseph's place.

"Mary Elizabeth Lightner, Address at Brigham Young University,

April 14, 1905," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 5.

Tells of first meeting of the Prophet with the Kirtland Saints, and of the Savior appearing at that meeting.

I joined the Church in the year 1830, in Kirtland, Ohio, just six months after it was first organized. I was then twelve years old.

The Smith family came to Kirtland early in the spring of 1831. After they were settled in their house, mother and I went to see them. We had heard so much about the Golden Bible, as it was then called, that we were very anxious to hear more. The whole Smith family, excepting Joseph, was there. As we stood talking to them, Brother Joseph and Martin Harris came in with two or three others. When the greetings were over, Brother Joseph looked around very solemnly (it was the first time some of them had ever seen him) and said, "There are enough here to hold a little meeting."

A board was put across two chairs to make seats. Martin Harris sat on a little box at Joseph's feet. They sang and prayed, then Joseph got up to speak. He began very solemnly and very earnestly; all at once his countenance changed and he stood mute. He turned so white, he seemed perfectly transparent. Those who looked at him that night said he looked like he had a search light within him. I never saw anything like it on earth. I could not take my eyes away from him. I remember I thought we could almost see the bones through the flesh of his face.

I shall remember him as he looked then as long as I live.

He stood some moments looking over the congregation, as if to pierce each heart, then said, "Do you know who has been in your midst this night?"

One of the Smiths said, "An angel of the Lord."

Martin Harris said, "It was our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ."

Joseph put his hand down on Martin's head and said, "The Spirit of God revealed that to thee. Yes, brothers and sisters, the Savior has been in your midst this night, and I want you all to remember it. There is a veil over your eyes, for you could not endure to look upon him. You must be fed with m ilk not with strong meat. I want you to remember this as if it were the last things that escapes my lips. He has given you all to me, and commanded me to seal you up to Everlasting Life, that where he is there you may be also. And if you are tempted of Satan, say 'Get behind me, Satan, for my salvation is secure.'" Then he knelt down and prayed. And such a prayer, I never heard before or since. We all felt that he was talking to the Lord, and that the Spirit of the Lord rested down on the congregation.

Mary E. Rollins Lightner, "Testimony," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 556-57.

Joseph approved of Mary's interpretation of tongues, and noted that normally the interpretation of tongues belongs to the priesthood.

On one occasion after interpreting [what someone had said in tongues] something about the saints going to be driven there was a great cry raised by the High Council. They wrote to the Prophet and said I was talking with an evil spirit. Joseph answered: "What she has said is true and correct. Interpretation right belongs to the priesthood, but you did not ask for it, she did and received it." I lost the gift after we were driven. I was well acquainted with all those who saw the plates and all who handled them, even those who saw Moroni.

Elsie E. Barrett, "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner," typescript biographical sketch, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 3.

Note: Elsie E. Barrett is a granddaughter of Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner.

Joseph prophesied that if Mary lived thirty years beyond his death, she would have evidence of proof of Book of Mormon; also said he had to seal his testimony with his blood, that God approved of his ministry, and that his greatness would be known at the judgment bar of God.

One day after asking about the Golden Bible he [i.e., Joseph Smith] told me if I lived 30 years after his death I would see and read things to prove the book true. I said: "Are you going to die?" (and) he answered: "I must seal my testimony with my blood, the testimony is of no force until the testator is dead. They say I am a fallen Prophet, but I am more in favor with my God this day than ever before in my life. They know (not) who I am, and I dare not tell. They will not know until they see me at the bar of God."

Elsie E. Barrett, "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner," typescript biographical sketch, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 3.

Joseph desired to help others to obtain salvation; he also knew he would be saved.

Another time in our talk he [i.e., Joseph Smith] mentioned a woman's name who had sinned very much, and said "I would like to do something for her so she can be saved." I asked, "Brother Joseph, how do you know you yourself will be saved?" To which he replied, "I know I will, I have the oath of God upon it and God cannot lie."

Elsie E. Barrett, "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner," typescript biographical sketch, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 3.

John was caught up into "the seventh heaven."

He (Joseph Smith) said, "John the Revelator was caught up to the third heaven, but I know one who was caught up to the seventh heaven, and saw and heard things not lawful for me to utter."

Elsie E. Barrett, "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner," typescript biographical sketch, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 4.

Note: If Lightner's memory is correct in saying it was John who was caught up, then Joseph Smith is adding something to our knowledge not contained in the scriptures. If she is confusing John with Paul, who said he was caught up to the third heaven, the account is found in 2 Corinthians 12:2; see also Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Joseph Fielding Smith, comp. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1976), 247.

Eating cold mush: an example of Joseph's sensitivity to the feelings of others.

One morning [circa 1831] Joseph came while we were eating breakfast of cold mush. It was after we had lost most of our things and we were very poor; but my stepfather liked cold mush so had told Mother not to fix anything else. When Joseph came in Mother and I looked at each other and must have shown it for he asked for some, first saying "Brother Burk that mush looks good. I like mush." Of course he was asked to have some. He ate heartily but we thought he did it to lessen our embarrassment.

Elsie E. Barrett, "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner," typescript biographical sketch, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 4.
