Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Littlefield, Lyman Omer

(November 22, 1819-September 1, 1893)

Compares Joseph' speaking style to that of the famed orator, Sidney Rigdon.

Sidney Rigdon was a fine-looking man, polished in address and powerful in oratory; but he was far behind Joseph in the possession of those magnetic powers of the mind which attracted the multitude, and chained the attention of his auditors. In comparison, Rigdon's eloquence was delightful, like the ripple of the merry brooklet that glides over its pebbled bed or dashes down a narrow declivity; but the testimony of Joseph struck through the heart, and, like the thunder of the cataract, declared at once the dignity and matchless supremacy of the Creator.

Lyman Omer Littlefield, "Autobiography (1819-1848)," Reminiscences of Latter-day Saints (Logan, Utah: The Utah Journal Co., 1888), 35-36.

Describes first meeting with the Prophet, and the Godlike power associated with him.

I was a mere boy [in 1834], between thirteen and fourteen years old, when I first met the Prophet. His appearance as a man won my reverence for him; but his conversation and public teachingall attended by a power truly Godlikeestablished me in the faith and knowledge of his prophetic mission which strengthened with the lapse of years until he sealed his testimony with his blood in the jail at Carthage, in 1844.

Lyman O. Littlefield, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 2 (15 January 1892): 64-65.

First and lasting impressions of the Prophet, including a description of Joseph.

The opportunity [to meet the Prophet] came, and I first beheld him a tall, well-proportioned man, busily mingling with the members of Zion's Camp, shaking hands with them, meeting them with friendly greetings and carefully seeing to their comforts. His familiar, yet courteous and dignified manner, his pleasant and intelligent countenance, his intellectual and well-formed forehead, the expressive and philanthropic facial lineaments, the pleasant smile and the happy light that beamed from his mild blue eyes; all these were among the attractive attributes that at once awakened a responsive interest in the mind of every kindly beholder, which increased in intensity as the acquaintance continued. With his most familiar friends he was social, conversational and often indulged in harmless jokes; but when discoursing upon complicated topics that pertained to the welfare of individuals or the progressiveness of communities, his elucidations were clear and so full of common sense and genuine philosophy that the candid and fair-minded felt interested by his views, though they might decline to entertain or promulgate all of the self-evident truths he originated.

Such is a brief though imperfect pen picture of this celebrated man; he was all this when I first beheld him in this traveling camp, and is it any wonder that I, so young in years, should be filled with sensations of intense pleasure and respect for him when I first met him . . . ?

Lyman O. Littlefield, "The Prophet Joseph Smith in Zion's Camp," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 1 (1 January 1892): 56-57.

Impressed by the affectionate reunion of Joseph and Hyrum on Zion's Camp.

[Joseph Smith] received our little company [in Zion's Camp] with manifestations of friendship and joy. The meeting with himself and his brother Hyrum was as might have been expected with two such noble men, united together by natural ties and with souls enlightened by divine influences, the fruits of which was to them the knowledge that God lived and communicated His will from the heavens to them as He had done anciently before the channel of revelation was closed.

Lyman O. Littlefield, "The Prophet Joseph Smith in Zion's Camp," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 1 (1 January 1892): 57.

Tells of an experience on Zion's Camp in which the Prophet, busy with administrative details, stopped and spoke to Littlefield, who was but a boy; he also tells of the effect that the Prophet's action had on him, and of Joseph's love of little children.

[During the Zion's Camp march] . . . I was then so very young I was naturally enough not made acquainted with the intricate or minute order in which the camp was organized for traveling; but I remember that they were classed into messes of tens for purposes of cooking, washing our clothing, eating, sleeping, etc. While there the men were paraded outside of the camp for exercise and instruction. This created within me, as I remember, some lonesome reflections. I sat down upon a rock where the men were passing, the better to observe their movements. While thus seated, the Prophet Joseph Smith, who happened to be passing by in quite a hurry, noticed me. He stepped to where I sat alone. It might have been my isolated position that attracted him. I knew not the motive; but that man, who to me appeared so good and so godlike, really halted in his hurry to notice meonly a boy. Placing one of his hands upon my head, he said: "Well, bub, is there no place for you?"

This recognition from the man whom I then knew was a Prophet of God created within me a tumult of emotions. I could make him no reply. My young heart was filled with joy to me unspeakable. He passed on and left me in my lonely attitude, for he was then in quite a hurry to accomplish something pertaining to the movements of the men which could not be delayed.

I mention this circumstance as it illustrates a trait of his character, which in after years he has often been seen to exemplify. He was naturally fond of the youngespecially little children. He did not like to pass a child, however small, without speaking to it. He has been know to actually cross a street if he saw a child alone on the opposite side, to speak to it or to inquire if it had lost its way.

Lyman O. Littlefield, "The Prophet Joseph Smith in Zion's Camp," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 4 (15 February 1892): 109.
