Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Lott, Cornelius Peter

(September 27, 1798-July 6, 1850)

Lott became superintendent of the Prophet's farm outside Nauvoo; had many conversations with Joseph while working together; felt Spirit of the Lord when in Joseph's presence.

The next four years there were desperate depredations against the Saints. Upon the escape of our Prophet, Joseph Smith from the Liberty jail, the exiles gathered at Commerce and immediately commenced building what was to become the most beautiful city of Illinois, 'Nauvoo, the beautiful,' it was called. Here too was built the beautiful Nauvoo Temple.

The historical Joseph Smith farm was located just three miles from the City of Nauvoo. It consisted of one-half section of prairie land which was fenced in. On it was an 8 room house consisting of 4 rooms upstairs and 4 rooms downstairs, and a barn suitably equipped with all the essentials. The homestead was an admiration of the Prohet and a special attraction to the many travelers passing through the largest city in the state, Nauvoo, in the direction of Carthage, Quincy, Monmouth and the cities further east.

My father, Cornelius P. Lott became superintendent of this beautiful farm in 1842 and Permilia Darrow Lott became landlady of the dwelling. This roomy house was none too extensive for our growing family.

. . . The farm was a haven of rest and refuge for the Prophet so he spent as much time there as he possibly could. He enjoyed doing hard, physical labor, working side by side with my father, Cornelius, hoeing potatoes or any kind of work that needed to be done. It was in the fields that Cornelius' testimony was strengthened that Joseph was truly a man of God. The two of them had many long and wonderful talks together while they worked. Cornelius said many times that when a person was with him, he would have to know that brother Joseph was a true Prophet of God because you could feel his wonderful influence when you were with him, as he was so humble, yet so dynamic. Cornelius, my father, gained a testimony from this association that never left him.

The Prophet visited our home often and our testimony of the gospel grew and became stronger after each visit, and we became more humble

Lorraine W. Silcox, "Zina-Forget-Me-Not: A Biographical Story," Sacramento, California, 1973, 44; copies in private family possession.

Present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

A special meeting was called, to be held on Thurs., August 8, 1844. The members of the Church were all urged to attend. Among others, Brigham Young addressed the great multitude of Saints assembled there. He spoke with great power. When he first arose to speak, we were greatly astonished. President Young stood transfigured before us and we beheld the Prophet, Joseph Smith and heard his voice as plainly as ever we did when he was living among us. My father and mother were there in attendance. I turned to Mama and said "Mama, I thought the Prophet was dead?" Mama answered and said "He is, Alzina, and this is the way our Heavenly Father has told us who is to be our next leader and Prophet."

I was 11 years old at the time.

Lorraine W. Silcox, "Zina-Forget-Me-Not: A Biographical Story," Sacramento, California, 1973, 45; copies in private family possession.

Note: The account of the transfiguration of Brigham Young cited here is told by Alzina Lucinda Lott (born on March 4, 1834), a daughter of Cornelius Peter Lott.
