Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Loveless, Matilda E.

(December 15, 1829-March 1, 1909)

Remembers Joseph rode a black, and Hyrum a white horse; heard Joseph preach, saw Emma in choir; recalls standing under an umbrella to hear Joseph preach; recalls the return from Dixon; tells of drinking in the Carthage well until after the martyrdom, and that the children went into the fields to pray for their parents; was present at transfiguration of Brigham Young, and so testifies.

I can remember very distinctly the appearance of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Joseph always used a black horse and Hyrum a white one, whenever riding on horse back.

I very often saw Joseph and his wife Emma at meetings, out walking and riding in their carriage with Porter Rockwell as coachman on their way to Joseph's farm, passing by our house. The farm of Joseph's was superintended by a man whose name was Lott.

I always attended Sunday School in the morning, and meeting in the afternoon in a grove near the Nauvoo Temple. Joseph was usually present. My happiest childhood remembrances are those spent in Sunday School, and many Scriptural passages I learned at that time. I remember often seeing Emma Smith singing in the choir.

At one time while attending meeting it was raining very hard. I was holding an umbrella and it seemed that Joseph had been absent a few meetings and at this time was speaking very powerfully, and every body was so interested that they did not notice the storm.

At one time Joseph was taken to Carthage [Dixon?] for treason and on his release Emma and many of the brethren and sisters left Nauvoo on horse back to go and meet Joseph on his return. Joseph came in a carriage, while I together with many other children were very much interested in the return of our prophet and great rejoicings were among the people. The feelings of the people when Joseph returned after having been arrested, cannot be described for it was heavenly. Down on the flat, south from the city of Nauvoo I have often seen the brethren drill and Joseph taking the lead. I can remember Emma being present at these military drills.

. . . [Tells of many times drinking water from the well at the Carthage jail against which the martyred Prophet fell, but that after the Prophet's death, she "never drank there" though the water was very cool]

. . . The last time I saw Joseph, was the day he delivered his last public address when he said "I call upon God and Angels to witness that I have unsheathed my sword with a firm and unalterable determination that the people shall have their loyal rights, and shall be protected from mobs, violence or my blood shall be spilt upon the ground like water and my body consigned to the silent Tomb." I can remember so well that day it looked so cloudy and as though it would storm so my mother sent me to my father with his coat. I remember so well the scene and how attentive my father was [to] the remarks of Joseph, so I listened and became equally so. The day that word came Joseph and Hyrum were killed I shall never forget, the confusion among the people. A number of we children run to the cornfield and prayed for the safety of our parents. I saw the murdered bodies of Joseph and Hyrum laying in state in the Mansion house. I saw the coat and other clothing Joseph and Hyrum wore when killed, also the pillow that Hyrum's head rested on and the stains from the wound on his face. Even now I can not think of that sight, but with the most terrible feelings. I was present at the meeting held in the grove when Brigham stood up and spoke with the voice of Joseph, and his very appearance was like Joseph's, and with one voice of approval the people sustained Brigham Young as their leader. The feeling that thrilled my soul gave me a testimony of the truth of this Gospel that has never left me and has sustained me through many trials for I learned then, and know God is leading this Church and this testimony I can bear to the whole world if needs be.

"Grandmother Loveless," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
