Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Lyman, Amasa M.

(March 30, 1813-February 4, 1877)

Tells of his first meeting with the Prophet, and of the spiritual confirmations that came with it.

After resting and refreshing myself for one week, I engaged to labor for Father Johnson at ten dollars per month; under this engagement I labored until the 1st of July, about which time the Prophet returned to Father Johnson's to reside, this afforded me an opportunity to see the Man of God.

Of the impressions produced I will here say, although there was nothing strange or different from other men in his personal appearance, yet, when he grasped my hand in that cordial way (known to those who have met him in the honest simplicity of truth), I felt as one of old in the presence of the Lord, my strength seemed to be gone, so that it required an effort on my part to stand on my feet; but in all this there was no fear, but the serenity and peace of heaven pervaded my soul, and the still small voice of the spirit whispered its living testimony in the depths of my soul, where it has ever remained, that he was the Man of God.

"Amasa Lyman's History," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 30 (29 July 1865): 473.

Joseph said all the Saints can have all the blessings he has.

The Prophet Joseph once took me by the arm in the street, and said, "I have so many blessings, and there is nothing but what you can enjoy in your time and place the same as I do, and so can every man."

Journal of Discourses, 10:89 (October 7, 1862).

Joseph calls Amasa Lyman on a mission.

I continued laboring for Father Johnson until some time in the month of August (1832), when one Sabbath evening, after a social prayer meeting with the few members of our place, the Prophet, in his own familiar way, said to me, "Brother Amasa, the Lord requires your labors in the vineyard." I, without thought, replied, "I will go," and on the 23rd of August, 1832, myself and brother Zerubabel Snow were ordained to the office of Elder in the Church, under the hands of Joseph Smith and Frederick G. Williams; . . .

Journal History, 24 August 1832, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

On instructions from the Prophet, Lyman and Zerubabel Snow administer to a Brother Harrington, who is healed.

About the time of our starting [for their mission in August, 1832] there was an application came to President Joseph Smith to visit an old gentleman who was afflicted with a severe pain in his head. From a press of business, brother Joseph could not go, but instructed Brother Snow and myself to call upon the old man, which we did, and as we came near his house, before we entered, we heard his groans extorted from him by pain, which seemed intolerable.

We entered and introduced ourselves, being strangers; we prayed for and laid our hands upon him, in the name of Jesus, and rebuked his pain which was instantly removed, and the sufferer rejoiced and praised God, who had so signally blessed himself and us as his ministers; the old gentleman's name was Harrington.

"Amasa Lyman's History," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 31 (5 August 1865): 487.
