Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Lyman, Paulina

(March 20, 1827-October 11, 1912)

Affidavit attesting Joseph prophesied she would go to Rocky Mountains.

United States of America

State of Utah

County of Salt Lake

Paulina E. Lyman, being first duly sworn, says, I am the daughter of Morris and Laura Clark Phelps, and was born in Lawrenceville, Lawrence County, Illinois, on the 20th of March, 1827. My present place of residence is Parowan, Iron County, Utah.

My father became a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1831, and moved, with his family, to Jackson County, Missouri, in 1832. I was a little girl when the Prophet Joseph came to Jackson County, and distinctly remember attending a meeting at the house of Lyman Wight, at which he was present. At this meeting the Prophet Joseph blessed the children who were present, and I was one of them. In blessing me he said that I should live to go to the Rocky Mountains. I did not know at the time what the term "Rocky Mountains" meant, but I supposed it to be something connected with the Indians. This frightened me for the reason that I dreaded the very sight of an Indian, and it was this circumstance that impressed this prediction made in my blessing, upon my mind. I have always retained this circumstance in my memory, and now remember it as though it happened yesterday.

(signed) Paulina E. Lyman

Subscribed and sworn to me, this 31st day of July,1902

(signed) James Jack

Notary Public

My Commission Expires

Aug. 6, 1905

"Paulina Lyman, Affidavit, 31 July, 1902," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Joseph prophesied in a blessing she would live to go to Rocky Mountains.

When Paulina was five years of age, she received a blessing from the Prophet Joseph Smith in which he promised here "that she would live to go to the Rocky Mountains," a remarkable prophecy to be given at that date.

"Pauline Phelps Lyman," in Kate B. Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1958-77), 6:432.
