Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Mace, Wandle

(February 19, 1809-August 10, 1890)

First time meeting the Prophet; Joseph said he had the promise of the Lord that he would be released from Liberty Jail.

As soon as the word reached us from Joseph we followed his suggestion and secured the land. Returning from one of our visits to Commerce upon this business, and when in sight of Brother McCleary's house at Lima, we saw two men standing as if they had just alighted from their horses. Bishop Knight exclaimed, "There is Joseph and Hyrum!" Now for the first time my eyes rested upon the great Prophet of the last days. I was introduced to them and shook hands with them. Their sisterwife of Brother McClearyhurried to and for pressing them to partake of refreshments at the same time telling them how anxious they had been and how fearful they were lest the mob would take their lives. Joseph said to her, "You were much troubled about us but you did not know the promise of God to us." Joseph and Hyrum Smith were on their way to Commerce to carry out to a finish the business commenced by the committee. Upon their return to Quincy they held meeting at my house.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah.

The first time Mace heard Joseph speak, Joseph quoted Moroni's promise that his name would be had for good and evil; Mace recorded his impressions of the Prophet.

As before stated, the stairs which led to the upper room where meetings were held, was on the outside and at the back of the house. On the landing at the top of these stairs the Prophet addressed the people. This is the first time I heard the Prophet Joseph Smith preach, and I shall never forget his words. In the course of his remarks he said, "Yes, said the Angel your name shall go out for good and for evil." Me think I see him now as he looked upon that occasion. He was a fine looking man, tall and well proportioned, strong and active, light complexion, blue eyes and light hair and very little beard. He had a free and easy manner, not the least affectation yet bold and independent and very interesting and eloquent in speech.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 37.

At general conference, Joseph overcome by the power of those singing the hymn.

On the fourth day of May [1839], a conference of the Church was held in a grove where the Presbyterians and Methodists held their camp meetings near Quincy. The meeting was called to order and Joseph Smith was appointed chairman. Elder Joseph Young lead in singing the hymn commencing with the following:

Glorious things of Thee are spoken

Zion, city of our God,

He whose word cannot be broken,

Chose thee for his own abode.

On the Rock of Ages founded,

What can shake thy sure repose,

With salvation walls surrounded,

Thou may'st smile on all thy foes.

The large congregation of Saints joined in the singing with the spirit and meaning thereof. Joseph was overcome. He arose to his feet to speak but it was with difficulty that he controlled his emotions. He however, made a few remarks upon the peculiar situation of the Saints, and of his own feelings after his imprisonment and long separation from them.

To look upon the Saints who had been driven from their homes, and scattered as they were, among strangers, without homes, robbed of everything, and to see them under all these trying circumstances assemble to this General Conference form all the region around, and sing of Zion, the city of our God, with so much spirit, showing their love and confidence in the gospel, and the pleasure he felt in meeting with them. He could scarcely refrain form weeping, he then opened the meeting with prayer.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 37-38.

Joseph gave the Quorum of the Twelve instructions on how to ordain Willard Richards; Joseph ignores Sidney Rigdon's rude undertone; ordains Brigham Young president of the Quorum of the Twelve [May 4-6, 1839].

The Quorum of the Twelve had been filled, but of the number selected oneWillard Richardswas in England and Joseph was instructing those present of that Quorum how they must proceed to prepare themselves, that they might ordain Willard Richards to the Apostleship when they should reach that country. Joseph told them to go to Kirtland and cleanse and purify a certain room in the temple, that they must kill a lamb and offer a sacrifice unto the Lord which should prepare them to ordain Willard Richard a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

Sidney made some remarks, when Joseph spoke with great power and spirit, said he, "I know the law." To a remark made by Heber C. Kimball he said, "It will be the sweetest smelling savor you ever smelled." He then walked to where Brigham Young sat and placed his hands upon his head said, "Come Brother Hyrum, come Brother Sidney!" Hyrum arose and came forward promptly and placed his hand upon him, but Sidney came forward very reluctantlyI thoughtand in a muttering way said he had laid his hands upon so many and conferred power upon me, who had turned and used it against him. Joseph took no notice of his remark, but proceeded to ordain Brigham Young President of the Twelve Apostles, said he, "while you live no other man can hold this power that is now conferred upon you," or words to that effect. All who were present upon that occasion [have] passed to the other side and I only am left. I too must soon follow them.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 38-39.

Joseph and Emma give their house to the sick and live in a tent; filled with the Spirit, Joseph rose from his sick-bed to administer to others; Elijah Fordham, Joseph B. Noble, and others miraculously healed.

The unhealthy climate of Commerce and vicinity, following the hardships and exposure of the Saints, brought on much sickness and it seemed all the powers of Satan were at work to destroy this people. Disease manifested itself to such an extent that all were prostrated at both Commerce and Montrose and in the surrounding country. Joseph gave his house up to the sick, and moved his family into a large tent, himself and his wife took care of the, they extended their labors as far as possible, Joseph and Emma would ride on horseback, form place to place visiting the sick, anointing with oil and lay hands on them, and heal them, and relieve their wants until Joseph himself was taken sick. This was on the 22nd July [1839].

One day while upon his bed of sickness, the spirit came upon him in great power, he Joseph arose from his bed, calling upon some of the elders to assist him, they went from house to house administering unto the sick, by the laying on of hands, and healed them by the power of God.

They crossed the river and commenced their labors at Montrose. At this time all were sick, no one was able to walk about except a negro called, Black Jack, and myself. Several of the Twelve lived in the fort. Joseph and the elders with him went first to the house of Brigham Young President of the Twelve, then to others of the Quorum who live here, and all were healed.

They went next to the house of Elijah Fordham who was sick nigh unto death, he was unable to speak and seemingly unconscious. Joseph took his hand and held it some time in silence, a chance came over brother Fordham, and he regained consciousness. Brother Joseph then asked him if he knew him, he faintly answered, "Yes." He then asked him if he wished to live, he replied "Yes, but feared it was too late." Still holding his hand, Joseph stood a few moments, and then with a loud voice said, "Brother Fordham, I command you in the name of Jesus Christ, to arise and be made whole."

He immediately arose from his bed, and shook from his feet the onion poultices which was on them, and with assistance put on his clothes, and walked with the company of brethren a few rods, to the house of Joseph Bates Nobles who was laying very sick upon entering the house, Elder Fordham was called upon to pray, and while praying he fainted. He soon recovered and proceeded with his prayer, which when had finished, they lay hands upon Brother Nobles and raised him up, many was likewise 'miraculously' healed as they went from house to house ministering to the sick, and blessing them in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and they recovered. There were many sick in the surrounding country whom Joseph could not himself visit, therefore he [deputized] the Twelve Apostles, to go and heal them, and he returned to Nauvoo. Parley P. Pratt, was with Joseph when he visited Montrose having made his escape from prison.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 41-42.

Mace hears the parents of the Prophet recount early experiences: persecutions, family gathering so Joseph could teach them, and the shared certainty of the truth of what he said.

Almost as soon as the father [Joseph Smith, Sr.] and mother [Lucy Smith] of the Prophet Joseph Smith set their feet upon the hospitable shore of Illinois, I became acquainted with them. I frequently visited them and listened with intense interest as they related the history of the rise of the Church in every detail.

With tears they could not withhold, they narrated the story of the persecution of their boy, Joseph, which commenced when he was about fourteen years old, or from the time the angel first visited him. Not only was the boy, Joseph, persecuted but the aged father was harassed and imprisoned on false charges until finally driven from Missouri in the depth of winter he contracted disease from exposure, from which he never recovered.

In these conversations, mother [Lucy] Smith, as she was familiarly called, related much of their family history. She told how their family would all be seated around the room while they all listened to Joseph with the greatest interest as he taught them the pure principles of the gospel as revealed to him by the angels, and of his glorious vision of the Father and the Son, when the father said to him as he pointed to his companion, "This is my beloved Son, hear Him."

She said, "during the day our sons would endeavor to get through their work as early as possible, and say, 'Mother,' have supper early, so we can have a long evening to listen to Joseph. Sometimes Joseph would describe the appearance of the Nephites, their mode of dress and warfare, their implements of husbandry, etc, and many things he had seen in vision. Truly ours was a happy family, although persecuted by preachers, who declared there was no more vision, the canon of scripture was full, and no more revelation was needed." But Joseph had seen a vision and must declare it.

Oh, how many happy hours I have spent with these good old folks. They were as honest and true as it was possible for mortals to be; and they exemplify the words of the Apostle who said, "All who will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution."

The Journal of Wandle Mace, Huntington Library, San Marino, California.

Mace heard Joseph teach in public and private; Joseph taught with great plainness, and always seemed to answer Mace's questions, which he illustrates by telling of his confusions over the Lost Tribes and Joseph's teachings on the matter.

Meetings in Nauvoo were held in a Jack Oak Grove, in the open air, and here I listened to the words of inspiration as they fell from the lips of the Prophet, as he taught the congregations of the Saints.

Who could listen to these words of inspiration and honestly say Joseph Smith is an imposter? No one, not even his bitter enemies.

Who among all the so called Christian Churches, with all their learning could explain the order of the Priesthood? No one.

Who among them could explain 'any' of the principles of life and salvation, with the ordinances necessary thereto? Not one.

I have listened to the Prophet Joseph in public, and in private, in sunshine and showeras many others have done as he taught from the standAt my own house, and at his hose, I have been familiar with him, from the time he escaped from prison in Missouri in 1839 until his martyrdom in 1844, and do know that no man could explain the scripturethrow them wide open to view, so plain that none could misunderstand their meaningexcept he had been taught of God.

I have felt ashamed myself sometimes, having studied the scriptures so much, that I had not seen that which was so plain when he touched them. He as it were turned the key, and the door of knowledge sprang wide open, disclosing precious principles, both new and old.

I have many times been pondering upon a subject, and seemed to come to a stand-still, not knowing how to gain farther information, relating to it, when upon going to meeting on the Sabbath, the key would be touched by Joseph and the subject would be so plain I wondered why I had not seen it before.

I was in this situation in relation to the Ten lost tribes of Israel. I had read everything I could find relating to them. I had carefully studied the statistics of the Jews, and not withstanding they had been persecuted for hundreds of years, being murdered and driven, until they were now scattered all over the known world, yet they numbered several millions. I reasoned thus, had the 'Ten Tribes,' suffered equal disaster, and they had increased in number, in the same ratio as the Jews, they would number nearly ten times as manyor nine times and a half as it is nine a half tribes instead of ten. If they have increased in this proportion, where is there habitable earth for this vast amount of people who are hidden from the rest of mankind? I could not see.

I was in this train of thought, unable to obtain further information from any source, when as usual on a Sunday morning, I took my skiff and crossed the river to Nauvoo, to attend meeting.

Joseph addressed the congregation, and as if for special benefit, touched upon this subject which opened a new field for reflection to me. His subject was: The "restitution of all things spoken of by all the Holy Prophets since the world began," quoting the twenty first verse of the third chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.

In the course of his remarks he spoke of the earth being divided at various times. He said, "When Enoch and his city was taken away, a portion of earth was taken and would again be restored. Also in the days of Peleg, the earth was divided, see Genesis 10th Chapter 25 verse." He then referred to the 'Ten Tribes,' saying, "You know a long time ago in the days of Shalmanezer King of Assyria when the Ten Tribes was taken away, and never been heard of since." He said, "The earth will be restored as at the beginning, and the last taken away will be the first to return, for the last shall be first, and the first shall be last in all things." He illustrated the return by saying.

"Some of you brethren have been coming up the river on a steamboat, and while seated at the table, the steamboat run against a snag which upset the table and scatter the dishes; so it will be when these portions of earth return. It will make the earth reel to and for 'like a drunken man,'" quoting 24th chapter Isaiah 20th verse. When speaking of the return of the Ten Tribes, he said, "The mountains of ice shall flow down at their presence," and "a highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep."

These remarks satisfied me, it was no longer necessary to hunt the place on this earth where the Ten Tribes were so long hidden, for the earth was divided and taken away, and will be the first to return, as it was the last taken away.

"He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land."

"And the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided." See [D&C 133:21-24]

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 46-49.

Joseph foretells the signs of the times: pestilence, wars, sun to be darkened, moon to turn to blood, peace in Zion only, fathers to be turned against sons and mothers against daughters, crops to fail, famine to follow.

Upon another occasion about this time, when addressing the Saints upon the coming of the Savior, Joseph said, "I prophecy that the signs of the coming of the Son of Man has already commenced, one pestilence will desolate after another, you hear of wars in foreign lands, but behold I say unto you they are nigh even at your doors, and not many years hence you shall hear of wars in your own land. I testify of these things and that the coming of the Son of Man is nigh even at your doors. The sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall be turned into blood. If our souls and our bodies are not looking forth for the coming of the Son of Man, and after we are dead, if we are not looking forth for his coming; we shall be among them that call for the rocks to fall on us and hide us."

"The time is coming when no man will have any peace, but in Zion, and her stakes. I know it I have seen it in vision! I saw men hunting lives of their own sons, and women killing their own daughters, and daughters seeking the lives of their mothers, and brother murdering brother. I saw armies arrayed against armies, I saw blood, desolation, firesThese things are at our doors!"

"They will follow the Saints of God from city to city, Satan will rage, and the spirit of the devil is now enraged. I know not how soon these things will take place and with a view of them, shall I cry peace, peace? No! I will lift up my voice and testify of them. How long you will have good crops, and the famine be kept off, I do not know."

"The Son of Man has said, that the mother shall be against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother, etc., and when the fig tree puts forth her leaves, know then that summer is nigh." Many times he spoke of these things.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 50-51.

En route to Washington Joseph saves passengers in a run-away carriage; those on board, including a Congressman, are favorably impressed; the incident opens doors for the Prophet when in Washington, D.C.

[On Oct 29, 1839] Joseph and his companions started on their journey and reached Washington safely on November the 28th. In crossing the Alleghany Mountains they had quite an exciting experience on reaching the top of one of the mountains, the driver on the stagecoach, fastened the lines and went into a tavern, as soon as he got into the house the horses took fright and started off at full speed. The coach was full of passengers; beside Joseph and his companions, were some Congressmen on their way to Washington, and a woman with a babe.

The Stage tossed and pitched like a boat in a storm, the passengers became very much alarmed fearful of being dashed to pieces over a precipice, the congressmen jumped out, and the brethren wanted to do the same, but Joseph restrained them awhile, but they were uneasy, Joseph told them if they were determined to wait till they started up the next mountain and then jump. They done so.

The woman wanted to throw her babe out and then jump herself. Joseph tried to dissuade her and at last took the babe from her lest she would do so, then he talked to her until she became somewhat calm. He then told her if she would take the babe, and sit quiet, he would climb out over the quarter panel and stop the horses, she said she would do so, he accordingly gave her the babe, and then climbed out and swung himself into the dickey seat, and took the lines soon stopped the horses. Those who have passed over this road in a stage coach nay appreciate the danger attending such a feat, with a runaway stage.

The stage driver was the first to reach the stage almost breathless from a run of about three miles, he was much relieved in mind when he saw the stagecoach all right, the horses quiet although panting and Joseph on the drivers seat calm holding the reins. He expected everything smashed and perhaps rolled over a precipice.

Along one after another came the passengers limping, being somewhat bruised up from their jump and roll, seeing Joseph on the drivers seat holding the lines they wanted to know "how the h___ he got up there?" The women was overjoyed and thanked Mr. Higbee, (so they called Joseph) and then told the company how he had saved her life and the life of her babe.

Wherever the stage stopped the story was told, the woman and the congressmen was loud in their praise of the bravery and daring of Mr. Higbee, until they came to the end of their journey.

The day after his arrival in Washington, Joseph met his traveling companions the congressmen, upon the street, with some of their friends; they gave him an introduction to their friends, and told of their perilous journey and Mr. Higbee's brave exploit, etc. Joseph then explained to them, how that Mr. Higbee had bought the tickets for the journey in his own name, and when they had addressed himself as Mr. Higbee he had not corrected it, and he thought they would not blame him for not explaining this matter earlier, but now he would do so. He then told them he was Joseph Smith, President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They were very much astonished at this announcement; they had heard of "Old Joe Smith" and supposed him to be a very different looking person than the one before them.

They saw before them a finely proportioned young and intelligent man, about thirty four years of age, and if this the 'Mormon Prophet' they must hear him preach. A fine hall was obtained at considerable expense, which was well filled with the heads of the nation, and the elite of the city of Washington to whom he preached two evenings the pure principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. I have narrated this circumstance as near as possible as Joseph told it in my presence after his return to Nauvoo. This circumstance plainly shows that, "God moves in a mysterious way His wonders to perform."

This very circumstance introduced him into the society of man of influence at the Nations Capital, and opened the way by which he could freely converse upon the persecutions of the people he represented, the wrongs they had endured from the hand of their enemies in the state of Missouri.

He presented to congress an eloquent memorial, plainly setting forth the crimes committed by the governor and other officials of the state of Missouri and urgently plead for redress. The memorial was read and referred to the committee on Judiciary which committee made a report in which they said, "The committee have examined the case presented by the petition, end the views urged by their agent with care and attention, and after a full examination and consideration, unanimously concur in the opinion, that the case presented for their investigation is not such as will justify or authorize any interposition by this Government. . . . The grievances complained of in the petition are alleged to have been done within the territory of the state of Missouri. The committee, under the circumstances, have not considered themselves justified in inquiring into the truth or falsehood of the facts charged in the petition. If they are true, the petitioners must seek relief in the court of Judicature of the state of Missouri." . . .

This committee recommended a resolution, that they be discharged from further consideration of 'memorial' in the case and that 'memorialists' have leave to withdraw the papers which accompany their 'memorial.' Seek relief from Missouri preposterous!

Joseph also visited the president and laid the case of the Saints before him, but all his efforts were in vain. On one of his visits to President Martin Van Buren, He said to Joseph, "Your cause is just. But I can do nothing for you. If I take up for you I shall have all Missouri on my back, and I shall loose the vote of that state."

Martin Van Buren exhibited himself in those few words to be a mean, contemptible, truckling sycophant, who being entrusted with the highest authority to govern a free people, dared not be just toward a small portion of his fellow citizens, who had been robbed and driven from their homes in the midst of a cold winter, to suffer all the hardships of hunger cold and storm, consequent upon such journeying under an exterminating order issued by the governor of the state of Missouri, Lilburn W. Boggs, for fear he would loose the vote of that state. What could brand him a coward, better or with more force than his own words?

At the conference held on the 6th April, 1840, Joseph gave an account of his mission to Washington having arrived home on the 4th day of March.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 51-55.

Note: The Prophet records this incident in the History of the Church but makes no mention of it as having helped win friends or open doors. Indeed, he says that when those involved discovered that he was "Joseph Smith the 'Mormon Prophet,' as they called me, I heard no more of their praise, gratitude, or reward" (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts, [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 4:19, 23-24). Joseph's reference, of course, is to those who were traveling with him, while Mace refers to others who were not with him.

Joseph underscores the importance of working on the temple by comparing it to preaching the gospel.

The next day the seventh of April conference assembled and was continued several days. A revelation was read which had been received by the prophet Joseph since the last conference, which was given January 19th 1841, and can be found in the present edition of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants Section 124. President Sidney Rigdon delivered a discourse on the 'baptism for the dead.' Joseph followed giving much valuable instruction upon this subject. He also spoke upon the necessity of building the [Nauvoo] temple, and the Nauvoo House, he said that, "labor on the temple would be as acceptable to the Lord as preaching to the world."

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 71.

Lyceums opened in Nauvoo; Joseph encourages the Saints to learn and promises to help them.

During the winter, the long evenings were utilized for improvement in public speaking. Lyceums or lecturing schools were opened, and it is surprising how much good was accomplished in attending a lyceum one winter, the new members at the commencement of the school would only occupy a few minutes of their time, but before the winter was gone they could occupy all the half hour allotted them and then had scarcely time enough.

Our lyceum was composed of eighteen members, each presided over the meeting in turn, one of the principles of the gospel was chosen as a subject, and each member spoke an half hour upon it, three evenings was taken up with the one principle, before another was touched, six members occupied the first evening, the second evening six other members spoke upon the same subject, and the remaining six occupied the third evening; so that each one of the eighteen had equal time and opportunity to talk upon the subject.

It was very curious how the same subject would be handled by different men, each member presenting it in a manner peculiar to himself, all coming to the same conclusion, by the evidence adduced from the scriptures; there was no jarring, no contention nor discord, and all were entertained, instructed and edified. Joseph encouraged us by his presence whenever practicable, giving us instructions and assistance. He would tell the brethren to, "Get into your lyceums, and investigate doctrine, and if you run against a snag, I am here, I will help you off." There were days and nights of pleasure and profit,to listen to a prophets voice and receive instruction from one who communed with angels and received his instruction from on high when or wherever I met him, whether in the lyceum, on the street, or at home, he spoke forth words of light and intelligence for the salvation of mankind. For the approaching conference a rough floor was laid in the foundation of the [Nauvoo] temple, the walk was up about half way of the windows of the first story.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 79-80.

At April Conference 1843 Joseph asks for a sustaining vote of confidence and humbly seeks to amend any offense he may have given; Joseph is then sustained as President of the Church and arrangements are outlined for transmitting funds to build the temple.

Conference convened within the walls of the [Nauvoo] temple on the 6th day of April 1843. The meeting called to order in the usual way Joseph arose and said, "One object of this conference was to ascertain the standing of the First Presidency, which he would do by presenting himself for trial." He asked if they were satisfied with him to preside over the whole church, or would they have another said he, "If I have done anything that ought to injure my character, reputation, or standing or have dishonored our religion by any means, in the sight of men or angels, or in the sight of men and women, I am sorry for it and if you will forgive me, I will endeavor to do so no more. I do not know that I have done anything of the kind; but if I have, come forward and tell me of it, I want you to come boldly and frankly, and tell me of it and if not ever after hold your peace."

"A motion was made and seconded that 'President Joseph Smith continue President of the whole church.' After a few minutes silence the motion was put by Brigham Young, President of the Twelve, when one vast sea of hands was raised, the motion being carried unanimously.

"Joseph returned his thanks to the Saints for the manifestation of their confidence and said, he 'would serve them according to the best ability God should, give him.' He said, he did not know anything against the Twelve or he would present them for trial. He spoke of the propriety of sending the Twelve to collect means for the [Nauvoo] temple and the Nauvoo House. He "was opposed to my man handling the public funds of the church who is not duly authorized, the Twelve are the most suitable persons to perform this business and I want this conference to devise some means to bind them as firm as the pillars of heaven if possible. The Twelve was always honest, and it will do them no hurt to bind them."

Joseph explained why he wanted this course pursued, he said, "Money had been sent by individuals coming to Nauvoo, and it had not been paid over to those authorized to receive it, and also to elders who had used the money for their own benefit, and I want it understood, that money should be paid only to duly authorized persons, and that should be the Twelve, and they should give the donors a receipt for the money's received."

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 80-81.

Joseph's vision of the sufferings to precede the Second Coming so graphic, he asked that the vision close.

I have listened to his recital of the vision given him of the terrible calamities which would sweep over the earth as with a bosom of destruction. The vision was so horrifying that he prayed the Lord to take it away, and the Lord gave him the vision a little at a time so he could bear it. He said when these things took place, "The report will go forth morning by morning, it will be vexatious to hear the report, thereof."

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 85.

Account of being kidnapped by Sheriffs Wilson and Reynolds while at Dixon, Ill. (June 1843), and of his deliverance from their control; also mentions the joy of the Saints in Joseph's safe return and the kindness showed by Joseph and Emma to the two who had treated the Prophet so unkindly.

Sometime during the month of June 1843 Nauvoo was thrown into the greatest excitement by the news that Joseph had been kidnapped by Reynolds, sheriff of Jackson County Missouri, and Wilson Sheriff of Hancock County, Illinois, with the intention of taking him into Missouri and placing him in the power of his old enemies. Information had been given them of the proposed visit of Joseph with his family to his wife's sister Mrs. Wasson, who lived about twelve miles from Dixon in Lee County Iowa.

Reynolds and Wilson disguised themselves, and upon their arrival at Dixon represented themselves as Mormon elders, and wanted to see the prophet Joseph Smith. They proceeded to the house of Mrs. Wasson, and found Joseph standing outside the house, they accosted him in the roughest manner and threatened to shoot him if he offered any resistance, although he had offered none. He asked them what they wanted of him, and by what authority they acted in that rough manner? They replied, they were going to take him to Missouri, and jamming their pistols at his side, swore that was their authority.

He requested them to let him go into the house and bid his family good bye; but they refused, not even giving him the chance to get his hat. With terrible oaths they threatened to shoot him if he stirred. Joseph answering to their abuse said baring his breast, "I am not afraid to die, shoot away, I have endured so much oppression, I am weary of life, kill me if you please; I am a strong man however, and with my own natural weapons could soon level both of you; but if you have any legal process to serve I am at all times subject to law, and shall offer no resistance."

Again with an oath they threatened to shoot him if he said another word. Joseph said, "Gentleman if you have any legal process, I wish to obtain a writ of habeas corpus." With an oath they answered "You shan't have one." Again they threatened to shoot. Joseph told them, "Shoot away I am not afraid of your pistols." Seeing a friend passing he told him, "these men are kidnapping me and I want a writ of habeas corpus to deliver me out of their hands."

They then forced him into a wagon and placing themselves one on each side of him each one with a loaded pistol pressed close against his side, and repeatedly striking him with themso that he was lame and sore two weeks afterwardthey drove to Dixon to a tavern kept by Mr. McKennie and ordered horses to be ready in fifteen minutes to drag him to Missouri, they thrust him into a room treating him in the most brutal manner, guarding him, and would not allow him to see anybody.

Joseph told Reynolds, "I wish to get counsel." Reynolds said with an oath, "You shan't have counsel, and one more word G-d Dn you I'll shoot you." Joseph replied, "What is the use of this so often, I have often told you to shoot, now I tell you again to shoot away." Seeing a person passing he said, "I am falsely imprisoned here, and I want a lawyer." A lawyer came and had the door banged in his face, another came and received the same treatment; by this time many of the citizens of Dixon being apprised of the situation stepped forward and gave the sheriff to understand, that if that was their mode of doing business in Missouri, they had another way of doing it here, that they were laws abiding citizens, and republicans, that Mr. Smith should have justice done him, and have the opportunity of a fair trial, and if they persisted in their course, they had a summary way of dealing with such peoples:and gave them to understand that Mr. Smith should not go without a fair and impartial trial.

Reynolds finding further resistance vain, allowed some attorneys to visit Joseph, who gave them to understand, that these men had taken him without process, they had insulted and abused him, and he wanted a writ of habeas corpus. Up till this time they had altogether refused to allow counsel to have any private conversation with Joseph.

At length Joseph obtained a writ of habeas corpus from the Master in Chancery of Lee County, returnable before Judge Caton at Ottawa, upon which he was conveyed by Reynolds and Wilson as far as Pawpaw Grove, a distance of thirty two miles to learn that Judge Caton was gone on a visit to New York. They all returned to Dixon, where another writ was issued this time returnable before the nearest tribunal, which was Nauvoo. On leaving Dixon a small company of friends traveled with Joseph and his captors, his friends fearing treachery, for Reynolds and Wilson did not disguise the fact that they intended to take him to Missouri.

As soon as the word reached Nauvoo of the kidnapping of Joseph companies of men were immediately organized and started out to find Joseph, some of these brethren soon after crossing Fox River on their way to Quincy, met Joseph and his captors also on the way to Quincy; which place they argued was the nearest place where the hearing could be had, their object being to get Joseph as near to the river as possible, hoping to get him across the river and into the state of Missouri. But the sudden appearance of the brethren thwarted their plans.

Upon seeing Joseph in the hands of his enemies who had captured him without showing any writ or other process except loaded pistols, they burst into tears, when they met Joseph exclaimed turning to his captures, "Gentlemen I think I will not go to Missouri this time! These are my boys!"

A halt, was made for consultation and the lawyers who had come with Joseph from Dixon decided that the hearing upon the writ of habeas corpus, could be lawfully held in Nauvoo; and they would rather go to Nauvoo than to Quincy. This took Joseph out of the power of his enemies once more to our great joy. News reached Nauvoo, that Joseph was coming, and a multitude with the band went out to meet him. As he entered the city the band played, Hail to the Chief who in Triumph Advances, etc.

Language fails me to describe my feelings upon this occasion as Joseph with his wife by his side each on horseback rode in triumph among his friends, into his beloved city. Joseph looked upon the multitude of his friends whose every countenance beamed with joy inexpressible and said, "I am out of the power of the Missourians again, thank God! And I thank you all for your kindness and love, I bless you all in the name of Jesus Christ, I will address you in the grove near the temple at four o'clock this afternoon."

A feast had been prepared for him, his lawyers and the company who were with him many friends sat down to dinner with him, his captors also, Reynolds and Wilson, the base kidnappers were treated with all the kindness and courtesy of distinguished guests by Joseph and his wife, literally filling the words of the Savior 5th Matthew:44, "Love your enemies, bless them that despitefully use you and persecute you." At the meeting held in the grove at 4 o' clock he rehearsed all the events as they had transpired, the treatment he had received, and how the Lord had raised up friends to defend and assist him, and had again delivered him out of the hands of his enemies.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 85-89.

Note: This same story appears in the History of the Church (Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 5:439-54).

Joseph prophesies day will come when Saints will have to "cast off" Sidney Rigdon.

It was only a few months after this time [October, 1843 Conference, in which Joseph said he no longer wanted Sidney as his Counselor], when Sidney aspired to the be the leader of the church and the people remembered these words of the Prophet Joseph, "If you do not cast him off now, the time will come when you will wish you had done it."

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 91.

Joseph asks the brethren for money to release Porter Rockwell from prison; wrestles with the same while waiting for others to return with money; the money was secured, and Porter was later released.

One day Joseph rode upon the [Nauvoo] temple grounds as we stood together talking after our day's work and called out, "Boys, has Bonaparte any friends in the French Army?" Of course we were all attention to know his meaning. He then told us he had learned from the mother of O. P. Rockwell, that for the sum of [one] hundred dollars she could obtain Porter's release from prison. Joseph said he had not sufficient money himself so he wanted the brethren to assist him. All present responded heartily. Some could give five dollars, others various amounts. Those who had money with them gave it to him some went to their homes for the money.

While waiting for the brethren to return, Joseph dismounted from his horse and engaged in a friendly wrestle with some of the "boys," as he called them. He often tried to get me to wrestle with him but I never would. I was a strong man as well as he was. Often when we met and shook hands he would pull me to him for a wrestle and say, slapping my shoulder with his hand, "If you are not a strong man, there is no use of putting a man upright."

Joseph obtained the necessary funds and soon afterward O. P. Rockwell was allowed his freedom after many weary months of imprisonment. He made his way on foot across the state of Missouri, which swarmed with his enemies, who had sworn to take his life if only they could get their eyes on him. The Lord preserved him in his journey and he reached Nauvoo and the house of the Prophet on 25 December, 1843. Joseph and all the Saints rejoiced in his safe return to liberty and friends.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 92-93.

Missourians sought to bribe Porter Rockwell into betraying the Prophet.

[Porter Rockwell], In speaking to me of the trials and hardships endured while in prison in Independence, being put in a dungeon about two months heavily ironed, and being continually kept in anxiety for the safety of Joseph, "I knew if they got him into their hands they would murder him; he said that during this time Sheriff Reynolds told him he was going to arrest Joseph, and seemed quite confident that he would succeed, he said he had 'received letters form Nauvoo which satisfied him that I could tote Joseph wherever I please,' and if I would get him into their hands I should never want, and they would protect me; said he, "You deliver Joe Smith into our hands and name your pile." I told Reynolds I would see them all damned first "and then I won't."

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 93.

Joseph emphasizes the importance of the temple.

Early in the spring Joseph suggested the propriety of putting all the forces upon the temple, and letting the Nauvoo House stand as it was until the temple was completed, for said he, "we need the temple more than anything else." A meeting was called for the 7th March 1844 to attend to business, and a vast multitude assembled as early as nine o'clock. Patriarch Hyrum Smith took the stand and stated the object of the meeting.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 94.

The Prophet's feelings about becoming president of the United States; Nauvoo Legionnaires carry him on their shoulders; Wandle Mace reflects on the role and dignity of a prophet.

Remarks was made by President Brigham Young, John Taylor and others, Joseph remarked, "As to politics, I care but little about the presidential chair. I would not give half as much for the office of president, as I would for the one I now hold as Lieutenant General of the Nauvoo Legion."

In the evening there was a general time of rejoicing, bonfires was lighted, the band played and when Joseph came upon the scene he was taken upon the shoulders of some of the 'boys' and carried about with shouts for General Smith.

What! Methink, I hear someone who has wrought in his mind a picture, such as he thinks a prophet should resemble; this picture would represent, a prophet, as a man of sober, solemn mein, without a smile of gladsome pleasure, he would be long faced, with flowing hair and beard, etc. A person who would have such an idea would approach

The prophet with 'awe' in their countenance, and no doubt if they gave expression to their feeling would make an exclamation such as, What a prophet [allows] himself [to be] carried about on the should(er)s of his friends in such a manner! What, a Prophet play all, and wrestle! Yes! there is no law, human or divine that prohibits a man from indulging in such healthy innocent exercises; there is no text in the scripture that forbids such exercise, then why condemn Joseph. . . . I have been with him at times when approached by a long faced religious stranger, who seemed to think it almost sin to smile, and that the prophet should be as sedate and as cheerless as himself; challenge someone for a wrestle to the utter astonishment of the religious stranger, who would be almost shocked at the mention of a wrestle, but would extol Jacob who seemed to be an accomplished wrestler and also a great favorite with God.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 100-101.

Joseph was free in conversation and ever ready to answer questions.

Such was Joseph the great Prophet of the last days as he often joined us on the temple grounds, when we were sure of a rare treat if we could get him to talk to us. Someone present being in a hurry to hear him would say, "Brother Joseph talk to us." He would say, "What do you want me to talk about, start something." Soon a conversation would bring out some question for Joseph to answer, and then I could lean back and listen. Ah what pleasure this gave me; he would unravel the scriptures and explain doctrine as no other man could. What had been mystery he made so plain it was no longer mystery.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 101-2.

A sense of urgency attended Joseph's ministry and his desire to teach.

As Joseph said in the conference, "I must teach the elders, and they must teach you." This he had been doing all the previous winter. He had spent most of his time in teaching the Twelve, and other elders, and in giving endowments; he was so constant in his labors that they wondered why he should be so untiring in his labors. Upon one occasion Elder Orson Pratt, remarked to me "I don't know what is the matter, Joseph gives us no rest, neither day or night, when we ask him he says, 'the spirit urges me.'"

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 128.

Joseph instructed Saints to pray for blessings of the temple and for long life.

He told us to "pray that you may live to go into this temple and be sealed in your foreheads,"putting his hand upon his foreheadfor said he, "It is your right to live until you are threescore years and ten." At that time I was a young man, seventy years was thought to be a great age; I could hardly hope to live so long, or to my present age, which in a few days will be seventy nine.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 129.

Discerning trouble, Joseph refuses a late night interview with William Law.

He had been feeding us deliciously with spiritual food, his discourses were becoming better every time he addressed the Saints, and we anticipated a continuance of these things. We had known for a good while that certain men were plotting with the enemies of Joseph at Carthage and with the Missourians, for his death, at the same time professing to be his friends. One of these was no other than William Law who had been his counselor. Joseph found him to be a wicked, corrupt and treacherous man which was plainly shown by the following incident, which is only one of many.

Late one night a steamboat landed some of their ilk, who waited while William Law went to Joseph's house and waking him,Josephasked him to come out, as he had something important to tell him. Joseph answered him, saying, "Brother Law, you know you have no business with me at this time of night." Law went off disappointed, his intention being to get Joseph down to the landing and onto the steamboat, which would land him in Missouri.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 129-30.

Joseph knew gospel net gathered in fish of all kinds.

Joseph knew his enemies and appreciated his friends. Upon one of my calls at his house on business, I found him walking the floor, chafing, I thought vexed. He was talking to someone in the next room and he was very earnest. He stopped in his walk and turning to me said, "Brother Mace, this gospel gathers up some of the meanest of all God's creation." After a short pause he said, "Yes, and some of the finest fellows that ever lived."

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 131.

Joseph sees R. D. Foster's pistol, and discerns his murderous motive.

R. D. Foster came one day to see Joseph on a pretended visit of reconciliation, seeking forgiveness and restoration to fellowship; he wanted a private interview. Joseph's keen eye detected something bright gleaming from Foster's vest, a very small part had escaped concealment. Joseph placed his hand upon it and said, "What have you got concealed here?" Foster found himself detected and answer, "My pistol." He was foiled in his purpose and his pretended humility with a pistol in his pocket betrayed his purpose of a private interview.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 131.

Joseph prophesies to members of the Nauvoo Legion that they will move to the Rocky Mountains and build a great kingdom there but will be overshadowed by converts; still, they will be rewarded and joined with Joseph again.

While such rascals constantly sought his life, his friends were constant and true and he knew it. Yes, many like myself, worked on the [Nauvoo] temple all day and stood guard through the night, traveling from place to place to warn him of danger and protecting him from his enemies. As general, speaking to the Nauvoo Legion, he said to us, "You have faithfully performed your duty in preserving the lives of this people as well as mine. You shall be called the first elders of this Church and your mission will be to the nations of the earth to preach the gospel and you will gather many people to the fastnesses of the Rocky Mountains and many of those who will come in under your ministry, because of their learning will seek for position, and they will gain eminence over you; and you will walk in low place unnoticed. Yet you will know all that transpires in your midst. Those who are your friends are my friends, and I promise you when I come again I will lead you forth, so that where I am you shall be with me."

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 131-32.

Mace quarrels with Reynolds Cahoon and Hiram Kimball about the need for Joseph to return from across the river; Cahoon and Kimball petition Joseph to return; he does and then goes to Carthage.

On the following morning [June 23, 1844] as with brother Hyrum Mace, I was walking up the street towards Joseph's house, talking over the events of the last few days, two men came to us in a great hurry, from an opposite direction. They were very much excited over the present situation and thought it was absolutely necessary that Joseph should return. We took an opposite view of the case and did not want to see him return into the very jaws of death.

But said they, "If Joseph don't come back the governor will put the city under 'martial' law, and then nothing can be brought into the city, neither can anything be taken out, and then what will all our property be worth?" They further argued that the governor was our friend, and he would protect Joseph from all harm if he came back.

I returned answer with considerable warmth of feeling, that I did not believe it. On the contrary, I believed the governor to be in perfect harmony with the mob, and if Joseph recrossed the river, he would be murdered. I did not want him to return; what is a little property compared to his life. Joseph could in a very short time build a city and property worth more than all Hancock County; and should we, for the sake of a little property, be so selfish as to push him into the very jaws of death!

These men, Reynolds Cahoon and Hiram Kimball then left us and turned and walked towards Joseph's house, when they reached it, and before entering, they leaned on the fence, talked together for some time, they then went into the house. We,Hyrum Mace and myselfboth felt the impression that they were going to persuade Sister EmmaJoseph's wife,to write to him and prevail on him to return. This feeling came upon us so forcibly, we were very uneasy as to the result.

From O. P. Rockwell, who was one of Joseph's company, I learned our impressions were correct. He said, Cahoon brought a letter to Joseph from his wife, he opened and read the letter then handed it to his brother Hyrum and said, "I know my own business." Cahoon replied to Joseph, "You always said, if the Church would stick to you, you would stick to the church, now trouble comes you are the first to run." Joseph made him no reply. He would not talk to him.

Hyrum read the letter and thought "we had better go back, and if we die, we will die like men." Joseph replied, "Hyrum you are my oldest brother, and if you say go back, we will go back," he said further, "If they had let me alone, there would have been no bloodshed, but now I expect to be butchered."

They accordingly recrossed the river the same night June 23rd and sent a letter to Governor Ford saying he would start for Carthage the next morning. The next morning, 24th June, Joseph had an interview with the officers of the Legion and instructed them to dismiss their men, but have them in a state of readiness, to be called upon if an emergency should occur.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 143-45.

Mace recounts his sadness at Joseph's last farewell to the Nauvoo Legion, which included the promise that he would come again.

When this company reached Nauvoo, the Legion was called together, and Joseph counseled us to give up our arms which had been supplied us by the state saying, "We will give to them that ask of us, and trust in God for our future welfare." While they were taking our arms, Joseph said to the officers near him, "These men are too good, too quiet and law abiding for this rough generation," and looking around him at his friends the Nauvoo Legion, and seeing our sad faces he said, "Boys," he always called us boys, "His Boys," "Don't be sad, don't be cast down, I will come back again." After a little hesitation he added, "as soon as I can." That expression, "As soon as I can," sank deep into my heart and confirmed my fears. I never expected to see him again alive. The sad expression upon his face as he looked upon us, "His Boys" for the last time I shall never forget. I felt in my inmost soul that he was going to be butchered, and we should see him no more alive. I feel yet even at this time, so many years after the tragedy, that his life was thrown away, by a few,I was going to say old grannies who cared more for property than anything else.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 145-46.

Rigdon's excommunication reminds Mace of Rigdon's earlier rebellious spirit.

This brought very vividly to my mind, the seeming reluctance manifested by Sidney at the time Joseph called upon him to assist in ordaining Brigham Young President of the Quorum of the Twelve. He, (Sidney) as he walked towards him, muttered"that he had laid his hands on so many men, and conferred power upon them, and they had used it against him," as though he had a premonition of the future.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 164.

Joseph interprets the parable of the twelve olive trees; there is no general conference held for three years, just as Joseph predicted.

Joseph, when preaching upon the redemption of Zion, read from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, the parable of the twelve olive trees,a revelation given through him on the 16th December, 1833 [D&C 101]. Commencing at the 43rd versehe explained this parable. He said, "The twelve olive trees were twelve stakes of Zion which should be built up; and thrown down by our enemies," and while we were building the tower of the temple we could count that 12 stakes had been organized, and we were a little fearful we would not accomplish our part of the labor. We did however, although the finish was given, and the final dedication took place after the body of the Church had started from Nauvoo; the 12 stakes were broken down, and the people fled to the Rocky Mountains.

No general conference had been held for the last three years, according to the declaration of our martyred prophet, who said, "There shall be no more baptisms for the dead until the ordinances can be attended too in the font of the Lord's House; and the Church shall not hold another General Conference, until they can meet in said House. For thus saith the Lord!"

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 189.

Joseph's directs that those who worked on the temple should be the first endowed.

During these labors [of preparing to go West] I was called to the temple to receive my endowments and sealings, as Joseph said, "Those whose names are on the books showing their labors for the temple, shall have the first claim." President Brigham Young and the Twelve were very particular to carry out his instructions; they saw that those who spent their whole time in these labors received the reward of their diligence by giving them a great endowment.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 194.

Joseph urges Saints to pray to receive the blessings of the temple.

"Pray that you may live to go into the [Nauvoo] temple, and be sealed in your forehead," said the Prophet Joseph. I have lived to enjoy this blessing and received my wife in the new and everlasting covenant, the celestial or eternal marriage covenant, a covenant which binds for time and all eternity.

"Autobiography of Wandle Mace," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 195.

Tells of transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Upon arriving in Nauvoo heSidneyimmediately appointed a meeting for the people to choose a Guardian for the Church. Fortunately the Twelve with the President Brigham Young, arrived in time to attend this meeting.Sidneys intentions was to hold this meeting before the Twelve arrived.

The meeting was held according to appointment, Sidney Rigdon addressing us, giving his views upon our situation and called upon the people to choose a Guardian in his remarks, and it was evident to all that he was not dictated by the Holy Ghost.

A Meeting was appointed or rather continued as a Special Conference and in the afternoon and President Brigham Young addressed the people. At this meeting the [spirit] was truly manifest inasmuch it seemed that Joseph himself was addressing us, the voice, the countenance was Joseph. The mantle of Joseph had indeed fallen upon Brigham Young. There was no dubiety now, if there had been any before, who held the power. All could see and bore testimony that the spirit had manifested to them that Brigham Young was the right man, and he was in the right place. Said Joseph with his hands upon the head of Brigham Young, in the house of John P. Greene at Quincy, "While you live no other man can occupy this place."

. . . President Brigham Young gave his views of the present situation of the church, now our Prophet and patriarch is taken from our midst. He said,

" . . . While the Prophet lived, we walked by 'sight' he is taken from us, and we must now walk by 'faith.'" After he had explained matters so satisfactory that every Saint present could see that as aforetime themantle of Elijah fell upon Elishaso also fell the mantle or the spirit and power which Joseph held in his life time had fallen upon Brigham Young as President of the Twelve, which was the highest Quorum, and holding the highestor first Presidencyof the Church of God upon the earth.

Wandle Mace, The Diary of Wandle Mace (Salt Lake City, Utah: Genealogical Society of Utah, 1964), 156-57.
