Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Bellows, John F.

(May 24, 1825-1894 [or November 8, 1898])

Bellows and his father visited Joseph's home; their visit was interrupted by two men from Missouri who sought to kidnap Joseph, who escaped from them.

In the latter part of the same month [May, 1843], in company with my father, I went to Nauvoo.

The next morning after we arrived there we went down to Joseph's Mansion to have an interview with the Prophet. We found him at home. He met us at the door smiling. At the same time he put out his hand and shook hands with my father first, and then grasped my hand, at the same time inviting us to come in. I cannot describe the feelings I had when he grasped my hand. I thought he was the best and noblest man my eyes ever beheld. He led us into the sitting room, where we conversed for over an hour. Joseph and my father did most of the talking; now and then he would ask me a few questions, and paid considerable attention to me.

While we were in the Prophet's house a knock was heard at the door. Joseph opened the door, and there stood two well-dressed men with tall, black stove-pipe hats on. One of the men asked if Mr. Smith was in. Joseph said, "Yes, sir, I am the man." There was silence for a moment, and then Joseph spoke up and said, "Gentlemen, I know what is in your hearts, but you do not know what is in mine; and I know who you are. You are officers from Missouri to arrest me. Wait a minute," he said, "till I get my hat and I will go with you." He turned around and made a polite bow and said, "Brother Bellows, please excuse me; call in again."

At this father and I followed Joseph out of the door. Joseph and the officers took the lead, and father and I went on behind until we reached the gate. Here Joseph grasped the two men, one with each arm. This aroused my curiosity. I wanted to see the end, so I followed behind. Joseph led them to where some men were working on the Nauvoo House. He led them around, and showing them the different rooms explained to them the design of the building. Present they went inside out of my sight. I stayed there a short time and then returned to my stopping place. I had not been there more than thirty or forty minutes when the news was all over town that the officers from Missouri had came for Joseph and that they could not find him. How he got away from the officers I never learned.

John F. Bellows, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 20 (15 October 1892): 641-42.
