Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Marsh, Thomas Baldwin

(November 1, 1799-January 1866)

Joseph settles a leadership difficulty, reaffirming that Marsh should be the company leader in the trek to Missouri.

At that time [i.e., Fall, 1832] an objection was raised to me being the leader [of a Company of saints going to Missouri] owing to my inexperience, but there was division on this subject as some considered my office entitled me to the presidency. My opposers appealed to Joseph, who decided I should lead on account of my office; still, although we started with the understanding that I was to lead the company, my opposers never became reconciled to my presidency, until we got into difficulties at the Ohio River, where we could not proceed without better order. Here they yielded to my dictation through necessity; but when we had got down the Ohio River as far as Louisville a rebellious spirit was again manifested.

"History of Thomas B. Marsh," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 24 (11 June 1864): 376. Also in Deseret News, 24 March 1858.

In meeting at Joseph's home, Marsh reconciles differences between some of the Twelve; later, Marsh joins Joseph on a mission to Canada.

About the month of June, 1837, I started for Kirtland in company with D. [David] W. Patten and Wm. [William] Smith, to try and reconcile some of the Twelve and others of high standing who had come out in opposition to the Prophet. On my journey I met Brother P. [Parley] P. Pratt about five miles west of Columbus, Ohio, moving to Far West; I prevailed on him to return with us to Kirtland. On our arrival I went to Brother Joseph's house, where I remained all the time I was in Kirtland.

About this time a special meeting was appointed at Joseph's house, by himself, to which several of the brethren who were disaffected were invited. I was chosen moderator, and called upon the aggrieved parties to speak first. A reconciliation was effected between all parties.

July 23rd, Joseph Smith, Jun., received a revelation to me [D&C 112] concerning the Twelve Apostles; and on the 27th, I started with Joseph and Brother Rigdon for Canada. During this mission we visited the churches in Canada west, and returned about the last of August.

"History of Thomas B. Marsh," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 26 (18 June 1864): 391.

Sensing Marsh's weakness, Joseph asked him if he was about to apostatize; Marsh evaded the question.

About this time I got a beam in my eye and thought I could discover a mote in Joseph's eye, though it was nothing but a beam in my eye; I was so completely darkened that I did not think on the Savior's injunction: "Thou hypocrite, why beholdest thou the mote which is in thy brother's eye, when a beam is in thine own eye; first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, then thou shalt see clearly to get the mote out of thy brother's eye."

Had I seen this I should have discovered myself a hypocrite, but as I had often said while in the Church, if I ever apostatized I would go away quietly; I tried to do so, but the Saints kept inquiring of me if I was going to leave, and so did Joseph twice. I evaded him both times. The last time he almost got me into so tight a corner I could hardly evade. He put the question direct to me, whether I was going to leave? With an affected look of contempt I answered: "Joseph when you see me leave the Church, you will see a good fellow leave it."

"History of Thomas B. Marsh," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 26, no. 26 (25 June 1864): 406.
