Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Martineau, Susan Ellen Johnson

(July 11, 1836-December 5, 1918)

The Prophet frequently stayed in her childhood home; she recalls a Christmas dinner with the Prophet when Joseph carved the turkey; she knew Joseph taught the doctrine of plural marriage and had plural wives.

As a child I often saw the Prophet in the Sunday meetings in the [Kirtland] temple, and also at the house of my father, Joel H. Johnson, but my more distinct recollections begin about 1841, when we lived in Ramus, afterward named Macedonia, about twenty miles from Nauvoo, where father was presiding elder. The Prophet frequently came to our house and sometimes stayed overnight. On one occasion Joseph, with Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant and some others from Nauvoo, whose names I do not now remember, partook of a Christmas dinner at my father's; and standing at the head of the table, carved the turkey. Fearing that his clothing might accidentally be soiled, my stepmother, Susan Bryant Johnson, tied a long apron upon him. He laughed and said it was well for he did not know what might happen to him. My brother Seth and I were in the room, admiring, in our childish way, him whom we thought the greatest man on earth.

My father was present when Joseph received the "Word of Wisdom."

The revelation, Section 131, Doctrine and Covenants [D&C 131], was given in my father's house in Ramus.

It was in Ramus that Joseph taught my father and grandmother, Julia Hills Johnson, the principle of plural marriage, both of whom accepted it.

To my certain knowledge the Prophet married my Aunt Alenera Johnson as a plural wife with my father's consent, living as such until his martyrdom. She died a few years ago in Parowan, Iron County, Utah, and was proud of her union with him.

Joseph desired my uncle to explain the law to another aunt of mine, and have her consent to be sealed to him, but she refused, preferring to marry a young man then paying her attention. She did marry the young man, and according to her conversation with me, regretted it all her life.

When I was but a child, I had a positive testimony that Joseph was a Prophet of God, and as I looked at him he seemed to me like a heavenly being. And at the age of eighteen I had a positive testimony that the principle of plural marriage as revealed through Joseph was a pure and holy one.

In conclusion I declare myself a living witness to the fact that Joseph Smith the Prophet not only taught but also practiced plural marriage, anyone to the contrary notwithstanding.

Susan Ellen Johnson Martineau, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 541-42.
