Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Maughan, Mary Ann Weston

(March 10, 1817-1901)

Saw Joseph, standing on a barrel, preaching in Nauvoo; witnessed sham battle of Nauvoo Legion in which Joseph exposed the murderous intent of John C. Bennett; refers to Joseph's prophecy of the martyrdom; heard Joseph call on the Twelve to carry off the burdens of the kingdom; Joseph prophesied Saints to go to Rocky Mountains; tells of Sister Rushton and Saints serenading the Prophet's family on Christmas, 1843; Joseph sent her husband and others to find coal for Nauvoo; he also prophesied Saints to be freed from their enemies; tells of mob persecutions prior to martyrdom, of mob threats against her husband, of Nauvoo Legion protective strategies, of the martyrdom, of seeing dead bodies come into Nauvoo, and the Prophet's funeral.

[After arriving in Nauvoo on Oct. 10, 1841:] The house was empty, so the company staid in it till they found their friends or rented houses to live in. Sister Simonds and myself went to find our company that left us at Kirtland, as we had some of their luggage with us. It was Sunday afternoon, and as we passed by the grove, we saw Joseph Smith standing on a flour barrel. Bro. Caleb Baldwin stood before him, and Joseph put his hand on his shoulders for a desk. He was preaching to a small company standing around him. We listened a short time and then went on to find our friends.

. . . One Saturday I went to see the Legion Parade. A sham battle was fought. The weather was fine. But a startling fact was made manifest by John C. Bennett, requesting and urging Joseph to command one of the cohorts in person (without his staff.) The Prophet, with the prophecy of his martyrdom now ever with him, refused to comply with his request, and exposed the treachery of Bennett. He said: "Let John C. Bennett, at the day of Judgment, say why he requested me to take my position on the 7th of Apr. 1842, without my staff, where my life might have been the forfeit and no man have known who had done the deed." I had a good view of the battle and saw Bennett ride many times to Joseph. Many thousands of people were present.

Mr. [Peter] Maughan bought our lot of the Temple Committee, and being a stone mason, he went to work on the Temple walls to pay for it. The Building Committee are making ready to erect the Baptismal Font, to be supported by 12 oxen. They are good, and do credit to the brethren who are carving them. It is intended to overlay them with gold. Most of the labor had been done by the brethren donating every 10th day. The people are making exertion to complete the Temple. It is intended to stop work on the Nauvoo House and devote their efforts to the Temple. About this time at a conference I heard Brother Joseph call on the 12 to stand in their places and bear off the Kingdom; and from then on the burden of this preaching was, "he was rolling off the Kingdom onto the shoulders of the twelve." But Nauvoo rose as a beautiful monument, then 20,000 souls.

On the 8th day of Aug. 1842, Joseph prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction and be driven to the Rocky Mountains, that many would fall, and some would live to go through and assist in making settlements and building cities, and see the Saints become mighty in the Rocky Mountains. This was given to his Masonic Brethren about 5 years before the Pioneers entered the Valley of Salt Lake.

December 1843. Joseph had 38 lawsuits and things were gloomy at Christmas time for the Saints. On the 25th, about 1 o'clock, one of our neighbors, Sister Rushton, with her family went to serenade Joseph. They were awakened by the singing: "Mortals awake, with Angels join." Joseph said: "This filled my soul with pleasure. My family arose to hear the serenade and I thanked my Heavenly Father for their visit and blessed them in the name of the Lord God of Israel."

In the spring, 1844, Joseph sent Brothers Maughan, Saunders, and Jacob Peart on a mission, to go up on Rock river and locate a coal mine so the city could have coal, the mine to be as near the Mississippi as possible, so the coal could be hauled to the river bank and loaded on the Maid of Iowa.

February 25, 1844. Joseph prophesied that in 5 years the Saints would be out of the power of their enemies, whether apostates or of the world. Our enemies put up a printing press and published the most infamous lies ever told on a community. The City Council according to law voted it a nuisance and treated it as such, and now our enemies left in a rage, swearing vengeance against all concerned. The Brethren had to stand guard day and night to keep the mob out. Governor Ford made a demand for Joseph, Hyrum and the City Council, pledging the faith of the State that they should be protected from the mob. We know how that faith was kept; but I will pass by some of these scenes at present and go on with my own. We took our share in these times, Mr. Maughan standing guard and us at home in constant dread of the mob, our house being on the street on which they would come into the City.

. . . [Peter Maughan and others went looking for coal, and] While at the hotel waiting for their supper, Mr. Maughan took up a newspaper and read an account of a great battle that had been fought in Nauvoo, then handed the paper to Bro. Peart. After supper they went out and decided to take the next boat for home. In a few hours they were on their way. On the boat were some mobocrats from Missouri, and some very hard talking was done about the battle of Nauvoo, the Missourians bragging of their wicked deeds in killing the Mormons and hoping to do the same again. They suspected Brothers Peart and Maughan were Mormons, and so gave them a good share of their abuse. The mate warned Mr. Maughan they were desperate men and to avoid a quarrel if possible. At Burlington they learned the battle was to be fought on Friday. The Brethren said, "we are glad, for we are going to Nauvoo. Our families are there and we will have a hand in the fray."

On arriving at home, Mr. Maughan took his gun and went to join his comrades in the Legion. He was an Officer; and sometimes twice in a night a stick would bang across my door with a call for Brother Maughan. Some not knowing he was sent away, said: "Well, he ought to be home now, for we need him in his company." The city was under martial law and the Brethren were on guard day and night to keep the mob from coming in. Thus things went on until Joseph and Hyrum were taken to Carthage.

June 28th. Brother W[illard] Richards and S. N. Smith brought the remains of the murdered Prophets to Nauvoo. I saw them come in on Mill Pond Street in 2 wagons covered with green boughs to keep off the sun. They were met by the officers of the Legion and the people.

June 29th. About 10,000 persons visited and viewed the remains of the martyred Prophet and Patriarch. The funerals took place in the evening. Brother Taylor was brought home on the 2nd of July, 1844, when the excitement was a little abated.

"Journal of Mary Ann Weston Maughan," in Kate B. Carter, comp. Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1958-77), 2:363-66. Spelling and grammar has been modernized.
