Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

McArthur, Daniel D.

(April 8, 1820-1903)

Joseph and the brethren fire a cannon from atop a hill where Father Adam blessed his sons at Adam-ondi-Ahman.

When the Mormon boys got into Adam-ondi-Ahman, it was in the dead of the night, but the news soon went the rounds that the cannon was taken from the mob which caused them to rejoice that the Lord had heard their prayers. So it was concluded by Joseph the Prophet and the brethren to take the cannon in the morning up on a hill to the place where old father Adam blessed his sons and fire off a few rounds. Consequently, as soon as the sun rose in the morning, the Saints collected on the spot and the cannon was prepared and loaded and fired three times, and every time it was discharged, the Saints took off their hats and shouted Hosannah to God and the Lamb. Three times the report was heard twenty-five miles distinctly.

"Autobiography of Daniel D. McArthur (1820-1846)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah.

Testimony of Joseph; memory of first meeting and of Joseph's sense of humor, which he demonstrates by asking about a "bull-eye watch."

To me he [Joseph Smith] seemed to possess more power and force of character than any ordinary man. I would look upon him when he was with hundreds of other men, then he would appear greater than ever.

My testimony is that he was a true Prophet of the living God; and the more I heard his sayings and saw his doings the more I was convinced that he had of a truth seen God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ, as also the holy angels of God. I cannot call to mind that I ever had a doubt enter my heart, since I first heard the gospel preached, which was in the spring of 1832, as to his being a true Prophet. It always seemed to me that if I ever did know anything on this earth I surely knew that he was a Prophet.

When he first spoke to me I was in the woods, about half a mile south of Kirtland. He was on his horse and I was chopping wood. Said he, "Good afternoon." I returned the compliment. He had a smile on his face, and I felt that he was going to say something else, "You are not the young man who sold his wife for a bull-eye watch the other day, are you?" he asked. I replied, "No, sir," and he went on laughing. There was a man who had sold his wife for a bull-eye watch a day or two before, and there was quite a talk about it in the neighborhood, so I suppose he thought he would have a little fun with me.

"Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 4 (15 February 1892): 128-29.

Note: In his autobiography, McArthur spells his name "McArthur," but in these "recollections" published in the Juvenile Instructor it is spelled "McCarthur."

Joseph corrects Joshua Holman for praying like "a braying jackass"; Joseph prophesies that if the Saints knew the trials of the next twelve years, they would apostatize.

This same winter, 1836, he stated that he was out of firewood and that he had no time to get up any, for the officers of the law were continually on his track. So some of the brethren thought they would turn out and get him some wood. Father and some two other brethren took their teams to haul, and myself and three other boys went to chop the wood into sled lengths. It was the last of December and snow was on the ground.

When noon came we were all called to dinner at Joseph's house. The table was loaded down with cornmeal mush and milk, and at the bidding of Joseph we all stepped forward to our places around the table, standing on our feet. Joseph asked Joshua Holman, who was one of the wood haulers, to ask a blessing upon the food. He went at his duty with all his soul. As he had been a Methodist exhorter before joining the Church, he commenced to call upon the great and mighty God who sat upon the top of a topless throne, to look down and bless the food and asked many other blessings to rest upon the Prophet, etc. As soon as he closed Brother Joseph said, "Brother Joshua, don't let me ever hear you ask another such a blessing;" and then before we took our seats he stated his reasons for making this remark, and showed us how inconsistent such ideas were, and told us many things about God and who He was. Then we sat down to our mush and milk, and after eating, the men went out to hitch up their teams, and Joseph took his hat and stepped out into the yard. We boys followed close at his heels, and he turned around and said, "Boys, you think I am a Prophet, and want to hear all I have to say. Now," said he, "if I should tell you all I know that will come to pass within twelve years, perhaps there would not one of you believe it, and would apostatize from the Church. But I shall let you learn things as they happen, then most likely you will all stand in the Church."

This saying of course caused me to watch what transpired in the following twelve years. About the first thing that took place after that was the great apostasy in 1837; next we were driven out of Kirtland; and Joseph was obliged to flee for his life; next Joseph and his brethren and the whole Church were driven out of Missouri; next Joseph and Hyrum were murdered; afterwards the entire Church were driven from Nauvoo, which history you are familiar with; all this inside of twelve years, and ten thousand other things besides!

"Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 4 (15 February 1892): 128-29.
