Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

McBride, Reuben

(June 16, 1803-February 26, 1891)

Tells of being baptized for the dead in the Nauvoo Temple font and of Joseph afterwards wrapping his scarf around McBride and giving him a ride home in his carriage.

Dear Sister Martha: I Received your kind and welcome letter some time ago, but circumstances has been such that hindered me till now the subject you wrote uppon is one of the greatest importance. the first Work that I done for our Dead Relatives was done in Nauvoo I think in the fall of 42 [It was the fall of '41] but you know for you was there. Bro Joseph Smith made a [illegible] and had the Font in the Temple filled with water from the wells. He Said he, wished me to be Baptized in the Font before I went back to Ohio. we met. Joseph, Spoke and the Font was Dedicated and he Joseph Said Blessed is the first man Baptized in this Font. Brigham Young Baptized me I was Baptized Six times. Joseph took off his mantle and Wrapt it around me took me in his Carrage and, drove to your House He talked all the way going to your House. . . .

Write as son as you get this God Bless you Good Bye your Brother

Reuben McBride

"Reuben McBride to Martha McBride Kimball, November 1886," photocopy of holograph, Nauvoo Restoration, Inc., Files, Nauvoo, Illinois.

In his diary he tells of volunteering for Zion's Camp and of Joseph promising eternal life to those who went; instructions for those on camp given and words of camp song provided; tells of finding bones of Zelph, of a storm at Fishing River, and of a cholera attack.

On the 16th of June, 1833, I was baptized into this Church in the town of Villanova, Chautauqua County, New York. In the spring of March 4th, 1834, Joseph Smith and Parley P. Pratt came to my house and held a meeting in that neighborhood. At the close of the meeting, Joseph called for volunteers to go up to redeem Zion. I volunteered to go. We were to meet in Kirtland, I think the 22nd of April. My brother-in-law, Vinson Knight, took me in his buggy to Kirtland. We arrived there before the time appointed. The day before we started, Joseph called us together and spoke for a short time and we were all sealed up to eternal life by and Joseph said they should come forth in the day of the LordIf they committed sins, they would be delivered over to the buffeting of Satan, but they should come forth in the Lord Jesus.

On the 5th of May we left Kirtland and the 6th we arrived at New Portage, where we were organized into companies. We were called upon to consecrate all the money we had. I did so. Frederick G. Williams was treasurer. Here we were joined by some who went on before us to New Portage. As we traveled along, we were not to molest anything in the street. not so much as a dog, nor to say anything, where we were going or what our business was or the names of those who were in the camp and frequently before starting in the morning, we would all join and sing.

Hark, listen to the trumpeters

They sound for volunteers

On Zion s bright and flowery mound

Behold their officers.

Their garments white,

Their armor's bright

With courage bold they stand.

Enlisting soldiers for their king

To march to Zion's land.

It sets my heart all in a flame

A soldier for to be

I will enlist, gird on my arms

And fight for liberty.

We want no cowards in our band

Who will their colors fly

We call for valiant-hearted men,

Who are not afraid to die. . . .

[June] 4th [1834] which he said he supposed occasioned his death. He [Zelph] was killed in battle. Said he was a man of God and the curse was taken off or in part he was a white Lamanite, was known from the Atlantic to the Rocky Mountains. . . . June the 4th came to the Mississippi River. Were two days in crossing, being very high, one mile wide. On the [June] 7th [1834] arrived at Salt River, stayed there 12 days to recruit and reorganize. Some came from Michigan and joined the company. Here a branch of the Church was organized. Lyman Wight was chosen general. I was one of the rifle company. Thomas Colburn was our captain.

Here we were drilled. On the 18th, passed through Richmond, Ray County. We now numbered I think 200. After we all got together, we were called together again and were sealed up unto Eternal Life, the same as in Kirtland. On the 19th of June [1834], camped on a rise of ground near Fishing River.

As soon as we camped, then put out a guard. Some of the men came, about four or five and told us to get out of the road and swore we would "catch hell" before morning. Soon there came up a thunderstorm. The wind blew. It took three or four to hold the tent down and the rain came down in torrents.

Brother Amasa Lyman and me laid down in the tent. The water was halfway up our sides. The thunder cracked, first on one side and then on the other. It was terrible in the extreme. I saw no hail where we were, but in the morning as we traveled on a short distance, the ground was covered with lime. The hail had cut off the trees, some no big as your finger. They said there were hailstones fell as big as a tumbler. Traveled five miles and camped. June 21st [1834], were met by Colonel Sconce and others. Held a meeting.

Joseph spoke at length. They were very much affected and some shed tears.

Colonel Sconce said if that were their sentiments, he could almost lay down his life for them. Fishing River had risen so high the mob could not cross to get to us. It was said it rose 22 feet. Joseph and others went to the river. In the morning I did not go at Rush Creek.

[June] 23rd [1834]. This night the cholera broke out. Some fell while standing on guard.

[June] 24th [1834]. Many were taken at one time to lay round on the floor together at a time. Thirteen or fourteen dieda very distressing time indeed. Next day, went to Lyman Wight's and camped. While on Fishing River, Joseph received a revelation [D&C 105] that the strength of the Lord's House had not listened to the call, but it was necessary to bring us thus far for a trial of our faith and our offering was accepted, as was Abraham's. You can read the revelation. Here at Lyman Wight's we were disbanded and received an honorable discharge under the signature of General Lyman Wight and was at liberty to return to my native land. Some who had not families were counseled to stay.

Reuben McBride, "Journal of Reuben McBride," microfilm of holograph, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Received power of attorney from Joseph Smith to manage certain church affairs in eastern and middle states.

In the year of the 1841 conference held the 6th Oct at Nauvoo, Ill., I was appointed by Brother Joseph Smith in place of Oliver Granger who died in Kirtland Ohio and Received a general power of attorney to transact the business in the Eastern and Middle states and more particularly Kirtland Lake to Ohio and take charge of all the Church property, in that place, including the Temple the farm was rented to Joseph Coe who had left the Church, in the year 1844, I received a letter from Brother Joseph to remove him from the farm Mr. Coe refusing to pay the rent because he said the Church owed him for his share of the Egyptian mummies and was not willing to leave the place. I removed him and took possession of the place 15 April, 1844 and July, 1845 the Rigdonites tried to drive me by force off the place my life was threatened by Jacob Bump who once belonged to the Church through mobbing and continual trouble by day and by night by Rigdonites and Strangites all apostates from the Church and Law Suit after law suit about the farm also the Temple and House & Lot formerly the Carlos Smith House, I held it until it was burned down by Law in 1847 in the same fall I delivered up the farm to Almon W. Babbit one of the trustees of the Ch it was sold for $ fifteen hundred dollars out of which received 1350 in property such as wagons, harness and store goods receipting the same to Babbit also received the House and Lot the House being a mere shell being on the Commons having the Expense of three Law Suits to get a man out of the house by the name of Lehasa Hollister who was in the house when Brother Joseph was killed and refused to go out, at the time Called worth $100, by A. W. Babbit, trustee for the church.

President Brigham Young said I could have this property to remove my family to Salt Lake Valley.

By the advice of President Young I left in 1852 with my family for Salt Lake Valley leaving the Temple in care of Christopher Dixon & Charles Parmer.

Seeing fulfilled the prediction of Brother Joseph which was if I would take a bold stance my enemies should lick up the very dust of my feet in Kirtland.

For services lawsuits and expenses including Lawyers fees from July /44 till Nov. /47, Five Hundred Dollars.

[Signed] Reuben McBride

N.B. by the advise of President Brigham Young he wished all this affairs to remain till we all went back to Kirtland. Great Salt Lake City, Dec. 12, 1853.

R. McBride

Reuben McBride, "Statement," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some spelling and punctuation has been modernized.
