Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Belnap, Adeline Knight

(May 4, 1831-June 10, 1919)

In her childhood, saw Joseph weak from having received a revelation.

How well (Adeline) remembers one day before her father (Vinson Knight) died, of a little excitement in school. The children were busy when the school room door was carefully opened and two gentlemen entered, carrying the limp form of Joseph Smith. The children all sprang to their feet, for Brother Joseph lay helpless in their arms, his head resting on his brother's shoulder, his face pale as death, but his eyes were open, though he seemed not to see things earthly. The teacher quieted them by telling them that Brother Joseph was in a revelation, and they were carrying him to his office above the schoolroom. That same revelation is recorded in section 124 of the Doctrine and Covenants and was a comfort to Adeline all during her (subsequent) life, as it speaks of her father and his family; tells his family to rejoice for their father's sins are forgiven; he is chosen and anointed and shall be honored in the midst of his house (see D&C 124:74, 141).

Some of Adeline's fondest recollections all her life are of the Prophet Joseph Smith, for she saw him nearly every day in the early part of her life. She grew up under his teachings. She could always feel the influence of a Holy Spirit when near him, and realized that he was a man who was continually communing with Heavenly Beings.

Lola Belnap Coolbear, "The Life Story of Adeline Knight Belnap," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 2.

Note: Vinson Knight died on July 31, 1842; D&C 124 was received January 19, 1841.

Memories of Joseph's final days; his premonition of his own forthcoming death; her feelings after the martyrdom.

[Adeline] remembered a few last speeches of Brother Joseph. He seemed to know that his death was near. She remembers he mounted the frame building and made a speech to his people and prophesied so many things that were to happen. She lived to see them fulfilled. She saw him when he was being taken to Carthage between two armed men. He seemed to know his fate, for she heard him call to her neighbor and say: "Brother Cahoon, have the floors laid and the doors hung to my sepulcher." She went with her mother to see the bodies of the Prophet and his brother, Hyrum, after they had been murdered. She saw them cut a lock of hair from Brother Joseph's head and give some to her mother, which she now keeps as a treasure. A feeling of horror now fills her heart when she thinks of the four tubs full of bloody clothes she saw outside of that house of mourning.

Lola Belnap Coolbear, "The Life Story of Adeline Knight Belnap," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 7.
