Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

McDonald, John

(May 5, 1797-August 31, 1874)

The McDonald family, converted in 1842 by the preaching of John E. Page; immediately went to Nauvoo, where they were met at the dock by apostates who tried to convince new arrivals Joseph Smith was a "damn scoundrel" and Mormonism a hoax; unable to find work, he counseled with Joseph and Hyrum, then went to St. Louis; while there, Joseph was murdered but McDonald could not believe a Prophet could be slain; when he arrived at Quincy, he heard details of martyrdom, and prayed to see if it was true; a personage appeared, asking "which of my prophets have they not slain?"; McDonald was but 13 when he saw the martyrs' bodies; many had apostatized, including John E. Page, who sought to persuade McDonald's father to apostatize. He testified of Joseph instead. Also tells of the founding of the church in St. Louis at the Prophet's instruction.

Father never took any interest in the religions of the day. He always said they were a lot of humbugs that they did not preach the doctrines that Christ taught, so he would have nothing to do with any of them. I think it was in the year 1842 that John E. Page one of the Apostles of the Mormons came to Pittsburgh and preached the Gospel according to the Mormon faith. Father happened to be passing by and stopped to hear what He had to say. I remember when Father came home in the evening he said to Mother he had stopped to hear a fellow preach, and he preached the strangest doctrine he had ever heard. He went to hear Mr. Page several times, and at last came to the conclusion that it was the first time he had ever heard the Gospel of Christ preached in his life. Father kept Mother well posted in what Mr. Page said and she came to the conclusion that she would go and hear him preach, just as she had made up her mind to go. A Methodist Minister called on her and pled with her to join his Church, but she told him "no" she wanted to hear Mr. Page first, [to learn] what he had to say. So she went with father to hear him preach. As soon as Mr. Page commenced to speak, Mother got a testimony that he was a Servant of God, and that he preached the true Gospel of Christ. In a very short time Father and Mother were both baptized in the Alleghaney River. As soon as father was ordained an Elder he started out to preach the Gospel. He went over in Alleghaney County and down through Ohio.

The next thing that struck Him was the spirit of gathering with the saints at Nauvoo the Zion of the last days, the Home of the Pure in Heart. So he closed up his business in Pittsburgh and started for Nauvoo. I think we arrived their in the fall of 1842. We landed at the Old Stone House wharf. As we were leaving the steamer we were greeted by the music of a brass band and a young lady in very short skirts dancing the Spanish Cachucha up on the Stone House balcony, which made it very pleasant for me at least, as I was always very fond of any thing of that kind. Our next greeting was from the Higbees, and a lot more apostates, scoundrels who gathered around the steamer and told the Saints that they had better get back on the boat and go back to where they came from.

One of the Higbees said the Prophet Joseph Smith was a damned scoundrel and that Mormonism was all a hoax. Father told him that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, and that the name he, Higbee, called him would apply to himself as near as he could judge. There came very near being a big row, but the Higbee crowd did lots of swearing, but no fighting.

Father's next experience was when he went to rent a house. The first man he asked after asking some questions in regards to religion told father he did not want any damned Mormons in his houses, that they were all a set of scoundrels. But I will say for this man he had been a good Latter day Saint but had got a little off the track, for He repented and came back in the Church again. After traveling a whole day father rented two rooms of a man by the name of Jos[illegible].

The next thing to do was hunt for work, but there was no work at his trade to be had in Nauvoo, so he came to the conclusion to leave mother and us children in Nauvoo and go down to St. Louis to work. He had a talk with Joseph the Prophet and His Brother Hyrum, and when he got us fixed for the winter he and my brother William started for St. Louis and had no trouble in getting work at their trade, as they were both first class workmen. Father and William worked in St. Louis for over a year but they came up to see us every two or three months. Father, hearing of the trouble at Nauvoo, started up the river for home, but he had not got far on his journey until the word came aboard the boat that a mob had killed Joseph the Prophet. But father could not believe it. He thought it impossible for them to kill a Prophet of God. But the further he came up the river and landed at the little towns on his way, the same news came on board, but He Only smiled at it. But when the steamer landed at Quincy, Ill., all the particulars of the murder of Joseph and Hyrum were told, [and] father began to think there might be something in it. He went into his State Room on the boat and asked the Lord in prayer if it was true that they had killed the Prophet. The answer came from some Personage (?) in the room, saying "which of my Prophets have they not slain?" He turned round to see who spoke but could see no one. He jumped to his feet and exclaimed "My God, they have killed him."

Father did not arrive in Nauvoo until after Joseph and Hyrum were buried. I remember I took my mother to see them lying side by side on boards laid trusses and covered with a white sheet in the front room of the Mansion House. I was Only [a] boy of about thirteen years of age, but that was a sight never to be forgotten by those who saw it. Those were dark days, and days of mourning for the Saints.

Think of it. The Prophet and Patriarch of the Church dead, and many of the men who stood shoulder to shoulder with them in life turned traitors to them and apostatized from the Church. John E. Page, one of the Twelve Apostles, who brought father and mother into the Church apostatized, and went back, and tried to persuade father to go with him. He said it was all over with the Church; that they had all been deceived. Father asked him if he did not bear his testimony to the truth of Mormonism and that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, in Pittsburgh, and told him that if he would join the Church he would receive a testimony for himself that Joseph was a true Prophet of God.

Father told John E. Page that he had received the testimony that he promised him that He should receive, and that he now knew for himself that the work he had embraced was the work of God, and that Joseph Smith was a true Prophet.

I forgot to mention that while Father was in St. Louis He and a man by the name of Rayer and another Brother were the first to hold meetings in that City, the three of them used to meet in a room were they were boarding, but it soon leaked out that they were Mormons. [Soon] others commenced to meet with them. As there was quite a number of the Saints who went down to St. Louis from Nauvoo to get work, it was not long before they sent a delegate up to Nauvoo to ask the Prophet's advise as to starting a branch of the Church there. The Prophet told them to go ahead and start a branch and God would bless them. You must remember that it was only a short time before this occurred that the Saints were driven out of the state of Missouri in the dead of winter and had to fly to Illinois for safety. After the Prophet's death, father stayed in Nauvoo and went to work on the Temple, at carpenter work. [He] worked on it until it was finished, and received His Endowments in it, and had mother sealed to him. Those were pretty tough times; men had to work late and early to get the Temple finished at the time appointed, and they had to keep their guns and ammunition under their benches as they did not know the hour that the mobocrats, who were always prowling around, would come down on them. The Temple was soon finished and some of the saints got their endowments, then word was received from President Young that the Saints must prepare to travel to some place in the far west in the Rocky Mountains.

"Short Sketch of the Life of John McDonald," handwritten, Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar, punctuation, and spelling have been modernized.
