Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

McLaughlin, Harriet Louisa Chase

(April 28, 1834-August 3, 1907)

Upon arrival in Nauvoo, her father gave money to the Prophet, which "saved the Church financially." On a second occasion her father gave Joseph money, and received a note from him; Joseph, unable to come in person, sent a handkerchief to the Chase family, which healed a sick daughter; the Prophet baptized her father; in a ceremony performed by Joseph, her sister was married to Brigham Young; her mother was set apart by Joseph and given a gift of healing; she heard Joseph's last public speech and remembers the spirit of depression at his death, and implies she was present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young. Also tells of the miracle of the seagulls in the Salt Lake Valley.

[When little Harriet was six years old her family left Sparta, Livingston County, N. Y., and passed through Kirtland en route to Nauvoo. In Kirtland, they saw the Temple. Her daughter, who writes this history, said:]

They passed through Kirtland, Ohio, where the first Latter Day Saint Temple was built, visited the Temple. Mother said the rooms were partitioned off with canvas. They journeyed on to Illinois where they bought a farm three miles out of Nauvoo on the Mississippi River. Grandfather and Cousin Ezra turned the balance of their means over to the Church and the Prophet Joseph Smith told them that they had saved the Church financially.

Some time later they were all at a meeting where someone spoke in a strange tongue. It was quite a while before the interpretation came, but it finally did through John Gleason, a son-in-law of Isaac Chase. The speech seemed to be directed to Isaac and Ezra Chase to the effect that they were to return to New York and dispose of the balance of their property there and turn the proceeds over to the Church. This they did. Part of the proceeds of the sale was merchandise which was put into the store. The Prophet gave a note for money received which note is a valued possession of the Chase family to this day.

The change of climate brought on a sickness which was known as winter fever. Sylvia, a daughter of Isaac, was very sick and father Chase sent for the Prophet to come and administer to her. There was so much sickness and the Prophet was so in demand that he could not come, but taking a handkerchief out of his jacket he said, "Take this and give it to her. Tell her to hold it in her hand. It shall be the same as an administration." This was done and the fever left her and she began to improve from that time.

The Prophet announced that at a certain time he would baptize in the Mississippi River and that that would be the last time he would officiate at baptisms. Father Chase took his family to be baptized but was a little late in getting to the place and the Prophet was coming up out of the water just as they drove up. He said, "Here is Father Chase and his family. I will baptize them." Which he did. So that makes my mother the last child publicly baptized by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Mother said after the Nauvoo Temple was finished Father and Mother worked there almost day and night. I remember father getting us all together and taking us to the temple to be sealed to them but there were so many ahead of us that it was not done and the exodus came before it could be done. I also remember that my sister Clarisa and her friend Helen Rockwood were married to Brigham Young as plural wives by the Prophet Joseph Smith. When Helen found out that I as a mere child knew this she took me off and talked to me and told me I must never tell this or it would cause the death of the Prophet and many of these good men.

Mother was one of the original members of the Relief Society organized by the Prophet in Nauvoo. She was set apart by the Prophet to administer to and comfort the sick and had the gift of healing sealed upon her. She was very faithful in this office and performed many seemingly miraculous healings. She always went away, alone to pray for the sick. I remember once when father was very sick they had given him up to die. Mother left his bedside and went away out in the trees and prayed for him and it w as minutes until he began to get better and was soon well.

Mother also said she remembered being at a meeting in the bowery when the Prophet made his last public speech. Among other things she remembered his saying, "I will throw my mantle on the twelve. They will have to carry on my work from this time on." During the persecution of the Prophet, Father's house in town was made a kind of barracks for what was known as the minute men or guards of the Prophet. There were beds everywhere all over the floors. Sometimes there were two men there and sometimes there would be ten or twelve in to get an hour or two sleep but if the slightest noise was heard they were up and out on guard again.

Shortly after this the Prophet was martyred and I remember the night he was murdered, there was such a depression came over the city of Nauvoo. Even the cattle and chickens awakened in the night and made mournful noises. I remember how terrible I felt and that after learning of the Prophet's death I hoped I would never live to see another head of the Church taken.

The twelve were all away but were called home and after they arrived there was a meeting called. I remember that there were two or three who thought that they should lead the Church, but when Brigham Young arose to speak, he looked so much like the Prophet and spoke with the voice of the Prophet that all recognized him as the leader on whom Joseph's mantle had fallen.

May McLaughlin Tanner, "Early History of Harriet Louisa Chase McLaughlin, 1926," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
