Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

McLellin, William

(1806-May 11, 1883)

Travels with Father Smith and sprains his ankle while walking; Joseph lays hands on him, and he is instantly healed; later, Joseph receives revelation for him (D&C 66).

Wednesday 26 [Oct., 1831] a large number of people collected to hear preaching and brothers Sidney and Oliver preached and brothers Hyrum and Orson followed by a few remarks and exortation, etc. From thence I returned to Kirtland, but I had caused old Father Smith to ride Tom and as I was walking on I stepped off of a large log and strained by ankle very badlythence I rode; and just as I was about to start to bed I asked brother Joseph what he thought about my ankle's being healed. He immediately turned to me and asked me if I believed in my heart that God through his instrumentality would heal it. I answered that I believed he would. He laid his hands on it and was healed although it was swelled much and had pained me severely.

Thence I went home with him on Saturday 29th [Oct., 1831]. Early in the morning we reached there having staid Friday night in the Nelson churchThis day the Lord condescended to hear my prayer and give me a revelation of his will, through his prophet or seer (Joseph)And these are the words which I wrote from his mouth, saying [then follows D&C 66].

Jan Shipps and John W. Welch, ed., The Journals of William E. McLellin 1831-1836 (Provo, Utah: BYU Studies, Brigham Young University, and Urbana and Chicago, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1994), 45.

Account of first meeting Joseph; testifies of Joseph's divine calling.

On the 25th of October [1831], I attended a conference, where I first saw and became acquainted with Joseph [Smith]. About 40 elders attended. General peace and harmony pervaded the conference and much instruction to me. From thence I went home with Joseph [Smith] and lived with him about three weeks. And from my acquaintance then and until now I can truly say I believe him to be a man of God, a prophet, a seer and revelator to The Church of Christ.

"William McLellin to Relatives, 4 Aug 1832." Used by permission of Community of Christ Archives, Independence, Missouri.

First meets Joseph; attends conference; Joseph receives revelation for him.

We [William McLellin and Hyrum Smith] reached Kirtland [from Independence] on the 18th day of October, and on the 25th, I attended a general conference in the town of Orange, about 20 miles distant. Here I first and formed an acquaintance with Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, John Whitmer, etc. About 40 ministers attended the conference. During its sittings, I, with nine others, was pointed out again by the spirit of revelation, as having the gifts and callings to the office of High Priest, and was ordained thereunto under the hands of Pres. Oliver Cowdery. Following this conference I went home with the Prophet, and on Saturday, the 29th, I received through him, and wrote from his mouth a revelation concerning myself [D&C 66]. I had expected and believed that when I saw Brother Joseph [Smith], I should receive one: and I went before the Lord in secret, and on my knees asked him to reveal the answer to five questions through his Prophet, and that too without his having any knowledge of my having made such request. I now testify in the fear of God, that every question which I had thus lodged in the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, were answered to my full and entire satisfaction. I desired it for a testimony of Joseph's inspiration. And I to this day consider it to me an evidence which I cannot refute.

William McLellin, Ensign of Liberty of the Church of Christ, (Kirtland, Ohio: [s.n.], 1847-1849), 1:61.

First meeting with Joseph; testifies Joseph is a prophet.

On the 25th of October, I [William E. McLellin or M'Lellin] attended a conference, where I first saw and became acquainted with Joseph [Smith]. About 40 elders attended. General peace pervaded the conference and much instruction to me. From thence I went home with Joseph [Smith] and lived with him about three weeks; and from my acquaintance then and until now I can truly say I believed him to be a man of God. A Prophet, a seer and revelator to the Church of Christ . . . We (the Mormons) believe that Joseph Smith is a true Prophet or seer of the Lord and that he has power and does receive revelations from God, and that these revelations when received are of divine authority in the Church of Christ.

"William McLellin to Samuel McLellin, 4 Aug 1832." Used by permission of Community of Christ Archives, Independence, Missouri.

McLellin tells of Joseph receiving revelations when he was present, and describes the process.

I [William McLellin], as scribe have written [D&C] revelations from the mouth of both the revelators, Joseph Smith and David Whitmer. And I have been present many times when others wrote for Joseph; therefore, I speak as one having experience. The scribe seats himself at a desk or table, with pen, ink, and paper. The subject of inquiry being understood, the Prophet and revelator inquires of God. He spiritually sees, hears, and feels, and then speaks as he is moved upon by the Holy Ghost, the "thus saith the Lord," sentence after sentence, and waits for his amanuenses to write and then read aloud each sentence. Thus they proceed until the revelator says Amen, at the close of what is then communicated. I have known both those men mentioned above, to seat themselves, and without premeditation, to thus deliver in broken sentences, some of the most sublime pieces of composition which I ever perused in any book.

William McLellin, Ensign of Liberty of the Church of Christ, (Kirtland, Ohio: [s.n.], 1847-1849), 1:98-99.

William H. Kelley tells of visiting the temple lot in Independence with McLellin, who identified the spot selected by Joseph.

In company with Bro. Warnky and Dr. Wm. [William] E. McLellin, we visited the "temple lot" lying west of the Court House [in Independence, Missouri]. The doctor [William E. McLellin] was able to point out the identical spot where Joseph [Smith] stood when he first visited it, and which is the place of the corner stone. He visited it soon after himself, when it was all covered with young poplars thickly standing. Joseph cut his way in through this thick growth of trees, brush and saplings, and marked the spot by blazing a tree near by, cutting away the under brush for a few feet around and setting up a small stone that had been picked up in the ravine below. This was all the corner stone that was ever laid upon it, and it only to mark the place of the corner.

"Letter from Elder W. H. Kelley," Saints' Herald 29, no. 5 (1 March 1882): 67.

William Kelley retells McLellin's account of how Joseph received inspiration; "there was something ahold of him."

I [William Kelley] gleaned from him and the records in his possession, the following items: He was present when the preface to the Book of Commandments [D&C 1] was given, and says that Sidney Rigdon wrote it down as it was dictated by Joseph [Smith]. A committee had been appointed to draft a preface, consisting of himself, O. [Oliver] Cowdery and I think Sidney Rigdon, but when they made their report, the Conference then requested Joseph to inquire of the Lord about it, and he said that he would if the people would bow in prayer with him. This they did and Joseph [Smith] prayed.

When they arose, Joseph dictated by the Spirit the preface found in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants while sitting by a window of the room [John Johnson home in Hiram, Ohio] in which the conference was sitting; and Sidney Rigdon wrote it down. Joseph would deliver a few sentences and Sidney [Rigdon] would write them down, then read them aloud, and if correct, then Joseph [Smith] would proceed and deliver more, and by this process the preface was given.

In reply to the question, "Did Joseph [Smith] seem to be inspired at the time? that is, did any thing of unusual character appear to be moving him?" He said, "There was something ahold of him."

"Letter from Elder W. H. Kelley," Saints' Herald 29, no. 5 (1 March 1882): 67.

On first meeting the Prophet, William stayed with him for three weeks; later, he asked the Lord five questions, without telling Joseph, who received inspired answers.

William journeyed to Ohio to meet the Prophet. He lived with him for about three weeks, "and from my acquaintance then and until now I can truly say I believe him to be a man of God, a prophet, a seer and revelator to the Church of Christ." Desirous to receive a revelation from the Lord through his Prophet, "I went before the Lord in secret, and on my knees asked him to reveal the answer to five questions through his Prophet, and that too without his having any knowledge of my having made such request." He then asked Joseph Smith to inquire of the Lord concerning him. The subsequent revelation both commended and reproved his actions (see D&C 66:1-3). He wrote in response to the revelation, "I now testify in the fear of God, that every question which I had thus lodged in the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, were answered to my full and entire satisfaction."

"William E. McLellin," in Susan Easton Black, Who's Who in the Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1997), 191.
