Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Merrill, Philemon Christopher

(October 12, 1820-September 16, 1904)

Participated in rescuing Joseph during the Dixon kidnapping; says that Reynolds, the kidnapper, was a brother of Missouri Governor Reynolds; tells of throwing boasting wrestler at Joseph's command; was present in Nauvoo when Joseph gave his last farewell to the Legion; saw bodies lie in State, and was present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

About the 20th of June 1843 was one of the ten [who] started to the rescue of Joseph Smith the Prophet at the time he with his wife Emma went to visit her relations in the northern part of Illinois. The ten that I was with was the first to get to him; he had been arrested on a writ issued by Governor Reynolds of Missouri. Whilst on that visit he was in the custody of one Reynolds I think a brother of the Governor and one Harmon T. (J. ?) Williams Wilson was a citizen of Carthage (?) hancock County, Illinois at the time. I and William Cutler the next day after we got to Joseph. Was told by him to demand the weapons that Reynolds and Wilson had on their persons and deliver them to the Sheriff of Dixon in Lee County. At First they refused to give them up, but we told them it was of no use to refuse because we should take them from them by force . Finally they delivered them up without much trouble. At this point there was something demanded of me by the Prophet that is already in History, but I will with delicacy insert here. There was a lawyer in the company that was against Joseph who gave a banter that he could through any man in the state of Illinois at side holt [wrestling]. Br. Stephen Markham being a man that was a great wrestler at that holt took the banter and the man threw Markham. When Brother Joseph arose to his feet and said to me to get up as I was laying on the ground and throw the man.

I was about to say that it was not my holt to wrestle but before I could say a word he commanded me to throw him with a power that I never felt in my life before or since. I rose to my feet and told the man to choose his side. Holding up my arms he approached me with his right arm under my leftreleasing (?) his one arm said it was not fair. I said I gave him his choice, and it made it fair. Brother Joseph said "when I count three throw him." When the number three was said I threw the man over my left shoulder as if he was a child. When Joseph said what do you think of that, he is not my best wrestler. There could be quite a history written on the subject of our finding (?) him. Bro. Joseph and what it was Said to Reynolds and Williams by our beloved Prophet. When we met him in the hands of his enemies, but suffer it to say we fetched him safe into Nauvoo where he was tried under a writ of Habeus Corpus, and as ever found not guilty. This I think was about the 26th of June 1843.

. . . In the year 1844 about the 20th of June the Prophet Joseph and Patriarch Hyrum gave them up to go to Carthage. I with a number was detailed as a Special Guard in the City of Nauvoo and was stationed at the Masonic Hall on Main Street when Brother Joseph and Hyrum came a long on horse back and they stopped in front of the Hall and spoke to us and said he was going to Carthage. He asked us as his Boys if we loved him. We simultaneously exclaimed we did. Then he intoned (?) this word. I am going to Carthage and if you never see me again in this life know this: I love you and this people that I will lay down my life for you . I never shall forget his word and the kind look he gave us and [then] forcefully (?) turned his horse away and rode slowly away and truly it was the last time that we beheld those two noble men on earth in life but we looked on their lifeless bodies as they lay in State in his mansion. I have lost Father, Mother, Wife and Children but never felt to weep as on that occasion. I will close the scene.

Sad was the day that the Saints went by a call of the apostles in a Grove East of our beloved Temple which was unfinished to listen to what might be said. For who was the good shepherd? We were left alone as we thought with none to lead us. It was a gloomy time. Sidney Rigdon talked to us and said we was of age and choose our Guardian and he offered himself as that one to lead the church but it did not satisfy the people but when President Brigham Young arose and said to the People Stand still and see the salvation of the Lord the spirit of God rested upon me and I received a testimony at that time, that upon Brigham Young rested the authority of the Holy Priesthood. That was in July [August] of 1844.

"Philemon Christopher Merrill," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-4. Grammar, punctuation and spelling have been modernized.

Note: This handwritten manuscript was written about 1890.
