Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Miles, Samuel

(April 8, 1826-May 22, 1910 )

Remembers the Prophet's kind manner and firm dislike of evil.

My recollections and acquaintance with the Prophet Joseph are those of a boy from the age of eight when I first saw him in the town of Freedom, Catturagus County, New York, where my parents joined the Church in the early part of 1834, until I was eighteen years old, when he was martyred.

His kind manner and gentle words when I first met him in company with my father, and he took me by the hand; his noble deportment when before the people, his easy, jovial appearance when engaged in the sports which were common in the days of Nauvoo; his firm dislike of that which was degrading; all these combined to give me a very favorable opinion of this noble man.

"Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 6 (15 March 1892): 173-74.

Recalls the need for open air meetings to accommodate the crowds and remembers growing prize melons to give the Prophet.

I recollect the Prophet in 1838, in Far West, Missouri, calling the people together from the city and country round about for conference and general instruction, at the frame schoolhouse. The building would not accommodate the people, and it being in the warm season the congregation assembled on the outside in the open air.

My father's farm, two miles south of Far West, on the rich prairie and bottoms of a branch of Log Creek, produced phenomenal growths of vegetables, etc. Among other things a mammoth muskmelon was being developed. Father said, "We will give this to the Prophet." I watched over it with great care, and we had much satisfaction when it was ripe in presenting it to Joseph and receiving his thanks. The fatness of the land of Adam-ondi-Ahman was apparent. The Saints were full of bright hopes and anticipations.

"Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 6 (15 March 1892): 174.

Remembers Joseph cheerfully helping in troubled times; recalls incident of helping Joseph recover wind scattered papers.

When times of trouble came on I have seen the Prophet mustering in the ranks, his rifle on his shoulder, encouraging the Saints by his example as well as by his cheering words.

On his first visit to Commerce, afterwards Nauvoo, traveling from Quincy, he stayed overnight in the little town of Lima, where several families of the Saints had found shelter. I recollect how joyful we all were to greet him and the brethren who accompanied him. They were on horseback. In the morning we all came out to bid them Godspeed on their journey to find a location for the Saints. Joseph's spirited black horse, when he attempted to mount him, made a start, wheeling partly around, but he with a sudden spring gained the saddle minus his tall black hat, containing, as was customary in those days, his papers, etc. There being at the time a light wind, hat and papers went flying around, but we were not long in getting them together and restoring them to their owner.

"Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 6 (15 March 1892): 174.

Remembers the dedication of the cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple and seeing the Bible with apocrypha placed therein.

I was present when the books, writings, etc., were deposited in the southeast cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple. Joseph was there overseeing the selection made for deposit. Perhaps two hundred persons were collected around the place. When a Bible was presented for deposit it was thought necessary that it should be completecontaining the Apocrypha. As there seemed to be none within reach, except large, highly-prized family Bibles, Brother Reynolds Cahoon volunteered to go to his home, which was nearby and cut out the Apocrypha from his large family Bible, which was accepted and the Bible thus made complete. After several books, coins, periodicals and publications had been accepted and deposited a poem was presented the Prophet to be laid away with the other things. Joseph handed it to one of the brethren requesting him to read it. When he was through Joseph said, "What does it amount to?"

"See saw, Margery Daw,

Sold her bed and laid in the straw."

So the poor poem was left out in the cold.

"Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 6 (15 March 1892): 174.

Tells of his baptism, of hearing the Prophet preach; also tells of the destructions in Far West; following the martyrdom, he rode thirty miles, through Carthage, to attend the Prophet's funeral.

In the fall of 1835, together with my father's family, I started for the gathering place of the Saints in Missouri. We passed through Kirtland, Ohio, and camped for the winter at new Portage. There I was baptized. We continued our journey in May, 1836, and arrived at Caldwell county, Missouri, where we settled near Far West. Many times have I rejoiced in listening to the Prophet's preaching in the public assemblies of the Saints. I was present July, 1838, when the cornerstones of the Temple were laid at Far West. The acts of the mob militia, ordered out by Gov. Boggs, in devastating our fields, destroying our crops, and abusing peaceful-minded and aged citizens, their hideous yells and cries, when they had the Prophet Joseph Smith and other brethren as prisoners in their camp near our house, are all indelibly impressed upon my mind; this, with the subsequent expulsion of the Saints from Missouri, together with the suffering endured before we reached Illinois, forms a chapter in my life never to be forgotten. Our family lived in Lima, Adams county, Il., till the fall of 1839, when we settled in Commerce, (later Nauvoo). I had the privilege of attending the University of Nauvoo and receiving instruction from Prof. Orson Pratt, Lorin Farr and others. At the age of fifteen I taught a primary school in Nauvoo, and later taught school in the eastern part of Hancock county. After the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, I rode 30 miles to attend the funeral, passing through Carthage on the way. I also took an active part in defending the city of Nauvoo against the mobs.

"Miles, Samuel," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:536-37.
