Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Miller, George

(November 25, 1794-1856)

On first seeing Joseph, felt like he had always known him; later arranged for Joseph to preach.

George recorded the first time he saw the Prophet: "A large man sitting in front [in a wagon] driving seemed to be familiar to me as if I had always known him, and suddenly the thought burst on my mind that it was none other than the prophet, Joseph Smith. Indeed, my whole frame was in a tremor with the occurrence of the thought" George urged the Prophet to agree to preach at a later date, but Joseph was reluctant at first because he had just escaped from prison and felt like "a bird uncaged"he wanted to spend time with his family and friends. When he finally consented, " a time and place was fixed upon" and George "went to notify the people of the appointment of the Mormon Prophet to preach."

"George Miller," in Susan Easton Black, Who's Who in the Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1997), 195-96.

Tells of first meeting the Prophet, of recognizing him before they were introduced; felt Joseph was like "an old acquaintance"; made arrangements for Joseph to preach, which he did on Parable of Good Samaritan.

As I was in the habit of riding out every fair day, on a bland, bright morning I prevailed on my wife to indulge in the luxury of a ride on horseback to visit our tenants on the farm. On our return home, as we were leisurely riding along, I perceived a carriage containing a number of persons meeting us, and as we neared it, the appearance of a large man, sitting in front driving, seemed familiar to me, as if I had always known him, and suddenly the thought burst into my mind that it was none other than the Prophet Joseph Smith. Indeed my whole frame was in a tremor at the thought, and my heart seemed as if it were coming up into my mouth. Getting in speaking distance, he suddenly reined up his horses, as if making ready to speak. I was much agitated as the words came from his mouth. "Sir, can you tell me the way to the farm of a Mr. Miller, living somewhere in the direction I am going?" Instead of answering him directly, my reply was, "I presume, sir, that you are Joseph Smith, Jr., the Mormon Prophet." "I am, sir," he replied, adding, "I also presume that you are the Mr. Miller whose farm I inquired for." "I am, sir." He then introduced me to his wife and family, and thus a formal (or rather informal) introduction passed between us and our families.

In our short interview certain things were said in regard to our belief, that on our approach we each thought that the other was an old acquaintance. I solicited him to preach. He excused himself, not feeling able to sermonize. He said that, having just escaped from prison, he felt like a bird escaped from a cage, and was ore disposed to reconnoiter the county and visit his people and friends. Upon my urging the matter of his preaching, he suddenly turned to me, saying that he did think of several of the elders preaching for me, but that he was now resolved on doing it himself; that it had been whispered that a Samaritan had passed by and bound up the wounds of his bleeding friends, adding that he would do the best he could in the way of preaching. Accordingly the time and place were fixed upon, and I went to notify the people of the appointment of the Mormon Prophet to preach.

The day arrived and the house and door-yard were filled with people apparently anxious to hear, as I then thought and do yet, more for the purpose of fault finding than as seekers after truth. He took for his text that chapter in the writings of Luke where a certain man journeying from Jerusalem to Jericho fell among thieves, and was ministered to by a Samaritan. He took an extensive latitude while treating this text, and took up a long time, and, notwithstanding that it was a rainy day, those outside the house stood in the rain, sheltered by umbrellas, until the service was over. I had no remaining doubts left in regard to the truth of the Prophet, Joseph Smith, and the doctrine of the Gospel as taught by the latter Day Saints. An arrangement was then agreed upon that I should circulate notice of an appointment for a two days' meeting, to be held in the Court House, on Saturday and Sunday, some weeks from that time, and Joseph was to send two Elders to preach in this stronghold of Presbyterianism and Methodism. [This was near January 20, 1839]

H. W. Mills, "De Tal Palo Tal Astilla," Annual PublicationsThe Historical Society of Southern California 10 (1917): 115-16.

Annoyed that the temple committee authorized the use of temple lumber for personal use, Miller complained to the Prophet, who assured him that he would set things right.

[In June, 1843] when I took down the last rafts in the fall season, upon my arrival at Nauvoo I found that a great deal of the lumber that we had (during the two last seasons of toil and sacrifice) made for the Temple and Nauvoo House had, to my great mortification, been used for other purposes than those intended. The Temple Committee said that the workmen must needs have houses, and they had to pay their men; but the truth of the case was that the committee had become housebuilders, that they were not alone content to have fresh eggs to set themselves, but they wanted eggs to set all their numerous brood of chickens, and that it was really convenient to use the material provided for the Nauvoo House (as its operations were temporarily suspended)as in like manner the Temple materials alsoas we had in common such productive mills in the pinery. I remonstrated at this course of procedure, but Joseph told me to be content and promised that he would see by and by that all should be made right, saying that it was most likely his persecutors would let him alone since his final discharge by Judge Pope, and that he would in future have more leisure.

H. W. Mills, "De Tal Palo Tal Astilla," Annual PublicationsThe Historical Society of Southern California 10 (1917): 125-26.

Consults with Joseph and Hyrum about the use of temple lumber, and Joseph said "the Spirit of God" was in the pineries which should therefore be organized by the brethren. Tells of council that nominated Joseph for U.S. presidency.

Towards the opening of spring, having made an abundance of lumber for the Nauvoo House and temple, we held a council in regard to future operations. The result of our deliberations was that a memorial should be sent to Joseph and the authorities in Nauvoo, expressive of our views, and I was delegated to be the bearer. A few days later I set out on the ice for Prairie Du Chien, at which place I took the stage coach for Galena, and, upon my arrival at Nauvoo, presented the document to Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith, whom I found together in consultation. After a hasty perusal, Joseph said to me, "Brother Miller, I perceive that the spirit of God is in the pineries as well as here, and we will call together some of our wise men, and proceed to set up the Kingdom of God by organizing some of its officers." And from day today he called some of the brethren about him, organizing them as princes in the Kingdom of God, until up to the number of fifty-three were thus called. In this council it was agreed upon that we should run Joseph Smith for president of the United States, which we would certainly do, and also Sidney Rigdon for vice-president, and, in case they were elected, we would at once establish dominion in the United States, and, in view of a failure, we would send a minister to the then Republic of Texas to make a treaty with the cabinet of Texas for all that country north of a west line from the falls of the Colorado River to the Nueces, thence down the same to the Gulf of Mexico, and along the same to the Rio Grande, and up the same to the United States territory, and get them to acknowledge us as a nation; and, on the part of the church, we would help them defend themselves against Mexico, standing as a go-between the belligerent powers, and, if necessary in this matter, we would have dominion in spite of the United States.

H. W. Mills, "De Tal Palo Tal Astilla," Annual PublicationsThe Historical Society of Southern California 10 (1917): 131-32.

While on a mission has a vision or dream that Joseph Smith was killed; his companion thought him deranged; later, newspaper accounts confirm the martyrdom, and so they returned to Nauvoo. Miller met John Taylor, and later Willard Richards; he thought Joseph Smith III would succeed the Prophet; tells of attending meeting to reorganize the leadership of the Church, and of the confusion present.

About this time we saw notices in the newspapers that there was a civil war in Nauvoo, and on the morning of the 28th of June, 1844, I had a dream, or vision, in an upper room in the house of a Mr. Saunders, where I then lodged with Brother Thomas Edwards. It took place after sunrise. I was lying on my bed, and suddenly Joseph Smith appeared to me, saying, "God bless you, Brother Miller. The mob broke in upon us in Carthage jail and killed Brother Hyrum and myself. I was delivered up by the brethren as a lamb for the slaughter. You ought not to have left me; if you had stayed with me, I should not have been given up." I answered, "But you sent me." "I know I did, but you ought not to have gone"; and then approaching me he said, "God bless you for ever and ever," making as though he was about to embrace me, and, as I was in the act of extending my arms to return the embrace, the vision fled, and I found myself standing on the floor in the midst of the room. Brother Edwards, roused from his slumbers, was calling me, "What is the matter, Brother Miller; whom are you talking to?" I requested him to rise and dress himself, so that we might take a morning walk, as was our custom.

Whilst on our walk I related to Brother Edwards my vision, and told him my mission was fulfilled, for my firm belief was that Joseph was dead. Brother Edwards told me that I had preached too much, and that my mind was somewhat deranged, and that I must not think of going home until our present appointments were fulfilledthe last a week henceand as to the rumors of trouble at Nauvoo, he did not believe a word of them. I told him that if I stayed he would have to do the preaching.

On the day that we fulfilled our last appointment, we started home. On passing a tavern, the landlord walked out on his porch, and addressing us said, "Are you the gentlemen that preached at the schoolhouse today?" We answered "Yes." "Walk in, gentlemen," he said, "and refresh yourselves." Handing us some ice water, and at the same time handing us a Nauvoo paper, he said, "You will find an article that may be of interest to you." We read an extract from the Warsaw Signal, giving an account of Joseph and Hyrum's deaths. After reading we started on. Brother Edwards, being an excitable man, was wholly unmanned, and insisted on an immediate separation, as traveling together might endanger our lives. He broke off from me as one distracted, and I did not see any more of him until I saw him in Nauvoo four weeks afterwards.

On my arrival in Nauvoo I visited Elder John Taylor of the quorum of apostles, who was sick of his wounds received in Carthage jail at the time of Joseph's death. Dr. Willard Richards was there, and, after a few remarks in regard to the mob, I asked Dr. Richards whom Joseph had left to succeed him in the prophetic office. He replied that all was right; that there were sealed documents left which would be opened when the twelve apostles should get home that would settle all these matters. Sidney Rigdon had already returned from Pittsburgh, where he was sent before Joseph's death, and had made some moves as a leader of the people, and, from hints and innuendoes that I heard frequently, I was induced to believe that Joseph had designated his son Joseph to succeed him in the prophetic office; and on this belief I rested.

On the return of the twelve a public meeting was called. The apostles and Sidney Rigdon were on the stand; Brigham Young acting as principal speaker. Sidney urged his pretensions as a kind of guardian or temporary leader. Young made a loud and long harangue, and as I had always taken him to be a blunderbuss in speaking,and, on this occasion, to me apparently more sofor the life of me I could not see any point in the course of his remarks other than a wish to overturn Sidney's pretensions. As this meeting was a pretty general conference of the elders, the twelve assumed a temporary leadership, which was pretty generally conceded to them, as they were the quorum next in authority to the prophet and presidency of the whole church. N. K. Whitney and myself were put in nomination as trustees in trust for the Church, instead of Joseph Smith, deceased, and were voted in by acclamation and acknowledged as such by all present.

There was a good deal of speaking from the stand. The principal speaker, however, was Brigham Young. I must confess that all the proceedings at this time were anarchy and boisterous confusion, as it appeared to me, and I felt, indeed, as one who had lost a friend.

H. W. Mills, "De Tal Palo Tal Astilla," Annual PublicationsThe Historical Society of Southern California 10 (1917): 134-35.
