Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Miller, Henry William

(May 1, 1807-October 9, 1885)

Anxious to know what to do with his property, Miller asked the Prophet, who instructed him to buy shares in the Nauvoo House.

"I will quote the following from the Journal of Elmira Pond Miller, written by herself in 1890.

Some of the brothern here (Nauvoo) received the word of the Lord concerning their property. I was very anxious to know what the Lord wished my husband to do with his. Brother Joseph inquired concerning his and several others and was told to take shares in the Nauvoo House. Then he gave the Committee $4,000.00. I was as willing as he was to have him do so. We had prospered ever since our marriage and here was a call for some of the means the Lord had given us."

Julia Carbine Waldram, "LDS Temples: Henry W. Miller and Elmira Pond Miller," 16 October 1870, Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Joseph received revelation telling Miller to sell his property to assist in building the Nauvoo Temple and Nauvoo House.

Henry was appointed on a committee to help raise funds for the building of the Nauvoo Temple, at the General Conference of the Church April 8, 1841. Shortly after this he asked through the Prophet Joseph Smith the will of the Lord concerning his property, he was asked to sell and assist with his means with the building of the Temple and Nauvoo House. He then gave the Church $4,000.00. This was not his first gift to the Church, as he assisted them greatly, giving 2,000 barrels of flour at one time. In the fall of 1841 he was called to go into the pineries to get out timber and lumber for the Temple and Nauvoo House. Here he went through many hardships due to cold weather and lack of food.

"Henry W. Miller," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Helped build Nauvoo Temple in spite of much hardship; when sacrificing and with little food Joseph prophesied his children would never cry for breadthe prophecy came true.

At this time Henry W. Miller gave the church four Thousand (4,000) dollars toward its [the Temple's] construction. This was March 20, 1841. On his moving to Nauvoo, he was made a member of the building committee of the Temple, and in the fall of 1841 he was called to go into the pineries and get out timber for the temple and the Nauvoo House. On this trip they encountered stormy weather. Grandmother relates in her journal how the men had to go ahead of the teams (oxen) and break trails so the oxen would follow. At night they would shovel away the snow, fixing a place to make their beds. During the winter they ran out of provisions and were out of bread for some time.

At one time, Joseph Smith made her the promise her children should never cry for bread. Through this ordeal, they lived up to this promise. She had cooked and cared for the extra men. When flour finally came the children asked for dough before it was baked.

"The Life Story of Henry William Miller, compiled by Arnold D. Miller Jr., His Grandson," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Served as the Prophet's bodyguard.

On June 19, 1831 [Miller] married Elmira Pond. They joined the church in 1835 and lived in Nauvoo until 1846. William served as a bodyguard to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

"William Henry Miller," in Kate B. Carter, comp., Treasures of Pioneer History, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1952-57), 1:448.
