Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Moore, Calvin White

(July 21, 1827 [or 1829]-May 11, 1908)

Boyhood impressions of Joseph; tells of Joseph casting a devil from Charles Hyde and of asking Bishop Knight to remove a disturber from a meeting; remembers Joseph raising money to free Porter Rockwell from jail; also remembers Joseph throwing a champion wrestler.

When I was a small boy my impression of him was that he was a great man and a Prophet of God, and when I grew up and became older I got a testimony for myself, and I can say that I know he was a prophet of the living God.

. . . One time in [the] Kirtland Temple, at a fast meeting, Charles Hyde, got up to talk, and the devil took hold of him and stopped him. Joseph laid his hands on him and rebuked the evil one, and Brother Hyde went on talking. On another occasion, at a Sunday meeting, Joseph was speaking when a large, tall man came into the temple and walked up and down the aisles whittling and whistling. Joseph requested Bishop Knight, who was a smaller man, to put him out, and he took hold of the disturber and put him out just as the Prophet told him to do.

There is one thing more, which I witnessed, I will relate: It was at the time Porter Rockwell was in jail, in Missouri. His mother went to see him at the jail, and the Missourians told her that if she would raise a certain amount of money and give them they would let her son go. Joseph started out to get the money. He came to a large crowd of young men who were wrestling, that being the popular sport in those days. Among the boys there was a bully from La Harpe, I believe. He had thrown down everyone on the ground who took hold of him. When Joseph came to the crowd he told them what he wanted, passed around the hat, raised what money he could and then went into the ring to take part with the young men and boys in their games. So he was invited to wrestle with this bully. The man was eager to have a tussle with the Prophet, so Joseph stepped forward and took hold of the man. The first pass he made Joseph whirled him around and took him by the collar and seat of his trousers and walked out to a ditch and threw him in it. Then, taking him by the arm, he helped him up and patted him on the back and said. "You must not mind this. When I am with the boys I make all the fun I can for them."

"Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no 1 (15 April 1892): 255.
