Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Moore, George

(May 4, 1811-1847)

Moore quotes Joseph as referring to "peep-stone" usage as "superstition."

At Nauvoo, they have what is called a "peep stone," and two boys, who are believed to have the power of looking into this stone, and seeing what people are doing at a distance, and of such implicit faith in this, that they go to see the peep-stone boys as soon as they lose any thing. But I hear that Joe [Joseph] Smith gives no countenance to this superstition.

Donald Q. Cannon, "Reverend George Moore Comments on Nauvoo, the Mormons, and Joseph Smith," Western Illinois Regional Studies 5 (spring 1982): 8.

Tells of a visit to the Prophet in Nauvoo and of conversing about the Book of Mormon and the plates; Joseph says Latter-day Saints do not accept common dogmas about God.

Called on the "Prophet Jo [Joseph] Smith." His carriage was at the door and he was about going away, but he received me very kindly, asked me into his house. I remained about 10 minutes. He was very communicative. We conversed about the golden plates, which he professes to have dug up and translated into the Book of Mormon. "Those plates are not now in this country," he said"they were exhibited to a few at first for the sake of obtaining their testimonyno others have ever seen themand they will never again be exhibited." He showed me some specimens of the hieroglyphics, such as, he says, were on the gold plates. He asked me if I was a Clergymanand of what denominationand what were the fundamental doctrines of our faithon my telling him that we believed in divine Unityin one God in one personhe said, we don't agree with you there. We believe in three Gods, equal in power and glory. There are three personages in heaven, but those three are not one. I suppose, from what I hear, that Smith makes it a point not to agree with any one in regard to his religious opinions, and adapts himself to the person with whom he talks for the time being . . . He expressed a desire to have a long conversation with me, but he had an engagement, and I was soon going away, so that we could not have much conversation. Our interview was short, but pleasant. [Diary, pp. 105-106.]

[Besides commenting on the circumstances surrounding this conversation and Mormon doctrine, the Quincy minister penned a physical description of the Mormon Prophet.]

This 'prophet' is a man of large frametending to corpulencyhas blue eyes, light complexion, one or two of his front teeth gonehe has a rather benevolent expression of countenance. [Diary, p. 106.]

Donald Q. Cannon, "Reverend George Moore Comments on Nauvoo, the Mormons, and Joseph Smith," Western Illinois Regional Studies 5 (spring 1982): 10-11.
