Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Benson, Ezra T.

(February 22, 1811-September 3, 1869)

Testified of Joseph Smith.

It always gave me more influence when I bore testimony that Joseph Smith was the prophet of God.

Deseret Theological Institute, Minutes of 23 May 1855. LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

At a debate he sees Prophet for first time; found Joseph's demeanor dignified.

In the month of July, 1840, I learned that Sidney Rigdon was going to discuss with Dr. Nelson upon the principles of Mormonism. They met in a Baptist meeting house and being solicited by Elder Beechias Dustin to go, and hearing that the Prophet Joseph Smith was to be there, I went. The house was crowded, but Sidney Rigdon did not come. His place was supplied by Dr. Ells. They debated about two hours. The Prophet was present. This was the first time I saw him. All the argument that Dr. Nelson used was denunciated without proof, epithets of false prophets, etc., and while he was trying to make the people believe that Joseph was the false prophet spoken of in the scriptures, Bro. Joseph looked up and smiled very pleasantly, and I thought, too much so, to be the character Nelson said he was. The meeting was adjourned to meet in a grove east of Quincy. The Prophet appointed John Cairns to continue the debate; they met according to appointment. Dr. Nelson commenced by ridiculing to a great extent the gifts of the gospel, especially the gift of tongues, and inquired how he could know whether the people spoke by the power of God or not, and said, he could speak in tongues and commenced uttering a ridiculous gibberish. He inquired if the people could tell him in what tongues he spoke, whether French, German, etc. Elder [John] Cairns rose and showed that such characters as Nelson were to arise as foretold by Peter, in his first Epistle, third chapter and third verse. "Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, And saying, Where is the promise of his coming?" And thus did he prove from scripture to my satisfaction, that Dr. Nelson was one of the characters through whom the truth should be evil spoken of. Dr. Nelson made another attempt to ridicule the Mormons, and their doctrines, at which time he had a fit, and had it not been for his friends, he would have fallen on the platform.

Ezra T. Benson, "Ezra Benson Autobiography," Instructor 80, no. 2 (February 1945): 56. Some grammar has been modernized.

Seeks Prophet's advice about moving to Nauvoo.

About the first of March, 1841, the spirit of gathering rested upon me and I told the brethren I thought of moving to Nauvoo, Illinois. They thought I had better remain where I was a little longer, but I was not satisfied and started to Nauvoo to get counsel from Bro. Joseph Smith. I did so and he told me to come if I wanted. It was all right and I should be blessed.

Ezra T. Benson, "Ezra Benson Autobiography," Instructor 80, no. 3 (March 1945): 103.

Benson takes a mission to New Jersey to promote the Prophet's presidential bid; Joseph promises him he will be blessed; returned home because of martyrdom.

In the Spring of 1844, a large number of missionaries were called upon by the conference to go into all parts of the United States to present the Prophet Joseph Smith as a candidate for the office of president of the United States, John Pack and I were appointed to go to the state of New Jersey.

About the first of May we started and commenced our important labors, traveling through the different towns and cities, preaching the gospel and presenting Bro. Joseph before the people as being the most suitable man for President. Delegates were appointed throughout the state of New Jersey in different districts to meet in Trenton in August to hold a convention and I had made calculations to be on the ground according to appointment, and make a speech to the delegates, and all who might be present, and to attend to all other business necessary in a convention of that kind that nothing should be neglected on my part for I had the promise from the Prophet before I started that I should be blessed and his last words were, taking me by the hand, "You are blessed and shall be blessed abundantly, go in peace and return in safety."

But, oh, how soon the change; for no sooner had we commenced our labors and made our arrangements than the news came out that our Prophet was martyred in Carthage Jail, when we found our mission was at the end.

Ezra T. Benson, "Ezra Benson Autobiography," Instructor 80, no. 5 (May 1945): 213-14.

Saints must be virtuous; obedience is a virtue.

Can you be a Latter-day Saint without being virtuous? The Prophet Joseph said one could not; and he said a virtuous man or woman is willing to do precisely as the Lord tells him. Then, according to the Prophet Joseph, it is virtuous for you to obey the voice of Godthe counsel of heaven through that man whom God has set to preside over us. He holds the keys of salvation to this people, and to the nations of the earth; and when that man unlocks, there is not power enough in this earth to lock.

Journal of Discourses, 2:349 (February 16, 1853).
