Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Murdock, John

(July 15, 1792-December 23, 1871)

Murdock boards at the Prophet's home; Joseph promises him that he could see the Savior, which he does.

(On the 3rd day of April 1833, Bro. [Brother] Zebedee Coltrin and myself started on a mission to the eastern country.) During the winter that I boarded with Bro. [Brother] Joseph, as just mentioned, we had a number of prayer meetings, in the prophet's chamber, in which we obtained great blessings. In one of these meetings the prophet told us if we could humble ourselves before God, and exercise strong faith, we should see the face of the Lord. And about midday the visions of my mind were opened, and the eyes of my understanding were enlightened, and I saw the form of a man, most lovely, the visage of his face was sound and fair as the sun. His hair a bright silver grey, curled in most majestic form, His eyes a keen penetrating blue, and the skin of his neck a most beautiful white and he was covered from the neck to the feet with a loose garment, pure white, whiter than any garment I have ever before seen. His countenance was most penetrating, and yet most lovely. And while I was endeavoring to comprehend the whole personage from head to feet it slipped from me, and the vision was closed up. But it left on my mind the impression of love, for months, that I never felt before to that degree.

"John Murdock Journal," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 13.

On the Prophet's instructions, he buys half of the town plot for Dewitt, Carroll County, Missouri; he settles there but is driven away by a mob.

June 23rd [18138] George M. Hinkle and myself, being sent by the High Council, by direction of Brother Joseph the Prophet, bought the undivided half of the town plot of Dewitt, Caroll County, Missouri, for five hundred dollars, giving our note for the same, Bishop Partrige [Partridge] being our endorser and we with our families proceeded forthwith to settle in Dewitt, it being sixty miles from Far West. About the last of July a committee sent by the mobbers of Carlton, the county seat, namely, Abbot Hancock, John Smart, and Secial Wood, came and ordered us to leave the county by the 7th of August and on the 20th a mob of more than a hundred men came, and ordered us off, but finally gave us ten days and threatened if we were not away in that time they would exterminate us without regard to age or sex and throw our property into the river.

"John Murdock Journal," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 18.
