Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Murdock, Joseph Stacey

(June 26, 1822-February 4, 1899)

From personal acquaintance, he testifies of the character of Joseph Smith, saying he is punctual in his dealings, honest, and just as legitimately called as was Moses; he refutes the claim that Joseph took the property of others for his own use.

I will now tell you about Myself. I enjoy myself first rate. I have been well ever since I have been in this state. As for the Prophet we have had some dealings with him and we find him to be a man of his word; he is very punctual in all his dealings and there is no doubt in my mind but he is a prophet of God and as much called to guide the people in this day as Moses was in his day. And as for his taking the property of the Saints and converting it to his own use, it is not so. It is like a good many other stories that are told about him. I wish you could be here and see for yourself and know and understand for yourself and not from another.

"Joseph Stacey Murdock to John Dougless, East Hamilton, N.Y., Jan. 24, 1844," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Met Joseph; gave Church his property; often heard Joseph and Hyrum preach; ordained a seventy by Joseph.

[Married Eunice Sweet] She became his bride just before the family left for Nauvoo. Soon after their arrival in 1842 they met the Prophet Joseph Smith. Old Father Murdock turned all his property over to the church, and in return he received his inheritance in Zion under the directions of the Prophet.

Young Murdock became well acquainted with the Prophet Joseph and Hyrum Smith and often listened to their teachings. He was a bodyguard to the Prophet and often used to join him in sports such as wrestling and jumping. On March 21, 1843, he received his patriarchal blessing under the hands of Hyrum Smith.

. . . In 1843 the young man was ordained a seventy, under the directions of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Sarah Cummings, "Sketch of Career of Joseph Stacy Murdock," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
