Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Neff, John

(September 19, 1794-May 9, 1869)

Neff remembers Joseph saying that he, as the prophet, would not live long.

In the spring of 1844, accompanied by his wife and child, a daughter named Barbara, he visited Nauvoo, Illinois, for the purpose of seeing the Prophet Joseph Smith, and purchasing property in the City of the Saints, with a view to moving there at an early day. The visitors were warmly welcomed by the Prophet, whom they heard many times in public and in private. On one occasion he said in their hearing that he should not live long. They stayed during their visit at the Mansion House, and left Nauvoo about six weeks before the martyrdom.

"John Neff," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:105.

Visited Joseph in Nauvoo and stayed in the Nauvoo Mansion; gave Joseph "several thousand dollars"; Joseph told them he did not expect to live long.

In the spring of 1844, grandma and grandpa together with their daughter Barbara visited the Prophet Joseph Smith at Nauvoo. They stayed at the Mansion House with the Prophet's family, had many conversations with him in private, and heard his prophetic voice many times from the pulpit.

They were very much impressed with this visit and returned to their home in Pa. With a still firmer conviction that God was speaking through this young prophet. It has been told that on this visit Grandpa gave the Prophet Joseph several thousand dollars. On their return home they began to make arrangements to sell their property in Pennsylvania and cast their lot with the persecuted and despised people of Nauvoo.

The Prophet Joseph had told them that he did not expect to live long. Notwithstanding this warning, his martyrdom six weeks later after they had left Nauvoo came as quite a shock. But, undaunted in their determination to serve the Lord in accordance with their new faith, they sold much of their property at a great sacrifice, and in the spring of 1846 the entire family joined the saints who were in the midst of the exodus from Illinois. Granpa's teams and equipment consisted of the best that money could buy, and it proved a great blessing to the church that one with wealth who was willing and did spend for the common good should join them in their poverty and desolation.

"Neff History," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
