Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Bernhisel, John Milton

(June 23, 1799-September 28, 1881)

Bernhisel stood to honor he whom God had honored; mortality a test of integrity; priesthood the only perfect order of government; this dispensation never to fall into apostasy; war predicted.

It was the writer's good fortune to become familiarly acquainted with Doctor Bernhisel, and he held him in veneration as a typical "Gentleman of the Old School." The Doctor had been intimately associated with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the two men were devoted friends. On his first arrival in Nauvoo, Dr. Bernhisel secured lodgings at the residence of an acquaintance, Mr. Schneider, but the Prophet insisted on his removal to the "Mansion House," and becoming a member of his private familyHere they sat at the same table, and discoursed familiarly together. It is related of the Doctor that he invariably arose when the Prophet entered the dining room, and when gently reproved by Joseph, asking why he did so, he replied, gracefully, "Because I love to honor the man whom God honors." He was the soul of etiquette, and sometimes carried politeness to extremesThe motto of the old French nobility"Noblesse oblige" might truly have been applied to Dr. Bernhisel. On one occasion, when riding together, visiting a country patient, he related to the writer many of the Prophet's mental peculiarities and his Revelations concerning the pre-existence of Spirits, and the arrangement of the program previous to our advent on the Earth, this being in perfect consonance with the Gospel of the Son of GodThe Prophet said: "We were predestined to undergo a probation here, to serve an allotted time on this earth in order to test our integrity, and determine the fact of our faith and strength to overcome the wiles and devices of Lucifer, the great prince and power on this earth at the present dayIn the future , it will become a question of earthly government, and that of the priesthood, being the only perfect order, must necessarily prevail.This Melchizedek to whom Abraham paid his tithes, and was a priest of that order, which was declared to be without beginning of days, nor ending of years" [See JST Heb. 7:1-3]In other words, it became the word of God, and the revealed will of the Father to the inhabitants of the earthIf obeyed, peace, happiness and union would result, but if absolute obedience was not rendered, anarchy and confusion must necessarily follow, and the object of Satan, was to prevail over the frailties of mankind, that they might continue in their disobedient course and follow his rulewe, being to a certain extent, free agents could select either path.In every previous dispensation, Lucifer had prevailed, and driven the priesthood from the earth, but in this seventh and last dispensation, the reign of the Son of God, and His Priesthood was firmly established, nevermore to depart, that all the inhabitants of the world might partake of the gifts and blessings. Our integrity to our Father and His righteousness, is the only plan whereby we save ourselves and become in possession of "Eternal Lives and Progression," which is the greatest blessing God can confer on his faithful sonsIt is only a question of time said the Prophet, a few years, or a few hundred, perhaps, according to our reckoning, but time and space, being without limit in the estimation of our Father, and the nations are even now arming for the conflict which even they foresee must necessarily ensue, and in the cruel desolation of war, men will be slain by hundreds, thousands, and perhaps millions, their widows and orphans compelled to fly to Zion for safety, and it will become the bounden duty of the Elders of Israel to provide for their sustenance and welfare.Our present system, said the Prophet, will eventually resolve itself into an "United Order" in which every member will work, not for his Individual aggrandizement, but purely with an earnest desire to promote the interests of the Kingdom of God on the earth.

The above were some of the principles enunciated by the Prophet Joseph to Dr. John M. Bernhisel, and rehearsed by the latter to the writer. When asked if he really believed such a state of affairs would ever by realized on this earth, he replied with enthusiastic fervor "As surely as yonder midday sun now shines in all his glorious splendor"raising his hand reverently, and pointing to that magnificent ORB.

The writer was much impressed, and vividly recalls the occasion, never indeed to be effaced from his memory, and he regards his former association with this "Grand Old Man" as one of the most delightful experiences in his life's career.

Washington Franklin Anderson, "Reminiscences of John M. Bernhisel (circa 1881)," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Bernhisel often stood when the Prophet entered the room, "to honor the man whom God honors."

[John M. Bernhisel] became intimately acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the two men became devoted friends. The Prophet insisting, my father took up his residence at the "Mansion House" and became a member of his private family. Here these two sat at the same table and discoursed familiarly together. It is related of the Doctor (i.e. John M. Bernhisel) that he invariably arose when Joseph Smith entered the room. On one occasion when he was gently reproved by Joseph Smith, and asked why he did so, he gracefully replied, "Because I love to honor the man whom God honors."

David M. Bernhisel, "Dr. John Milton Bernhisel," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 3 (October 1912): 173-77.

Bernhisel stood to honor him whom God honored; recalls Joseph teaching of pre-existence, how mortality is a testing ground, and that Satan's power is underrated by mortals; God has placed bounds beyond which Satan cannot go; gospel not to be taken from the earth in this dispensation; great conflicts to come; men will flee to Zion for safety; individual selfishness to be abolished.

Early in 1842 [Bernhisel] changed his place of residence to Nauvoo, Ill., and at first secured lodgings at the home of a Mr. Snyder, an old acquaintance. The Prophet having formed his acquaintance and taken a liking to the courtly, modest gentleman, insisted upon his removal to the Mansion House, where he became a member of President Smith's private family. "Here," says the late Dr. W. F. Anderson, a close friend to Dr. Bernhisel, "they sat at the same table and discoursed familiarly together. It is related of the Doctor that he invariably arose when the Prophet entered the dining room, and when gently reproved by Joseph, asking why he did so, he would reply gracefully, 'Because I love to honor the man whom God honors.' He was the soul of etiquette, and some times perhaps carried politeness to extremes. The motto of the old French nobility, 'Noblesse oblige,' (rank imposes obligation) might appropriately have been applied to Dr. Bernhisel.

"On one occasion," continues Dr. Anderson, "while out riding together, visiting a country patient, he related to me many of the Prophet's mental peculiarities, and his revelations on various subjects, including the pre-existence of spirits, and kindred themes. We were predestined to undergo probation here, to serve an allotted time on earth, in order to test our integrity and faith, and determine the fact of our strength to overcome the wiles and devices of Lucifer. We were too apt to underrate his power; he is a mighty factor in this world. When driven from the presence of his Father and Elder Brother, he had influence enough, even in heaven, to take with him one-third of its hosts, to assist him in his work of destruction. This is his mission, and his wicked efforts can only be rebuked by the great Jehovah and His Priesthood, which restrains his power only when attempting too great destruction. The object of Satan is to prevail over the frailties and ignorance of mankind, and make them subject to his rule. In every previous dispensation Lucifer has prevailed, and driven the Priesthood from the earth, but in this seventh and last dispensation the reign of the Son of God and His Priesthood is firmly established never more to depart, that all the inhabitants of the earth may partake of its blessings. Lucifer's reign of anarchy prevails at present, and nations are now arming for the conflict, which they foresee must necessarily ensue. Men will be slain by millions, and multitudes of survivors will flee to Zion, where it will become the bounden duty of the Elders of Israel to provide for their sustenance and welfare. Our present system will eventually resolve itself into a United Order, in which ever member will work, not for his individual aggrandizement, but purely with an earnest desire to promote the interests of the Kingdom of God on the earth.

"According to Dr. Bernhisel, these were some of the principles enunciated by the Prophet. When asked by the writer if he really believed such a Utopia would ever be realized, he replied with enthusiastic fervor, 'As surely as the sun now shines in heaven.' The writer was much impressed, and vividly recalls the occasion. He regards his former association with Dr. Bernhisel as one of the most delightful experiences in his life's career.

"In contemplating that mysterious bond of sympathy which united these two men, Joseph Smith and John M. Bernhisel, we arrive at the conclusion that in one respect their similarity was great,each possessing remarkable integrity. Aside from this, probably two greater extremes were never associated in so friendly a bond. Dr. Bernhisel was a man of education and culture, but naturally shy and retiring, almost a recluse, never obtrusive, but silent and shrinking from public observation. A confirmed bachelor, in that condition he would most probably have remained, but for the teachings of the Prophet, who strenuously urged him to obey the law and engage in the marital state. Joseph, on the contrary, from all accounts, was fond of society, freely mingling with his fellow men, and withal an enlightened philanthropist. He was a man of splendid physique, an athlete, bantering any man for a wrestle, and generally throwing his opponent. These two men, so widely diverse in disposition and habits, were the most congenial friends and companions."

"John Milton Bernhisel," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:664-65.

Received copy of JST manuscript from Emma in 1845.

Elder John M. Bernhisel called at the request of Pres. Taylor and explained concerning his manuscript copy of the New Translation of the Bible as taken from the manuscript of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Bro. Bernhisel stated: "I had great desires to see the New Translation, but did not like to ask for it; but one evening, being at Bro. Joseph's house about a year after his death, Sister Emma to my surprise asked me if I would not like to see it. I answered, yes. She handed it to me the next day, and I kept it in my custody about three months. She told me it was not prepared for the press, as Joseph had designed to go through it again. I did not copy all that was translated leaving some few additions and changes that were made in some of the books. But so far as I did copy, I did so as correctly as I could do. The markings in my Bible correspond precisely with the markings in the Prophet Joseph's Bible, so that all the books corrected in his Bible so far as I now know are marked in my Bible: but as I stated, the additions are not all made in my Manuscript of those books that I did not copy."

L. John Nuttall's diary, 10 September 1879, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 1:335. Also cited in Robert J. Matthews, A Plainer Translation (Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1975), 118.

Testimonies that Joseph said he had not finished the JST.

The School of the Prophets met at 1 P.M. President Young spoke of the new translation of the Bible and said it was not complete. Dr. Bernhisel testified that the Prophet told him he wished to revise it. Emma Smith let Dr. Bernhisel have the new translation to peruse it for three months; during this time the Doctor copied much of it.

Orson Pratt compared many of the sayings in the new and old translations.

George A. Smith testified that he had heard Joseph say before his death that the new translation was not complete, that he had not been able to prepare for it, and that it was probably providentially so.

Journal History, 20 June 1868, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Also cited in Robert J. Matthews, A Plainer Translation (Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1975), 119, 185 n. 8.
