Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Nelson, William Goforth

(June 10, 1831-October 30, 1922)

Joseph often visited the Nelson home; he once prophesied that a sick brother would be healed and that the family would have no more sickness while living in Nauvoo; Joseph said if the Nelsons would stay with the majority of the Twelve and the Church records, they would not go astray.

In the summer of 1836 the Prophet stopped overnight with my father. We were then living in Missouri. This was the first time I had ever seen him. Some time after this we moved to Nauvoo, where we lived until starting west with the Saints. During the four years I saw the Prophet quite often. Father and he were personal friends, and he came to our home many times and talked with father in the presence of the family.

One day he rode up to the gate and called to my mother:

"Where is Brother Nelson today?"

Mother told him he was on the island cutting wood.

"I should like to have seen him. Is your family well?"

Mother answered that one of the boys was sick with chills and fever.

"Tell Brother Nelson that the boy will get well, and you will not have anymore sickness in your family as long as you live in Nauvoo," the Prophet said.

This prophecy was literally fulfilled.

I have heard the Prophet speak in public on many occasions. In one meeting I heard him say:

"I will give you a key that will never rust,if you will stay with the majority of the Twelve Apostles, and the records of the Church, you will never be led astray." The history of the Church has proven this to be true.

William G. Nelson, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 543.

At his baptism, Joseph gave him a "key that will never rust": following the Twelve.

When he was baptized by Joseph Smith the Prophet said to him, "I will give you a key that never will rust; if you will stay with the majority of the twelve Apostles, and the records of the Church, you will never be led astray."

"Autobiography of William Goforth Nelson," in Davis Bitton, Guide to Mormon Diaries and Autobiographies (Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1977).

Joseph stayed at his father's house in Missouri; counseled the Saints to stay in Far West, and later in Nauvoo; said the gospel would always be found with a majority of the Saints and the records of the Church.

My parents lived near Grand River, Mo., in 1838 and the Prophet Joseph Smith on one occasion, stayed with us over night, which was the first time any of us had ever seen the Prophet. My parents lived on their land near Grand River one year and a half. In the fall of 1838 a General Conference of the church was called at Far West, Mo. My father was one who attended. The Prophet counseled the Saints to gather thereFar West, Mo., forthwith. My father was the only one of the four brothers who immediately complied with the counsel of the Prophet. He started at sunrise the next morning after getting home, taking a wagon, in which his family could comfortably ride, and taking five head of horses, one yoke o oxen, three good cows, and a small bunch of sheep. He left thirty-four head of cattle and 50 head of hogs in the woods. His brothers were slow to comply with the words of the Prophet and the mob robbed them of nearly all their property. They even took possession of Abraham's ferry and charged him for crossing on it when he started to Far West.

. . . We did not move to Nauvoo until early the next spring1840. Here we became closely acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith and the leaders of the Church, and my brother William and I were baptized into the Church by the Prophet Joseph during the summer of 1842. I well remember many of the sayings of the Prophet which are on record in the Church. But one I will mention here. He said: "I will give you a key that never will rust; if you will stay with the majority of the twelve Apostles, and the records of the Church, you will never be led astray."

"William Goforth Nelson," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
