Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Noble, Joseph Bates

(January 14, 1810-August 17, 1900)

Goes to Kirtland to meet Joseph; works for him for six days; tells of spiritually uplifting meetings and being taught by Joseph.

In the summer of 1833, I went to Kirtland, Ohio, to visit Joseph Smith, for as yet I had never seen him. The distance was 250 miles. When I arrived at Kirtland, I went to the house of Joseph Smith and told him I had come to stay a few days in the place. He was going to work in the hayfield. He invited me to go with him. I did, so, further said he would tell me all about it. I stayed nine days at the place, worked with the prophet six days. During my stay at Kirtland, Brother Brigham Young came from Canada to Kirtland and had some four or five very interesting meetings. The power of God was poured out upon us, so that we spake with other tongues and prophesied as the spirit gave utterance. Much good instruction was given by President Joseph Smith.

"Joseph Bates Noble Autobiography," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 4.

Joseph predicts a scourge to come on Zion's Camp.

While in this place, President Joseph Smith received the word of the Lord, saying our offering was accepted, comparative to that of Abraham. Our hearts rejoiced when they heard this. A few were for crossing the Missouri River into Jackson County, or die trying. At this time there was stationed at the crossing, 500 men. Some two weeks previous to this time President Smith told us plainly there was a scourge coming from the camp. He said he had prayed, but nevertheless it will come. We thought it would come from our enemies who were threatening us continually, but just at the time when we were dismissed to make our own arrangements to get back, behold a cholera came on us with mighty power, and 14 of our best men fell, and I, myself, very narrowly escaped with my life. It was my lot to assist in taking care of four of them in one small room until they were dead.

"Joseph Bates Noble Autobiography," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Librae, Provo, Utah, 7-8.

At Joseph's invitation, attends the School of the Prophets; he studies Hebrew and Chaldean.

As we were about ready to start, a learned gentleman by the name of Seixas came to Kirtland and wished to teach a Hebrew class and other languages, if wanted. President Joseph Smith called the leaders together and said to us it was a favorable opportunity to get a knowledge of the Hebrew and other languages. The hand of God was in it. We right about and went to school. The next six months I gained considerable information on the Hebrew and Chaldee language, so I could read and translate tolerably well. I had at this time no knowledge of the English grammar. That was against me in making progress.

"Joseph Bates Noble Autobiography," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 13.

Tells of the healings at Montrose; Noble himself was one of those healed by the Prophet.

At this time Brother Elijah Fordham, a next-door neighbor to me, was very sick; indeed they were preparing clothes for his burial. In this trying hour the Holy Ghost was poured out upon the Prophet Joseph Smith, and he, with Brothers Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt and others, came to Brother Fordham's house and commanded him, in the name of Jesus Christ, to arise and walk. He immediately jumped from his dying bed, kicked off the drafts from his feet, and came into my house, following the brethren, and shouting, leaping, and praising God with all his might.

President Smith, while leading the way to my bed, made this remark: "Brother Noble, you have been too long with me to lie here." As soon as I saw him the tears of joy burst from my eyes. In a moment he was by my bedside, and took me by the hand. Without waiting for the other brethren to get to my bed, he commanded me, in the name of Jesus Christ, to arise and walk. I arose, and while putting on my clothes I fainted. When I regained consciousness I was on the bed, and Joseph was standing close to me.

As soon as my eyes met his he said, "Wherefore didst thou doubt?" and again commanded me to arise.

While he was speaking I felt the healing virtue flowing through every part of my system. I immediately arose and walked, rejoicing and praising the Lord with all my heart, for His blessing resting upon me, by which I was made whole.

Brother Fordham was more active and stronger than I was. He never sat down in my house, but as soon as Brother Joseph had given directions to my wife concerning some nourishment for me, he left with the rest of the brethren. They went and administered to others who were sick, and called them up in a similar manner.

Joseph, at this time, rebuked the Elders for administering the form without the power. Said he, "Let the Elders either obtain the power of God to heal the sick, or let them cease to administer the form without the power."

Joseph B. Noble, "Early Scenes in Church History," Juvenile Instructor 15, no. 10 (15 March 1880): 112.

Tells of Alvah Beman, who at one time handled the thinly covered golden plates.

I formed an acquaintance with Mary A. Beman. . . . My first introduction to this young woman was at McMillons, my place of boarding. She was teaching school in the neighborhood. Her father, Alvah Beman lived about 2 ½ miles distance. [He was] a man well off as to houses and land and goods of this world, and very highly esteemed among men for his word. This man was well acquainted with the Smith family before the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and was with Joseph [and] at one time assisted him in hiding the plates from a mob. He was permitted to handle the plates with a thin cloth covering them.

"A Journal or Diary of Joseph Bates Noble 1810-1834," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 3.

Joseph told him of the Book of Mormon and that he recognized the angels by the sound of their voices; he went on Zion's Camp and helped rescue Joseph from Liberty Jail.

I was born Jan. 4, 1810 in Egramont, Berkshire County, Mass. In 1815 my father Ezekiel and mother Theodolia Bates moved to Monroe Co. New York. I lived in that vicinity until the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. In 1832 heard Prest. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball bear testimony to the principles of the gospel as revealed through Joseph Smith. I with a few others went forth and was baptized in Avon, Livingston Co., Sept. 1832. In 1833 I went to Kirtland. [Illegible] where I saw for the first time Joseph Smith. I went with him to a field and helped him mow some hay. While there he gave me much information in relation to the Book of Mormon, etc. etc. He told me that the voices of the angels became so familiar that he knew their names before he saw them. On the return of Bro. Brigham Young from Canada we returned to New York.

Early in the Spring of 1834 I again went up to Ohio to join the company that was called together by revelation to go up and redeem Zion.

The company was composed of 205 members. We traveled 1000 miles under the guidance of the Prophet Joseph Smith. There were 14 died of the cholera. I barely escaped but through the laying on of hands and by the prayer of faith I was healed.

I returned to New York and on Sept. 11, 1834 I married Mary Adeline Bennion and returned to Kirtland the same fall. While here I passed through the House of the Lord in connection with my Brethren in the Temple; was ordained a seventy. Then moved up to [illegible]

I was one of the [illegible] that assisted in the rescue of the Prophet Joseph and his fellow prisoners from Liberty Jail. I was at the surrender of Far West and assisted in moving the helpless out of the state. While at Commerce I buried four of my family. I was with the Prophet Joseph in many of his difficulties at this time.

I assisted the helpless as much as I could in the exulsion from Nauvoo and then returned for my own family and started for Winter Quarters.

While in this place I buried my wife Sarah Alley Noble and two children.

"Autobiographical Sketch of Jos. Bates Noble," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
