Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Noble, Mary Adeline Beman

(October 19, 1810-February 14, 1851)

Tells of her father, Alva Beman, helping to conceal the gold plates from a mob.

My father sold his place in Levonia [Livonia] and we moved with his family to Avon, Livingston County [New York]. Some year-previous to this, my father [Alva Beman] became acquainted with father Joseph Smith, the father of the Prophet. He frequently would go to Palmyra to see father Smith and his family during this time. Brother Joseph Smith came in possession of the plates that contained the Book of Mormon. As soon as it was noised around that there was a Golden Bible found, for that was what it was called at the time, the minds of the people became excited, and it rose to such a pitch that a mob collected together to search the house of father Joseph Smith to find the records. My father was there at the time and assisted in concealing the plates in a box in a secluded place where no one could find them, although he did not see them. My father soon returned.

"A Journal of Mary A. Noble," in "Joseph Bates Noble Autobiography," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 16.

First meeting with Joseph; she has a testimony that he was a prophet; she felt privileged and blessed to be able to prepare food for he and his companions.

The next season I taught school in the neighborhood of my father. This was 1833, in the fall and winter of the same year. I commenced keeping company with Mr. Noble, and in a year, the spring of 1834, Brother Joseph Smith came from Kirtland, Ohio, to my father's New York estate, Avon, Livingston County. This was the first time I ever beheld a prophet of the Lord, and I can truly say at the first sight that I had a testimony within my bosom that he was a man chosen of God to bring forth a great work in the last days. His society I prized, his conversation was meat and drink to me. The principles that he brought forth bind the testimony that he bore of the truth of the Book of Mormon and made a lasting impression upon my mind. While he was there, Sidney Rigdon and Joseph and Brigham Young, Luke and Lyman Johnson, and 12 or 14 of the traveling elders had a council to my father's. I, in company with my sisters, had the pleasure of cooking, and serving the table, and waiting on them, which I considered a privilege and blessing.

"A Journal of Mary A. Noble," in "Joseph Bates Noble Autobiography," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 18-19.

Attends a meeting at which Joseph testifies of the Book of Mormon; tells of the departure of Zion's Camp.

Brother Joseph and Elder Rigdon held a meeting in Geneva, which is called the Orton neighborhood, in a barn. Elder Rigdon preached, Brother Joseph bore testimony of the truth of the Book of Mormon, and of the work that had come forth in these last days. Never did I hear preaching sound so glorious to me as that did. I realized it was the truth of heaven, for I had testimony of it myself. Many very interesting interviews we have had with them while they were at my father's house.

At length the time arrived for them to start back to the Ohio, for they intended to take a journey [Zion's Camp] that season for Missouri at a distance of a thousand miles, for previous to this the Lord had said in a revelation to Brother Joseph, "Gather up the strength of mine house, yea, ye young men and middle aged, and march to Zion for the redemption of the Saints," for it was then in possession or in hands of a ruthless mob that had driven the Saints from their houses and homes which they had purchased with their own money and were then in a suffering condition.

"A History of Mary A. Noble," holograph, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 18-19.
