Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Noble, Susan Hammond Ashby

(August 28, 1808-May 15, 1851)

Tells of the healings at Montrose and how her father's faith failed; also tells of living near the Mansion House in Nauvoo, and of seeing Joseph ride on his big black horse wearing his beaver hat and circular cape; also tells of the mourning and howling of the dogs at time of the martyrdom.

My father related to me an incident connected with that sorrowful time. The Prophet arose from a bed of sickness, filled with the power the Spirit and went among the stricken saints, rebuking the disease and commanding the sick to arise, and there were many wonderful healings known. He came to my father's home, where he lay helpless, commanding him to arise, which he did, but in doing so fell again. The Prophet said to him: "Joseph, why did you doubt?" My brother and sister never recovered from the chills and fever which the contracted at this time until they came to the Valley.

In Nauvoo my mother lived on the corner of Parley and Carlin Streets. Her home stood two block north and one block east of the Mansion House where lived the Prophet. Living so near the Prophet's home he was often seen riding by on the back of a black horse, sitting very erect and looking very gentlemanly in a tall beaver hat and a circular cape. Once he came to my mother's home and was loaned twenty-five dollars which he later returned. About this time the Prophet was a candidate for the presidency of the United States. Brother Ashby was sent to the eastern states to advocate his claims to that high office. Now came the troublous times of the martyrdom.

Mother had been less than a year in Nauvoo when the Prophet and his brother were taken prisoners to Carthage. The night following their death, mother sat in her bedroom at the window through the entire night, filled with terror for the safety of the people now their leaders were away. So slow are we to comprehend the dealings of the Lord. His work which is never more to leave this earth until His Son again appears. No schemes will ever be deep enough or strong enough to prevail against the word of God. The dismal howling of the dogs, with the uncertainty and fear, made the night most memorable. In the morning mother came upstairs to the bedside of her children, saying word had just been received of the martyr's death. When the bodies lay in the Mansion House, mother took her children to see them. They lay side by side with the stains of their life blood visible.

"A Sketch of the Life of Susan Hammond Ashby Noble by Her Daughter Louisa Adeline," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
