Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Nye, Ephraim Hesmer

(August 6, 1845-May 15, 1913)

Tells of meeting an old man, who, as a young boy came to Nauvoo and spent a night in the Nauvoo House, where he was kindly cared for by the Prophet; later, he saw the Prophet jump from the window of the Carthage Jail; as a young stage driver, this boy often drove the Prophet.

E. H. Nye, who was President of the California Mission of the Latter-day Saints Church, 1898, tells of meeting and spending the evening with an aged gentleman who was, as a boy, a stage driver between Nauvoo and Keokuk, with Carthage as a half way station. On the fateful twenty-seventh of June 1844, he came rattling into Carthage with the stage. Driving past the old jail, the man said he saw the mob gathered around it; as his passengers were getting out, the shooting commenced; and while driving to the stable, the prophet jumped out of the window. He saw him fall; but as soon as the stableman took charge of the team, he jumped off and ran, frightened as he states, half out of his wits.

"This man," says Elder Nye, "speaks in the highest terms of commendation and praises of the Prophet and his family. He says that he arrived in Nauvoo at night a stranger, about a year prior to the death of Joseph Smith, without money or friends, a boy fourteen years of age, having understood that his brother lived there. On inquiring for his brother, he learned that it was eight miles to his home, with snow on the ground and very cold. The gentleman, of whom he inquired, took him over to a large house that he thought was a hotel and told the man of that house of the situation, who said, "Come in, son, we'll take care of you." He was taken in, warmed, fed and lodged. The next day was bitter cold and the man of the house, who he learned was Joseph Smith, told him to content himself in peace, it was too cold for him to go out to his brother's place alone; some teams would be in from there and then he could go out. The boy said he had no money but he was told not to worry about that; they would take care of him. After this incident, he became well acquainted with Joseph Smith, who always called him "Sonny," and after the boy obtained the position of stage driver Joseph Smith rode with him repeatedly."

"Ephraim H. Nye Biographical Information," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah; also in Edwin F. Parry, Stories about Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret News Press, 1951), 100-102.
