Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Oakley, John

(November 12, 1819-May 4, 1890)

First meeting with Joseph, who tells him not to expect perfection of the Prophet or the Prophet would expect it of them; introduced his father to Joseph and purchased a lot from him; tells of Joseph befriending mobocrat Joseph H. Jackson to discern his motives; assigned to [home]teach Heber C. Kimball and Joseph Smith; Joseph explained meaning of Word of Wisdom; tells of the last time he saw Joseph, who was very reflective, and tells of Mother Smith's words upon hearing of the martyrdom.

In the fall of 1842 I moved to Nauvoo in company with a young man by the name of Spencer. H. D. Bayless, James Dorland, Thomas Dollinger and families [were also with us. We] journeyed by way of Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Cincinatti, Louisville, [and] St. Louis. When we arrived at Nauvoo Brother Joseph Smith invited us to the upper room of the Public Store. He shook hands with us and informed us that his enemies had been hunting him. He greeted us warmly and told us that we must not look for perfection in him. If we did he would look for perfection in us.

. . . I purchased for my Father from Brother Joseph Smith a lot opposite his then residence (Log house) (lot lying north) at this date I think [I paid] $2000 per acre. Though I could have bought at half price a lot lying next owned by Br. Isaac Allred, I was counseled to buy of the Trustee in Trust so that he could have means through profit to purchase the land adjoining Nauvoo that the Gentiles might not weaken our power by being mixed with us. My Father sent the money on to me in a draft, or certificate of deposit. My father and family, consisting of my mother and my brother James and my sisters Mary Ann and Margaret, came to Nauvoo in the Spring of 1843. I introduced my father to Brother Joseph Smith and we went out to look out some farming land that Brother Joseph had to sell as agent for the Church. Brother Joseph sent with us his agent. Joseph H. Jackson, Brother Joseph and William Clayton his, Secretary also came out to the farming land. My father concluded to take forty acres opposite the church farm (3 miles from Nauvoo). When about starting to go back to the city Brother Joseph told me to get on his horse. I told him I could walk as well as him; he then said, "I command you in the name of the General to get on the horse and ride home." I felt that I could not disobey the command, so I mounted Bro. Joseph's black horse. Brother Joseph and Joseph H. Jackson walked home arm over shoulder like two cronies. My father and Brother Clayton rode in a Buggy Wagon. Joseph Jackson, I afterwards learned, was a most villainous man, and Brother Joseph's intimacy with him was only to learn the extent of his villainy. I believe Jackson was one who had a hand in shooting Brothers Joseph and Hyrum.

Brother Joseph, not being able to make payment for the lot I purchased of him, threw it up, and my Father took a lot on Parley St. in place of it for $250thus purchasing 40 acres of farming land $800. We set out an orchard of apple trees on the farm and built a two story brick house on the city lot.

My father sold his farm on Long Island for upwards of $3000 and had insurance, stock, and money in worth about $1500. As is common when a person, having embraced the gospel makes an effort to gather with the Saints, his neighbors did what they could to hinder and retain as much as possible of their God (Mammon). When I was making readiness to gather with the saints my father offered to assist me by letting me have some money that I had deposited in the Brooklyn Saving Bank as agent for him. I went to draw it with the Bank book but Mr. Hegaman, the Bank President, had learned that I was a Mormon, and that I was going to Nauvoo. He therefore refused to let me have my money unless I would go before the Mayor and obtain an affidavit certifying that I was empowered to draw the money. I did so, but yet he would not let me have it, notwithstanding he had a partial acquaintance with me.

. . . During the time I lived in Nauvoo I was busied in the mercantile business for my fatherwe bought our goods at St. Louis. I was called to act in the office of a Teacher and with my companion had a district assigned us, and Brother Heber C. Kimball and Joseph Smith were in our district. We hesitated to visit such prominent men, as we well knew we were not capable of teaching them, yet we could not find any excuse to pass by their houses, so we ventured. The Presiding Bishop, Newel K. Whitney, gave us a routine of questions to ask every one in our district. Among the questions was, "do you keep the word of wisdom?" We found that Brother Joseph Smith was the most submissive of any in our district. After he had answered our questions, he called his wife Emma to answer also. I then asked him the meaning and purport of the word of wisdom, as at that time there was a great diversity of opinion concerning it. He answered and said, "I understand the Word of Wisdom to mean that we must get in wisdom all things. If I think a glass of Brandy will do one good or a cup of Coffee or to smoke a cigar I will use these things." Thus in short he gave us the meaning of the Word of Wisdom.

I was organized in the Nauvoo Legion, and during the mobbing by the Gentiles surrounding us I with others was called out to guard and protect the outer settlement around Nauvoo.

I went out with a company to guard Camp Creek settlement, under the Command of Capt. Howard Egan. While out there a man by the name of Debinare was found dead, and the blame laid to our company by the Gentile mobbers. By some means they obtained our names and got writs out to take us on the charge of murdering Debinare, so I had to watch close and disguise myself to keep out of the way of the officers. Thinking I could go to St. Louis and buy some more goods and settle up with creditors preparatory to leaving for the mountains, I departed. From what I could learn the Sheriff of . . . was on my back, so by a dream that I had on board of the steamboat going to St. Louis, and by all I could other ways learn, I left the Steam Boat when she stopped at Quincy (50 miles from Nauvoo). Concluding I had made a fortunate escape, and taking the stage back to Nauvoo, I left the officer, as I suppose, in the firm expectation of arresting me at Alton, Ill.

It was during these mobbing times in the month of June (27th) 1844 that Joseph Smith the Prophet was murdered.

The last time I saw him was in front of the Masonic Hall sitting on his horse seeming to be in very deep thought looking down on the neck of his horse. He had returned having met some officers with an order to have the Nauvoo Legion give up their arms. He returned with them, fearing that the brethren would not willingly give them up. I spoke to Brother Joseph, saying, "Brother Joseph, what are we now going to do, seeing they are to disarm us?" But he seemed listless, looking down, seeming in very deep study. This was the last time I saw him alive. His body, with his Brother Hyrum's body, was brought back from Carthage Jail, pierced with balls. I was at Bro. Joseph's home when an express came to inform of this murderous deed. His mother said "They have not rested till they have got the blood of my sons."

John Oakley Journal, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling, punctuation, and grammar have been modernized.

Note: These recollections appear to have been written sometime between May, 1868 and January 8, 1872. Joseph's comments on the Word of Wisdom, if rightly quoted by Oakleyand misquotation is always a concern in retrospective accountssheds an important light on this important revelation, for they underscore the importance of the law of agency. This quote implies that men are accountable first, to understand the laws of good health, and second, to live in harmony with them. Taking the position to the extreme, if one thought there was medicinal value, for instance, in a sip of brandy, the violation of agency would not be so great as in the instance of one who knew better.
