Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Osborn [Osborne], David

(March 31, 1807-June 12, 1892)

Recalls things he heard Joseph teach: Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Moses all held keys; Joseph understood why the world thought him a fool; Joseph testified of the Book of Mormon; Joseph prophesied that because of greed and land speculation, great sorrow and persecution would follow the Saints.

I feel to record here a few of the sayings of Joseph Smith, our martyred prophet, which I was privileged to hear, at different times, which were very interesting to me at the time and think they may be equally so to my children in a time to come. I well knew by the spirit of revelation before I gathered with the Church at Far West that he was verily a prophet of God and every time I had the opportunity of hearing him I listened with intense interest and attention to every word he uttered. I settled 10 miles north of Far West in the year 1837. There was then but a few houses in that place. The same fall father Smith and family, Joseph and Sidney and others arrived. Notice was given and nearly everyone gathered to see and hear the Prophet. There was no meeting house and a wagon was provided for a stand. Therefore the first sight I had of Joseph Smith was then on that wagon box. He had quite a green or boyish appearance at first, but he had not spoken long till he assumed a more manly appearance, even that of a man of God. He spoke of Adam, Enoch, Noah, Moses, the patriarchs and some of the prophets, telling what keys each one held, and the work he accomplished in his day down to Jesus and the apostles.

Now says he, having told you so much about these ancient men of God, I will proceed to tell you something of myself. Some of you have known me and heard my testimony, but many of you have not. You have heard many things about me and what I have been doing, some things were true and some were not; the world had called me a fool. Well I don't wonder at it. I suppose I have acted to them like a fool, the Lord has shown me many things concerning the ancients of this continent, with their record and my mind was so much absorbed in regard to these things and the great responsibilities resting upon me as a servant of God, and having had but little experience in regard to worldly matters, I do not blame people for thinking me a fool; indeed, we are all fools. We know but little, hence the necessity of the Lord teaching us something.

Says he, I bear testimony to you in the name of the Lord, that the Book of Mormon is true and the testimony I expect to meet in the day of judgment. For this testimony I have suffered persecution, but I expect to suffer much more. If I obtain the glory which is set before me I expect to wade through much tribulation. He told us that Peter, James and John, having held the keys of the kingdom in their day had come and conferred the same upon him and his brethren. He quoted the saying of the Savior that the time would come when "every secret thing should be proclaimed on the housetops." Thus I have proclaimed these secret things, if not on the house top, it is upon the wagon top.

In the conclusion of his discourse he reproved the brethren who had purchased government land and dividing it and selling it out at a high price to their poor brethren, and other matters of speculation and iniquity which was going on in the Church. Now says he, you call me a prophet. If I am it is my privilege to prophesy which I will do, and when you go home, write it down and remember it. You think you have suffered much already by the hand of your enemies, but if you don't cease this thing and take a different course and be more faithful, your enemies will again come upon you in greater numbers and you will not find a resting place in the state of Missouri

Well I did not write down the prediction on paper, but I did in my memory and have thought of it thousands of times since. At that time we were well treated and apparently much respected by the Missourians. All was peace and goodwill but two years had not passed away till all the Church that could get away were safely out of the state.

"Autobiography of David Osborn," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 63-64.

Osborn's recollections of Joseph's interpretations of the Savior's statement that the gospel would be preached to all nations before the end.

I will mention a few instances of his commenting on or explaining the scriptures. On the stand (upon the bench at Nauvoo) he read the 24th chapter of Matthew in the German Bible. When he came to the 14th verse, he read it thus: "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached for or against all nations and then shall the end come." He called on a learned German in the congregation to say whether he had read the verse correctly; he said he had. Joseph then observed that he considered the German translation of the scriptures more correct than any other and furthermore he believed the German people were more honest than many other nations. Again in commenting on 1st Corinthians, 12th chapter, 31st verse, he read it thus: "Thus I have shown unto you a more excellent way," for, said he, the translators make the apostle swerve from the truth in order to do away or invalidate the true organization of the gospel ordinances with its spiritual gift and office.

"Autobiography of David Osborn," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 64-66.

Note: Matthew 24:14 reads: "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come."

Recollections of Joseph's interpretations of parable of mustard seed, the leaven, and the pearl of great price.

I will also give Joseph's explanation of the parables contained in Matthew, 13th chapter; 31, 33, 42 [45-46]. The grain of a mustard seed represented the Book of Mormon, which was hid in the ground, which was thought by the world to be the least of all such productions. The leaven hid in three measures signified the testimony of the Angel Moroni to three witnesses; viz. Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris. The Pearl of Great Price of the treasure hid in a field was fulfilled in the finding and pointing out of the place where the city of Zion or New Jerusalem will stand and the brethren in the west selling all they had and purchasing that land. He said it was plain to be seen that all these parables had reference to the coming forth of the kingdom in the last days.

In conclusion, he says, "Jesus asks the question, have you understood these things." His disciples say, 'Yea Lord.' And I say too with all my heart, 'Yea Lord.' So much I remember of Joseph's commentary.

"Autobiography of David Osborn," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 67.

Note: For Joseph's explanation of the parable of the mustard seed, see Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Joseph Fielding Smith, compiler (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1976), 98-99; for his explanation of the parable of the leaven see Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 100; and for his explanation of the parable of the man who found the pearl of great price, see Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 101-2.

Angry because Joseph could not redeem a Kirtland Safety Society Note, a man insulted Joseph repeatedly; Joseph then threatened to whip the man, who thought it wise to leave.

I will also here state two or three incidents in the life of Joseph which may be entertaining to some. While the church was at Kirtland, Ohio, through Joseph's counsel they instituted a bank [Kirtland Safety Society] and let out money to the gentiles as well as the brethren. The elders had raised up a branch of the church over in Canada and Joseph went over the lake to see and preach to them, and while there came a man with a bill of their Kirtland money. Joseph was the president of the bank, and he presented it to him and wanted him there and then to redeem it with the specie. Joseph told him he was not prepared to do so there but to come over at another time and it would be done. This did not satisfy him; he abused and insulted him with many words, calling him a swindler and imposter, etcetera.

Joseph listened a while patiently and then says he, "Repeat that again." He did so, another time, he continued again. Now, says Joseph, I only want you to say so once more and then I'll give you such a whipping as you'll never forget. He then began to open his eyes and sneaked off. Some of his brethren almost apostatized in consequence of the prophet's proposing to fight. This was told me by an elder from Kirtland.

"Autobiography of David Osborn," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 67-68.

As Mayor of Nauvoo, Joseph serves writ against a man who violated the liquor law; the man strikes at Joseph, who in turn knocks him down.

There was an apostate by the name of John Eagle, a large man and quite a bully. He kept a grocery in a little frame house on a side hill at Nauvoo. The city council passed an ordinance forbidding the sale of liquor. Joseph being the mayor sent a writ by an officer to bring him before the council, but Eagle refused to have him serve the summons, he being afraid of him. He returned the writ to Joseph. "Well," says he, "I never did send a man to do anything which I was afraid to do myself and I believe I can take him." So he went up to the grocery where there was quite a crowd of men. Eagle saw him coming and suspecting his business, squared himself, striking at him, but Joseph dodged the blow and then was his turn. He knocked him down the second time before he was willing to stand. He served the writ and afterwards sent a few men and tipped over his little house and poured out his liquor. This was frequently spoken of at Nauvoo though I saw nothing of it myself.

"Autobiography of David Osborn," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 68.

Exhausted by abuse, Joseph finally knocked his abuser down.

I will tell another story as related to me by Ira N. Spaulding of east Weber. He lived near Joseph at Nauvoo. He got into Joseph's carriage to ride with him down to his store one day and while in the carriage there came a man who held a note against Joseph. He talked kindly to the man and begged him to wait a short time for the money as he could not pay him then but good words would not satisfy him. He abused him shamefully, calling him every mean name he could think of. He said, Joseph did not appear to be much irritated in his feelings but after hearing him a while he turned his head to Spaulding and said, "That's enough, hold the lines." He just stepped outside the carriage and knocked him down as flat as a beef, not speaking a word and come into the carriage and traveled on.

"Autobiography of David Osborn," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 68-69.

Joseph explains "new wine in old bottles."

Joseph's explanation of this saying of the Savior: "No man putteth new wine into old bottles but new wine must be put into new bottles, lest the bottles break and the wine be spilt," etcetera. He said the Jews anciently used bottles made of the skins of sheep and other animals. The wine, when new, would ferment and swell; so would a new bottle stretch and swell. But to put new wine into an old one that had stretched all it could, the bottle was liable to burst and spill the wine. He explained the new wine to represent new revelation. He said he had seen this saying of the Savior's exemplified in this church many times by those who had been gathered out of other churches, who were so full of ancient revelation on the Bible that when a little more was given they could not find room for it. Consequently, it was lost to them. They would turn away and leave the church. Joseph Smith was the first man I ever heard try to tell who was meant by "The Ancient of Days" in the Book of Daniel. He said it was Father Adam and, says he, if you don't believe it, then get the Holy Ghost and see what it will tell you.

"Autobiography of David Osborn," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 69-70.

Note: Joseph also said: "The speaker then answered the objections urged against the Latter-day Saints for not admitting the validity of sectarian baptism, and for withholding fellowship from sectarian churches. It was like putting old wine into new bottles and new wine into old bottles. What, new revelations in the old churches! New revelations knock out the bottom of their bottomless pit. New wine into old bottles!the bottles burst and the wine runs out. What, Sadduccees in the new church! Old wine in new leathern bottles will leak through the pores and escape; so the Sadduccee saints mock at authority, kick out of the traces, and run to the mountains of perdition, leaving the long echo of their braying behind them" (Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith [Provo, Utah: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1980], 78).

Remembers Joseph bearing testimony of the Book of Mormon and of his accountability before God.

The first time I saw Joseph Smith was at Far West, in 1837. There were but three houses in town at that time. On the south side of the elder Peter Whitmer's house was a wagon with a box on. Here were seated Joseph, Sidney Rigdon and others. There was quite a congregation including old residents (Gentiles) of Caldwell County. I remember many of his sayings. A few things he said on this occasion I will relate. Said he, "You have heard many reports about me. Some perhaps are true and others not true. I know what I have done and I know what I have not done. . . . You may hug up to yourselves the Bible, but except through faith in it you can get revelation for yourself, the Bible will profit you but little. . . . The Book of Mormon is true, just what it purports to be, and for this testimony I expect to give an account in the day of judgment. . . . If I obtain the glory which I have in view I expect to wade through much tribulation."

In closing his remarks he said, "The Savior declared the time was coming when secret or hidden things should be revealed on the house tops. Well," says he, "I have revealed to you a few things, if not on the house top, on the wagon top."

David Osborne, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 6 (15 March 1892): 173.

Joseph prophesies that because the rich took advantage of the poor, the Saints would suffer and leave Missouri.

On another occasion he preached and chastised the rich, or those who had money, for buying land at government price and selling it in small lots to their poor brethren at a high price. He said the Lord was not pleased with their conduct. "You say I am a Prophet. Well, then, I will prophesy, and when you go home write it down and remember it. You think you have been badly treated by your enemies; but if you don't do better than you are now doing, I prophesy that the state of Missouri will not hold you. Your sufferings have hardly commenced."

I think about eighteen months after this we all left the state.

David Osborne, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 6 (15 March 1892): 173.
