Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Pack, Ward Eaton

(April 17, 1834-November 16, 1907)

As a boy, had a breakfast with the Prophet while his father waited in the street; saw the Prophet hiding from his enemies in disguise; also tells of seeing the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum and of joining the funeral procession.

My parents attended meeting regularly and I went with them. I was baptized when eight years old in the font of the Nauvoo Temple by Charles C. Rich. I saw the Prophet Joseph Smith many times when he was passing in the little oak grove at the west end of the temple. I also saw him wrestling and jumping with the young men. Seemingly he could surpass them all in these sports.

At one time I was sent by father to the Mansion House and found the Prophet at breakfast. He insisted on my eating with him. When the meal was over he took me by the hand and led me into the street where father was waiting. He asked, "Brother Pack, did you think you had lost your little boy?" "No," my father answered, "I knew he was in good hands." I also saw him in disguise, dressed in a long black frock coat with a wide brimmed slouch had upon his head. He bowed to father and I recognized him. Father tried to persuade me that I was mistaken, but he could not. He told me that the Prophet was disguised for the purpose of deceiving his enemies who were hunting for him to place him under arrest. I distinctly remember my feelings. I do not believe any person could have induced me to mention that circumstance. I saw the Prophet many times on parade, dressed in his military suit, drilling the Nauvoo Legion.

I stood by the roadside when the teams passed with his and brother Hyrum's bodies. They were being brought from Carthage in large boxes to Nauvoo. Their hats and some of the clothing they were wearing when they were martyred were upon the boxes. The people standing while the teams were passing stood with hats off and tears coursing down their faces. I saw the bodies lying in their caskets in the dining room of the Mansion House, while the saints were passing though taking a last view. Their caskets were plain covered with black velvet with glass to cover the upper part of the bodies. Hyrum was shot in the face, cutting the side of his nose. The bullet wound was covered with a round white patch of cloth. No other wounds were visible on either body. I went with mother in the procession to the cemetery, a mile and a half east of the city, where they were supposed to have been buried.

"Sketch of the Life of Julia Ives Pack, Utah Pioneer of 1847, Prepared by her Granddaughter, Myrtle Pack Ure," Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1937, 4-5.
