Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Palmer, James

(August 6, 1820-October 6, 1905)

Tells of hearing Joseph preach in the grove near the temple and of how the people loved to listen and would keep perfect silence when he spoke; also gives a physical description of Joseph.

[During the spring of 1842 Palmer left England and arrived in Nauvoo. Then:] . . . when the Sabbath day came the saints assembled in a grove near the sight of the Temple where was erected a stand or platform for the speakers and it was nearly always filled by our leading officers, with our beloved Prophet and Patriarch Joseph and Hiram Smith at the head; he The Prophet did not always address the audience meetings but when he did all ears were opened and the most profound silence was observed, and those that spake in his presence, no matter on what subject, allowed themselves to be corrected if needed, which was done by him in a kind and Christian like manner. With such a monitor as he [it] did not take long to win from me my most profound regard and esteem for this noble man of God, and he could hand out to all mankind God's divine law and make it so plain to the understanding of the people, that on reflection one would benefit to think you he had always known it, whereas you had only just been taught it; he looked and had, the appearance of one that was heaven born while preaching, and or as though he was had been sent from the heavenly worlds on some divine mission, he was a man of fine form and Stature measuring over six feet in height, he was of a light complexion, his hair was of a flaxen color, with little or no he wore no whiskers , his chin was a little tipped with light brown hare, his nose was rather long and straight, his mouth was rather massive and his upper lip rather long and a little inclined to be thick. He had a large full chest and intelligent eyes and fine limbs; altogether he presented a very formidable appearance, being a man of Gentlemanly bearing kind The kindness he manifested in all the walks of life caused him, to be beloved by the little boys and girls that who often sought his company as well as the many thousands of his people that who looked upon him with pride as their leader and director in the great Latter day work, it will be but little use for one to try to represent any further the outlines of character with which this noble man of God is endowed, but henseforth to cronicle his teachings in my memory for his history will surely be written by men of more gifted hands than mine and so I will content myself with a little sketch from time to time as I may be favored. The summer of 1842 has worn away and the sickly season approaching when my wife was taken sick with the fever and soon she became delirious, this troubled me, I caused her while the fever was at its [illegible] wife to be taken to the Baptismal font in the basement of the temple and there to be baptized for her health and that with the laying on of hands and prayer of faith she was that hour restored to health. She was taken there on a bed on a light wagon and she returned to me singing the fever having left her.

James Palmer, "Reminiscences," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 69-70. Spelling and grammar have been modernized.

Saints persecuted in Nauvoo [1843]; Palmer joins the Nauvoo Legion; Joseph is arrested at Dixon then returned safely with help of the Saints; Palmer heard Joseph testify of the Book of Mormon and say the angel John (Revelation 14:6-7) came to him; it was a kind, powerful testimony; also heard Joseph give discourse on the coming Civil War, which distressed both he and Theodore Turley greatly.

During this season [i.e., 1843] there were great threats of violence by the Anti-Mormons that lived in adjoining counties; they wished to drive us from the state because we out numbered them at the ballot box. On the election day we could always elect our county officers, and they despised us; also because of our religion, they would muster and parade, and call it (a) wolf hunt, and kept up an excitement. Some of our brethren were shot at while quietly at home inside their own house and had done no one any harm. At this time the Prophet proclaimed a day of fasting and prayer through all the wards of the City, praying Almighty God to turn away from us the anger of our enemies and allow us live in peace. At the same time he advised us to prepare to protect ourselves if they came upon us, and in order to effectively accomplish this, I became a member of the Nauvoo Legion; and was mustered in to service in Capt. Worthington's Company, 2nd Regiment. I found it required much time in company musters and regimental drills to make us accomplished in military tactics to take the field as good soldiers. On all grand parades the military brass band was in the field led or conducted by Captain Pitt, and also the martial band conducted by Major Drisitt, [?] this military organization known as the Nauvoo Legion amounted to about 2,000 Efficient troops and was a strong barrier against the outside presence known as mobocrats, and to cope with our strength was their greatest trouble. about this time our Prophet was arrested at Dixon while Preaching among his relatives a sheriff from Missouri pressed a pistol to his breast commanding him to surrender he instantly unbarred his bosom and told the Sheriff to fire away said he I am not afraid of your pistol I have never broken any law and the result is I have nothing to fear, our People on learning of this outrage rallied immediately and a company of friends hastened to Dixon with all speed traveling night and day, and succeeded in bring their Prophet safe to Nauvoo, where he procured a writ of habeus corpus and was there judged and honorably acquited among his own people, as being innocent of any charge crime lawfully against his personal character our people now began to regard such proceedings as the foregoing as being instituted by a spirit of Persecution and an outrage upon their peaceable citizens and those men were warned through their public Journal not to come upon them again and petition the General Government to redress them of their wrongs done them in the state of Missouri; but all to no effect they ware told that their cause was just but it was out of the power of the federal government to do anything for them, and all their Importunities availed them nothing. This caused our people to be more united and look well to their own interests and we resolved to defend our leaders and to hide them and to shield them as much as possible from those that were seeking their lives, for at this day the enemy was always on the alert, and to be known as a Mormon was only to be hated by the outside element, a note to the reader, at that day the Christian world did not have plural marriage as a bug a boo or cause for pressuring us for it was not known to me at least, until some time afterwards, time now rolled on and the spirit of persecution continued to increase and the Prophet had to hide up for some there ware among us that ware his avowed enemies, however he wrote to the church from time to time instructing them as touching the ordinance for baptism for the dead, and other important matters confirming his people in their faith, teaching them to observe all things written in the divine law of God, and manifesting a disposition to be patient in all their deprivations and sufferings for the God we serve is a just God and will eventually reward every man according to his works. it will now be in place to record the Prophet's testimony on the book of Mormon, it occurred at a public meeting of the saints near the Temple, for the walls of that building were not yet erected. He said that he had accomplished that which the world could never rob him off, the Church of Christ was established never more to be cast down or overcome or the authority given to another people, and, said he, "I did translate the book of Mormon by the gift and power of God, and it is before the world, and all the powers of earth and hell can never rob me of the honor of it, and I now bear this testimony to you my brethren and sisters of this fact. On another occasion I heard him say at a public meeting in the Temple, for on the Sabbaths the meetings were held within its walls when as yet the building was not enclosed neither had the walls reached their [illegible]. He spoke of the angel coming forth as recorded in the revelations of Saint John on the Isle of Patmos which reads as follows, and I John "saw another angel flying threw the midst of heaven having the everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell on the earth and to every nation kindred tongue and people saying with a loud voice fear God , and give glory to him , and worship him, that made heaven and the earth and the sea and the fountains of water." The Prophet said this was the angel that did appear unto him and commissioned him to preach the gospel as it is now preached by the Elders of this Church and must be carried to all the world. His was a divine mission that God would honor, and he wished the saints to understand this, and to be firm, and know most assuredly that this was so, yes verily so, this was a testimony that I was glad to ear. It was given in such a kind manner, and with such force and power that it seemed to me no man could disbelieve such an independent and powerful statement, as he made that day and the Spirit of God seemed to carry his words deep into the hearts of the people, and it might be consistently said that all present believed him, for they manifested by signs unmistakeable, throughout the entire congregation that such was the fact. And as for my part I had made up my mind never to be absent from Church, if possible it could be avoided, lest I should loose the golden opportunity of being instructed in all correct principles pertaining to our holy religion as he could teach them for it was uncertain how long he might be permitted to live to benefit the world of mankind; for Satan's emissaries had already become quite bold and said that he was not fit to live, when at the same time they knew nothing of the excellent qualities of the man, and the feelings of his heart towards all mankind. I was in attendance at a public meeting held in a grove when the Prophet delivered a very lengthy discourse on the dreadful war that would be brought about between the northern and the southern states, he predicted in what state it would commenced, and the condition of the contending armies that many of the slain would not get descent burial, but would rot upon the ground and the wolves and turkey buzzards would eat their flesh by thousands. There was a large audience present and I was minus a seat, and sad, and moved quietly around to the back of the stand where the Prophet occupied and there I discovered Theodore Turley pacing too and fro, and strongly contemplating upon the Prophet's discourse as it was then peeling forth from the stand, said I to him, what think you of this, oh said he this is dreadful, and it will all come to pass just as sure as we are here this Day. The Summer of 1843 had passed away and that coming winter there were many missionaries sent out among the people to instruct them in the spirit and power of Elijah, that by this power the hearts of the Fathers would be turned to their children and the hearts of the Children unto their fathers, thereby creating a welding link with those that have gone before us, into the spirit world, for it was alleged that we without them, could not be made perfect, nor them without us, could not be made perfect, and except this was accomplished the earth would be smitten with a curse, and the missionaries in their course were endowed with power to bless all young children who parents belonged to the Church, for those blessings belonged to them, having inherited the promised blessings threw the obedience of their fathers and mothers to the gospel Covenant and thus endedth the year 1843.

James Palmer, "Reminiscences," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 72-77. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.

Mob and apostate sentiment join in Nauvoo and conspire to kill Joseph; Palmer heard Joseph call the Nauvoo Legion his boys; Joseph and Hyrum are murdered, their dead bodies are returned and their clothes are "besmeared in clots and gouts of gore"; many saw the bodies during a day of great weeping; Palmer's heart "withered" to see the sight.

It would be impossible for me to record all the important events that daily transpired, and so I will content myself with a sketch of matters wherein I was interested and was an eye witness, to the same at this time there was a great apostasy from the church by men that where considered functionaries that for years had glided along upon a smooth sea, but the Prophet had for some time past protested against their secret workings and their conduct was made manifest to the multitude, this put them in ill favor, and the consequence was they would not take measures to retrieve themselves but turned traitors, and apostatized being filled with revenge and a deadly hatred they became the Prophets inveterate enemies and from that time henceforth continued to work against him; and lay plans for his destruction, and the overthrow of his people, those men united with the outside element known as the mob and was a great help to them in accomplishing their plans for his destruction, the most influential among them ware William and Wilson Law, Robert D. Foster and his brother Charles, they ware Doctors MD, then there was Chancey Higbey an attorney at law, and his brother, there was the Mars [Marshall ?] and brother, they ware merchants and many others that united with them that it would be nonessential to name at this time. The Nauvoo expositor was issued by this gang of would be murders its columns was loaded with invectives against the Prophet and his people and as his name and views were published tot he world and he was a candidate for the Presidency of the United States, this editor took particular pains to slander him and thereby show himself to be a vile calumniator, before all the people, this was too much to be borne and so it was the City Council assembled and declared the Nauvoo expositor a nuisance and ordered by the Mayor, to be removed, which was promptly done, by a portion of the Nauvoo Legion, I was on the ground and saw the nuisance after it was abated. this being accomplished this gang hastily left the city more enraged than ever and swearing vengeance as they hastened away, tot he mobocrat settlements and when there concocted further plans to entramel the Prophet and get him into their hands if possible, the daily threatenings that daily came to us, caused some excitement among us, and our people determined to protect themselves against mob violence and armed themselves as best they could, and the Nauvoo Legion was ordered out on muster and put in readiness for protection and to always act on the defensive, we ware told to place our guns and ammunition where we could put our hand upon it the darkest night that ever was, and be ready to run, at the tap of the drum, during those days our people ware unsettled and could not engage in any kind of labor no matter how much needed and many there ware that did not have six days provisions in their house for their families and in this condition they are called out, and with a willing heart responded to the call to arms, from all appearances it was evident to an observing mind, that this state of things could not last very long, our Prophet was our Commander and held his authority from the state being signed by the governor and claimed a legal right to control the Legion for I heard him say when we ware assembled that his Commission constituted him Lieutenant General, of Nauvoo Legion and of the State of Illinois and consequently he felt assured that he was acting on safe ground, and soon it was discovered that Thomas Ford Governor of that state was in sympathy with the mob, and when he pledged the faith of the state for the protection of the Prophet and his friends, they had no faith in him, and they felt assured that he was working deceptively to bring them into a position that the mob could seek their vengeance upon him, and his friends and at a public meeting of the Legion assembled on the main street near the Prophet's Mansion he told us plainly that he would be the first to be offered up, he appeared careful in his remarks before the Legion for he knew the hearts of that body of men, that they would stand between him and death and risk their lives for his sake, and so he admonished them and said unto them henceforth I shall call you my boys, at this time there did not appear to be any fear or dismay he was calm and deliberate and so was the Legion they understood him well and felt nerved up for the onset come what may; at this time he knew that he would be murdered but for the sake of his friends he would not say so, but some wise heads comprehended as much, however he was prevailed upon to answer to the pretended requirements of the law, and he went accompanied by his Brother Hiram, John Taylor, Willard Richards and a few friends it was then that they walked into the Jaws of death for they ware brought home to their families pierced threw and threw and their clothing besmeared in clots and gouts of gore blood and so soon as their friends had prepared their remains ware laid in state, and all the people of that City took a last farewell of those men they so dearly loved and such a day for weeping I never saw before, and my heart withered while I gazed upon the horrible picture before me. I returned home weeping and with a sad heart feeling to rely upon the mercy and the providences of God in future life, come what may, and the Twelve Apostles Returned from the eastern States came home and commenced to console the people and by their wise council lead them along causing them to believe that all was well and that it was necessary that the blood of our Prophet should be shed, as a testimony of the truth of his divine mission, like unto all the Prophets and apostles that have gone before, he had now sealed his testimony with his blood and his testimony is now in force henceforth while this gang of murderers fled the state for the time being and not one of them was ever indicted and brought to justice and some of them boasted over the country of helping to murder the Smiths and the officers of justice connived with them and the Governor of the state also At this time Brigham Young the President of the Twelve Apostles came to the front and Claimed that the Twelve in their organized capacity had the legal right to Preside over the Church in all the world and their rights were acknowledged by the main body of the people and those that did not come to that standard and went their own way some after Rigdon and some followed the false prophet James J. Strang that soon ended in a myth, and thus ended the year 1844.

James Palmer, "Reminiscences," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 78-80. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.

James Palmer names his newborn son after Joseph Smith. This suggests the depth of his respect for the Prophet.

The next matter of importance that occurred was in the month of January 1847 when my wife brought forth a son and we blessed and named him Joseph in honor of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He lived six weeks only, and then departed, so at this date I am left without a living issue and a sickly wife. Yet my blessing says I shall have a numerous posterity. It will be for the reader to mark this and mark the result in the future, while I trust to the providences of God and claim the promised blessings.

James Palmer, "Reminiscences," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 91. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.

Heard Joseph teach that the spirit of man is eternal, just as God is eternal; the spirit of man cannot be annihilated.

The spirit of man is an intelligent spirit; it emanated from God; it never can be annihilated; it is eternal as God is eternal; it is without the beginning of days or end of years. If it had a beginning, than it surely would have an endand this was the testimony of Joseph Smith the Prophet, for I was and am a living witness, for I heard him utter those words.

James Palmer, "Reminiscences," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 200. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.

Quotes excerpts from the King Follett discourse at which he was present; Joseph says God and spirit have always existed; God could not create himself; doctrine of annihilation not true; begins by telling of meeting King Follett and of the cable that broke causing rocks to fall and kill him.

When I resided at Nauvoo, Hancock County, State of Illinois, taking a walk one morning I came to the residence of a brother by the name of King Follett he had undertaken to dig a well for the use of his family and while working below walling up the same the cable broke and he was crushed to death by the falling rocks that fell directly upon him he was a faithful good Latter-day Saint and a true Friend to Joseph Smith the Prophet, he desired the Prophet to preach his funeral sermon which he did, I was present on that occasion and I remember well this portion of his remarks that I am about to write for I was much interested in all he said at that time for no make spake like unto him; "he said I have another subject to dwell upon, and it is impossible for me to say much, but I shall Just touch upon them; for time will not permit me to say all, so I must come to the resurrection of the dead, the soul, the mind of man, the Immortal Spirit, all men say God created it in the beginning. the very idea lessens man in my estimation; I do not believe the doctrineI know better, hear it all ye ends of the earth, for God has told me so, I will make a man appear a fool before I get through, if you don't believe it, I am going to tell of things more noblewe say that God himself is a self-existing God; who told you so? it is correct enough; but how did you get it into your heads? who said that man did not exist in like manner upon the same principles? how does it read in the Hebrew? it don't say so in the Hebrew, it says God made man out of the Earth and put into him Adam's spirit, and so became a living body, the mind of man is as immortal as God himself. I know that my testimony is true, hence when I talk to these mourners; what have they lost? they are only separated from their bodies for a short Season; their spirits existed co-equal with God, and they now exist in a place where they converse together the same as we do on the earth, is it logic to say that a spirit is immortal, and yet have a beginning? because if a spirit has a beginning it will have an end; good logic, I want to reason more on the spirit of man, for I am dwelling on the body of man, on the subject of the dead, I take my ring from my finger and liken it to the mind of man, the immortal spirit, because it has no beginning suppose you cut it in two; but as the Lord lives there would be an end, all the fools, learned and wise men, from the beginning of Creation, who say that man had a beginning, proves that he must have an end, and the doctrine of annihilation would be true, but, if I am right, I might with boldness proclaim from from the house-tops that God never did have power to create the spirit of man at all, God himself could not create himself; intelligence exists upon a self-existent principle, it is a spirit from age to age, and there is no Creation about it in all the Spirits that God ever sent into the world are susceptible of enlargement the first principles of man are self existent with God; that God himself finds himself in the midst of Spirits and glory, because he was greater, and because he saw proper to institute laws, whereby the rest could have a privilege to advance like himself, that they might have one glory upon another in all knowledge, Power and glory, in order to save the world of Spirits, I know that when I tell you these words of eternal life, that are given to me, I know you taste it, and I know you believe it, you say honey is sweet and so do I, I can also taste the spirit of Eternal Life, I know it is good, and, when I tell you of these things that are given me by inspiration of the holy Spirit, you are bound to receive as sweet, and I rejoice more and more."

James Palmer, "Reminiscences," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 304-6. Spelling, punctuation, and grammar have been modernized.

Heard John Taylor say Joseph said he had given the Twelve all the Keys.

[Quoting from a discourse John Taylor gave on October 12, 1884, Palmer quotes John Taylor as saying:] Question: What keys do the twelve apostles hold? Answer: Every key needful to save in the Celestial Kingdom of God, was given to the twelve apostles. Joseph Smith gave the twelve apostles all the keys of the Kingdom saying if they kill me, I have given you all."

James Palmer, "Reminiscences," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 309.

Recalls Joseph's calm demeanor at the Dixon arrest; Joseph encouraged Palmer to have faith; one of the brethren counseled Palmer to respect the sheriff because he was a U.S. officer.

When he [i.e., Joseph Smith] was arrested at Dixon, I visited him on his way home with his brethren. He appeared calm. I extended to him my hand, he shook it cordially and said "Gird up your loins and be faithful." I asked one of the brethren to point out to me that villain, the Sheriff that had abused him. He did so, and said he is a United States officer, and must be respected

James Palmer, "Reminiscences," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 341. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.
