Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Palmer, Mrs.

(birth and death dates unavailable)

Childhood memories of the Smiths; once when she was too tired to walk home, the teenaged Joseph carried her on his shoulders; her father thought the First Vision the "sweet dream of a pure minded boy"; a local Churchman opposed Joseph; after Moroni came it was "too late" to stop Joseph.

The Spirit of the Lord remained with Joseph Smith from the time at which he received his first vision. Mrs. Palmer, a lady advanced in years came to Utah with her daughter who was a teacher in the Presbyterian schools of our State. The daughter taught in Montrose, Sevier Co., died there and is buried in the Monroe cemetery.

Mrs. Palmer's father, according to a story told by her, owned a farm near to that of the Smith family in New York. Her parents were friends of the Smith family, which, she testified was one of the best in that locality, honest, religious and industrious, but poor. The father of the family, she said, was above the average in intelligence. She had heard her parents say he bore the appearance of having descended from royalty. Mrs. Smith was called "Mother Smith" by many. Children loved to go to her home.

Mrs. Palmer said her father loved young Joseph Smith and often hired him to work with his boys. She was about six years old, she said, when he first came to their home. She remembered going into the field on an afternoon to play in the corn rows while her brothers worked. When evening came she was too tired to walk home and cried because her brothers refused to carry her. Joseph lifted her to his should and with his arm thrown across her feet to steady her and her arm about his neck he carried her to their home.

She remembered the excitement stirred up among the people over the boy's first vision, and of hearing her father content [sic] that it was only the sweet dream of a pure minded boy. She stated that one of their church leaders came to her father to remonstrate against allowing such close friendship between his family and the "Smith Boy," as he called him. He father, she said, defended his own position by saying that the boy was the best help he had ever found. He told the churchman that he always fixed the time of hoeing his large field to that when he could secure the services of Joseph Smith, because of the influence that boy had over the wild boys of the neighborhood, and explained that when these boys worked by themselves much time would be spent in arguing and quarreling which often ended in a ring fight. But when Joseph Smith worked with them the work went steadily forward, and he got the full worth of the wages he paid. She remembered the churchman saying in a very solemn and impressive tone that the very influence the boy carried was the danger they feared for the coming generation, that not only the young man, but all who came in contact with him would follow him, and he must be put down.

Not until Joseph had a second vision and began to write a book which drew many of the best and brightest people of the churches away from them, did her parents come to a realization of the fact that their friend, the churchman had told them the truth. Then her family cut of their friendship for all the Smiths, for all the family followed Joseph. Even the father, intelligent man that he was, could not discern the evil he was helping to promote. Her parents then lent all the aid they could in helping to crush Joseph Smith; but it was too late, He had run his course too long. He could not be put down. Mrs. Palmer recognized the picture of Joseph Smith placed among other pictures as a test, and said of him that there was never a truer, purer, nobler boy than he before he was led away by superstition.

"Stories from Notebook of Martha Cox, Grandmother of Fern Cox Anderson," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: An early resident of Palmyra, Mrs. Palmer later moved with her daughter to Monroe, Sevier County, Utah.
