Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Parker, John Davis

(November 22, 1799-February 27, 1891)

Davis's affidavit certifies that Shadrach Round and Josiah Arnold thwarted the attempt of a mob led by William Law to kidnap the Prophet from his home in Nauvoo.

Salt Lake City Sept. 3rd, 1880

I hereby certify that Shadrach Roundy and Josiah Arnold were the two police detailed for duty as guard's at the Prophet Joseph Smith's Residence at Nauvoo, Hancock Co., Illinois, the night that William Law with forty men, went to kidnap the Prophet, their excuse being to see the mummies.

Josiah Arnold was on duty at the gate. Shadrach Roundy was taking a survey of the grounds, hearing voices he repaired to the gate and found a body of men headed by William Law trying to gain admission four or five having forced their way in, despite Bro. Arnold's refusing to admit them, Bro. Roundy with a hickory cane forced them back and with Bro. Arnold told them that if they gained admission, it would be over their dead bodies.

William Law asked if they knew who they were talking too: they told him yes they knew him too well.

Some years after hearing that Daniel Carns was accredited with what Bro's Roundy and Arnold did on that memorable occasion. I went to Daniel Carn's and spoke to him thinking he would go ahead and have the mistake corrected, but he refused to do anything in the matter.

In bearing this testimony I do it that history may be correct, and that the names of two, worthy men may be honored as they justly deserve. I was an eye witness.

(Signed) John D. Parker

We certify that the above statement is truthful, and correct as we heard our father Shadrach Roundy relate the circumstance the next morning and many times since.

(Signed) Almeda Sophia Parker

(Signed) Samantha Parker

The foregoing affidavits of John D. Parker, Almeda Sophia Parker and Samantha Parker were subscribed and sworn to before me this third day of Sept. A. D. 1880. As witness my hand and Official seal at my Office in Salt Lake City the day and year aforesaid

(Signed) W. W. Clayton

Notary Public

"Affidavit, Sept. 3, 1880," LDS Church Archives.
