Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Patten, George

(October 26, 1828-February 16, 1914)

Often heard Joseph preach; present when Brigham Young was transfigured.

My mother died when I was six years old. Two years later, I was put out on a farm in the State of Delaware, sixty miles south of Philadelphia, with one of my father's cousins. There I lived till the fall of 1842, receiving in the meantime two months' schooling yearly for several years. In the fall of 1842 we removed to Nauvoo, Illinois, where I attended school the following winter. During the summer of 1843 I worked in the Temple stone quarry at Nauvoo; later I learned stone cutting under Jerome Kompton [Kempton]. I also became acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith and often heard him preach. I was present at the grand meeting held in Nauvoo on August 8, 1844, when Brigham Young was accepted as the leader of the Church, and I, together with so many others present on that occasion, received a strong testimony as to who it was the Lord had appointed to lead his people and upon whom the mantle of the Prophet Joseph had fallen.

"Patten, George," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 2:157.

Knew Joseph and heard him preach; saw the bodies of the martyred Prophet and patriarch; saw the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

I was accuainted with the Prophet Joseph & heard him preach often & Played with his son young Joseph. I saw the Prophet & Br. Hiram as they lay corps in the Prophet's Mansion. I was at the meeting when the spirit of the Prophet Rested on President Brigham Young & can say of a truth it was one of the strongest Testimonies of the truth of this work I Ever Had & the People that ware Present saw whare the Leader was their was great confusion as to who should head the Church as the song says The mantel which our Joseph wore was sought for by a Half a score, but God he knew the very man therefore it fell on Brigham Young.

"A Short Sketch of the Life of Geo[rge] Patten," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: Patten was the son of William Cornwell Patten, "and as long as I can find out a cousin of David Patten." This is a handwritten account.

Heard Joseph preach; saw transfiguration of Brigham Young.

"During the summer of 1843 I worked in the Temple stone quarry at Nauvoo; later I learned stone cutting under Jerome Kempton. I also became acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith and often heard him preach. I was present at the grand meeting held in Nauvoo Aug. 8, 1844, when Brigham Young was accepted as the leader of the Church, and I, together with so many others on that occasion, received a strong testimony as to who it was the Lord appointed to lead his people and upon whom the mantel of the Prophet Joseph had fallen."

George Patten, "Statement," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
