Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Bigler, Henry W.

(August 28, 1815-November 24, 1900)

In correcting Erastus Snow, Joseph explained Daniel's imagery of the stone cut out of the mountain without hands; Bigler tells of his first meeting and impressions of Joseph, of Joseph's instructions to make short prayers and sermons and avoid mysteries; elders to preach repentance and baptism.

The first Sunday after I reached Far West, I went to meeting with the hopes of hearing the Prophet. How disappointed I was when he called to the stand a beardless boy (Erastus Snow). But I soon found there was preach in him. When he finished, the Prophet got up and complimented the young man, but said: "I will correct the idea in regard to the little stone rolling forth, as foretold in Daniel, chapter 2. This is not so. It is stationary, like a grind stone, and revolves. (He made a motion with his hands showing how it turned.) When the Elders go abroad to preach the gospel, and the people become believers in the Book of Mormon and are baptized, they are added to the little stone. Thus, they are gathered around it so that it grows larger and larger until it begins to pinch the toes of the image, and finally breaks it into pieces to be carried away like the chaff of a summer's threshing, while the stone will keep growing until it fills the whole earth.

I believed he was a man of God, had seen angels and conversed with them, yea, more; he had seen the Father and the Son, and was told there was not a true church on earth; and my testimony today is, Joseph Smith was a true Prophet of God, and died a martyr, as also his brother Hyrum.

. . . Speaking about praying to our Father in Heaven, I once heard Joseph Smith remark, "Be plain and simple and ask for what you want, just like you would go to a neighbor and say, I want to borrow your horse to go to the mill." I heard him say to some elders going on missions, "Make short prayers and short sermons, and let mysteries alone. Preach nothing but repentance and baptism for the remission of sins, for that was all John the Baptist preached."

Henry W. Bigler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 5 (1 March 1892): 151-52.
