Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Peart, Jacob Haldon

(July 1, 1835-January 28, 1914)

When sick as a child he was healed by the Prophet; later remembers the bodies of the Prophet and Patriarch.

Five weeks after their arrival [in Nauvoo, about mid-May, 1841] the mother died, and her four daughters soon followed her. Her son Jacob was sick at the same time, but was healed by the power of faith, under the administration of the Prophet Joseph Smith. When eight years of age, seeing some Elders baptizing in the Mississippi river, he asked to be baptized. . . .

Among his personal reminiscences is the sight he had of the murdered Prophet and Patriarch, when their bodies were brought from Carthage to Nauvoo, and lay in state at the Mansion House. Says he: "I stood on Mulholland St. and saw them pass. Many of the people were in tears, and some wept aloud. It was feared that mobs would attack the city, and my father spent many nights on guard, with others of the brethren."

"Jacob Peart," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:383.

A Nauvoo neighbor of Joseph. Once, when sick, Joseph administered to him and he was healed; he saw Indians do a war dance for Joseph, whom he also saw in uniform leading Nauvoo Legion. He heard Joseph preach many times; he saw Hyrum and Joseph lie in state.

In the year 1841 we emigrated to America [from England]. After nine weeks on the ocean we landed at New Orleans, then went up the Mississippi river to Nauvoo. Lived neighbor to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Here my mother and four sisters died. I was very sick, but was administered to by the Prophet and restored to health. I was present when a number of Indians visited the Prophet and gave a war dance on the lawn. I was also present when the Nauvoo Legion were on parade, General Joseph Smith in uniform riding a beautiful grey horse called Joe Duncan.

In the grove near the Temple I have heard the Prophet preach many times. I loved to listen to him even when I was too young to understand.

I was standing on the Mull-Halland street when the bodies of the Prophet Joseph and Hyrum were brought in from Carthage after the martyrdom. Many of the Saints were weeping aloud. Next day I went down to the Mansion House and viewed the remains, as they lay in State.

Peter Maughan, John Sanders and Father had just returned from Rock Island where they had been sent to locate coal. The "Maid of Iowa," a steam boat, had been chartered by the Prophet to deliver coal to the city of Nauvoo.

"History of Jacob Haldon Peart," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
