Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Phelps, William Wines

(February 17, 1792-March 6, 1872)

Phelps lived for a time with the Prophet's family. He helped compile the Doctrine and Covenants, contributed to building of the Kirtland Temple, and served as a scribe in the translation of the Book of Abraham.

In the early part of 1835, he and his son Waterman were called to Kirtland, where they made their home with the family of the Prophet Joseph Smith and assisted a committee appointed to compile the "Book of Doctrine and Covenants." About this time, Elder Phelps subscribed $500 toward the erection of the Kirtland Temple. When the Church purchased the Egyptian mummies and papyrus from Michael H. Chandler in 1835, William W. Phelps served as one of the scribes in the translation by Joseph Smith of the "Book of Abraham."

"Letters of W. W. Phelps," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, 31 (January 1940): 26.

Prophet writes to Phelps lamenting his inability to teach the Saints in person and wishing for a future day of peace.

Bro. Wm. W. Phelps has left a little space for me to occupy and I gladly improve it. I would be glad to see the children of Zion and deliver the work of Eternal Life to them from my own mouth, but cannot this year. Nevertheless the day will come that I shall enjoy this privilege I trust; and we all shall receive an inheritance in the land of refuge, which is so much to be desired, seeing it is under the direction of the Almighty, therefore let us live faithful before the Lord and it shall be well with us. I feel for all the children of Zion and pray for them in all my prayers. Peace be multiplied unto them, redemption and favor from God, Amen. (signed) Joseph Smith Jr.

Journal History, 2 June 1835, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2.

Phelps writes of mummies and Egyptian papyrus. He notes the papyrus contained a record of Joseph and of Abraham.

The last of June, four Egyptian mummies were brought here; there were two papyrus rolls, besides some other ancient Egyptian writings with them. As no one could translate these writings, they were presented to President Smith. He soon knew what they were and said they, the "rolls of papyrus," contained the sacred record kept of Joseph in Pharaoh's court in Egypt, and the teachings of Father Abraham. God has so ordered it that these mummies and writings have been brought in the Church and the sacred writing I had just locked up in Brother Joseph's house when your letter came, so I had two consolations of good things in one day. These records of old times, when we translate and print them in a book, will make a good witness for the Book of Mormon. There is nothing secret or hidden that shall not be revealed, and they come to the Saints. . . .

"William Phelps Letter, 19-20 July 1835," in Leah Y. Phelps, "Letters of Faith from Kirtland," in Improvement Era 45, no. 8 (August 1942): 529.

Tells of Joseph's last dream in which he saw that with Hyrum and Samuel he returns to the presence of God, while his enemies, William and Wilson Law, are destroyed.

In June 1844 when Joseph Smith went to Carthage and delivered himself up to Gov. Ford I accompanied him and while on the way thither he related to me and his Brother Hyrum the following dream. He said while I was at Jordans in Iowa the other night I dreamed that myself and my brother Hyrum went on board a large steamboat lying in a small bay near the great Ocean shortly after we went on board their was an alarm of fire and I discovered that the boat had been anchored some distance from the shore out in the bay and that an escape frome [sic] the fire in the confusion appeared hazardous but as delay was folly I and Hyrum jumped over board and tried our faith at walking upon the water at first we sank in the water nearly to our knees but as we proceeded we increased in faith and were soon able to walk upon the water looking towards the burning boat in the East we saw that it was drifting towards the wharf and the town with a great flame and clouds of smoke and as if by whirlwind the town was taking fire too so that the scene of destruction and horrors of the frightened inhabitants was terrible we proceeded on the bosom of the Mighty deep and were soon out of sight of land the ocen was still the rays of the sun were bright and we forgot all the troubles of our Mother Earth just at that moment I heard the sound of a human voice and turning round saw my Bro Samuel H. aproching [sic] towards us from the East we stoped [sic] and he came up after a moment's conversation he informed me that he had bin lonesome back and had made up his mind to go with me across the mighty deep we all started again and in a short time were blest with the first sight of a city whose silver steeples and towers were more beautiful than any that I had ever seen or heard of on earth. it stood as it were upon the western shore of the mighty deep we walking on and its order and glory seemed far beyond the wisdome of man while we were gazing upon the perfection of the city a small boat launched of from the port and almost as quick as thought came to us in an instant they took us on board and saluted with welcome and with music such as is not of earth the next scene on landing was more than I can describe the greetings and the music from a thousand towers and the light of God, himself at the return of three of his sons soothed my soul into quiet and joy that I felt as if I were truly in heaven I gazed upon the splendor I greeted my friends I awoke and lo it was a dream. While I meditated upon such a marvelous scene I fell asleep again and behold I stood near the shore of the burning boat and there was great consternation among the officers crew and passengers of the flaming craft as there seemed to be much amunition or powder on board the alarm was given that the fire was near the magazine and in a moment suddenly it blew up with a great noise and sank in the deep water with all on board I then turned to the country East among the bushy openings and saw William and Wilson Law endevoring to escape from the wild beasts of the forest but two lions rushed out of a thicket and devoured them I awoke again. I will say that Joseph never told this dream again, as he was martyred about two days after. I relate from recollection as nearly as I can.

[Signed] Phelps

William W. Phelps, "Joseph Smith's Last Dream," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
