Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Phillips, Edward

(April 2, 1813-December 1, 1896)

Saw transfiguration of Brigham Young; a drunken mob prank with an eight-year-old boy almost lead to Phillips being killed.

I knew then and also now that Joseph was a true prophet of God, and that the mantle of Joseph fell on Brigham Young who was his legal successor.

I was present at the meeting when this took place and heard with my own ears and saw with my own eyes. We all thought Joseph had come back to us although we knew he was in his grave. I was standing by the temple talking to Brother Woodruff and he pointed out a spot to me on the opposite side of the river about a mile and a half above Montrose, and said there would be a city and a temple built there and the place would be called Zarahemla. I was at Nauvoo when the temple, was finished and dedicated. I went up into the tower and wrote my name there. As I understand that the wicked have burned the temple to the ground and it is all destroyed like the Jerusalem temple. But I expect to see that temple re-enacted and the one built on the opposite side to match.

Before leaving Nauvoo in 1849 (for that was the time that we were driven far away) I went to McDonald's near McAween's Hill to try to sell my little farm. There I found a few of Joseph and Hyrum's murderers drinking together. One of them was "Old Tom Dickson," of Locus Grove, and an old professed friend of mine. If it had not been for him, I expect they would have butchered me also for they placed a pistol in the hands of a little boy about eight years of age, and told him to say "Damn you Sir, I could Kill you." The little fellow swung his revolver and acted bravely over the affair.

[The above Sketch was written by Sylvia Phillips the 14 year old grand daughter of Edward Phillips, as he dictated it to her in the year 1889. A conclusion to the history was then written by the daughter of Edward Phillips, Hannah M. Phillips Layton.]

Sylvia Phillips, "Biographical Sketch of Edward Phillips, Written by Sylvia Phillips in 1889 from Dictation," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2.

Heard Joseph's last speech to the Nauvoo Legion; witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young; tells of being accosted by the mobbers who murdered the Prophet.

Mr. Phillips was a member of the Nauvoo Legion, and was under arms with his comrades when the Prophet, lieutenant-general, reviewed them for the last time, and told them he would die for them: a prediction fulfilled a few days later. It was near his home that the martyrs Joseph and Hyrum were buried, after the bodies were brought from Carthage. Mr. Phillips was an eye-witness of the famous incident in which "the mantle" of the Prophet fell upon President Young. Just before leaving Nauvoo he went to the house of a man named McDonald, near McQueen's mill, to try and sell his little farm. "There," says he, "I found some of Joseph and Hyrum's murderers, drinking together. One of them was Tom Dickson, who lived at Lucas Grove, in Hancock County, an old professed friend of mine. If it had not been for him I guess I would have been butchered too; they placed a pistol in the hands of an eight year old boy and told him to say 'D___n you, sir, I could kill you.' The little fellow swung his revolver and acted quite bravely over the affair."

"Edward Phillips," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:385-86.
