Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Phillips, Hannah Simmonds

(b. January 24, 1824)

Story of a mother keeping the bonnet of a daughter who had left England to join the Church; Hannah's mother saw the transfiguration of Brigham Young; her father was almost killed by a drunken mob's prank.

Hannah Simmonds was born Jan. 24, 1824 at Dymock, Glouscestershire, England, the daughter of John and Sarah Bryan Simmonds. She was part of the group Wilford Woodruff baptized of the United Brethren; he baptized 600 of them. Then:

"Mother left her home in England in June 1841 to cast her lot with the Latter Day Saints. She went in company with Benjamin Hill and his wife. She was seventeen years old and her mother gave her consent for mother to come to America because she was entrusted to the guardianship of Mrs. Hill, who had no children of her own, but she loved mother as though she had been her own. Rebecca didn't leave England until a few years later. Mother left her bonnet hanging on a peg in the hall at the foot of the stairs. She had intended to take it to America, but didn't. Her mother refused to have it moved and used to look at it and cry about mother leaving them.

" . . . Father and Mother were personally acquainted with the prophet Joseph Smith and his brother, Hyrum. I've heard them tell how they loved them. They said they would have died gladly for the prophet if they could have done so, to save his life. Mother went with father to see the window and well curb, where Joseph Smith jumped out when he was shot. They mourned his loss, as did all the saints, and felt like lost sheep without a shepherd. They knew them and testified all their lives that Joseph Smith was a true prophet of God. Mother was present at the meeting when the mantel of Joseph Smith fell on Brigham Young and she said she was convinced beyond a doubt that he was the successor of Joseph Smith chosen of God. She said his voice sounded like the voice of the prophet and he even looked like him. They had thought the prophet had come back to them, although they knew he was dead.

" . . . Before leaving Nauvoo, when they were driven away by mobs in 1846, father went to McDonald's near McQueen's Hill to try to sell his little farm. There he found a few of Joseph's and Hyrum's murderers drinking and swearing. He narrowly escaped death as they placed a gun in the hands of an eight year old boy and told him to shoot."

Hannah Maria Phillips Layton, "Brief Sketch of the Life of Hannah Simmonds Phillips," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
