Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Phippen, James Worthington

(October 12, 1819-December 3, 1908)

Assessment of Joseph's character and appearance.

I was favorably impressed with his noble mien, his stately form and his pleasant, smiling face and cheerful conversation.

James W. Phippen, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 1 (1 January 1892): 24.

Often heard Joseph preach; saw Joseph heal many that were sick upon his return from Washington, D. C.; heard Joseph preach on the resurrection; saw Joseph baptizing for the dead on the day the 600 ordinances were performed; heard Joseph preach on the plurality of wives; heard Joseph say that he had given the Twelve all the keys; also remembers Joseph's playful sporting activities with others.

The first time that I saw Joseph Smith was June, 1839, near the Mississippi River at Commerce, Illinois. After this I saw him often and heard him preach at the Sunday meetings which were held at different places in the grove, as at that time there were no meeting houses, or houses where the Saints could gather.

About this time there were many sick, the Saints having been exposed to great hardships in leaving Missouri. The Prophet was full of sympathy for the sick, and in the majesty of his authority he went forth rebuking the destroyer, laying hands on the sick and healing them. I knew many who were healed.

I saw him when he returned from Washington, where he and others went to learn what could be done for the Saints that were driven from Missouri. The account he gave of his travels to Washington and what transpired there was very interesting. At meetings I have had great satisfaction in hearing him explain the scriptures; in listening to his great sermons on the resurrection and the vicarious work that would be done for our relatives, who had died without receiving the gospel. So anxious were the Saints to do something for their kindred that they could not wait for the temple to be finished, and thousands were baptized in the river and other places. I saw the Prophet and others baptize 600 one day in the Mississippi River.

I heard him speak on the marriage covenant for time and eternity, and on one occasion he remarked that Abraham and Jacob, Prophets and men of God, were given the privilege of having more wives than one at the same time, and he said"would it be wrong for good men to have more than one wife at the same time in our day?" This occurred about the time the revelation was written on celestial marriage, or the eternity of the marriage covenant.

I was in a meeting when the Prophet said to the Twelve that he rolled the responsibility of building up the Church in all the world upon them; and that they had the same authority with all the keys and qualifications that he had.

I have seen him on the playground with "the boys," as he called them, ball playing, wrestling, jumping, and helping to roll up logs on buildings for the widows. I have seen him in public and in private talking with the Saints on various occasions, so kind, so charitable, a prophet in very deed, so noble in appearance. He loved the Saints. He was willing to suffer for them and die if necessary. Old members of the Church never tire of talking of Joseph, what he said and did. May his memory be fresh in their minds forever and with the children of the Saints.

James W. Phippen, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 540.
