Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Potter, Amasa

(January 10, 1833-March 21, 1911)

Recalls Joseph preaching, and asking Saints to pray that the impending storm be averted, and it was so; also recalls Joseph promising him that he would be delivered from trouble if he would think about Joseph, and it was so.

In the year 1842 we reached Nauvoo City where the Saints were building up a fine city on the banks of the Mississippi River. My parents settled here and here I became acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith and heard him preach many times and have heard him prophesy and have lived to see it fulfilled and know that he was a great friend of God and the day will come when all future generations will rise up and call him blessed. I remember Joseph Smith as a General at the head of the Nauvoo Legion, giving command and it seemed to me that he was the finest and most portly looking man that I ever see or ever have seen since I remember him once when he preached in the grove west of the temple and a terrible storm came up and large hail stones and rain did fall and the people commenced to leave their seats to run for shelter. Joseph called to them to sit down and to let their prayers ascend to Almighty God that he will stay the winds and storm and it shall be so, and the people done as they were told and the storm stopped and winds abated and all became a calm and the Prophett spoke one hour and half with out another gust (?) of rain. We could see the wind and rain on either side of us falling thick and fast this was a great evidence to all present that Joseph was a man of God and had power with the elements when needed.

I remember him one time calling me to him and took me by the hand and said "God bless you my little man, you have a great work to perform in the earth and when you are in trouble think upon me and you will be delivered. I will here say that I have been in very close places and when my life has hung by a thread I have thought upon the Prophet and have been delivered.

"Reminiscences and Journal of Amasa Potter, Jan. 1857Jan. 1910," Microfilm of holograph, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling and grammar have been modernized.

Tells of the thrill of first meeting Joseph; says it felt "like a current of electricity."

In the year 1842 I was moving with my parents from Indiana to Nauvoo, Illinois, and one bright sunny day as we came within three miles of that city we met a buggy with two men in it. The buggy turned out of the road and stopped.

My father was driving our team, and he stopped the horses. The man in the buggy asked if we were moving to Nauvoo. Father replied that we were.

The gentleman in the buggy said, "No doubt you have heard of Joseph Smith the Prophet."

Mother then answered, "We have come five hundred miles to see him."

"I am that man," replied the person in the buggy who acted as spokesman, and then called us all up to the side of the buggy and shook hands with us, and gave father some instructions about where to go to purchase some land, and to settle near the city.

But one thing I remember was, when the Prophet took hold of my hand and said to me, "May God bless you, my little man," I felt a thrill through my whole body like a current of electricity, and I can say that the recollections of my feelings on that occasion have followed me through life, and when dangers on sea and land threatened my destruction, I have thought of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and all perils have been removed from me.

Amasa Potter, "A Reminiscence of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 29, no. 4 (15 February 1894): 131-32.

Joseph speaks on spiritual gifts; he then reads in German to show the exercise of one of his gifts.

I remember the Prophet arising to preach to a large congregation in the grove west of the Temple in Nauvoo. He stated that he would preach on spiritual gifts, as he said his Heavenly Father had given him power or a gift of other language. He took a large Bible that was on the stand, and read from Paul on spiritual gifts about half the chapter; and then said that we would exercise his gift and would read the same in German, so he read it and then asked the congregation if there were any that understood what he read, and two Germans arose in the congregation and said that it was read correctly. Then Joseph stated that every Latter-day Saint had a gift, and by living a righteous life, and asking for it, the Holy Spirit would reveal it to him or her.

Amasa Potter, "A Reminiscence of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 29, no. 4 (15 February 1894): 132.

While the Prophet is preaching the King Follett discourse, a storm comes, which is diverted by the exercise of faith.

I recollect the Prophet arising to speak at another time in the grove in Nauvoo. I think it was on the occasion of the funeral of Elder King Follett, who was crushed to death in a well. The subject of baptism for the dead was dwelt upon, and when he had spoken about thirty minutes there came up a heavy wind and storm. The dust was so dense that we could not see each other any distance, and some of the people were leaving when Joseph called out to them to stop and let their prayers ascend to Almighty God that the winds may cease blowing and the rain stop falling, and it should be so. In a very few minutes the winds and rain ceased and the elements became calm as summer's morning. The storm divided and went on the north and south of the city, and we could see in the distance the trees and shrubs waving in the wind, while where we were it was quiet for one hour, and during that time one of the greatest sermons that ever fell from the Prophet's lips was preached on the great subject of the dead.

Amasa Potter, "A Reminiscence of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 29, no. 4 (15 February 1894): 132; see also "Amasa Potter Life History (Written by a Son of Amasa Potter)" and "Biographical Sketch of the Life of Amasa Potter," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Joseph promises Potter deliverance from danger if he would but think of Joseph; also tells of the memory of Joseph on his horse leading the Nauvoo Legion; "even the horse seemed to sense the greatness of his mount."

[Joseph Smith] called [Amasa] to him on one occasion, taking him by the hand and said: "Young man, you have a great mission to perform and when you are in danger think upon me and you will be delivered," and he could testify that prediction had been fulfilled many times, when his life hung on a thread as it were, it thrilled him to see the Prophet riding on his beautiful white horse at the head of the Nauvoo Legion, giving commands as their General, he seemed so kingly and noble. Even the horse seemed to sense the greatness of his mount.

"Amasa Potter Life History (Written by a Son of Amasa Potter)," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
