Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Pratt, Orson

(September 19, 1811-October 3, 1881)

Orson tells of going to see Joseph who inquired of the Lord for Orson and received a revelation on his behalf (Doctrine and Covenants 34).

In October, 1830, I traveled westward over two hundred miles to see Joseph Smith, the Prophet. I found him in Fayette, Seneca County, New York, residing at the house of Mr. Whitmer. I soon became intimately acquainted with this good man, and also with the witnesses of the Book of Mormon. By my request, on the 4th of November, the Prophet Joseph inquired of the Lord for me, and received the revelation published in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 1vi (now Section 34.)

Elden J. Watson, comp., The Orson Pratt Journals (Salt Lake City: Elden Jay Watson, Publisher, 1975), 9.

Pratt boards at the Prophet's home while attending the school of the Prophets.

February 18 [1833]. Washed my hands and feet as a testimony unto the Lord that I had warned this wicked generation, and that my garments were clean of their blood, and on the same day I was admitted into the School of the Prophets. During my attendance at this school, I boarded with the Prophet Joseph [Smith], from whom I received much good instruction. On the Sabbath days I continued preaching in various places.

Elden J. Watson, comp., The Orson Pratt Journals (Salt Lake City: Elden Jay Watson, Publisher, 1975), 16.

Anticipating the Saints westward trek, Joseph proposed sending advance parties.

Previous to [the laying of the cornerstone of the temple in Far West] . . . Joseph had this mission [of crossing the plains] in contemplation. Whenever Joseph spoke on that subject he proposed to send a company of young men as pioneers to seek a location and raise a crop previous to sending families.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1846-1847 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Eldon J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 142.

Note: Pratt said the above quotation April 26, 1846.

Orson Pratt writes to his brother Parley reminding him of a vision in which Joseph Smith saw a common ancestor of the Pratts and the Smiths; that ancestor was the Reverend John Lathrop who was born in 1584.

I have published the history and genealogy of Joseph Smith as written before his death: this includes six or seven generations of his ancestry. You will recollect that Joseph had a vision and saw that our fathers and his all sprang from the same man a few generations ago. I should be pleased to trace both genealogies back to their junction, if it be possible.

"Orson Pratt to Parley P. Pratt, 1853," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, cited in Anonymous, John Lathrop (1584-1653): Reformer, Sufferer, Pilgrim, Man of God (Salt Lake City, Utah: Institute of Family Research, 1979), 33.

Names of the Father, Son, men, and angels in Adamic revealed.

There is one revelation that this people are not generally acquainted with. I think it has never been published, but probably it will be in the Church History. It is given in questions and answers. The first question is, "What is the name of God in the pure language?" The answer says "Ahman." "What is the name of the Son of God?" Answer, "Son Ahmanthe greatest of all the parts of God excepting Ahman." "What is the name of men?" "Sons Ahman," is the answer. "What is the name of angels in the pure language?" "Anglo-man."

This revelation goes on to say that Sons Ahman are the greatest of all the parts of God excepting Son Ahman and Ahman, and that Anglo-man are the greatest of all the parts of God excepting Sons Ahman, Son Ahman, and Ahman, showing that the angels are a little lower than man.

Journal of Discourses, 2:342 (February 18, 1855).

Joseph prophesied the elders were not to see angels and the face of God until their hearts were sufficiently pure.

And this makes me think of the prophecy delivered by the Prophet Joseph, concerning the Elders in this Church. They were very anxious, in the early rise of the Church, to have the angels of God come from heaven to administer to them, and to have the face of the Lord unveiled in their midst, when they were unprepared for it. By sectarianism and the traditions handed down to us by our fathers, we were not prepared to abide the presence of those holy beings who dwell in the celestial worlds. Joseph, knowing this by the Spirit of truth, arose and said to the Elders, that when the time came that they should go forth unto the house of Israel, when that day should arrive, and their hearts were sufficiently purified before the Lord, then the Lord should appear unto them, that is, in His own time, in His own way, and after His own order, and in His own place. Now this will shortly be fulfilled. Let these missionaries go forth and endure troubles like good and faithful Elders; let them bear all afflictions and trials patiently; let them not be faint-hearted when they go hungry and thirsty; and when they suffer cold, and when they are in deep distress and sore difficulties; for be assured that the time is not far distant when God will fulfill these promises that He made by the mouth of His servant Joseph the Prophet; and the face of the Lord will be unveiled.

Journal of Discourses, 2:263 (April 7, 1855).

Must exercise faith in good as well as poor times.

I heard brother Joseph, when speaking of those that were sick in Nauvoo, make remarks similar to those that I have now made. He said, that those who would not, when in good health, call upon the Lord, and acknowledge His hand in all things, and remember him, would not have faith when it was neededhe said that those individuals would have but very little faith in the days of their calamities and affliction.

Then seek to get faith and spirit sufficient to assist us in the days of our afflictions, that we may be prepared for all the vicissitudes of life. We ought to know that we are well off at the present, but all do not realize this fact.

How often I have thought of the remark made by the Prophet; nothing can be more true than that remark; it carries its own evidence with it, that those individuals who have wealth and riches in abundance, but do not remember the Lord, when troubles come, they will be in the greatest distress, generally speaking.

Journal of Discourses, 3:15 (May 20, 1855).

Years before his calling, Orson was told he would become an apostle.

In that early day the prophet Joseph said to me that the Lord had revealed that twelve men were to be chosen as Apostles. A manuscript revelation to this effect, given in 1829before the rise of this Churchwas laid before me, and I read it. Joseph said to me, although I was young, weak, inexperienced, especially in public speaking, and ignorant of many important things which we now all understand, that I should be one of this Twelve. It seemed to me a very great saying. I looked upon the Twelve Apostles who lived in ancient days with a great deal of reverenceas being almost super-human. They were, indeed, great mennot by virtue of the flesh, nor their own natural capacities, but they were great because God called them. When Joseph told me that I would be one of the Twelve, I knew all things were possible with God, but it seemed to me that I would have to be altogether changed to occupy such a great position in the Church and Kingdom of our God.

Journal of Discourses, 12:85-86 (August 11, 1867).

Revelation on plural marriage was given in 1832; it was not announced until later.

I will tell you what the Prophet Joseph said in relation to this matter [i.e plural marriage] in 1831, also in 1832, the year in which the law commanding the members of this Church to cleave to one wife only was given. Joseph was then living in Portage county, in the town of Hiram, at the house of Father John Johnson. Joseph was very intimate with that family, and they were good people at that time, and enjoyed much of the Spirit of the Lord. In the forepart of the year 1832, Joseph told individuals, then in the Church, that he had inquired of the Lord concerning the principle of plurality of wives, and he received for answer that the principle of taking more wives than one is a true principle, but the time had not yet come for it to be practiced. That was before the Church was two years old.

Journal of Discourses, 13:193 (October 7, 1869).

The Lord commanded that the Kirtland Temple be built. He even showed Joseph a vision of what the temple should look like in detail.

When we came to Kirtland the Lord gave us further commandments, and He revealed a great many things through His servant Joseph. Among others, He gave one that the Latter-day Saints in Kirtland, Ohio, should go to with their might and build a house to His name, wherein He promised to bestow great and choice blessings upon His people. He revealed the pattern according to which that house [Kirtland Temple] should be built, pointing out the various courts and apartments, telling the size of the house, the order of the pulpits, and in fact everything pertaining to it was clearly pointed out by revelation. God gave a vision of these things, not only to Joseph, but to several others, and they were strictly commanded to build according to the pattern revealed from the heavens.

Journal of Discourses, 13:357 (May 5, 1870); see also Journal of Discourses, 14:273-74.

Joseph explains why the Urim and Thummim were not needed for the New Testament translation.

He [Orson Pratt] mentioned that as Joseph used the Urim and Thummim in the translation of the Book of Mormon, he wondered why he did not use it in the translation of the New Testament. Joseph explained to him that the experience he had acquired while translating the Book of Mormon by the use of the Urim and Thummim had rendered him so well acquainted with the Spirit of Revelation and Prophecy, that in the translating of the New Testament he did not need the aid that was necessary in the first instance.

"Minutes of the School of the Prophets in Salt Lake City, January 14, 1871," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, cited in Robert J. Matthews, "The Prophet Translates the Bible by the Spirit of Revelation," in Larry C. Porter and Susan Easton Black, ed., The Prophet Joseph Smith: Essays on the Life and Mission of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1988), 183.

During the First Vision, Joseph questioned "which is the true church?"

When he was thus praying he saw a light which appeared to be approaching him from the heavens. As it came nearer it seemed to grow brighter until it settled upon the tops of the trees. He thought it would consume the leaves of the trees; but it gradually descended and rested upon him. His mind was immediately caught away. He saw in this light two glorious personages, one of whom spoke to him, pointing to the other, saying, "This is my beloved Son, hear ye him." This was a glorious vision given to this boy. When these persons interrogated him to know what he desired, he answered and said, "Lord show me which is the true church." He was then informed by one of these personages that there was no true church upon the face of the whole earth;

Journal of Discourses, 14:141 (March 19, 1871).

Joseph predicted the Saints would gather in the mountains.

Prior to the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord predicted through him that this people should be gathered out from all the nations under heaven, and should be established in the mountains, or elevated regions of this continent; and two or three years after his deathtwenty-six years ago, this coming seasonthis prediction began to be fulfilled, for in the year 1847, the pioneers made a journey of 1,400 miles from the Mississippi river, and, by the inspiration of the Spirit of the living God, they rested upon this mountainous, and then wild and desolate region.

Journal of Discourses, 16:79-80 (June 15, 1873).

Enoch and his city minister to those of a terrestrial order.

They [i.e., Enoch and his people] have been gone, as I have already stated, about five thousand years. What have they been doing? All that we know concerning this subject is what has been revealed through the great and mighty Prophet of the last days, Joseph Smiththat unlearned youth whom God raised up to bring forth the Book of Mormon and to establish this latter-day Church. He has told us that they have been ministering angels during all that time. To whom? To those of the terrestrial order, if you can understand that expression. God gave them the desires of their hearts, the same as he gave to the three Nephites, to whom he gave the privilege, according to their request, of remaining and bringing souls unto Christ while the world should stand. Even so, he granted to the people of Enoch their desire to become ministering spirits unto those of the terrestrial order until the earth should rest and they should again return to it.

Joseph inquired concerning their condition, whether they were subject to death during that period, and was informed, as you will find in the history of this Church, as printed in the Millennial Star and other publications thereof, that these personages have to pass through a change equivalent to that of death; notwithstanding their translation from the earth, a certain change has to be wrought upon them that is equivalent to death, and probably equivalent also to the resurrection of the dead.

Journal of Discourses, 17:148 (July 19, 1874).

Note: The Prophet Joseph Smith taught the doctrine that Orson Pratt attributes to him (see Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Joseph Fielding Smith, compiler [Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1976], 170), but what Orson Pratt here adds to our understanding is the clear statement that the Prophet sought the Lord on the matter and received his understanding by revelation.

In the Kirtland Temple, Joseph saw a vision of the future.

It was in that [Kirtland] temple that the visions of the Almighty were opened to our great Prophet, Seer and Revelator, Joseph Smith, wherein the future was portrayed before him, wherein keys were committed to him in relation to this great Latter-day dispensation, and the power of God was made manifest through the holy priesthood sent down from heaven.

Journal of Discourses, 18:132 (October 9, 1875).

Joseph predicts the flight of the Saints to the Rocky Mountains.

After we had again established ourselves in a new country, and built up a beautiful city, and when all was peaceful and prosperity attending us, this same Prophet, on assembling the Elders of the Church on a certain occasion at Nauvoo, told us that we would have to flee to the Rocky Mountains for safety. The fulfillment of this prediction is apparent to all. I might mention scores of others, and in no instance has that man uttered a single Prophecy that either has not already been fulfilled to the very letter, or will not have its fulfillment in the due time of the Lord.

Journal of Discourses, 18:224 (August 26, 1876).

The Lord revealed the pattern after which the Kirtland Temple was built; ordinances are revealed incrementally; Joseph washed the feet of the Twelve as a witness that they were clean.

We went to the Ohio; and after we had been sufficiently taught and instructed, the Lord commanded us through Joseph, to build a [Kirtland] temple, giving the pattern thereof, and the size thereof, the size of the inner and outer courts, the size of the several rooms and apartments, and the form of the pulpits and everything pertaining to it, was given by the inspiration of the Almighty that rested upon Joseph, and upon those associated with him.

When the temple was built, the Lord did not see proper to reveal all the ordinances of the endowments, such as we now understand. He revealed little by little. No rooms were prepared for washings; no special place prepared for the anointings, such as you understand, and such as you comprehend at that period of the history of the Church! Neither did we know the necessity of the washings, such as we now receive. It is true, our hands were washed, our faces and our feet. The Prophet Joseph was commanded to gird himself with a towel, doing this in the temple. What for? That the first elder might witness to our Father and God, that we were clean from the blood of that wicked generation, that then lived [see D&C 88:138]. We had gone forth according to our best ability, to publish glad tidings of great joy, for thousands of miles, upon this continent. After this we were called in, and this washing of hands and feet was to testify to God that we were clean from the blood of this generation. The holy anointing was placed upon the heads of his servants, but not the full development of the endowments in the anointing. These administrations in the Kirtland Temple were revealed, little by little, corresponding with what I have already been saying, that the Lord does not give the fullness at once, but imparts to us according to his own will and pleasure.

Journal of Discourses, 19:16 (May 20, 1877).

Michael Chandler was told by many that Joseph could translate ancient texts; he thus came to Kirtland and met the Prophet, who inquired of the Lord and learned that Chandler's papyrus contained writings of Abraham and Joseph; the Prophet purchased the papyrus and mummies and translated the Book of Abraham.

The Lord brought to light sacred records from the catacombs of Egypt. After several hundred men had wrought and toiled for many months in digging down one of these vast structures, they entered into its interior; they found a great number of mummiesthe bodies of persons that had been preserved since the catacomb was built, and some eleven of these mummies, well preserved, were taken out by these men, and they finally fell into the hands of a person named M. [Michael] H. Chandler. They were sent from Egypt to Ireland, where it was supposed he resided, but learning that he resided in America, they were sent to him. After receiving the mummies he began to take off some of the ancient covering or wrapping, and to his astonishment he found upon the breast of one of these mummies a record written upon ancient papyrus in plain characters, written both in black and red inks, or stains, or colors. And the mummies and the records were exhibited by Mr. Chandler, in New York, Philadelphia, and many of the Eastern States of our Union; and thousands of people saw them, and among them many learned men; and these characters were presented to them, and not infrequently was Mr. Chandler referred to "Joe" [Joseph] Smith as they used to term him, who, they said, pretended to have translated some records that he found in the western part of New York, and that if Mr. Chandler would go and see him perhaps he would translate those ancient characters.

Many of these references were made with the intention of ridiculing Mr. Smith; but it so happened that in traveling through the country, he visited Kirtland, Ohio, where the Prophet Joseph Smith resided, bringing the mummies and the ancient papyrus writings with him. Mr. C. [Chandler] had also obtained from learned men the best translation he could of some few characters, which however, was not a translation, but more in the shape of their ideas with regard to it, their acquaintance with the language not being sufficient to enable them to translate it literally. After some conversation with the Prophet Joseph, Mr. Chandler presented to him the ancient characters, asking him if he could translate them. The Prophet took them and repaired to his room and inquired of the Lord concerning them. The Lord told him they were sacred records, containing the inspired writings of Abraham when he was in Egypt, and also those of Joseph, while he was in Egypt; and they had been deposited, with these mummies, which had been exhumed. And he also inquired of the Lord concerning some few characters which Mr. Chandler, gave him by way of a test, to see if he could translate them. The Prophet Joseph translated these characters and returned them, with the translation to Mr. Chandler; and who, in comparing it with the translation of the same few characters by learned men, that he had before obtained, found the two to agree.

The Prophet Joseph having learned the value of these ancient writings was very anxious to obtain them, and expressed himself wishful to purchase them. But Mr. Chandler told him that he would not sell the writings, unless he could sell the mummies, for it would detract from the curiosity of his exhibition; Mr. Smith inquired of him the price which was a considerable sum, and finally purchased the mummies and the writing, all of which he retained in his possession for many years; and they were seen by all the church that saw proper to visit the house of the Prophet Joseph and also by hundreds of strangers.

The Prophet translated the part of these writings which, as I have said is contained in the Pearl of Great Price, and known as the Book of Abraham.

Journal of Discourses, 20:64-65 (August 25, 1878).
