Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

The Quincy Whig

(Publication Date: October 17, 1840)

Account of visiting Joseph in Nauvoo and of seeing Egyptian mummies and the papyrus of Abraham.

It was a beautiful morning towards the close of April last, when the writer of the foregoing sketch, accompanied by a friend, crossed the Mississippi River, from Montrose, to pay a visit to the Prophet. As we approached his house, we saw him ride up and alight from his beautiful horse; and handing the bridle to one of his followers in attendance, he waited in front of his gate to receive us. A number of principal men of the place soon collected around, apparently anxious to hear the words which fell from his lips. His bearing towards them was like one who has authority; and the deference which they paid him convinced us that his dominion was deeply seated in the empire of their consciences. To our minds, profound knowledge of human nature and had evidently taught him that, of all principles, the most omnipotent is the religious principle, and to govern men of certain classes, it is only necessary to control their religious sentiments.

After he had shown us the fine grounds around his dwelling, he conducted us, at our request, to an upper room, where he drew aside the curtains of a case, and showed us several Egyptian mummies, which we were told that the church had purchased, at his suggestion, some time before, for a large sum of money.

"The embalmed body that stands near the center of the case," said he, "is one of the Pharaohs, who sat on the throne of Egypt, and the female figure by it was probably one of the daughters."

"It may have been the Princess Thermutis," I replied, "the same that rescued Moses from the waters of the Nile!" (See the Works of Josephus.)

"It is not improbable," answered the Prophet, "but time has not yet allowed fully to examine and decide that point."

"Do you understand the Hebrew language?" said he, raising his hand to the top of the case, and taking down a small Hebrew grammar of Rabbi Seixas.

"That language has not altogether escaped my attention," was the reply.

He then walked to a secretary, on the opposite side of the room, and drew out several frames, covered with glass, under which were numerous fragments of Egyptian papyrus, on which, as usual, a great variety of hieroglyphical characters had been imprinted.

"These ancient records," said he, "throw great light on the subject of Christianity. They have been unrolled and preserved with great labor and care. My time has been hitherto too much taken up to translate the whole of them, but I will show you how I interpret certain parts. There," said he, pointing to a particular character, "that is the signature of the patriarch Abraham."

"It is indeed a most interesting autograph," I replied, "and doubtless the only one extant. What an ornament it would be to have these ancient manuscripts handsomely set, in appropriate frames, and hung up around the walls of the temple which you are about to erect at this place."

"Yes," replied the Prophet, "and the translation hung up with them."

Quincy (Illinois) Whig, 17 October 1840, 1. Also in Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1948), 16.
