Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Randall, Alfred

(June 13, 1811-March 21, 1891)

Randall accompanied the Prophet and Hyrum to Carthage and was one of the last to leave; he heard members of the mob swear they would see "Old Joe Smith dead" and stood next to Governor Ford when he counseled soldiers to keep their murderous intent to themselves.

I quote from the Journal History in the Historians office in Salt Lake City, where it is found, that on June 24th, 1844, Alfred Randall accompanied the Prophet Joseph Smith to Carthage Jail, and it has been stated that he was one of the last to leave the Jail. He was pushed down the narrow stairs backwards at the point of a bayonet.

He was in Carthage about 10 o'clock that night where the troops under Governor Ford were stationed in squads around the square. He was standing nearby when he heard one of them say: "I calculate to see old Joe Smith dead before I return." Several others said: "So do ISo do I, and I'll be dd if I don't" was the general comment. One fellow then spoke up and said: "I shouldn't wonder if some dd Mormon isn't hearing all we say." Another one, who stood next to Alfred said: "If I knew there was, I would run him through with my bayonet."

Alfred then wandered to another crowd and heard one say: "I guess this will be the last of Old Joe smith and his dd Mormons." He then went to Hambleton's [Hamilton] Hotel where Governor Ford was standing by the fence, and he heard a soldier tell Governor Ford: "The soldiers are determined to see Joe Smith dead before they leave here." Ford replied harshly: "If you know of any such plot, keep it to yourself."

Now Joseph and Hyrum Smith had planned to go westward in the hope of escaping persecution, but they were told: "Submit yourselves to be arrested and tried before the Magistrate." John Taylor protested, saying, that they would be murdered if they came to Carthage. But Governor Ford replied: "I pledge myself for their safety." So they returned, believing that they were under the protection of Governor Ford. Nothing could have been further from the truth. An infuriated mob filled the city, declaring that they would not leave until "Old Joe Smith" was killed.

A mob stormed the jail, and before they were dispersed, Joseph and his brother Hyrum had been murdered. Two days later, on June 29th, 1844, the bodies of the two men lay in state at the Mansion House, and from 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. a steady stream of mourners filed past the twin biers. Many and varied were the thoughts of the crowd as they took the last look at their leaders. What was now in store for this band of religious people of which Alfred Randall was a member?

"My Grandfather Alfred Randall," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
