Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Black, Edward L.

(June 11, 1868-June 27, 1954)

Assigned as bodyguard to protect the Prophet; when mob general came to assault Joseph, Black sent the mobster to talk to the Prophet; whatever Joseph said or did caused the mobster to cry.

Now, a few words about Father [i.e., George Black] before coming to the valleys. He was a trusted bodyguard of the Prophet Joseph when 18 years old. He was put to various tests and came through with flying colors. No man ever lived who loved Joseph Smith better than Father unless he had a greater capacity given him from the Lord to love. At one time a mob general had his army assembled across the river from Nauvoo with the intention of exterminating the Mormons unless they left at once, so he decided to be sporty and serve notice on Joseph in person. Some way the Prophet got wise to this. The Prophet knew the general would come through a certain land to come to the city, so he selected 6 men and gave them all the same counsel, which was, "Boys, don't let him come into the city except as a prisoner." So the Prophet placed two of the men at the end of the lane where the general would enter the lane, one on either side of the road, each with a gun. At the middle way of the lane were two more men. At the end of the lane next to the city the Prophet placed Uncle Robert Barrow and Father. The general rode a fine white horse. He had selected 6 men to go with him, all well mounted. After riding off the boat on the Nauvoo side, they rode casually along until they got near the first two guards. The captain discovered what was in the wind, and he gave the order to charge, and just before he got to the guard they stopped out in the road, threw their guns down on him and ordered him to halt. He turned quick in his saddle and screamed to his men, "Come on boy." By this time they were past the first guard. He did the same with the second guard. Uncle Robert said, "George, the son of B has passed all the other boys and he is coming like hell." Father said, "Don't worry, he will stop when he gets here or I'll pick him off that horse, and I'll come close to getting all his men before they know where they are at if they offer resistance." Father gave the order, and the captain nearly pulled his horse over backwards trying to stop. Father walked up to him and said, "Captain, you are my prisoner. Throw the reins over your horse's head," which order was promptly obeyed. "Now unbuckle those six-shooters, as well as that saber. Give them to me." Father buckled that paraphernalia around himself, picked up the reins, and told the captain to tell his men to follow, which they did. Uncle Robert and father lead the captain to the Prophet's office. Father said, "Captain, get down from your horse, go in that office, and talk to a prophet of God. I will entertain your men." He sure entertained them. He told them what a bunch of cowards they were and what God had in store for them if they did not repent of their sins and cease trying to take the lives of God's other children who had just as much right to serve God according to the dictates of their own conscience as any people who ever graced the earth. After Father had lectured to those fellows about an hour, the captain came out of the office. It was very plain he had been crying. Father gave him his guns and saber. He went back across the river and dispersed his army. Next day it was learned that one of his men asked him how it was he passed the first two sets of guards and stopped at the last set. His reply was, "I saw shoot in that fellow's eye, and if I had disobeyed his order he would have shot hell right out of me."

"Life Story of Edward L. Black the son of George Black who was the son of William Y. Black and Jane Johnson as written by Himself," 16-17; copies in private family possession.
