Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Remington, Lydia Ripley Badger

(March 16, 1831-May 9, 1906)

As little girl she attended school in the upper rooms of the Kirtland Temple; Father Smith showed her the mummies; she knew the Smiths; her brother lived with Hyrum's family and drove Hyrum's carriage team to Missouri; she was present at the laying of the cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple; she saw Joseph at the head of the Nauvoo Legion that day; her brother worked for Joseph.

Lydia Ripley Badger Remington was born March 16th 1831 at Charleston Orleans Co. Vermont. She was the daughter of John Badger and Lydia Chamberlain Badger. Her parents received the Gospel and were baptized in 1832. [She] Gathered with the Saints at Kirtland in 1836. While there she attended meetings with her parents in the Kirtland Temple. She also attended school in the upper story of that building. While at Kirtland she with her parents went to visit father Smith the 1st patriarch to view the mummies and ancient records in his care. Her father and mother received their patriarchal blessings from him while in Kirtland. They became well acquainted with the Smith family. The oldest son Rodney Badger having lived with Hyrum Smith's family. He drove Hyrum Smith's carriage team to Missouri. The families formed acquaintences [sic] which continue to this day. John C. Badger her younger brother lived with William Smith, and went with him to Far West. While living in Far West her father and Rodney were called out to help protect the saints in the winter. The mob came into town and called on the saints to bring their arms to the public square and stack them, which they did. While this was transpiring some of the mob armed went around through the suburbs in parties of two and three terrorizing the women and children. They were forced to leave Missouri with the saints in the winter of 38 and 39. They went to Commerce afterwards Nauvoo Illinois. They were obliged to cross the Mississippi river to Montrose to get a place of shelter for the mother who was very sick. Where Lydia was baptized in the Spring of 1840 by her father, who died the next fall of lung fever occasioned by exposure. She saw the prophet Joseph many times and heard him preach at Nauvoo in the Bowery and other places. She was present at the laying of the cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple and saw the prophet at the head of the Nauvoo Legion that day. Rodney her oldest brother worked for the Prophet at Nauvoo. Her mother died in 1844 in the fall after the prophet's martyrdom.

In 1846 Lydia R. Badger started west with the Saints.

"Life Sketch of Mrs. Lydia R. Badger Remington," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-4.
