Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Reynolds, George

(January 1, 1842-August 9, 1909)

Quotes Joseph as saying Lehi and his colony landed near Valparaiso, Chile.

After many days (we do not know how long) [Lehi's] vessel with its precious freight reached the shores of this continent, at a place, we are told by the Prophet Joseph Smith, near where the city of Valparaiso now stands. . . .

The course taken by Lehi and his people has been revealed with some detail. We are told by the Prophet Joseph Smith that Lehi and his company traveled in nearly a south-south-east direction until they came to the nineteenth degree of north latitude; then, nearly east to the sea of Arabia; then sailed in a southeast direction, and landed on the continent of South America, in Chile, thirty degrees south latitude.

This voyage would have taken them across the Indian and South Pacific oceans.

George Reynolds, "Lessons from the Life of Nephi," Juvenile Instructor 26, no. 15 (1 August 1891): 476-77.

Note: Reynolds gives no more information than that provided above as to when Joseph made the remarks he quotes. In the Times and Seasons, which were "edited, printed and published . . . by Joseph Smith" (see, e.g., Times and Seasons, 3:926) Joseph said (or approved as editor the writing of another who said) that "Lehi went down by the Red Sea to the great Southern Ocean i.e. the Indian Ocean, and crossed over to this land, and landed a little south of the Isthmus of Darien i.e. where we have now located the Panama Canal" (Times and Seasons, 3:921). Joseph Fielding Smith had such confidence that the editorial stating Lehi landed "a little south of the Isthmus of Darien" was written by the Prophet Joseph Smith that he included it in The Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (see pp. 266-67). In a follow-up article to that written about Lehi's landing, Joseph Smith adds that it is almost a certainty that the city of Zarahemla was located in what is present day Guatemala (See: "Zarahemla," Times and Seasons 3, no. 23 [1 October 1842]: 927). On page 135 of the Bernhisel Manuscript of the JST, the following statement appears without any other comment: "The course that Lehi travelled [sic] from the city of Jerusalem to the place where he and his family took ship. They travelled [sic] nearly a south south East direction until they came to the nineteenth degree north Latitude then nearly East to the sea of Arabia then sailed in a south east direction and landed on the continent of South American [sic] in Chile thirty degrees south latitute. [sic]" (Cited in Robert J. Matthews, A Plainer Translation [Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1975], 122). Ezra G. Williams, the son of Frederick G. Williams, records in his journal the above statement about Lehi's travels, but says that it was a revelation given to Frederick G. Williams at the Kirtland Temple dedication, and that it was erroneously attributed to Joseph Smith (see "Notes on the Life of Frederick G. Williams, One Time Counselor to the Prophet Joseph Smith," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah).

Mahonri Moriancumer is the name of the brother of Jared.

While residing in Kirtland, Elder Reynolds Cahoon had a son born to him. One day when President Joseph Smith was passing his door he called the Prophet in and asked him to bless and name the baby. Joseph did so and gave the boy the name of Mahonri Moriancumer. When he had finished the blessing, he laid the child on the bed, and turning to Elder Cahoon he said, "the name I have given your son is the name of the Brother of Jared; the Lord has just shown (or revealed) it to me." Elder William F. Cahoon, who was standing near, heard the Prophet make this statement to his father; and this was the first time the name of the Brother of Jared was known in the Church in this dispensation.

"The Jaredites, Part II," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 9 (1 May 1892): 282; also cited in Improvement Era 8, no. 9 (July 1905): 704-5.
