Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Reynolds, John

(February 26, 1788-May 8, 1865)

As a U. S. Congressman Reynolds introduced Joseph Smith to President Martin Van Buren; Joseph insisted he be called a "Latter-Day Saint"; his petition for redress of grievances against the Saints was denied by the U. S. Senate.

When the prophet reached the city of Washington, he desired to be presented to President Van Buren.

I had received letters, as well as the other Democratic members of congress, that Smith was a very important character in Illinois, and to give him the civilities and attention that was due him. He stood at the time fair and honorable, as far as we knew at the city of Washington, except for his fanaticism on religion. The sympathies of the people were in his favor.

It fell my lot to introduce him to the President, and one morning the prophet Smith and I called at the white house to see the chief magistrate. When we were about to enter the apartment of Mr. Van Buren, the prophet asked me to introduce him as a "Latter-Day Saint." It was so unexpected and so strange to me, the "Latter-Day Saints," that I could scarcely believe he would urge such nonsense on this occasion to the President. But he repeated the request, when I asked him if I understood him. I introduced him as a "Latter-Day Saint," which made the President smile.

Smith, the prophet, remained in Washington a great part of the winter, and preached often in the city. I became well acquainted with him. He was a person rather larger than ordinary statue, well proportioned, and would weigh, I presume, about one hundred and eighty pounds. He was rather fleshy, but was in his appearance amiable and benevolent. He did not appear to possess any harshness or barbarity in his composition, nor did he appear to possess that great talent and boundless mind that would enable him to accomplish the wonders he performed.

His claim for damages done to the Mormons in Missouri, was submitted to the Senate, and both the senators of Missouri, Messrs. Benton and Lynn, attacked his petition with such force and violence that it could obtain scarcely a decent burial. Smith returned to the State of Illinois a red-hot Whig.

John Reynolds, My Own Times (Chicago, Ill.: Chicago Historical Society, Fergus Printing Company, 1879), 367.
