Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Rich, Ben E.

(November 7, 1855-September 13, 1913)

Correspondence between Ben E. Rich and Heman C. Smith clarifying the fact that on his way to Carthage Joseph was not under control of officers of the State, but went of his own volition; Joseph also leaned down and kissed the child Sarah J. Miller, daughter of Charles C. Rich.

Lamoni, Iowa, Nov. 24, 1906

President Ben E. Rich,

Dear sir: In the Nauvoo Rustler for Nov. 20th I see an account of your visit to Nauvoo accompanied by your sister, Mrs. Sarah J. Miller. The Rustler speaking of Joseph Smith kissing your sister while on his way to Carthage, says: "Officers were taking Joseph and Hyrum up Mulholland street to Carthage when Mrs. Miller, then a child, was standing in front of her home," etc. I think there is an important point in this to all who believe in the prophetic calling of Joseph Smith. Our information gathered from all that we have read is that no officers were in charge of him but that he and Hyrum, with others, went to Carthage voluntarily and delivered themselves up there. I wish that you would call your sister's attention to this that the impression may not obtain that Joseph was arrested and taken against his will to Carthage.

I think your sister's memory is at fault or the Rustler has unintentionally misrepresented her. From my personal acquaintance with the editor of the Rustler I am sure that he would not intentionally misrepresent her, but may have misunderstood her.

What about the story of your sister driving the team that drew the cannon from Nauvoo to Salt Lake Valley?

Is it a fact that the cannon used in the Nauvoo Battle was taken to Salt Lake?

A word from you or your sister or both on these points would be appreciated. I thought of writing the Rustler and calling attention to the mistake, but have chosen this way as the fairer to Mrs. Miller, and hope she will appreciate it as intended.

Respectfully,

(Signed) Heman C. Smith

Nashville, Tenn. November, 20, 1906

Elder Heman C. Smith, Historian

Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of L.D.S.

Lamoni, Iowa

My dear Sir:

Your kind favor of the 24th inst., was forwarded to me at this place, where I am holding conference. My sister, Mrs. Miller, who is at Chattanooga, sent me a letter along with it, from which I quote as follows:

"The enclosed came this morning. I did not claim that 'officers' were taking the Prophet to Carthage. I do claim that he and other men, among them Hyrum Smith, were passing our house on the way to Carthage I supposed, and that myself and little brother were playing in the yard, and that we called after them, 'Uncle Joseph'; that he reigned up his horse and motioned for us to come to him; that he drew me up on his foot in the stirrup and kissed me and told me to be a good girl. I then lifted up my little brother for him to be kissed, and that my mother shook hands with him and that he sent a message to Desdemona Fulmer living in one end of the house. I claim to have driven the oxen attached to a cannon called 'The Long Tom,' part of the way from the Elk Horn River to the Rocky Mountains. My Father, Brigadier General of the Nauvoo Legion, was in charge of the Nauvoo Legion at the time of Joseph's death, owing to the suspension of Major General Wilson Law. After the Saints left Nauvoo, according to order of Lieutenant General Brigham Young, he returned to Nauvoo, gathered up all the cannon, amunition [sic] and supplies that he could get, and that three cannon that came from Nauvoo were brought to the valley; whether they were used in the battle or not I do not know. I marked these papers, 'some mistakes,' when I sent them out, as I supposed they were mistakes of the editor and unintentional. I have no wish for notoriety nor to injure anyone."

I think the above extract from the letter written by my sister will explain the matter to your satisfaction. I have in my possession the original letter addressed to my father by the Prophet Joseph Smith, covering that part mentioned by my sister concerning Wilson Law; also the original letter from President Young instructing him to take charge of the weapons, ammunition, and other property belonging to the Legion.

Both my sister and myself were treated very nicely by the editor of the Nauvoo paper and I am satisfied the mistakes which occured [sic] in the interview were of the head and not of the heart. He merely made memorandums and wrote the article afterward in a spirit of friendliness, but not being as well acquainted with the history of the Church as the members are he naturally made the mistake, for which I feel to excuse him, knowing full well that it was unintentional on his part. It is absolutely true, as stated by you, and is well known by us, that the Prophet went from Nauvoo to Carthage, where he surrendered himself, but was not under arrest, as we understand it, at the time he left Nauvoo. My sister thoroughly understands this but was misunderstood by the editor in the interview.

Trusting this will be a satisfactory answer to your inquiry, I remain,

Yours very truly,

[Signed] Ben E. Rich

"Benjamin Erastus Rich [1855-1913] Correspondence, 1881-1908," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
