Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Rich, Emeline Grover

(July 30, 1831-May 4, 1917)

Knew Joseph and his family from her infancy; heard Joseph preach; her father helped prepare the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum for burial.

I can remember the Prophet Joseph Smith and his wife from my early childhood, my parents having joined the Church the year that I was born.

Sister Emma Smith and my mother were dear friends and their families were on intimate terms. One of my sisters was named for Sister Emma.

I personally knew the Prophet, and attended the same school with his children. I received patriarchal blessings from the Prophet's father, also his brother Hyrum.

My father's family shared in the early persecutions of the Saints in Missouri, was driven from there in 1839 to Quincy, Illinois, where my father had charge of the Prophet's family during his imprisonment in Missouri. Later he was one of the Prophet's lifeguards.

In the fall of 1839, the Saints moved to Commerceafterwards known as Nauvoowhere the Prophet bought a little white house on the banks of the Mississippi River. At the meetings held there I can remember singing out of the same hymnbook with Sister Emma and also listening to some very powerful sermons delivered by the Prophet.

At that time Sister Emma was looked upon as a noble, good woman, and was dearly beloved by the Saints.

The day the martyred Prophet and his brother were brought home, my father assisted in preparing the bodies for burial. I had the privilege of viewing the remains with thousands of others, as they lay in state at the Mansion House.

Up to the present time I have never doubted for a moment that Joseph Smith was a true Prophet of God, and that his brother Hyrum was an inspired man. After nearly seventy-five years experience, I bear my testimony that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, and the gospel he taught is true.

Emeline Grover Rich, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 543.
