Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Rich, Mary A. Phelps

(August 6, 1829-April 17, 1912)

Tells of her mother who was determined to help her own husband, W. W. Phelps, get out of prison; the Prophet blessed her and encouraged her.

In the meantime, my mother had gotten a letter from father, comparing her to a star, and telling her how dark and dismal everything seemed since his star was out of sight. She immediately decided to go and visit him, and be there at the trial, so she went to Nauvoo to see Joseph Smith and tell him what she was thinking of doing and ask his council. He laid his hands on her head and blessed her and told her to go. He said, "Sister Phelps, perhaps you can accomplish more than we can. We have done our best to get those prisoners liberated, but all our plans have failed."

"The Life of Mary A. Rich," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 4-5.

Tells of Joseph's remarks at the funeral of her mother, who was the wife of W. W. Phelps; he said she lived life to the fullest and could not receive a greater reward had she lived to a hundred.

We moved to a town 20 miles from Nauvoo called Macedonia. Here we located and soon all our friends. Father was a carpenter, and we soon gathered things around us and were comfortable. We lived there about a year and a half. These were the happiest days of our lives. Then my mother was taken sick and died, leaving her five children, three girls and two boys, the baby one and a half years old, with my father heartbroken, and her children not knowing how to manage. Father took mother's body to Nauvoo to be buried. She was quite young when she died, not 33 years old, but her nervous system was broken. Joseph Smith said she had lived her life so fast. (He and Heber C. Kimball both spoke at her funeral services.) He said her salvation was sure, that if she had lived until she was one hundred years old, she could not have done any more.

"The Life of Mary A. Rich," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 14-15.

En route to Carthage, the Prophet and his company stop at her home and she gives the Prophet a drink of water; he blesses her.

At this time I was 15 years old; I was almost everywhere there was anything to be seen. I saw the Prophet when he was standing on the frame of a building delivering his last speech to the Nauvoo Legion.

When he found he had to go to Carthage, he wanted a man by the name of Rosecrantz, who was well acquainted with the governor, to go with him. He sent word by Mr. Rosecrantz, asking me if I would go and stay with Mr. Rosecrantz's sick wife while he went to Carthage with him. I went to stay with Mrs. Rosecrantz, and as they were going, they called at the gate with their company of about 20 men, and Joseph Smith asked me if I would bring them out a drink of water. I took a pitcher and glass and went out and gave them a drink. The Prophet said to me, "Lord bless you. You shall have a disciple's reward." This was the last time I ever saw him alive.

"The Life of Mary A. Rich," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 16.

Memories of seeing the bodies of the martyrs.

My father was at the mansion all night, doing what he could to help them. In the morning he came up early and told me that if I would get up I could go down, as he had gotten permission for me to see Joseph and Hyrum Smith as they lay at their home. I went down, saw them and laid my hand on Joseph's forehead. The blood was oozing out of the wound in his shoulder, and the sheet that was around him was stained with blood. Still he looked very natural; Hyrum had been shot in the face and therefore he did not look very natural. The funeral was held at one o'clock that day. The Saints were all allowed to go and view the remains after they were dressed.

"The Life of Mary A. Rich," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 17.
