Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Rich, Sara DeArmon Pea

(September 23, 1814-September 12, 1893)

Memories of the Prophet visiting the homes of missionaries who were away and of blessing the families, healing the sick, and caring for their wants.

Thus we passed the winter and summer together; and the Prophet Joseph would also call on us from time to time. He would also inquire after the wants of dear Sister Kimball, as he took great interest in the welfare of the families of those that were off on missions, to see that they did not want for the comforts of life. We then, as a people were united and were more like family than like strangers. And as there were many sick these the Prophet Joseph Smith would to go from house to house with others of the brethren and administer to the sick, and see that they had the necessary comforts that the sick needed, and many were healed and raised up from a bed of sickness, looking as though they were nigh unto death.

"Autobiography of Sarah DeArmon Rich," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 37.

Fate of Colonel Williams, who was one of the mob that murdered the Prophet.

And I must now tell my readers that one of those murderers was this same Colonel Williams that I have spoken about, the one that me and my husbandso kind when we were moving to Nauvoo, when we stayed at his house, and Mr. Rich was so sick, and he was kind to all our people and lay aside all his goodness, and joined the mob and helped take the life of those two good men. And after many years he died a wretched death, saying, "He had helped murder the servants of God." His crime was before his eyes in his dying moments. Thus justice overtook him at last.

"Autobiography of Sarah DeArmon Rich," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 39.

Memories of the arrival of the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum at Nauvoo following the martyrdom.

I cannot describe the sorrow the Church was thrown into at this time, men, women, and children wept and cried aloud when the news came in that our brethren were killed; and Brother John Taylor, then one of the Twelve Apostles, badly wounded. So arrangements were made to have their bodies brought into Nauvoo. Teams and men were sent to Carthage to bring them, Brother Taylor was wounded so bad that the brethren had to bring him, in a litter; and when the word came that they were near the city, thousands went out to meet them. My father took his team and brought my mother and sister to my house and took me and them out to meet our dead Patriarch and Prophet Hyrum and Joseph together with our dear Brother Taylor, who lay groaning on the litter as our brethren bore him into the city. O, what a solemn time! I shall never forget it. They were taken to the mansion house where their families and aged mother was awaiting their arrival. Brother Taylor was taken to his home and family.

The mother of the Prophet Joseph and Hyrum lived with Joseph and Emma. She being 80 years old, she was heart broken to look upon the bodies of her two murdered sons. But she bore up with great faith, knowing they were pure and innocent men.

The next day after their bodies were prepared for burial and placed in their coffins. They were placed in the Hall of the Mansion, side by side, where the brethren and sisters and children could pass through and look upon their peaceful faces. Thousands came from all quarters to take a last look; and steamboats loaded with strangers came from Burlington, Quincy and many other places, to look upon their dead bodies.

So on the third day they were laid to rest.

"Autobiography of Sarah DeArmon Rich," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 39-40.
