Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Richards, Franklin D.

(April 2, 1821-December 9, 1899)

Joseph prophesies tempests and the elements to bear witness of the truth.

The words of the Prophet Joseph, have been and are being verified, those words he uttered before he went to Carthage. Said he: "I call for the four winds of heaven, the thunderings, lightnings, earthquakes, whirlwinds, the hailstorms, pestilence, and the raging seas to come forth out of their hiding places and bear testimony of the truth of those things which I have taught to the inhabitants of the earth as is promised in the revelations that have been given." These were some of his last words among the people. And what have we seen? Scarcely a week last summer without a cyclone or hurricane happening somewhere in the States, destroying towns and villages, or parts thereof.

Journal of Discourses, 24:283 (October 6, 1883); see also Journal of Discourses, 24:335.

God had not revealed all to Joseph.

Do not let us think that we have got all the revelation there is. In the last great revelation which the Lord gave to Joseph, He told him that He had not revealed all to him, but that there were many laws pertaining to His Priesthood which He would reveal hereafter.

Journal of Discourses, 26:169 (April 4-5, 1885).

Joseph had to protect himself against the malice of enemies and the folly of friends.

I recollect well a saying of the Prophet Joseph when there were men laying in wait for him and for his life, and when there were brethren around him who did not know what they were abouthe said he had not only to protect himself against the malice of his enemies, but also against the follies of his friends. So it is in these days. We have to protect ourselves, not only against our enemies, but frequently against the folly of our friends who bring trouble needlessly upon us by their unwise conduct and conversation.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:109-10.

Joseph obtained the parcel of land on which Nauvoo was located from Daniel H. Wells.

I was glad to know him fifty years ago in the city of Nauvoo, and can speak of the kindness which he exhibited towards an afflicted and distressed people, driven from the State of Missouri in deep sorrow, and left without a home. When the Prophet Joseph obtained deliverance from his guardsmen and arrived at Commerce he found in Brother Wells one who received him kindly, in conjunction with a few other proprietors of an extensive tract of land in that region, and the Prophet was thereby enabled to secure a place for the Saints to begin to dwell in. He obtained from Brother Wells a portion of the land on which the city of Nauvoo is situated, on reasonable terms. When any little variance arose among the people, he who was then the respected and beloved Squire Wells settled their difficulties and gave satisfaction to all concerned.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:194.

John Whitmer apostatized and kept church records.

No recorder or clerk should be allowed to buy the books and keep them as his own, when Church matters are recorded in them. We had an example of this in early days. When President Joseph Smith received a revelation that John Whitmer was to be appointed Church historian, he got his book and kept records in it, and by and by, when the Prophet Joseph Smith wanted it to find data so that he could write his history, this man would not let him have the book, he having apostatized from the Church. He kept that book, and it was handed down in his generation. We have obtained a copy of the entire record, so while they keep the book, we have its contents. This sample is enough to give us a warning.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 4:273.
