Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Richards, Jane Snyder

(January 31, 1823-November 17, 1912)

Her brother seeks counsel of the Prophet, who instructs that they delay coming west for two years in order to help the traveling elders.

My brother, Elder Snyder, went early in the Spring to Nauvoo, and attended the Conference on the 6th of April (1840?), bringing back counsel from the President, Joseph Smith, to my father, to remain where we were for two years, and make a home for the elders as they traveled through Indiana. We were anxious to go on West while we had means to settle comfortably there; we were unsettled and anxious to reach our destination.

"Reminiscences of Mrs. F. D. [Jane Snyder] Richards," San Francisco, 1880. Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley, 8.

Recognized Joseph on first seeing him because of an earlier dream; she gives a physical description of the Prophet.

The first time I ever saw Joseph Smith I recognized him, from a dream I had had. He had such angelic countenance as I never saw before. He was then thirty-seven years of age, of ordinary appearance in dress and manner, a child-like appearance of innocence. His hair was of a light brown, blue eyes and light complexioned. His natural demeanor was quiet, his character and disposition was formed by his life work, he was kind and considerate, taking a personal interest in all his people, considering every one his equal. We were regular in our attendance at the meetings, and [I] was always anxious to hear Brother Joseph.

"Reminiscences of Mrs. F. D. [Jane Snyder] Richards," San Francisco, 1880. Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley, 11.

Gives an account of the martyrdom; Joseph and Hyrum Were arrested on false charges with the Governor's approval; Joseph said he was willing to die like a man; the spirit of fear so enveloped Nauvoo that mail was not delivered.

In June, on the 27th [1844] Brother Joseph Smith was murdered by the mob at Carthage. I remember perfectly well his appearance at the Grove when he delivered his last sermon. On the morning he was to go to Carthage, 12 miles distant, to answer to a charge of treason against the Government. He had previously been tried and acquitted, but now he seemed at the first to shrink from going; but in this meeting he told his people that he was innocent of any charge that could be brought against him, but if he must go, he would go like a man, and if he should die, he would die like a man. He was promised protection to and from Nauvoo, by the Government and was too confiding in their promise. Among those who accompanied him were John Taylor, his brother Hyrum and Willard Richards; the remaining Twelve apostles were on missionary labors in the U. S. They were tried and acquitted, of the charges, Governor Ford being present. The people retained President Smith and his brother on the pleas that they had more charges to bring up; the elders remained to protect and comfort them. That night Governor Ford was in Nauvoo with a company of soldiers, assuring the Mormons of the safety of the brethren, who were at that very hour in the hands of the mob. Governor Ford was small of stature and the Mormons had a song in which were the lines, "Governor Ford, he was so small, He had no room for a soul at all."

The mob surrounded the jail and said that "if the law could not reach him, powder and ball should." He was shot and sprang out of the window, falling to the ground dead. His brother was shot dead in prison. John Taylor was shot several times and the mob left him for dead; Willard Richards escaped as by a miracle and was the only one to attend the burial of his companions and the affairs of his distracted people at home. As soon as word reached Nauvoo of the terrible tragedy, a company was formed who went out to meet and bring back the victims; the mob had dispersed at once upon accomplishing their fiendish aims.

Our people felt uneasy which was the way they learned so quickly about the trouble; Willard Richards undertook to send us word but as he had no sympathizers so one would carry the intelligence. Some of our people went into the place and discovered the truth. A proclamation was published and generally circulated calling back all the elders who were sent out on missions, to return to Nauvoo, and it was in response to this call that Elder Richards returnedthere was such a feeling of hatred that letters directed to Nauvoo would not be delivered, and so I had heard nothing from my husband since his departure.

"Reminiscences of Mrs. F. D. [Jane Snyder] Richards," San Francisco, 1880. Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley, 11-14.

Tells of the transfiguration of Brigham Young; she also tells of the storm which fell on Nauvoo the night following the martyrdom, driving off the mob.

Upon the return of the apostles and elders a meeting was called, and by an unanimous vote Brigham Young was chosen President. As he stood on the stand he said he felt as though he would rather sit, in sack cloth and ashes for a month than appear before the people, but their loneliness seemed to require somebody to step forward, and he felt constrained to do so, and we knew he was, because he had the voice and manner of Joseph at the time, as hundreds can testify.

I should have spoken of the excitement and distress that prevailed in Nauvoo the night after Brother Joseph's funeral. Word was brought to us from the Prairies that the mob was coming in to exterminate the whole Fraternity. All night men were on guard and women and children prepared for flight. Even the dogs howled and manifested great uneasiness, and hourly we heard the noise of horsemen. At midnight a terrific thunderstorm broke, so unusual in its violence, that as we were afterwards told it drove the mob back, a thousand men it was said were on their way bent on our destruction, but the rain wet their ammunition and so rendered them powerless to destroy us. The mob seemed to give up further persecution at this time; they had killed our leaders and were satisfied.

"Reminiscences of Mrs. F. D. [Jane Snyder] Richards," San Francisco, 1880. Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley, 14-16.

Had a prophetic dream of Joseph, who in person fulfilled what she had dreamed; she describes his humility, his prophetic posture, and his sociability.

I first saw the Prophet Joseph Smith and shook hands with him, in a dream, about eighteen months before my removal to Nauvoo. Later, at Nauvoo, from the recollections of my dream, I recognized him at first sight, while he was preaching to the people. His was one of the most engaging personalities it has ever been my good fortune to meet. As Prophet he seemed to understand, and was able to foretell the mysteries of the future with a marked degree of accuracy, and nearly as much readiness as the ordinary individual could relate the happenings of the past. As Seer and Revelator he was fearless and outspoken, yet humble, never considering that he was more than the mouthpiece, through whom God spoke. As the leader of his people he was ever active and progressive but always modest and considerate of them and their trying circumstances. Socially he was an ideal of affability and always approachable to the humblest of his acquaintances.

Jane Snyder Richards, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 550.

Recalls Joseph feeling safe because he knew that the little children were praying for him; also recalls that the Saints flocked to the roadside to see him; she also saw the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

As an instance of his humility and faith in prayer, I recall that upon one occasion when his enemies were threatening him with violence, he was told that quite a number of little children were then gathered together praying for his safety. Upon hearing of that he replied:

"Then I need have no fear; I am safe."

As an evidence of the admiration in which he was held by his people, let me say that it was the common custom for men, women and children, alike, to flock to the roadside and salute him as he passed along.

After his tragic death I attended the meeting at which President Brigham Young addressed the Saints, and saw his face illuminated and appear as the face of Joseph while the voice of Joseph seemed to address the people through the mouth of Brigham. I can never forget the divine thrill that passed through the audience on that occasion and the impression that the appearance and voice of Joseph produced upon his hearers.

Jane Snyder Richards, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 550.

Gives a detailed account of her experience seeing the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

The newly wedded pair [i.e., Jane and Franklin D. Richards] took up their abode at Nauvoo, where, on the 2nd of December, 1843, their first child was born. She was a bright and beautiful spirit and was named Wealthy Lovisa, after both her grand-mothers. With this child in her arms Mrs. Richards attended the special meeting held on the 8th of August, 1844, where President Brigham Young stood transfigured before the congregation, many of whom in consequence recognized him as the lawful successor to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Mrs. Richards is a living witness to the marvelous manifestation. She was sitting in the meeting and had bent over to pick up a small plaything dropped by her little daughter, when President Young uttered the first words of his address. His voice was that of the Prophet. On hearing it, she was so startled that she dropped the article she had just taken from the floor, and on looking up beheld the form and features of the martyred Seer.

"Jane Snyder Richards," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:581-82.
