Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Richards, Samuel Whitney

(August 9, 1824-November 26, 1909)

Was a member of a group of 25 young men whom Joseph had selected to scout out a place for the Saints to inhabit in the Rocky Mountains. They met several times with Joseph, his counselors, and members of the Twelve. The martyrdom interrupted their plans.

In the winter of 1843-44, the Prophet Joseph Smith sent to me one of the Twelve Apostles of the Church to learn if I would be one of a company of twenty-five (25) young men whom he wished to send out to pioneer the Rocky Mountains and lower California, to find a place for the Church to remove to as the persecutions were getting too strong to think of staying in that part of the country, so near the borders of the State from which we were driven, without being able to obtain any redress, or any sympathy from any source in the Union. My personal acquaintance with the Prophet up to this time was of a most endearing character, and I most freely and gladly responded to the request, and my name was enrolled as one of the chosen number. Weekly meetings were held for the purpose of instructing the company of twenty-five (25) young men thus selected. These meetings were attended by the Presiding authorities, including the Prophet's Counselors Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith; also several of the Twelve Apostles then present in the city of Nauvoo. I had been present at three or four of these meetings before I heard the Prophet say just what was expected of those twenty-five (25) young men who were to go on that expedition. At one of the meetings he said he wanted young men of faith who could go upon the mountains and talk with God face to face as Moses did on Mount Sinai, and learn from Him where His people should make a home. When I heard this in one of the meetings, I was very seriously affected. My first thought was to resign at once before leaving the meeting room, but after a few moments of reflection I thought I would ask my heavenly Father before I decided the matter. I went home and upon my knees by my bedside I prayed for some manifestation that would satisfy my mind as to what I should do. My prayer was answered. In vision I performed the entire journey successfully, and, in connection with it, I saw the future of my entire life, and also down to the end of time, when all things were restored to their Eden grandure [sic], purity and excellence, for the use of man. All this was given to me as the result of responding to the wishes of the Prophet by becoming a member of that Pioneer party organized to find a place for the Church in the wilds of the west. The outfit of the party was to be two animals for each man, one to ride and one to pack; a double-barreled gun, one barrel for shot and one for ball, with which we were to provide our living on the way; and each one to take no less than five-hundred dollars ($500.00) in cash with which to purchase lands to settle upon if necessary.

During the latter part of the winter the persecutions became very severe and increased almost daily. Soon after the Pioneer company was fully organized and properly instructed as to what was expected of them, the Prophet Joseph left Nauvoo and with his brother Hyrum went in a westerly direction, as was supposed by some to escape the pending trouble seemingly coming upon the people; but by others it was supposed that his intention was to join the Pioneer party when it should go out, and be their leader to the mountains. He was followed by those who did not feel disposed to consult his wished in the least and was accused by them of cowardice, and as having no regard for the people in their time of trouble, but sought his own safety. Because of this accusation the plan was never carried out. He told his accusers that if his life was of no value to them it was not to himself and he would return with them going as a lamb to the slaughter, which verily proved true.

It was well known, however, that the Prophet had perfected every necessary arrangement for the Saints to make their exodus to the mountains of the West, and as had been Prophecied many times in our weekly Pioneer meetings, they would become a great and a mighty people, establishing the Kingdom of God upon the earth no more to be thrown down forever.

The removal of the Saints from Nauvoo to the Rocky Mountains was no plan originating with Brigham Young, but originating with the Prophet Joseph Smith. This I personally know. Brigham Young, at the time, was away in the East on missionary work, when these plans were being arranged under the Prophet's personal direction, assisted by his brother Hyrum, who mostly presided at the meetings of the party. At our meetings the spirit of prophecy was always strong, and on one occasion the Patriarch Hyrum Smith arose from his seat and remarked, "There has been enough said," and dismissed the meeting without further ceremony.

"Samuel W. Richards Affidavit, Sworn Dec. 11, 1903," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

In 1834 he heard of the First Vision, which missionaries later confirmed; he determined to meet the Prophet and goes to Nauvoo; he is eventually seated next to Joseph at a meeting where he feels Joseph's prophetic power; he is selected as one of the young men to scout out the Rocky Mountains as a residence for the Saints; he tells of a vision of the millennial world he received as a result of knowing Joseph Smith.

When I was but ten years old, at my home in the State of Massachusetts, I heard the report that a young man in the west named Joseph Smith had been visited by God and His Son Jesus Christ was with Him.

Not long after hearing this, two men came into the town where I was living and called at my father's house as missionaries. From them we learned the facts of the wonderful message they were bearing to the world; viz., that God, the Father, and His Son Jesus Christ appeared to Joseph Smith and authorized him to declare to the world the introduction of a new dispensation by which the people might be prepared for the fullness of times or when time should cease, and eternity enter upon its never-ending career.

My mind from extreme youthfulness had been trained to religious thought of the future, and the importance of all being prepared to meet it. My mind was so exercised that I determined to make myself acquainted with this wonderful Prophet, and learn of him and from him.

To this end after having received the Gospel as taught by the missionaries who had visited us, my father's family removed in 1842 to Nauvoo, the home of Joseph Smith. I soon made an effort not only to see, but if possible to get somewhat acquainted with the now noted Prophet of the great and last dispensation.

In the winter of 1842-43 the Prophet Joseph Smith selected one man from all the principle states of the Union to write an appeal to the governor of this state, setting forth the wrongs and sufferings the Latter-day saints had experienced by being expelled from the state and deprived of their homes, and appealing to them for their assistance in obtaining redress. A meeting was to be held at which those thus chosen should attend and read to the Prophet that which they had written.

My father was the one appointed to write to the governor of Massachusetts, being from that state, and when he went to that meeting I was with him. After my father was seated, there was but one vacant chair, and that was by the side of the one in which the Prophet was seated; this I occupied, though with some reluctance on account of my extreme diffidence.

After several of these appeals had been read, the Prophet became so aroused that he could not remain seated. He arose to his feet and reviewed some of the terrible scenes referred to in such language as I had never heard spoken in a public meeting before. I became so entirely lost to myself that I was unable to move, or rise out of my chair for quite a little bit time after he had closed. I felt at the time that he had a purpose in this; viz., to leave with me an impress never to be forgotten, and in this he certainly succeeded, as his influence over me at that time has never been forgotten, neither can be. To this day his memory to me is more than that of father or any other person with whom I have ever associated.

During the year following I was employed upon the Temple, and had frequent opportunities of meeting the Prophet, though much of the time he had to be in seclusion, as he was almost constantly sought after by his enemies.

My uncle, Willard Richards, was Joseph's almost constant companion, with him day and night in his seclusion from public society, and as I was acting as clerk for Willard, who was editor of the paper then being published, I had frequent opportunity of hearing of the Prophet and he also of me. By this means we continued our personal regard for each other.

In the early part of the winter of 1843-4 a messenger was sent to me by the Prophet Joseph, asking me to be one of the company of young men to go on an exploring expedition to the Rocky Mountains. My reply was: "Yes, most gladly!" and my name was enrolled as one of a company being selected to go to the Rocky mountains and find a place for the Saints to go to, as they would have to retire into the wilderness to get rest from their enemies.

During the latter part of the winter, weekly meetings were held by this company to be instructed as to what would be necessary for their outfit and the object of the expedition. These meetings were mostly in care of Hyrum, the Prophet's brother, as Joseph had to be in seclusion most of the time.

At one of the meetings we were told what the Prophet had said to those called to form this company. It was to be mostly young men of faith who could go upon the mountains and talk with God face to face as Moses did upon Mount Sinai, and learn of Him where He would have the people gather for a resting place.

This thought was too much for me, and I arose from my chair to go and tell the President of the meeting that I could not think of going under those conditions, but as I arose to my feet, I heard a loud voice say "Stop!" But there was no one near me who could have said it. But I did stop and take my seat again, and after meeting closed I returned home and prayed most fervently to know if I should continue to be one of the company or not. My prayer was satisfactorily answered so that I continued with the company, while it was completing the outfit for the expedition. On resting I soon fell asleep; a personage appeared by my bedside to inform me of the future, and he opened up to me the most wonderful vision or dream of my life. Under his direction I found myself in Salt Lake Valley; from there I went in a southerly direction to southern California, passing a number of sentinels on the way to whom I had to give a password; and this I had to get by inspiration as I approached the guard. This I did successfully, passing some six or seven on the journey south, exploring the mountains.

From there, I went south into Mexico, and from there took a northeast course and arrived in Jackson County, Missouri, where I stopped and helped build the temple which is to be reared there. I saw it completed, and then went out to a retired place and laid my body down, and my spirit took its flight over this whole continent to the east, west, south and north, then again to my body, and I saw this whole continent as the Garden of Eden, restored to its condition of purity as it was before sin was known upon it, and as it will be when covered with towns, cities and villages, inhabited by resurrected beings, enjoying immortality and eternal lives.

It would take a volume to describe the face of the earth, and what I saw upon it. No plowing, sowing, reaping or mowing, but trees bearing fruit of every description. Vines and small fruit among the green grass that covered the face of the land. Truly a Paradise of God!

All this came to me as the result of my acquaintance with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and much more that might be written of him who is the personal associate of Jesus Christ, and has been ever since introduced to Him by the Father in [Palmyra] New York

Samuel W. Richards, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 18, no. 12 (December 1907):537-39. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.

Physical description of Joseph Smith.

The Prophet was a man to attract the eye and he held it, not only of a friend but of a stranger as welland, usually, the better one knew him, the better they liked him. In his mature years he stood a full 6 feet tall without shoes and weighed two hundred pounds. His chest and shoulders were broad and muscular, his hands were small but his feet were large enough to make up for the hands. He head was oblong oval the coronal region high. His hair was quite light and fine, his complexion pale, cheeks full, lips thin. His eyes were a light hazel-shielded, and at times almost veiled by long thick lashes. His voice low and soft and his smile agreeable.

"What Joseph Smith Looked Like," from a note found in an old book belonging to Samuel W. Richards, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
