Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Ricks, Sarah Beriah Fiske Allen

(September 1, 1819-June 12, 1891)

Heard of the Book of Mormon and then accepted the missionaries; she then tells of being thrilled at seeing a priesthood ordinance performed and of not wanting to shout like a Methodist; she also tells of hearing Joseph preach and of the sadness at his martyrdom.

[She tells of her husband going down to be baptized, but she stayed in the home with a sick child. When her husband and others were baptized they returned to the home for confirmation.]

After receiving this ordinance, my husband requested the elders to administer to our sick child, which they did.

My soul was now filled to overflowing; I had spent all my days in a Christian land, and had never witnessed the ordinances of the gospel performed until now, and yet it was plainly written in the scriptures and practiced in the days of Jesus and his apostles.

How earnestly I wished I could be where no human ear could hear the sound of my voice that I might shout glory to God in the highest, "Hallelujah to God and the Lamb." I had never heard a Latter-day Saint shout, and I had not been very charitable toward the Methodist shouting so I closed my lips and pondered over those things in my heart. Our infant was blessed but not healed, our Heavenly Father had decreed it to be otherwise and its blessed spirit was freed from its mortal tabernacle. . . .

In April [1843] we returned to Nauvoo, and were present at the General Conference, which was held on the 5th of April inside the walls of the Temple. This was the first time that we had the privilege of seeing the prophet Joseph Smith and hearing him preach. We had a time of rejoicing with the saints, and returned to our home in good health. In May 1843 I was baptized by Amasa Lyman, and confirmed a member of the Church. Meetings were held in the branch and the Spirit of the Lord attended, causing our hearts to rejoice.

. . . In June 1844 the clouds which had so long been gathering around the heads of the Latter-Day Saints now burst in all their fury, and enshrouded in deep gloom the hearts of the Latter day Saints. On the 27th our beloved Prophet and Patriarch were murdered and brother John Taylor was seriously wounded in Carthage jail.

I will pass hastily over this painful scene as many have written upon the subject but suffice it to say that many were the bitter tears shed upon that occasion, "but our faith was in God." He had commenced his work upon the earth, and we would not forsake it. We knew God's work would triumph, while those who had committed this horrible crime would eventually be punished.

"A Brief Sketch of the Life of Sarah Beriah Fiske Allen Ricks," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 4-9.
