Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Riggs, John

(December 12, 1812-March 26 [or 28], 1892)

Lived in Kirtland when the first missionaries arrived; following the Prophet's advice to obey his father, Riggs did not march on Zion's Camp; he was present when Joseph received the papyrus of Abraham; he heard Oliver read Joseph's translation, which was compared to a translation made by Charles Anthon. Joseph knew one language Anthon did not.

[Gideon Riggs, John Riggs' father] was keeping the only hotel in Kirtland at the time Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer and Ziba Peterson came there to preach, and he and his son went to hear their first sermon. The son believed at once, and wanted to be baptized, but his father would not give his consent. Though he was not a member of the Church, he was enrolled as a member of Zion's camp in 1834; but his father having come for him to forbid his march, the Prophet counseled him to obey his father, and blessed him and said he should receive the same blessing as those who went.

Dr. [John] Riggs saw Joseph the Prophet on his first arrival in Kirtland, and became immediately acquainted with him. He worked on the Temple before he came into the Church, was at its first dedication, and heard Dr. Frederick G. Williams bear his testimony that while Sidney Rigdon was making his first prayer, he saw an angel enter the window, and take a seat between Father Smith and himself and remain there during the prayer.

The doctor tells the following story relative to the translation of the Book of Abraham:

When Mr. Chandler arrived in Kirtland with his mummies to exhibit, he put up at the hotel of Father Riggs, who, at the request of Chandler, sent his son to the Prophet's house to invite him and family to attend the exhibition that evening, but Joseph was engaged to attend a meeting and could not come. Young Riggs was again sent, with a note asking when Mr. Chandler could have an interview with the Prophet, who replied that he would come in the morning at 8 o'clock, which he did; and young Riggs was present when the Prophet first saw the papyrus from which is translated the Book of Abraham. Joseph was permitted to take the papyrus home with him, Father Riggs vouching for its return, and the morning following Joseph came with the leaves which he had translated, which Oliver Cowdery read, and Mr. Chandler then produced the translation of Professor Anthon as far as the professor could translate it. Dr. Riggs, who was present at the reading, says that the translation agreed so far, but "there was one language Professor Anthon could not translate which the Prophet did."

[John Riggs was baptized in August 1, 1839.]

. . . In the Spring of '40 he was sent on his first mission, and when the Prophet set him apart he could not walk more than a quarter of a mile at a time, not being recovered from the fever and ague.

"Dr. John Riggs," in "History of Provo," Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine 3, no. 3 (July 1884): 282-83. See also Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 2:235, where Joseph Smith mentions this same incident.

Heard Oliver Cowdery testify of Book of Mormon in 1830; his father refused him permission to join Zion's Camp, but Joseph promised he would be as blessed as those who went; heard Joseph preach first sermon on baptism for the dead, and saw Joseph baptize Hyrum for the dead.

In November 1830, I first heard Oliver Cowdery preach his first sermon of this gospel on Kirtland Flats, giving an account of the angel visiting the Prophet Joseph Smith and his receiving the records or plates of gold and the translation of the same which I believed when they gave their first testimony, but my father forbade me joining them. I continued to attend their meetings and in May, 1834, Joseph the Prophet called me to go with Zion's Camp to Missouri, but my father forbade me by declaring that he would disown me as his son if I went.

The Prophet said it was a hard saying for him when I wanted to go and do good to those who stood in need of help, but if I would stay at home, the day should arrive that I should receive as great blessings as those that went. I stayed at home as the Prophet told me. I was well acquainted with nearly all the members of Zion's Camp, also all the first Quorum of the Twelve Apostles; also the first Quorum of Seventies and the leading members of the church. Among them was Brother Oliver Granger, a leading man in doing business for the church in the East and who was a great help to the Prophet during his life. He died in Ohio in 1841, well respected by all the Saints.

I was present when Joseph preached his first sermon on baptism for the dead and when he baptized Brother Hiram and said, "Today I weld the link of Priesthood that was broken by Oliver Cowdery for in life we shall be one and in death we shall not be separated,["] The same day they began to baptize for the dead, in 1841. I was present when they baptized for the dead in Nauvoo and stood on the bank of the Mississippi River and counted six hundred and sixty six baptisms for the dead.

John Riggs, Autobiographical Sketch, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
