Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Riser, George Christian

(July 16, 1818 [or 1819]-January 24, 1892)

Riser arrives in Nauvoo, hears Joseph preach, and obtains a testimony; his child gets sick, Joseph predicts he will get well; in humor, Joseph tells Orson Hyde when he should have gathered the Jews; Joseph administers to, but cannot promise the recovery of, a sick child.

When I arrived in Nauvoo [Oct. 4, 1842] I found matters dull. A Mr. (blank) prevailed on me to go to Keokuk 12 miles below Nauvoo. While going to the river on the way, something whispered to me "Keokuk is not the place for the Saints to gather to," [Note: vertically, in the margin, Riser writes: "for the gathering of the Saints"] and I turned about. After some 3 or 4 weeks I heard the Prophet Joseph Smith preach. I then made up my mind that Mormonism was the truth and I would be baptized.

I must here state that at the time I came to Nauvoo, and for a considerable time after, the Prophet was hid up as his enemies from Missouri were seeking for him.

Dec. 11th my little child John was sick nigh to death. I was led to send for Joseph the Prophet to lay hands on him. Elder O. Hyde accompanied him. Joseph advised us to keep the child in a room that was not so hot, and predicted it would recover, which it instantly did as soon as they took their hands from it. [Note: Vertically, in the margin, he writes: "They laid there hands on the child, John Jacob. Orson Hide was mouth, and recovered at once."]

Joseph & Elder O. Hyde, who had then lately returned from Jerusalem, called into the adjoining rooms where a Bro. Albert Brown & a Sister Knight (wife of Bishop Vinson Knight) lived. The door being left open I could hear the conversation. Elder Hyde spoke of some things relative to his missionsaid that while in company with some of the leading Jews they became somewhat merry: exhilarated, drinking wine and smoking. They said to him, "Mr. Hyde, I'd be damned if we won't do anything you may tell us." Bro. Joseph told Bro. Hyde that that was the time he ought to have gathered the Jews. The jocose conversation so contrary to my notions of the character of a Prophet and saints [that it] caused me to think soberly; but upon reflection I could not think of anything they had said but what was innocent, and I felt that a Prophet had a right to enjoy himself innocently as well as any other person. I then concluded to be baptized. My wife also came to the same conclusion, and we were baptized the following day (December 12, 1842) by Elder Albert Brown in the Mississippi River. The weather was extremely cold: the river [was] so frozen that a hole had to be cut in the ice to baptize us in. Two of Sister Knight's daughters were rebaptized at the same time. We were confirmed the same day at our residence by the same Elder.

During the winter I worked at my trade and improved every opportunity to hear preaching, that I might the better become acquainted with the doctrines and principles of the Church.

The winter was extremely cold. The following Spring my little boy John was again taken very ill. I had him administered to by a number of Elders among, whom were two of the Apostles, Brothers H. C. Kimball and Orson Hyde; also Patriarch Hyrum Smith and Brothers Wm. Carmichael & John Oakley.

Brother Joseph called at Sister Knights[she was in] an adjoining room to me. I again asked him to administer to the child but for some cause he was not led to make the same promise of life as before. It died on the 6th of May at the age of fourteen months, and was buried the next day. Elder Brown officiated. The child was an exceedingly promising [one].

The following week I moved into a house I had built on my lot two blocks north of Brother Joseph's residence. I bought the lot but shortly after I arrived in Nauvoo, for which I paid a team of horses and wagon. The lot was on Main St. adjoining Bro. Joseph Smith's.

"Reminiscences of George Christian Riser 1818-1892," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar and punctuation have been modernized.
