Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Black, Jane Johnston

(June 11, 1801-January 20, 1890)

Arrived in Nauvoo with her family and heard the Prophet speak; when Joseph entered the room, all respectfully arose; Joseph motioned for them to be seated; Brigham introduced the family to the Prophet.

Mary had arranged for a place for them to live. They got settled with George and Joseph to help and anxiously awaited Sunday to come so they could go to church and meet the Prophet Joseph Smith. Jane didn't think she could wait many more hours to see this man who was responsible for such a dramatic change in their lives. She and her family were seated on the front row, and when the Prophet walked erectly up the aisle, Jane thanked the Heavenly Father for such a blessing as to be in his presence. The whole room stood and Jane did, too, with tears streaming down her face. He motioned for them to be seated. When he later rose to speak, Jane knew that he was God's oracle on earth. Nothing earthly had told her, but she indeed knew. When the meeting was over Brother Brigham quickly strode to the Blacks and gathered them in his arms. They had met him in England those first early days when they had been introduced to the gospel. Then the Prophet was there beside Brigham, and he introduce them, "Brother Joseph, let me acquaint you with my friends, the Blacks, newly arrived from Manchester, Jane, George, Mary, Will, and this is Joseph." They had gloried in hearing the Prophet's voice and now, to hold his hand. It was warm, strong and sure.

"Biographical Sketch of William 'Young' Black and Jane Johnston Black by Geniel Robertson," typescript copy, Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Heard Joseph preach.

Heard the gospel first from missionaries in England: "The meeting was held in Paul Harris's cellar and Elder William Clayton and Joseph Fielding addressed us and it was 'Tidings of Great Joy' to my husband and myself. We both believed in their teachings and on January 14, 1839 we were baptized by Elder William Clayton. Then in the year 1840, we (mother and children) moved to Nauvoo and heard the Prophet Joseph Smith preach and I can testify that he was a prophet of God.

"Jane Johnston Black," in Kate B. Carter, comp., Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1958-77), 6:427.

Received blessing from Joseph that she would succeed as a midwife; Brigham promised her she would never lose either a mother or child; dressed John Taylor's wounds after the martyrdom; promised to stand as a witness before God of the assassins' work.

The leading brethren of the Church loved this noble woman. The Prophet Joseph Smith blessed and set her apart to administer to her sex as long as she lived, with a promise of success in her labors. During her life she brought more than 3,000 babies into the world, and never lost a mother or baby. This was according to a promise Pres. Young gave her as he was ready to start to the Valleys. He said to her, "Jane, if you will try and live up to the counsel the Prophet Joseph gave you, I promise you will never lose a mother or baby." . . .

Going back to the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum. We remember that Brother John Taylor lay wounded in Carthage Jail with a number of bullets from the assassin's guns lodged in his body. After he was moved to a place where he was to receive medical attention, he would not let the doctor touch him until Jane Black was summoned on the scene to assist in the operation. After the bullets had been extracted and the wounds dressed, she asked Brother Taylor why he sent for her to assist in the operation. His answer was, "Not only did I know there was none better at such a job, but I want you to stand at the morning of the resurrection and testify to the Lord against the assassins who murdered the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum and attempted my life." She replied, "Don't worry, Brother Taylor, I will be there and tell the Lord all about it."

"Life Story of Edward L. Black the son of George Black who was the son of William Y. Black and Jane Johnson as written by Himself"; copies in private family possession, 6, 8.

Saw transfiguration of Brigham Young.

With the death of the Prophet Joseph, there grew conflicts and dissentions over the right to Church leadership. It was a time to try the faith of each member and many fell away. Many were hoping the church was finished. Sidney Rigdon, Joseph's former counselor, claimed that no one could be a Prophet and Joseph's place by mere appointment, the people must wait for God to call a Prophet. A meeting was called for August 8th, to decide the matter of a "Guardian," as most of the Apostles were now back home. When Brigham Young, President of the Quorum of the Twelve, started to speak, Jane suddenly sat up electrified! Her back tingled. Her heart raced, she hardly breathed. Joseph Smith's voice spoke to them! She sat up straighter to see better. Brigham seemed taller, as tall as their slain Seer. She strained forward. . . . Yes, he even looked like their slain Prophet. Shocked, dazed she sat, feeling more than hearing, listening to the whisperings within her, and that familiar voice once again. She wasn't alone in her perception. . . . for turning tear brimmed eyes around her she saw others wiping their eyes, some of the brethren on the stand cried unashamedly. The Prophet to succeed Joseph had been chosen! The family of William and Jane remained staunch and true to the leadership of Brigham Young from that moment on.

"Biographical Sketch of William 'Young' Black and Jane Johnston Black by Geniel Robertson," typescript copy, Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, Salt Lake City, Utah.
