Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Rockwell, Orrin Porter

(June 28, 1813-June 9, 1878)

Prophesies Rockwell will not be hurt as long as he does not cut his hair.

[Following Rockwell's release from a Missouri jail and arrival in Nauvoo, Joseph said] I prophesy, in the name of the Lord, that youOrrin Porter Rockwellso long as ye shall remain loyal and true to thy faith, need fear no enemy. Cut not thy hair and no bullet or blade can harm thee!

Harold Schindler, Orrin Porter Rockwell: Man of God, Son of Thunder (Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press, 1966), 108-9.

Note: In recording this prophecy, Schindler says: "The story of Joseph's prophecy spread throughout Nauvoo within days, but the prophet's exact words were never recorded. Rockwell himself mentioned the prophecy to his friends and family on many occasions. A journal notation made the following morning which refers to the incident can be found in James Jepson, "Memoirs and Experiences," manuscript, 9-10. For additional evidence see T. B. H. Stenhouse, Rocky Mountain Saints: A Full and Complete History of the Mormons, From the First Vision of Joseph Smith to the Last Courtship of Brigham Young, New York, 1873, 140n; George W. Bean, Autobiography, compiled by Flora Diana Bean Horne. Salt Lake City, 1945, 175; and Mrs. Elizabeth D. E. Roundy's letter to the LDS Church explaining her part in writing Rockwell's life history at his request. The letter is on file in the Church Historian's Library" (Harold Schindler, Orrin Porter Rockwell: Man of God, Son of Thunder [Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press, 1966], 109).

Remembers Father and Mother Smith coming to his parents home to tell of Joseph's visions; also of his picking berries by moonlight and selling them; remembers hauling wood to obtain money to help publish the Book of Mormon; when traveling west, he returned six miles to find Brigham Young's lost spy-glasses; once in California, he cut his hair to make a wig for Ina Coolbrith, Don Carlos Smith's widow; Brigham said he never knew Porter to lie.

Orrin Porter Rockwell was a pioneer from the day that Joseph received his first vision or visitation by holy beings; from his own statement made to me [Elizabeth Roundy] in 1875 when he came to me to write the history of his life. He stated that Joseph Smith's father and mother used to come to his father's house and tell his parents of the wonderful things that were being revealed to their son Joseph. He said he used to watch for their coming and plead with his mother to let him stay up to keep the pine torch burning as that was the only means they used to illuminate their dwelling. When they spoke of getting means to print the Book of Mormon Porter determined to help, and as he had no other way he went after his day's work was done and picked berries by moonlight and in the early morning and sold the berries and gave Joseph the money to help with the printing. He also gathered wood [and] hauled it to town and sold it and used the means for the same purpose. No man loved Joseph the Prophet more than O. P. Rockwell. He was not one having the advantage of education but his heart was devoted to the cause of truth. He would not have hesitated to have given his life for Joseph at any time. He accompanied Joseph with others when he went to Washington to ask for redress of President Van Buren; also went with Joseph and Hyrum when they started to come West. He was sent by Joseph to his wife Emma with a message and through that some brethren went with him to see the prophet and patriarch and persuaded them to return, which he always spoke of with regret and manifestations of grief.

Brother Rockwell was fearless and daring to the extreme in trying to mix with the mobocrats and find out their plans and thus try to frustrate their plans and protect the people.

He was chosen to come with the first company of pioneers and by the historic records account, he must have done much and served his brethren faithfully as hunter, scout, and messenger and when Indians stole their horses Porter Rockwell was one selected with others to go after them. On May 6 twenty days after they were on their journey President Brigham Young lost his spy or field glasses; they searched diligently but could not find them. The next day Porter went back six miles and found them and restored them to President Young.

Orrin P. Rockwell was selected one of the 42 men of Brother Orson Pratt's advance guard and was sent back occasionally to report to the brethren the progress they had made and the new route had been found. Some years after, he was in California and met there the widow and daughters of Don Carlos Smith the brother of the prophet Joseph. When he saw her he she was just recovering from typhoid fever in consequence of it her hair had all fallen off. Porter wore his hair long, as he said the prophet told him that if he wore his hair long his enemies should not overpower him neither should he be overcome by evil. He had no gold dust or money to give Sister Smith so he had his hair cut to make her a wig and from that time he said that he could not control the desire for strong drink nor the habit of swearing. This was his own statement to one and I have no doubt but it was true. President Young speaking in the Farmington Meeting House, in speaking about mining and referred his hearers to O. P. Rockwell and said Pres. Young [of] brother Porter Rockwell "I have never known [him] to lie."

Orrin P. Rockwell died in Salt Lake 9 June, 1878 after spending over forty years with this people and being a pioneer from the first having done a good work and let us hope is reward will be as he used to say when he thought anything good, "all wheat."

"Elizabeth D. E. Roundy to President Spencer Clawson, President [of the] Semi Centennial Jubilee Committee," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
