Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Rogers, Aurelia S.

(October 4, 1834-August 19, 1922)

Joseph visits the Spencer home and is particularly attentive to an infant daughter, whom he blesses.

After arriving in Nauvoo father rented an unfurnished room of Mrs. Mercy Thompson, sister-in-law to Brother Hyrum Smith. This house was within a few blocks of the river, in the southern part of the city on the flat or bottom land. While staying there another little sister came to us, who was called Lucy. The Prophet Joseph Smith, who lived close by, often came in, and when he saw the baby, he exclaimed, "Oh, what a little black head!" for she had so much hair; then he laid his hand upon her head and blessed her.

Aurelia Spencer Rogers, Life Sketches of Orson Spencer and Others, and History of Primary Work (Salt Lake City, Utah: George Q. Cannon & Sons Company, 1989), 22-23.

Memories of the martyrdom: the gloom over Nauvoo and throngs of people viewing the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum.

Well do I remember the morning after the martyrdom of those noble men. A gloom was cast over the whole city of Nauvoo; men, women and children wept for their departed Prophet and Patriarch. I witnessed the long procession that followed the bodies of our beloved Leaders, as they were taken to Joseph's mansion, where they laid in state until the people could take a last look at them, and say farewell. My father lifted me through one of the windows of the mansion, as the door-ways were thronged with people, when after viewing the bodies I was passed back again and taken home.

Aurelia Spencer Rogers, Life Sketches of Orson Spencer and Others, and History of Primary Work (Salt Lake City, Utah: George Q. Cannon & Sons Company, 1989), 31-32.

Her Uncle Hyrum Spencer had disquieting premonitions on the day of the martyrdom.

The day that Joseph and Hyrum were martyred [my uncle Hyrum Spencer] was on his farm six miles east of Nauvoo, and was so influenced that he could not work; and he three times saddled his horse to go to Carthage, but rebuked himself for nervousness.

Aurelia Spencer Rogers, Life Sketches of Orson Spencer and Others, and History of Primary Work (Salt Lake City, Utah: George Q. Cannon & Sons Company, 1989), 43.
