Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Rogers, David White

(October 4, 1787-September 21, 1881)

Commissioned to take papers to the Prophet in Liberty Jail, which he does; his courageous speech quails a mob, which disperses; then the Sheriff ridicules the Prophet with a cat-gut song.

And after obtaining this information And documents showing what we had and what could be done in that direction we returned to Quincy. And a Conference or meeting was called and we made our report. And after it had been deliberated upon for a while It was desided and agreed that an Express with the papers be sent to Joseph Smith, who was then in Liberty Jail in Mo. And after several fruitless attempts were made to obtain a person from among the Saints who had come out of Mo. Bishop Partridge came to me and asked if I would accept the appointment And although I had heard of the threats that the Jackson county folks had made against the Mormons in case they should come there to sell or take possession of their lands (I was a stranger in Mo. and also to the saints having as it were Just arrived from the city of New York on my way to gather with the saints.) Notwithstanding I was not intimidated and therefore replied It is the will of the Lord. And the decision of his servants who have authority to appoint. Endow me with the power and let me have your prayers. And I will go and do the business or be found dead trying. Acordingly the nessary power of attorney was made out. Directions written out. And on the tenth day of november (?) 1838 (?) I left Quincy Ill. for Jackson County Mo. And on the fifteenth I arived in Far West. Where there was a committee who were appointed to assist the brethron in disposing of their property and making [illegible] fill out [illegible] for leaving the State. To this committee I was recommended for assistance and council if I should kneed. They thought I ought to have some person with me and therefore sent Br. Charles Bird who was acquainted in Jackson County. We left Far West on the 20th (I having visited the brethren in Richmond Jail in the mein time). And on the morrow we Visited the Prophet Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail. And then there made my report of the up river mision, and delivered to him the documents and papers sent by the authorities at Quincy. And having received his santion and blessing we crossed over the river into Jackson County and went to the City of Independence a distance of some 20 miles and just up at City Hotel there kept by Spotwood Knowland. The next morning went to the Recorder's office and got my power of attorney registered and Paid up all the Taxes which had aumulated on the land for the five years past. And then advertised they several plats of land for sale just at that time. Sent a young man by the name of Mason from Kentucky arived in town in search of a place to have a farm and the notice came to me and we (went?) to see the land. I went and showed him the largest pieces and he made choices of a Quarter Section known as the Whitmore farm and paid me $700.00 in Cash and gave me a horse Saddle and bridle worth $400.00. the next morning as Br. Bird and myself were crosing the Public Square we met a Posse of about 40 men who on coming up to us opened to the right and left and formed a hollow square, with ourselves inside on looking around I saw the people on every side coming until the crowd would have numbered some three hundred. And one of the first Posse a tall thin man by the name of James King (a brother to Thomas King, then Sheriff of Jackson County) comenced informing me that I must deliver up to them the money and property for which I had sold the land, and that I must leave the county before sun set or I would be found a dead man as I could not remain another night in Jackson county and live. And, said he, we mean what we say, and you need not presume in anything else. After he had finished and a pause of about one minute, I observed you have pronounsed sentence upon me can I be allowed the privilege granted to condemned criminals in courts of law. They are asked if they have any cause to show why the sentence of the law should not be executed upon them. He said he had no objection to my saying a few words, But would not hear any long preamble. Several of his party sang out, let him speak, let him speak &c. he said say on after about a half minute I commenced by saying a few years ago the God of Israel sent a few of his servants to settle in Jackson, Mo. (And he had but few at that time on the Earth who would acknowledge themselves His servants to obey) they came forth and in conformity with the laws of the United States And the State of Mo. They made selections and Entered some twenty thousand acres upon which they settled some 14 or 1500 souls in the space of three years, at which time the peoples of the county arose simoltaniously almost en mass and drove those servants of God from their homes and from the country in violation of all Laws. Those servants of God then settled in other counties. And subsequently were driven Among those servants of God, there were some very old some sick, some cripples, some widows, and many orphan children. Who are destitute of means to convey themselves out of their State. And the Lord will not They should be exterminated. And therefore the God of Israel has ordered that the lands from which his servants were first driven shall be sold and the means used in helping these helpless ones out of the State. And I am sent here to perform that business. And in the name of Israel's God and by his Power I shall accomplish the work . And if any one present is prepared for that Now is the best time you can ever have in the blaze of this beautify morning sun and in the presents of this large concourse of witnesses, that the honor and glory of the dead decend to the latest posterity. That is all I wish to say: And on looking around I saw nothing of Br. Bird. I heard nothing said [illegible] soon the people began to leave and I was alone without any one near enough to speak to. So I went on about my business, And sold all the land I was authorized to sell except six acres of Praria laying alone. The amount in all sold for was $2700.00. I was in the state of Mo. forty day on my way from Jackson Co. I stoped a few days at Far West and while there Jack Maynard an apostate Swore out an Attachment for some $250. And a levied (?) on five yolk of oxen there horses a wagon and some $300.00 [illegible] goods and in order to have the use of the property to help the brotheron out of the state I paid the amount and cost in money. Just at that time Joseph Smith Jr. Prophet was taken from Liberty Jail to another county for trial. And from there sent Br. Kiploy (?) to Far West for some [illegible] the committee there saw fit to take $150.00 of the money I had and sent it to him. About that time he the Prophet and his fellow prisoners left their [illegible] and went to Ill. when about 100 miles from Far West on my way home I saw Sheriff Brasfield who had the Prophet in charge when he left the Sheriff had a posse with him, And while he was Aquainting one with the particulars of their escape and how they stole two of his horses one of his posse said and would have stolen more if they had have had more money. The sheriff was a fidler and had a fidle in hand at the time And said to me when you see him Smith till him for me if ever I find him I will play him the Tune called Jo Smith. Then began to pass the horse hair over the cat gut saying that's it. When in the little town of Paris Mo. on my way out of the State I met Brigham and several more of the Twelve on their way to Far West to lay the corner stone of the Temple. And I let him have Twelve dollars cash.

David White Rogers, "Statement 1 Feb. 1839," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
