Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Roundy, Shadrach

(January 1, 1789-July 4, 1872)

Has an interview with the Prophet and is baptized; he later became one of Joseph's bodyguards, once protecting him against William Law and his associates.

In the winter of 1830-31 [Roundy] left his home and traveled on horseback to see the Prophet Joseph who then resided at Fayette, Seneca county, New York. After having an interview with the Prophet, he was baptized and became an honorable member of the Church. . . .

About the year 1840 he removed to Nauvoo, where he served as captain of police. In times of imminent danger and persecutions he acted as special guard around the person of the Prophet Joseph. On several occasions he was on duty without intermission, for many days and nights, without sleep or rest. His love for the Prophet was so great that he would have given his own life freely in defense of his beloved friend and brother. On one occasion, when the Prophet had been forewarned that he was in danger, he sent for Brother Roundy and told him to pick a trusty man to be on guard with him at his house, as a party was coming that night by water to kidnap him. Brother Roundy selected Joseph Arnold and placed him on guard at the gate, with orders to admit no one, while he himself took his beat by the river, but on hearing a noise he hastily repaired to the gate and found William Law inside the gate and others in the act of entering. Brother Roundy, who had a hickory waking cane in his hand, quickly took hold of it at each end, and pressing it against the men forced them back outside, and then fastened the gate. William Law endeavored to explain that the men who were with him were gentlemen merchants, who wanted to see the mummies. Brother Roundy replied that if they were gentlemen they should come at gentlemen's hours. William Law insisted that Brother Joseph would admit them, as they would pay $10 in pocket money, there being about forty of them; the admission being about 25 cents for each. On their agreeing not to try to enter while he was gone, Brother Roundy went to Joseph's room. The Prophet, who had overheard the conversation, told Elder Roundy to go back and tell the strangers as a messenger from him what he (Roundy) had already told them himself. Thus was the Prophet's life and property preserved by the courage and fidelity of Elder Roundy and his associate.

"Roundy, Shadrach," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:642-43.

Was one of Joseph's bodyguards.

He was Captain of Police for years and one of the Prophet's most trusty life guards; was Aide-de-Camp to Lieut. General Joseph Smith was also Senior Warden in the Masonic Lodge at Nauvoo for years. [When the Saints arrived in the Valley, he was one of the first three white men to plow in the Valley; he plowed where Main St. now runs.]

"Shadrach Roundy," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
