Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Rushton, Edwin

(June 1, 1824-December 28, 1904)

Tells of a witty, humorous toast Joseph offered in behalf of the mobocrats who had persecuted him.

On or about the 6th of May 1843 a grand review of the Nauvoo Legion was held in Nauvoo. The Prophet Joseph Smith complimented them for the good discipline and evolutions performed. The weather being hot, he called for a glass of water. With the glass in his hand he said, "I will drink you a toast, to the overthrow of the mobocrats," which he did in language as follows:

"Here's wishing they were in the middle of the sea in a stone canoe, with iron paddles, and a shark swallow the canoe and the devil swallow the shark and him locked up in the northwest corner of hell, the key lost and a blind man looking for it." [The account then tells of someone who was offended with this toast and came the next morning to fight the Prophet over it. Edwin Rushton and Theodore Turley observed the fray.]

"Edwin Rushton Statement," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar and punctuation have been modernized.

Note: Parley P. Pratt later incorporated this toast in his "A Dialogue Between Joseph Smith and the Devil," in Parker Pratt Robison, Writings of Parley Parker Pratt (Salt Lake City, Utah: Parker Pratt Robison, 1952), 239-52.

Tells of bearing testimony of Joseph to Joseph and of the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Elder [Edwin] Rushton said he wished there was more time to speak of the Prophet Joseph Smith tonight. He became acquainted with the Prophet on the 13th of April, 1842, when he landed at Nauvoo as an emigrant. He saw a handsome looking man coming toward him, riding a fine horse. This person, who proved to be the Prophet, accosted him and asked if a boat had landed at the wharf. Answered in the affirmative, he asked the occasion of its landing. "There is a company of emigrants here, sir," answered the speaker. "Oh, indeed what are they?" said the Prophet. "They are called Mormons." "Are you a Mormon?" said Joseph. Answered in the affirmative, the Prophet continued: "I suppose you have heard a great deal said coming up the river about 'Joe Smith,' both good and evil?" "Both kinds, sir," was the speaker's reply. Said the Prophet, "What do you come here for? What do you know about Mormonism?" The speaker raised his hand and said, "I know that Mormonism is true, or I would not be here. I know it for myself and not for another." Said he, "I am that same 'Joe Smith' you have heard so much talk about. What do you think of me?" Said the speaker, "You are a Prophet of the living God. I knew it when I left my native land." "I hope the rest of them all know that," answered the Prophet. I was then but 17 years of age. After that I was very familiar with him, and he never forgot the "boy." In 1843 the Prophet told me that I should come here to the Rocky Mountains. He told me that I should see the things that have transpired since I have resided here. He told me of many local occurrences, that I might believe the other predictions of greater moment which he made to me. We have great scenes to pass through that we little expect, but they will all come to pass. The speaker also bore testimony . . . of Joseph's appearance being manifest in Brigham Young.

I never saw a man equal to the Prophet Joseph in dignity and kind, gentlemanly deportment. In conversation with him there was nothing frivolous, light minded or debasing.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:33-34.

On arrival at Nauvoo, Joseph met them dressed in rough clothing to test the strength of their convictions.

After sailing from England, our immigrant company reached Nauvoo, April 13, 1843. Father was very anxious to find the members of his family already established there, and hurried towards the town in search of them. He had gone only a short distance when he met a man riding a beautiful black horse. The man accosted him, saying, "Hey, Bub, is that a company of Mormons just landed?"

In much surprise, Father answered, "Yes sir."

"Are you a Mormon?" the stranger continued.

"Yes, sir," Father again answered.

"What do you know about old Joe Smith?" the stranger asked.

"I know that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God," said Father.

"I suppose you are looking for an old man with a long, gray beard. What would you think if I told you I was Joseph Smith?" the man continued.

"If you are Joseph Smith," said Father, "I know you are a prophet of God."

In a gentle voice, the man explained, "I am Joseph Smith. I came to meet those people, dressed as I am in rough clothes and speaking in this manner, to see if their faith is strong enough to stand the things they must meet. If not, they should turn back right now."

This was Father's introduction to the Prophet.

"Edwin Rushton (Related by his Son)," in Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 170.

Helped bury the Prophet following the martyrdom; says Joseph asked Emma to train his boys to walk in their father's footsteps.

Father's acquaintance with and admiration for the Prophet grew rapidly, and there developed an intimate friendship between them. The Rushton family often serenaded the Prophet.

After the martyrdom, Father was one of four who took part in the second burial of the Prophet, to preserve the body from the hands of ruthless, designing men. Joseph Smith had prepared a burial vault for the Smith family, and when persecution became alarming he came to Father and requested him, in the event the Prophet was killed, to see that the remains of the Smith family were put into this vault.

When Joseph Smith was on his way to Carthage for the last time, Father was standing near by when Joseph said to his wife, "Emma, can you train my sons to walk in their father's footsteps?"

She answered, "Oh, Joseph, you are coming back."

Father says Joseph asked the same question three times, and that Emma gave the same answer each time. The Prophet then rode away to Carthage and his death.

"Edwin Rushton (Related by his Son)," in Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 170-71.
