Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Russell, Isaac

(April 13, 1807-September 25, 1844)

In Far West Joseph has a face to face confrontation with the devil, whom he rebukes.

I will relate one circumstance that took place in Far West in a house which Joseph had purchased, which had formerly been occupied as a public house by some wicked people. A short time after he had moved into it, one of the children was taken very sick. He layed hands upon the child and it got better. As soon as he went outside again the child was taken sick again. He again laid his hands upon it so that it again recovered. This transpired several times and Joseph inquired of the Lord what it all meant, when he had an open vision and saw the devil in person who contended with Joseph face to face for some time. He said it was his house, it belonged to him and Joseph had no right there. Then Joseph rebuked Satan in the name of the Lord and he departed and troubled the child no more."

Isabella M. Johnson, "Isaac Russell," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 5-6; this same incident is referred to in Joseph Fielding Smith Jr. and John J. Stewart, The Life of Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1972), 340.

Note: Perhaps this is the incident to which Joseph referred when he confided in Heber C. Kimball: "When I returned home I called upon bother Joseph, and we walked down the bank of the river. He there told me what contests he had had with the devil; he told me that he had contests with the devil, face to face. He also told me how he was handled and afflicted by the devil, and said, he had known circumstances where Elder Rigdon was pulled out of bed three times in one night. After all this some persons will say to me, that there are no evil spirits. I tell you they are thicker than the 'Mormons' are in this country, but the Lord has said that there are more for us than there can be against us. 'Who are they,' says one? Righteous men who have been upon the earth" (Journal of Discourses, 3:229-30).
