Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Saint Louis Weekly Reveille

(1844)

Quotes a Philadelphia astrologer named Hague who astrologically predicted Joseph would experience difficulties in the church, be dishonest, and be in danger of death by violence; women would plot his destruction, for Mars and Venus have so decreed.

ASTROLOGY AND PROPHECY.Hague, the astrologer of Philadelphia, in his last number of the "Horoscope," has the following with regard to Joe Smith. He has predicted, almost as ingeniously as we could have done ourselves, up to within twenty-four hours of the Prophet's death. That part of it about "children rising up against him," may still come to pass, if we believe all stories.

Joseph Smith, the founder of the Mormon doctrine, &c., was born December 23rd, 1805, in the town of Sharon, Windsor County, state of Vermont. The corner stone of the Temple at Nauvoo was laid April 6th, near 11 h. 30 m. A. M., 1841. Joseph is now in his 39th year, and the moon opposes his Jupiter's place at birth, causing great difficulties in the church, in his employment, and with lawyers. He will waste property by extravagance and vice. His 40th year will commence with popular tumult. His confident friends will betray him. Men of rank will oppose him; ill health attends him. Nothing that he puts his hands to will prosper during his 40th, 41st, and 42nd years. Should he live to the latter part of 40, severe illness, or misfortune to his body, is certain.

The Stars awaiting to afflict, are Mars, Mercury and Saturn. Mars gives abundance of sorrows, accidents, and misfortunes; imprisonment, loss of property, and thefts. Active enemies rise against him. He will be in danger of death by cuts, stabs, or gun shots, &c. He will associate with martial men, and become addicted to vice. Fires surround him. Females will plot his destruction. Nothing that Mars and Venus can afflict him with will he escape. He will become very dogged, and more hypocritical than ever before. He will be frowned on by the people in all parts of the country. He will be committed to prison for forgery or swindling. The city of Nauvoo goes out of his hands. It is probable he takes to sea, to escape the vengeance of an enrage people.

Saint Louis Weekly Reveille, Monday Morning (15 July 1844), 7.

Newspaper carries a sarcastic comparison between Joseph Smith and Mohammed, saying Joseph would become a mythic personage among the saints, and that they would begin to claim great miracles in his name.

THE PROPHET.Joe Smith has surpassed Mohammed in every respect. He has composed his Koran, carnalized heaven, established his creed, sent forth a distinct and restless people in the very teeth of opposition and persecution, while, better than all, if anything were wanting to hallow his memory, he has "borne testimony with his blood," &c. Joe would, no doubt, very willingly have avoided this deviation from the Arab's career, but, as it is, his Saintship is more sacred for it. 'Twill not be long ere pilgrimages are made to Nauvoo, and miracles announced, quite as marvelous as that of the suspended coffin!

The creed of Mohammed was, comparatively, a light of truth to the tribes surrounding; but, thrice potent, Mormonism prevails amid the radiance, philosophical and religious, of the nineteenth century. If its found be but as luck in his successors, as the impostor of old, there will be considerable of a "clearing out" of Hancock county, and a few others, as well!

There can be no doubt that the crimes of Smith's neighbors, in killing him, has made the Prophet a fairer character in the minds of all, while the imagination of his own people is already investing him with the robes of deathless glory. Twenty years, in spite of printing, will make Joe a mythic personage among the Mormons!

The following extracts show that blind fanatical devotion which clings to its object through all changesthrice closely when opposed. The lady evidently has so me stuff in her, albeit her spirit is as far from really poetical, as Joe's was from the divine.

From the Times and Seasons

The Assassination of Generals Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith, first Presidents of the Church of the Latter-Day Saints, who were massacred by a mob, in Carthage, Hancock County, Ill., on the 27th June, 1844;

By Miss Eliza R. Snow

[Then follows Rev. 6:9-11, and a poem published by Eliza R. Snow in the Times and Seasons 5, no. 12 (1 July 1844): 575.]

Saint Louis Weekly Reveille, Monday Morning (29 July 1844), 23.
