Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Salisbury, Catherine Smith

(July 28, 1812-February 1, 1900)

Letter from Aunt Catherine to John, Joseph F., and Samuel H. B., which shows their closeness and affection.

Joseph [F.] and John, for my part I would be exceedingly glad if all of us the connections, and all, could live in a society together and believe in one Lord, one Savior, one faith, and one baptism, and see eye to eye and rejoice in the holy one of Israel. This is the sincere desire of my heart. . . . This is from your affectionate aunt, Katherine Salisburey.

"Katherine Salisbury to 'Dear Nephews' John, Joseph F., and Samuel H. B. Smith, Sept. 11, 1865," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah.

Note: Katherine (or Catherine) Salisbury, was the younger sister of the Prophet Joseph Smith. In this letter, she signed her name "Salisburey."

Testifies of the early days of the Church, of the day it was organized, of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and of the felicity of the early church; she also warns against pride.

FOUNTAIN GREN TOWNSHIP,

Hancock Co., Ill., March 10th [1886]

Dear Sisters:Seeing the invitation in the "Home Column" for both the aged and young to contribute to sustaining it, and wishing to lend a helping hand towards carrying on the great work which has been commenced in these last days, I desire before I pass away, to place my testimony on record. I have been a member of this church, ever since its first organization on the 6th day of April, 1830. I am the only surviving sister of the martyrs Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and will soon be 73 years old. I can testify to the fact of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and also to its truth, and the truth of the everlasting gospel as contained therein.

I well remember the trials my brother had, before he obtained the records. After he had the vision, he went frequently to the hill, and upon returning would tell us, "I have seen the records, also the brass plates and the sword of Laban with the breast plate and interpreters." He would ask father why he could not get them? The time had not yet come, but when it did arrive he was commanded to go on the 22nd day of September 1827 at 2 o'clock. We had supposed that when he should bring them home, the whole family would be allowed to see them, but he said it was forbidden of the Lord. They could be seen only by those who were chosen to bear their testimony to the world. We had therefore to be content until they were translated and we could have the book to read. Many times I have read its sacred pages, I have wept like a child, while the Spirit has borne witness with my spirit to its truth. Brothers and Sisters, who have obeyed the gospel and are members of the Church of Jesus Christ, you have greater reason to be thankful than all the rest of the world, because the Lord has given you the gospel in its plainness, also revelations for the government of his church, and opened your eyes that you could see the truth, and touched your hearts with a desire to do his will and filled you with peace and love one for another?

After the records were translated and the book printed, we often met together and held prayer meetings. Some of our neighbors would come to these meetings and ask us mockingly, if we expected with our little band to convert the world and make them believe the golden bible? Thank the Lord, the truth did go forth and the gospel was preached in power and demonstration of the Spirit, to the converting of hundreds and thousands, who are to-day rejoicing in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and of the heavenly gifts of the gospel. I was one of the number who met in the first conference held in these last days, when the church was first organized. We only numbered thirty, but we were a happy little band. It was a great day of rejoicing for us, and a number were added to the fold by baptism. My brother William and myself are all who are left now, and we shall soon pass away, but while I can I will bear my testimony to the truth of the latter day work, both spiritual and temporal. I know that it is true. I saw its rise and saw its fall. Saw the sheep scattered without a shepherd, but thank God, after the dark days I have seen its rise again, and the shepherd whom the Lord has raised up [is] calling the sheep together, and may the work roll on till the whole earth is filled with the knowledge of the Lord, and all Israel is gathered home.

And now, dear sisters, go on in the good cause you have begun. Train up your children in the way they should go and when they are old they will not depart from it. Beware of pride. It was pride and seeking after the vain things of the world that caused the Nephites' fall. Be humble and the Lord will bless you all. I may write again, for I have only told in part what I wish to say.

Your sister in the gospel,

KATHERINE SALISBURY.

"Katherine Salisbury to Dear Sisters, 10 March 1886," Saints Herald 33, no. 17 (1 May 1886): 260; also in Dan Vogel, Early Mormon Documents (Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books, 1996), 1:521-22.

Affidavit certifying Joseph translated the Book of Mormon prior to meeting Sidney Rigdon.

State of Illinois

Kendall County

I, Katherine Salisbury, being duly sworn depose and say, that I am a resident of the State of Illinois and have been for forty years last past; that I will be Sixty Eight years of age July 28th, 1881.

That I am a daughter of Joseph Smith senior and Sister to Joseph Smith Jr. the translator of the Book of Mormon. That at the time the said book was published I was seventeen years of age; that at the time of the publication of said book my brother, Joseph Smith Jr., lived in the family of my father, in the town of Manchester, ontario county[,] New York and that he had, all of his life to this time made his home with the family.

That at the time and for years prior thereto I lived in and was a member of such family and personally knowing to the things transacted in said family, and those who visited at my father's house, and the friends of the family and the friends and acquaintances of my brother Joseph Smith Jr., who visited at or came to my father's house.

That prior to the latter part of the year A.D. 1830, there was no person who visited with or was an acquaintance of my brother Joseph <or called upon the> said family or any member thereof, to my knowledge, by the name of Sidney Rigdon; nor was such person known to the family or any member thereof to my knowledge, until the last part of the year AD 1830, or the first part of the year, 1831, and Sometime after the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ by Joseph Smith jr. And Several months after the publication of the Book of Mormon. That I remember the time when Sidney Rigdon came to my father's place and it was after the removal of my father from Waterloo, N. Y. to Kirtland, Ohio; That this was in the year, 1831, and some months after the publication of the Book of Mormon and fully one year after the Church <was organized> as before stated herein. That I made this statement not on account of fear, favor or hope of reward of and [any?] kind; but simply that the truth may be known with reference to said matter; and that the foregoing statements made by me are true as I verily believe.

[signed] Katherine Salisbury

Sworn to before me and Subscribed in my presence by the said Katherine Salisbury this 15th day of April, A.D. 1881.

[signed] J. H. Jenks

Notary Public

"Katherine Smith Salisbury, Affidavit, 15 April 1881," Artificial Collection, Community of Christ Archives, Independence, Missouri. Published in Saints' Herald 28, no. 11 (1 June 1881): 169; also cited in Dan Vogel, comp., Early Mormon Documents (Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books, 1996), 1:519-20.

Heard Joseph's last sermon, in which he said there were those present who sought his life; tells of her farewell conversations with Joseph and Hyrum.

"I heard Brother Joseph's last sermon, delivered to a great audience in Nauvoo," said Mrs. Salisbury, and a look of tenderness lighted up those dimming eyes as she spoke. "In that sermon," continued the venerable lady, "Brother Joseph said there were seated on the speaker's stand beside him those who were conspiring to take his life, and who would be responsible for his death."

Among the valuable relics exhibited to the visitor was a portrait of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, standing facing each other, dressed in the peculiar costumes worn by them as prophets of the church. "That is the position they assumed the last time I ever saw my brothers," said Mrs. Salisbury. "I left them on the Saturday (June 22, 1844)before the Thursday that they were murdered at Carthage. Brother Joseph shook my hand, saying, "Sister Catherine, as soon as this trouble blows over I will come down to Plymouth and make you a visit." Brother Hyrum simply said "Good-bye" in an impressive manner. I never saw them again in life. They were both very kind to me, and whenever there was a church celebration or any big doings at Nauvoo they would always send for me."

Warren Lovel Van Dine, "Biographical Sketch of Catherine Smith Salisbury," Carthage Republican, 16 May 1891, microfilm, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Tells the story of the coming of Moroni, describes his dress, of his telling of the ancient prophecies about the Book of Mormon, and of his showing Joseph a vision of the Hill Cumorah; also recalls that Joseph told his father and family, that he tried to take the plates and failed, that when he secured them he was to take someone with him, and that he was assaulted on the Hill on the day he received the plates.

I stand before you a remnant of the family that brought forth the sacred record, to bear my testimony.

I can remember the time that this work commenced, that my brother had the vision, that he saw the angel and talked with him. After he had his first vision, he lay in bed one night studying what he had seen. And his room became light, and it grew lighter and lighter until an angel descended and stood by the side of his bed. He did not touch the floor, but he stood in the air. He was dressed in white raiment, of whiteness beyond anything Joseph had ever seen in his life, and had a girdle about his waist. He saw his hands and wrists, and they were pure and white, and talked with him. He said that he was Moroni, and that he was sent as a messenger to tell him concerning the record that was hidden in the hill [Cumorah] which was a history of the people that once inhabited this continent, and also that it was the pure gospel of Christ. That the gospel that he had had been adulterated, and this was the pure gospel of Jesus Christ, and would be preached in these last days.

He also talked with him and told him concerning the prophecies of [Isaiah] and told him what was coming upon the earth. And he also opened the vision and showed him the hill [Cumorah] where the records laid, and talked with him a while, and then ascended. And while Joseph was still thinking over what he had seen and what the angel had told him, he descended again and stood by his side, and repeated the same things. He told him the prophecies of [Isaiah] were being fulfilled and would come true, and that this record must be brought forth to the church established in the last days, for there was no true church on earth. He ascended again, and then he descended the third time; and then my brother said that the chickens crowed for day, showing that he had conversed with the angel all the blessed night.

The next morning when my brother got up he went to the field to work, but he could not; the spirit of God was upon him and the angel was with him. Father told him he was not well, and he had better go to the house. Joseph started to the house, but fell by the way, and the angel Moroni appeared to him and said:

"Joseph, tell your father what you have seen and what you are commanded to do."

He said: "I am afraid my father won't believe me."

But the angel told him his father would believe him. So he went to the house and sent for father and my two brothers, and they came to the house and sat and talked quite a spell. I wondered at it. I was young, and I didn't know what they were talking about, because I knowed they were so busy with their harvesting.

Father said: "Joseph, go and do just as you are bid."

So he went to the hill [Cumorah] (this was, I think, the 22nd day of September, 1827,) and found it exactly as he had seen it in the vision. The earth was rounding on top, and he got a stick and pried the dirt away from the edges, and got a lever and raised the lid, and there beheld the records that were to be translated, and the Urim and Thummim, and the sword and the breast-plate of Laban, and the brass plates Lehi brought from Jerusalem.

Moroni told him the time had not yet come for them to be brought forth, but that in due time he should bring them forth and translate them. Joseph said: "I am not learned," and the angel said: "There is the Urim and Thummin, and they will show you how to interpret them."

The next year at the same time Joseph visited the same place again, and the third year he went expecting to get the records. So he raised up the lid and took them out. And he thought that somebody might come along and see these things (not thinking that the Lord had watched him 1,400 years), and laid the record down and covered up the box. When he turned to take his record it was gone. The angel told him he must persevere and must not give up.

He raised the lid again, and there was the record, just as it laid before. He reached forth his hands to take it and he felt a pressure pushing [him] away. He tried the second time, and the third time he fell to the earth with the pressure, and he cried in the bitterness of his soul:

"Lord, what have I done, that I can not get these records?"

Moroni said: "You have not obeyed the commandments as you were commanded to; you must obey his commandments in every particular. You were not to lay them out of your hands until you had them in safe keeping."

Joseph said: "What shall I do?"

He said: "Come here the next hear at this time and bring your oldest brother with you, and you can receive the records."

In November my brother [Alvin] took sick, and through the ministering of medicine by the doctors he passed away. Joseph went to the place and inquired of the angel what he should [do] now. The angel said: "you must bring some person with you."

And Joseph said: "'Who shall I bring? My oldest brother is gone."

The angel said: "You will know her when you see her."

That fall he went down to Pennsylvania and became acquainted with his wife, Miss Hale, and he knew when he saw her that she was the one to go with him to get the records.

In March they were married and he brought her home, and on September 22 she went with him to the place. She didn't see the records, but she went with him. He took them up and brought them part way home and hid them in a hollow log. My father in a few days heard that they had got a conjurer, who they said would come and find the plates, and he came home. Emma was weaving, and he said to her:

"You will have to go after Joseph (Joseph was away at work), for they are determined to find them records."

She said: "If I had a horse I could go."

A few days before a stray horse (we had nothing but oxen then) had come to our place, and father said: "I will get you a saddle and bridle and you can ride that horse."

She went to where Joseph was at work and told him that the records were in danger and that father was anxious for him to come and take care of them. He came right home and went to the place where the records were and wrapped them up in his frock and started home. He stepped on a log, and a man raised up and struck at him. Joseph knocked him down. He stepped on the second and thirds logs, and three different men struck at him, but he made his escape and came home. When he got to the door he said:

"Father, I have been followed; look and see if you can see any one."

He then threw himself on the bed and fainted, and when he came to he told us the circumstances; he had his thumb put out of place and his arm was very lame. We got a chest and locked the records up in the house. From that time on our house was searched all around; and our field and our wheat stacked were searched. The mob was around our house nearly every night, and one night they went into father's cooper shop and tore up his floor and dug the earth up. And from that time until we went to Pennsylvania we had to keep watch for the enemy.

And when he went to Pennsylvania he commenced translating the book of Mormon, and translated some one hundred and sixteen pages that Martin Harris took home and lost, and when my brother found they were lost, he was very much troubled and said:

"I am afraid I have broken the commandments and will not be allowed to translate the record."

The angel came and took the Urim and Thummim from him. He fasted and prayed several days, and the angel returned them again, and told him that his sins were forgiven, and for him to go ahead and translate, but not to translate that that was lost, but to begin where he had left off. He commenced, and when he had got the record partly translated, persecution rose there, and he wrote for David Whitmer to come and take him to his house. David came, and he asked how he should carry the plates and he was told that they would be there when he got there, in the garden.

When he got to Father Whitmer's he found the records, as he had been told he would, and there he finished tra[n]slating the Book of Mormon, and there is where the three witnesses were showed the plates by the angel, that turned the leaves over one by one. And the angels told them that when the church became pure and the rest of the record (some of the plates were sealed) would be translated and brought to the church. After that the eight witnesses saw the book, and turned it over leaf by leaf and saw the characters that were on them. From that time on they commenced printing the Book of Mormon, and soon after the book was printed there were six that met together and organized the Church of Jesus Christ as it now exists in these last days.

Kyle R. Walker, "Katharine Smith Salisbury's Recollections of Joseph's Meetings with Moroni," BYU Studies 41, no. 3 (2002): 5-17.
