Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Salisbury, Herbert Spencer

(1879-1964)

Memories of the night Joseph brought the plates home; Joseph counsels Alexander Doniphan not to buy land in Missouri; description of Joseph; in January 1843 Joseph visits his impoverished sister; recollections of hiding the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon.

Catherine Smith Salisbury, told me she was present at home when her brother, Joseph Smith, came in nearly exhausted, carrying the package of gold plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. He was carrying the package clasped to his side with his left hand and arm, and his right hand was badly bruised from knocking down at least three men who had leaped at him from behind bushes or fences as he ran until out of breath. She said he entered the house running and threw himself on a couch panting from his extraordinary exertion.

She told me Joseph allowed her to "heft" the package but not to see the gold plates, as the angel had forbidden him to show them at that period. She said they were very heavy.

She told me that she was one of the first eight members, baptized into the Church. She said the first six members were, Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Samuel H. Smith, Hyrum Smith, David Whitmer, and Peter Whitmer, Jr.

. . . She said that when they [were] driven from their lands in Missouri the Prophet told General Doniphan, his attorney, not to invest in the lands as the time would come when all improvements would be destroyed and not one building stone would be left standing upon another.

This prophecy was literally fulfilled during the Civil War when Gen. Ewing ordered the Missourians to vacate several counties including the very ones where these same Missourians and their fathers robbed, murdered and exiled the Mormons. . . . The Missourians speak of Gen. Ewing's Order No. 11, as the acme of the worst persecution in all history. They were made to take their movable property and leave those counties while the Union Army pushed them out and burned every house, barn and stack so that Joseph Smith's prophecy to General Doniphan was literally fulfilled.

. . . My grandmother, Catherine Smith Salisbury, told me that her brother Joseph was six feet tall, athletic and fair, and loved to wrestle. She said that he was not in the least snobbish, but treated all he met with kindness, consideration and respect. Once when a noted wrestler from New England visited him in Nauvoo, he challenged the wrestler to "take a fall" with him. In the ensuing bout he threw the wrestler three times, and the man then refused to take any more "falls." From what she told me, I think the Prophet must have been as affectionate with his relatives as President George Albert Smith. She said that on her rare visits to Nauvoo the Prophet treated her and her family with great kindness and generosity and sent her home laden with food, money and clothing.

These things she sadly needed as she and her family lived among anti-mormons who tried to make life hard for them, refused her husband work in his blacksmith shop, or elsewhere, and after the death of the Prophet, expelled them from one neighborhood after another, so that some of her small children died, and her husband also died of typhoid fever, malnutrition and discouragement at an early age. The family was often in the condition described by Dr. Richards, who with the Prophet visited Catherine in January in 1843 in Plymouth, Illinois, and found her almost barefoot, and her four children entirely so, in the middle of a severe winter ([see] p. 507 [of] Historical Record). My father was the youngest child at that time being about 15 months old. As I remember it, she told me that on that visit Joseph gave her some money, among which she afterward found his "lucky" penny, one of those old fashioned copper cents about as large as a half dollar, and bearing the date 1830, the year of the founding of the Church.

. . . It is my recollection that my grandmother knew that the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon, as translated from the plates, was placed in the corner stone of one of the main buildings at Nauvoo.

"Things the Prophet's Sister Told Me," 30 June 1945, typescript copy, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-5.
