Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Sargent, Abel Morgan

(February 28 [or 27], 1799 [or 1798]-October 1847)

Tells of joining the Church, of enduring persecution, and in moment of discouragement being uplifted by a "heart to heart" conversation with Joseph Smith.

Abel Margan Sargent, a member of the Mormon Battalion, was born in the state of Maryland Feb. 27, 1790 the son of John Sargent and Sarah Tunis. Having received a good education he taught school in Floyd Co., Indiana where he married Sarah Edwards daughter of a wealthy family, who bore her husband 9 children . . . [children named and listed; tells of joining church].

Abel and his wife both joined the church, and suffered much persecution being driven from their home by a mob. They arose from their breakfast table and hurriedly gathered a little clothing. He turned his animals loose, then placed his wife and children in a one horse vehicle, and took them to his wife's parents (David and Drusilla Edwards) for safety. Hardship and exposure brought about a premature confinement to his wife, who died a few days after reaching there. Her last wish expressed was that he would keep his children with the body of the church. The loss of his companion caused him to leave the smaller children with their grandparents, who later refused to give them up. For fear of being followed, he and his brother (Benare) made a skiff and secretly took the children down the Mississippi river to a place of safety. After many disappointments, and the loss of two children, and realizing that his own health was failing, he became discouraged. At this time he had the pleasure of a heart to heart talk with the Prophet Joseph Smith who gave him advice and counsel which made his burdens lighter ever after. . . . [As the manuscript continues, it tells of his preparing to go West, and of joining the Mormon Battalion, and later of dying from a sudden attack of cholera.]

Caddie Rich Parrish, "Abel Morgan Sargent," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-2.
