Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Saunders, Orlando

(b. ca. 1803)

In an interview with William and E. L. Kelley, Saunders says he knew the Smiths when they lived in Palmyra and "always thought they were honest"; after leaving Palmyra, he returned to pay off a debt; the Smiths were not good managers, but were helpful during sicknesses; drank as did others at the time; Joseph was always a gentleman.

Mr. Saunders is a man seventy-eight years old [in March, 1881]; a fair type of the intelligent New York farmer; seemingly well-to-do in this world's goods; and quite active for a man of his years; and withal, has an honest and thoughtful face.

Entering upon conversation with reference to our business, Mr. Saunders at once said:

"Well, you have come to a poor place to find out anything. I don't know anything against these men, myself." (Evidently judging that we wanted to get something against them, only.)

"Were you acquainted with the Smiths, Mr. Saunders?"

"Yes, sir; I knew all of the Smith family well. They have all worked for me many a day. They were very good people. Young Joe (as we called him then) has worked for me, and he was a good worker."

"In what respect did they differ from other people, if at all?"

"I never noticed that they were different from other neighbors. They were the best family in the neighborhood in case of sickness; one was at my house nearly all the time when my father died. I always thought them honest. They were owing me some money when they left here. One of them came back in about a year and paid me."

"How were they as to habits of drinking and getting drunk?"

"Everybody drank a little in those days, and the Smiths with the rest; they never got drunk to my knowledge."

" . . . How well did you know young Joseph Smith?"

"Oh, just as well as one could, very well. He has worked for me many a time, and been about my place a great deal. He stopped with me many a time, when through here, after they went west to Kirtland. He was always a gentleman when about my place."

"What did you know about his finding that book, or the plates in the hill over here?"

"He always claimed that he saw the angel and received the book; but I don't know anything about it. Have seen it, but never read it as I know of; didn't care anything about it."

"Well; you seem to differ a little from a good many of the stories told about these people."

"I have told you just what I know about them, and you will have to go somewhere else for a different story."

William H. Kelley and E. L. Kelley, "Interview With Orlando Saunders and Dr. John Stafford, March, 1881," Saints' Herald 28, no. 11 (1 June 1881): 165; also in Juvenile Instructor 17, no. 19 (1 October 1882): 301-2.
