Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Scott, Jacob

(August 12, 1782-January 2, 1845)

In a letter to his daughter, he tells of Joseph coming to him to heal a rift between them; he also mentions to avoid starving, Orson Hyde ate snails en route to Jerusalem.

Elder Law who were assembled, to attend the funeral [of Scott's wife] Joseph's child died, shortly after; and another since, an infantThe Church is increasing in number dailyJoseph has translated and published the "Times and Seasons." A considerable part of the writings of Abraham, found on the body of one of the mummiesJoseph, and I, are now reconciled to each other;He has been out to see me, this winter, and appeared very friendly.He has paid me part of what he owed me and has promised me moreElder Orson Hyde has been to Jerusalem, and has consecrated the spot, where the former Temples stood for the building of the Temple of the Lord in these last days; He had to have several days without food, and for some time he had subsisted on snails, and could not get enough of them.On his passage to Jerusalem, and not a great way from that place; while sitting on the deck in meditation, about one o'clock at night, a very bright glittering sword appeared in the Heavens, about six feet long, with a beautiful Hilt, as plain and complete, as any you ever saw, and an arm, with a perfect hand, stretched itself out, and took hold on the Hilt of the sword.

"Jacob Scott to Mary Warnock, March 24, 1842," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Used by permission of Community of Christ Archives, Independence, Missouri. Spelling, punctuation, and grammar have been modernized.

Note: Mary Warnock is Scott's daughter.

When Scott was sick, Joseph predicted he would get better, which he did; he speaks of Orson Hyde's return from Jerusalem with Olive branches; also speaks of rebaptisms in Nauvoo, including Joseph's.

When I was living so to all human appearance almost at the point of death Joseph Smith the Prophet and Elder William Law came to see me; I was reduced to a skeleton. Joseph predicted openly that I would recover and it was the common Town talk that Father Scott would not die at that time; although the report had been circulated often that I was dead; and the first time I went to Town in our wagon I met Brother Joseph in one of the streets, and the words with which he first accosted me were, "Well, Father Scott, did not God tell the truth that time?" He also hinted to my family and Elder Law in my hearing that perhaps an old friend of yours might go on the Lord's business to Ireland yet!!! But to shame I confess that, his words seemed to me as idle tales and I believed him not.The "cold clammy sweat" came out in me at intervals, and I expected to die in a very few days at most. . . .

. . . Elder Hyde has been to Jerusalem to consecrate the place for the Temple of the Lord and for the gathering of the Jews. He returned to Nauvoo after having accomplished his mission. He also brought with him "Two Olive Branches" one from the Garden of Gethsemane, and the other from the "Mount of Olives." I had them both in my hands and also one of the olive berries, and a composition of dead locusts and wild honey, which John Baptist used to live upon. On his way home from Jerusalem he (Elder Hyde) published an account of the work in the German language and had it printed in Germany before he left there. One Elder has been sent to the East Indies and one to New South Wales and so the gospel of the Kingdom will shortly be preached in all the world for a witness to all nations and then shall the end come. Amen. . . .

Nearly all the Church have been baptized again, for the remission of their sins, since they joined the Church, I have also, by the hands of Brother Joseph (as he himself has been) and I would advise Jane and you, Mary, to attend to it as soon as you can have an Elder or a Priest of the Church to administer. I had only to explain the mater to Brother Joseph candidly and fairly, why we stayed in Missouri so long, after the main body of the church, and he was perfectly satisfied with us all. I don't repent that I sacrificed my property, and have for six years this month (sine I joined this Church of Christ) been "suffering affliction with the people of God." If we suffer we shall also reign with him. Hundreds are coming here without a dollar in their pocket, but he [illegible] supplies the young lions and ravens lays out a way for them.We want not your assistance in worldly things, but we would be glad to have your society once in a while and to see you all and your children walking in obedience to the will of God.

"Jacob Scott to Mary Warnock, February 28, 1842," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Used by permission of Community of Christ Archives, Independence, Missouri. Spelling, punctuation, and grammar have been modernized.

Note: Mary Warnock is Scott's daughter.

Joseph tells Scott to prepare for a mission to Ireland if his health permits and to go via Canada and take William and Isaac with him.

When Brother Joseph was giving me charge, relative to my going to Ireland in case my life and health would be spared so to do; he ordered me to go by way of Canada, and by you, William and Isaac, to be assisted to go there; viz: to Ireland: but if it does not meet with your views and feelings; write as soon as possible and let me know your minds candidly, for I would be sorry to put you to much trouble.

"Jacob Scott to Mary Warnock, January 5, 1844," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar has been modernized.

Mentions the Mansion House; describes Joseph's power as a public speaker; tells of the untiring efforts of the Missourians to persecute Joseph; and gives a good summary of the revelation on eternal marriage.

Joseph keeps the principal hotel in the city; vast numbers call and stay with him. The name of his establishment is Mansion. He owns perhaps the most extensive and best stable from where you live to Nauvoo, take what route (road?) you might, it is built of brick. The Mansion is a frame, very elegant and tastefully furnished, maybe 200 feet long in the form of an L.

Could you all but see the Congregation of the Saints gathered together in the summer to meeting every fair day, perhaps it exceeds in number, order, solemnity, and yet cheerful, happy countenances, cleanliness and beauty of dress and persons any other on the face of the globe. Joseph preaches far oftener than formerly; the brethren and sisters are not so well pleased with any other, and no wonder for he is a scribe well instructed and he brings out of his treasures things new and old. In the winter there is preaching in different parts of the City, every first day of the week and in the country also we have preaching in our neighborhood in winter, likewise.

In Nauvoo, they have a City guard drilled every day and well equipped to keep order and be ready on a minutes notice wanting to quell riots, secure offenders, protect life and property, etc. They are paid by the Corporation. The Missourians are untiring in their persecutions of Joseph and the Church, but their wicked plots and designs are always baffled and frustrated and it exposes them tenfold more to the execrations of an insulted community, and when they are ripe in iniquity and their cup is full, then wrath will come upon them to the uttermost, and terrible vengeance will not linger nor slumber and the day is not far off.

Several communications of good utility and uncommon interest have been lately communicated to Joseph and the church; but where you all are you cannot obey them; one is that all marriage contracts or covenants are to be "Everlasting," that is; the parties (if they belong to the Church and will obey the will of God in this relationship to each other) are to be married for both Time and Eternity; and as respects those whose partners were dead before this Revelation was given to the Church, they have the privilege to be married to their deceased husbands or wives (as the case may be) for eternity; and if it is a man who desires to be married to his deceased wife, a sister in the Church stands as proxy or as a representative of the deceased in attending to the marriage ceremony, and so in the case of a widow who desires to be joined in an everlasting covenant to her dead husband and if they are not thus married for eternity they must remain in a state of celibacy and be as the angels, ministering spirits, or servants to the married to all eternity and can never rise to any greater degree of glory. Many members of the Church have already availed themselves of this privilege and have been married to their deceased partners, and in some cases where a man has been married to two or three wives, and they are dead, he has been married to them all; in the order in which he was married to them while living, and also widows have been married to their dead husbands but only to one husband. I intend to be married to the wife of my youth before I go to Ireland. I would be respectfully glad to have you there to witness our second nuptials. The work of Generation is not to cease forever with the Saints in this present life. There are many things connected with this subject which would make the matter much plainer to your minds and more satisfactory. Therefore, beware how you treat is subject for no doubt it is of God.

Other revelations intimately connected with this momentous dispensation and which are almost ready to unfold themselves to us I cannot communicate to you at present although I know them in part, for you could not hear them now; If you were living with the Church, your spiritual advantages would be much greater than they are now; but to inform you of all that is made known to the Church, here, yet would go abroad from you and likely cause you much persecution, at any rate much more than you have.

"Jacob Scott to Mary Warnock, January 5, 1844," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar and spelling have been modernized.

Note: Mary Warnock, Scott's daughter, was living in Upper Canada at the time Scott was writing.
