Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Sewell, James

(birth and death dates unavailable)

Joseph's last speech to the Nauvoo Legion; he wished he could buy them shoes and other necessities; he prophesied that they would go to the Rockies and that learned men would seek positions over them, but that their friends would be his friends.

June 22, 1844 An Address given by Joseph Smith on this day, we were rolled out by order of General Joseph Smith and [he] counseled to give up our arms that had been supplied for our defense by the authority of the State of Illinois, saying we will give unto them that asketh of us, and trust in God for our future welfare. I wish to render to you my thanks as soldiers and citizens under my command, as your General you have done faithfully your duty, in guarding this city, and in preserving the lives of all the people, as well as my own life, in a special manner, for I have seen you on duty without shoes and comfortable clothing, and if I had the means to buy or if I could obtain these necessary things for you I would gladly do it, but I cannot mortage any of my property to get one dollar, but I will say this: you will be called the first Elders of the Church, and your mission will be to the nations of the earth. You will gather many people unto the fullness of the Rocky Mountains as a center for the gathering of the people, and you will be faithful because you have been true, and many of those that come in under your ministry because of their much learning, they will seek for high positions, and they will be set up and raise themselves in eminence above you, but you will walk in low places unnoticed and you will know all that transpires in their midst, and those that are your friends, will be my friends. This I will promise to you, that when I come again to lead you forth, for I will go to prepare a place for you, so that where I am you may be with me. He then thanked us for past duties, you are now dismissed, to take [care] of yourselves.

"James Sewell Notebook (1853-1886)," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-3.

Joseph speaks to the Nauvoo Legion; he acknowledges he has many friends; he prophesies his enemies will pursue his friends, but they shall rise to the top of the wheel of fortune; he also prophesies the Rocky Mountains to be a gathering place for all, that Jehovah will protect the Saints, and that the elements will defend them.

On the 24th day of June 1844 We heard a call for the Legion to muster, in Main Street, near the Mansion house, where I again saw our General in his uniform upon a small house, when he again spake unto the Legion laying his hand upon the head of Brother Hancock, who was sitting at his feet, saying, "this day the Lord has shown unto me that which was never shown to me before, that I have thousands of friends that never pretended any friendship to me. While others have sought to crawl into my bosom, because of my good feelings towards the, and now they are vipers, and seek for my life; and if they take it they will pursue you. They will do it anyhow, and if you are obliged to fight in self defense, be sure that you do not stain your hand with the blood of woman or children, and when your armies call for quarters be sure that you grant them the same, and then you will gain favor over the world. When he raised his hand, and also his voice, saying YOU WILL FOREVER BE NAMED THE NAUVOO LEGION, and as I have had the honor of being your General and leader, I feel to say a few words for your comfort, and I wish to ascertain your interest and faith, in your future mission through life, that you are now engaged in, even the same cause with the power of the priesthood sealed upon you, and your calling is to minister life and salvation unto all nations upon the earth, although things appear at the present crises by the works of our enemies that they hold an overruling power over us. But I will liken these things to a wheel of fortune, if we are at this time under the wheel it is sure to be rolling on and as sure will the Saints sometime be on the top of this great wheel if they hang on; for their fortune is in view (?); our enemies are after me to trust my life among them by their vows and honor of State and that, by the Governor and authorities of the State of Illinois. Therefore I will say to you, and Saints and Elders of Israel, be not troubled, nor give yourselves any uneasiness, so as to make any rash moves, or to take any hasty steps in doing any wrong where by you will be cut short in your calling in preaching the Gospel to this generation, for you will yet be called upon to go forth, and call upon the freemen from Main to Texas, to gather themselves together to the Rocky Mountains. And the red man from the west, and all people from the North, from the South, and from the East, to go to the west, and to establish themselves in their strong holds of their gathering places. and there you will gather the red man to their center, from their scattered and dispersed situation, to become the strong arm of Jehovah, who will be a strong bulwark of protection from your foes. These things I feel to tell you beforehand, that you my be ready for every duty that you may be called to perform, for at this time I need the best of friends to stand by me. And on this occasion I would like to know of you all by your own voices, yes of no. are you willing to lay down your lives for me, when with one unanimous voice Yes!! I am your Father. Shall I not be your Father, when all with a loud exclamation said Yes!! When he again said to us, then I am willing to lay down my life for you, and if they kill me, they will shed innocent blood. He then drew his sword from its scabbard, raising it above his head, saying I will call upon the Gods to bear witness of this . I will draw my sword and it shall never be sheathed again until vengeance is taken on all your enemies. I will call upon the elements in your defense. The winds and the whirlwinds, and the thunder, and the lightning, and the hail storms. The heavens shall tremble, and with earthquakes, shall the earth be shaken, with the seas heaving themselves beyond their bounds. These things shall be brought to bear against your enemies, for your preservation, as the people of the Lord, we have given up our arms, and they [have] taken away our right of protection, by our City Charter, and they desire that I should surrender myself unto their hand, which I have consented to do. So I only go to return to you again. With this blessing upon us we were dismissed to go to our homes

"James Sewell Notebook (1853-1886)," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 4-10.

Revelation on Sidney Rigdon in which the Lord tells Joseph to let Sidney go east, as he would otherwise aid the enemies of the Saints; also that he should run for vice presidency.

To Joseph Smith: Forasmuch as Sydney chooses his own ways rather than mine, let him go east with his family, even as he has desired; for persecution is coming upon you, and it will be better for you and for my people that he be far away from this place, for he will correspond with the mob, and work for the injury of my people, if he remain here, and be a thorn in your side; for he has not abode in my word, and Satan will have power over him; send him, therefore, speedily away from this city, and let him be and I will so over-rule his ways, that he shall meet the chastisement that is in store for him for his disobedience here, and for his blasphemy in the land of Missouri. Nevertheless, let him be a candidate for Vice President, and place upon him every mark of honor and respect that he may have every possible inducement to abide in the truth, being borne up by the good feelings of his brethren. This will be noble and indulgent upon your part; but if he will not remain in the faith, but fall from his standing, these honors which you place upon him shall stand as a testimony against him.

"James Sewell Notebook (1853-1886)," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: While Sewell records the above as a revelation received by the Prophet Joseph Smith, he gives neither source nor footnote for it, which is contrary to his normal procedure, as almost everything else in his notebook provides some documentation.
