Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Sirrine, Mephibosheth

(October 27, 1811-May 21, 1848)

Knew and wrestled with Joseph as a youth; received a prophetic blessing from Joseph which was completely fulfilled: he was instantly healed, went on a mission, and met a woman who offered him housing, all as predicted.

At an early age, he [Mephibosheth] became acquainted with the young prophet, Joseph Smith, the man who claimed to have received visitation of heavenly beings; who restored the gospel of Jesus Christ and the Priesthood of God giving him the right to act in his name and do His work here upon the earth. Both of these boys were good athletes and became fast friends, often wrestling together to test each other's strength. While "Bosha" was living in New York State near the Prophet's home he became very ill and was too weak to rise from his bed. The prophet visited him and called him to go out and preach the gospel in these words, "Bosha, get up. I have a mission for you." Mephibosheth replied, "Brother Joseph, I am so weak I can hardly raise my head, but if you will get me a bite to eat and have your wife pack my suitcase, I will leave on my mission." He also requested that the Prophet anoint his head with consecrated oil and give him a special health blessing. This the Prophet proceeded to do and promised him in the name of the Lord that it would not be but a few minutes until he would be walking as well as ever, that when he got to the end of his mission trek, permission would be granted him to speak in a school-house and that he would have a large audience. He told of how a lady and her daughter would be present and at the close of the meeting they would walk down the aisle and invite him to stay at their home and to have dinner there. This was fulfilled as it had been promised. When he was opening the meeting, he observed a lady and her daughter walk down the aisle and seat themselves near the front of the large audience and the girl took a tablet as the prophet had also predicted, and began to take down his sermon, in shorthand. After the people had left the building, they remained and came forward to invite Mephibosheth to dinner that evening and to stay at their home as long as he was in that part of the country. Later, he married this young woman who became the mother of his first three children, namely Theodore C., Parley P. and Helen Sirrine. This was a great testimony to Mephibosheth Sirrine. He recognized the prophetic power of the Prophet, Joseph Smith.

Warren L. Sirrine, "The Life of George Warren Sirrine," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
