Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, Bathsheba Wilson Bigler

(May 3, 1822-September 20, 1910)

Knew the Prophet and his family; she was present at the laying of the Nauvoo Temple cornerstone.

In the spring of 1840, our family moved to Nauvoo, in Illinois. Here I continued my punctuality in attending meetings, had many opportunities of hearing Joseph Smith preach, and tried to profit by his instructions, and received many testimonies to the truth of the doctrines he taught. Meetings were held out of doors in pleasant weather and in private houses when it was unfavorable. I was present at the laying of the cornerstone of the foundation of the Nauvoo Temple, and had become acquainted with the Prophet Joseph and his family.

"Autobiography of Bathsheba W. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 6.

Joseph gives the newly weds, George A. and Bathsheba Smith, a lot with a house on it, where they lived.

I was very happy and all of our relations on both sides were well pleased with our marriage. After living at Father [John] Smith's about a month, my husband [George A. Smith] rented a small log cabin close by and we moved into it. I had enough furniture, cooking utensils and earthenware, beds and bedding, including some nice earthenware which had been presented to my husband at the Staffordshire potteries in England while he was engaged there as a missionary. All of these blessings tending to make us very comfortable, but the house leaked and smoked and was otherwise uncomfortable. We next bought an unfinished log house, we fitted it up and built a brick chimney and that smoked. Soon after this my husband was counseled to move to Nauvoo. We did so and rented an old log house of Ebenezer Robinson which smoked and was open and cold. In a few weeks we rented a more comfortable room of [Bishop]. Vinson Knight. Bro. Joseph gave us a lot, which had a small log house on it. My husband fixed up the house the best he could. But after all, it was the worst looking house we had yet lived in. I was ashamed to have any of my acquaintances see me in such a looking place. It had, however, the desirable qualities of neither smoking nor leaking.

"Autobiography of Bathsheba W. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 7-8.

Heard Joseph charge the Twelve to administer the endowment, work for the dead, and to counsel the sisters regarding plural marriage.

Soon after my husband's return [Fall, 1843] we were blessed by receiving our endowments and were sealed under the holy law of Celestial Marriage which was revealed July 12th, 1843. I heard the Prophet Joseph charge the Twelve with the duty and responsibility of administering the Ordinances of Endowment and of Sealing for the living and the dead. I met many times with Brother Joseph and others who had received their endowments, in company with my husband, in an upper room dedicated for that purpose and prayed with them repeatedly in those meetings.

I heard the Prophet give instructions concerning plural marriage; he counseled the sisters not to trouble themselves in consequence of it, that all would be right, and the result would be for their glory and exaltation.

"Autobiography of Bathsheba W. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8-9.

Prior to his death, Joseph left instructions that the Twelve were to return to Nauvoo after his death.

Brother Adams has gone to Boston and [Jedediah] M. Grant to Washington. Joseph told Adams to go and tell the Twelve to come home when the tragedy was over and a good many more things, which he should preach on Sunday before he was killed, but the people did not understand it. Adams said he was a going to speak in parable. I have understood he said he did not understand all himself but it is explained now.

"Bathsheba W. Smith to George A. Smith," 6 July 1844, in Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1982), 132.

Heard Joseph preach baptism for the dead and saw such baptisms occur; also preached that the ancient order of Abraham would be restored, that children were the "royal diadem of woman"; also taught the true order of prayer; she was present when William Law was released from First Presidency, and she heard Joseph predict his impending death.

My first impressions were that he was an extraordinary mana man of great penetration; was different from any other man I ever saw: had the most heavenly countenance, was genial, affable and kind, and looked the soul of honor and integrity.

I know him to be what he professed to bea true Prophet of God, and the Lord through him restored the everlasting gospel and every ordinance and endowment that will lead us into the celestial kingdom.

I heard Joseph Smith preach baptism for the dead; saw him baptizing for the dead in the Mississippi River. . . .

I heard him preach that the ancient order of Abraham should be restored.

In Nauvoo, at his home, while playing with my baby boy, he said the children were the "honor, glory, and royal diadem of woman."

Once when speaking in one of our general fast meetings, he said that we did not know how to pray to have our prayers answered. But when I and my husband had our endowments in February, 1844, Joseph Smith presiding, he taught us the order of prayer.

I was present when William Law, Joseph Smith's counselor, was dropped from that quorum by each one present voting yes or no in his turn. He was the first member that was dropped who had received his endowments. One member hesitated to vote, which called forth earnest remarks from the Prophet Joseph. He showed clearly that it would be doing a serious wrong to retain him longer. After his explanation the vote was unanimous.

Joseph Smith attended one of our Relief Society meetings in the lodge room. He opened the meeting by prayer. His voice trembled very much, after which he addressed us. He said: "According to my prayer I will not be with you long to teach and instruct you; and the world will not be troubled with me much longer."

Bathsheba W. Smith, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 11, (1 June 1892): 344-45.

Testifies of Joseph, of the endowment, and of the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Bathsheba W. Smith said: "I rise to say that I know Joseph Smith was a true Prophet of God. I know that God, through that Prophet, revealed the endowments. I received mine in company with my husband when Joseph was living. I never had anything to disturb my faith. I know that President Young was the lawful successor of Joseph the Prophet. I heard Joseph's voice so plain, and even the different actions or gestures were the same in Brigham Young as in Joseph on the occasion referred to by Bishop Burton tonight. I wish to say that the pictures we see here of the Prophet are not true likenesses. Joseph was a handsome man, and above all he was a noble-appearing man. These pictures do not do him justice, and the best I have seen are little better than caricatures."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:32-33.

Meeting Joseph strengthened the testimony she had of him; she describes Joseph as a handsome, splendid looking man; she visited in the Prophet's home often; she recalls Joseph approved of her and her marriage to George A. Smith; she also recalls Joseph prophesied the Saints would move to the Rocky Mountains.

Father sold his farm in West Virginia and we moved to Missouri in 1838. We went to Illinois in February, 1839, but did not see the Prophet Joseph until the spring, when he got out of prison and came to Illinois. A conference was called soon after Joseph and his brethren arrived at Quincy. My brother took my sisters and me and went to that conference, and there I saw Joseph for the first time and heard him preach. I knew he was a Prophet of God, when I joined the Church before I saw him; my testimony was strengthened when I heard him preach, though at this time I did not get to speak to him. I do not remember just when I did first speak to him and shake hands with him.

The Prophet was a handsome man,splendid looking, a large man, tall and fair and his hair was light. He had a very nice complexion, his eyes were blue, and his hair a golden brown and very pretty.

I have heard the Prophet Joseph preach many a time. I have heard him prophesy, and I never knew but that everything came to pass that he said. I never missed a meeting.

I used to go very often to Brother Joseph's house, though not much before I was married. Once at dinner, I knew he was looking at me, but I did not feel afraid because I knew I had always been good and obedient and had all the faith possible in him and Mormonism, so I just let him look at me. Pretty soon he said to my sister-in-law, "George hit the right stick when he got her." And I have proved it, for my husband (George A. Smith) and I have lived happily togetherlike lovers.

Joseph, the Prophet, said we would come to the Rocky Mountains, and he had a company of young men selected to hunt a location for a home for the Saints. Samuel Richards was one of that company. I heard of it when we were in Illinois, and I remember an old lady coming in and talking to mother about what Joseph, the Prophet, had said that we would be in the Rocky Mountains sometime. I said I would like the time to come soon, I would like to get away from our enemies. She gave me a right good scolding, saying it was terrible to think of going to the Rocky Mountains.

My testimony today is, I know Joseph Smith was and is a Prophet, as well as I know anything. I know that he was just what he professed to be. I am the only one now living who had her endowments while he was alive, and I received them in Nauvoo before the temple was built. I have seen very many good man, but they had not the gift and blessing Joseph had. He was truly a Prophet of God.

Bathsheba W. Smith, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 549-50.
