Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, Elias

(September 6, 1804-June 24, 1888)

Arrives in Kirtland; meets Joseph; sees light shining from Kirtland Temple.

[Mon. 16th May 1836] Stopped at Erie, Erie County, Pennsylvannia; Ashtabula, Ashtabula County, Ohio; passed Conneaut & Marion & landed at Fairport, Geauga County, Ohio, 12 miles from Kirtland about 5 p.m.

Here I met Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and leaving Grandmother and the brethren at Fairport proceeded in the rain, tho it had been fair till after we landed, to Kirtland with Joseph and Hyrum, where we arrived at 11 0'clock at night. Stayed with Hyrum Smith south of the Lord's House, in which extraordinary lights were seen as we passed it in the evening after all were still in quietude and the arms of sleep.

Elias Smith Journals 1804-1888, 3 vols., compiled by Sarah C. Thomas, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Records visit of Grandmother Mary Duty Smith to Kirtland in 1836.

[Tuesday 17th May, 1836] After seeing my relatives in this place who were at home went to Fairport with Joseph and Hyrum after grandmother. Found her well and as smart as I have ever seen her for ten years. The day was fine after the rain of the preceding evening and every thing seemed to welcome her to this country. Joseph brought her in his carriage from Fairport and Hyrum and some other brethren from Kirtland moved the brethren to Kirtland where they all arrived safe. Toward evening Grandmother was overjoyed at meeting her children, grandchildren and all (?) in this place whom she had not seen for many years. And many of them she had never had the satisfaction of beholding.

Elias Smith Journals 1804-1888, 3 vols., compiled by Sarah C. Thomas, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Mentions the death of Mary Duty Smith.

[Fri 27 (May 1836)] Grandmother [Mary Duty] Smith died

[Sat. 28] Funeral sermon preached on the occasion of the death of Grandmother by S. Rigdon, and her remains were interred in the graveyard near the Lord's House.

. . . [Fri 17 (June, 1836)] Received a Patriarchal Blessing with the rest of my father's family in the Lord's House under the hand of my Uncle Joseph Smith senior, in company with my Father.

Elias Smith Journals 1804-1888, 3 vols., compiled by Sarah C. Thomas, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Joseph's cousin Elias brings their Grandmother, Mary Duty Smith, to Kirtland to see the Prophet and his family; a happy reunion ensues; Mary Duty dies and is buried near the temple; Joseph and Elias were childhood playmates.

[In May of 1836] When [Elias] was taking his grandmother [Mary Duty Smith] to the hotel, Joseph the Prophet, his brother Hyrum and Frederick G. Williams, from Kirtland, came down to the wharf to meet them. They followed them to the hotel, and Joseph and Hyrum went into the room to see their grandmother, but would not make themselves known that night. They left their grandmother there for the night in comfortable quarters, and with their cousin Elias returned to Kirtland, in the midst of the storm, arriving very late. Next morning they took carriage and drove down for their grandmother, while Elias hired teams and went down to the emigrants, whom he had sheltered for the night in a warehouse. The meeting between the grandmother and her Prophet descendant and his brother was most touching. Joseph blessed her and said she was the most honored woman on earth. She had desired to see all her children and grandchildren before she died, which, with one exception was providentially granted her, and she passed away contented. She arrived in Kirtland May 17, 1836, and died on the 27th, aged 93 years; she was buried near the Kirtland Temple. Elias Smith and his cousin Joseph had not seen each other since they played together when small boys until they met at the hotel at Fairport.

"Smith, Elias," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:720.
