Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, Emma Hale

(July 10, 1804-April 30, 1879)

Squire Tarbell marries Joseph and Emma; She tells of the loss of three children; tells of meeting Sidney Rigdon and the translation of the Book of Mormon; she voices questions about plural marriage.

In an interview conducted in February, 1879, by Joseph Smith III, the son of Joseph and Emma Smith, the following questions and answers were given. Also present during the interview were a Bishop Rogers, Elders W. W. Blair, H. A. Stebbins, Emma's husband, Lewis C. Bidamon, and "a few others," all of whom were members of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints. The interview was conducted in Nauvoo, Ill., the questions having been written and agreed upon prior to the interview.

Question.Who performed the marriage ceremony for Joseph Smith and Emma Hale? When? Where?

Answer.I was married at South Bainbridge, New York; at the house of Squire Tarbell, by him, when I was in my 22nd or 23rd year.

We here suggested that Mother Smith's History gave the date of the marriage as January 18th, 1827. To this she replied:

I think the date correct. My certificate of marriage was lost many years ago, in some of the marches we were forced to make.

In answer to a suggestion by us that she might mistake about who married father and herself; and that it was rumored that it was Sidney Rigdon, or a Presbyterian clergyman, she stated:

It was not Sidney Rigdon, for I did not see him for years after that. It was not a Presbyterian clergyman. I was visiting at Mr. Stowell's, who lived in Bainbridge, and saw your father there. I had no intention of marrying when I left home; but, during my visit at Stowell's, your father visited me there. My folks were bitterly opposed to him; and, being importuned by your father, aided by Mr. Stowell, who urged me to marry him, and preferring to marry him to any other man I knew, I consented. We went to Squire Tarbell's and were married. Afterwards, when father found that I was married, he sent for us. The account in Mother Smith's History is substantially correct as to date and place. Your father bought your uncle Jesse's [Hale] place, off father's farm, and we lived there till the Book of Mormon was translated; and I think published. I was not in Palmyra long.

Question.How many children did you lose, mother, before I was born?

Answer.There were three. I buried one in Pennsylvania, and a pair of twins in Ohio.

Question.Who were the twins that died?

Answer.They were not named.

Question.Who were the twins that you took to raise?

Answer.I lost twins. Mrs. Murdock had twins and died. Bro. [John] Murdock came to me and asked me to take them, and I took the babes. Joseph died at eleven months. They were both sick when your father was mobbed. The mob who tarred and feathered him, left the door open when they went out with him, the child relapsed and died. Julia lived, though weaker than the boy.

Question.When did you first know Sidney Rigdon? Where?

Answer.I was residing at father Whitmer's, when I first saw Sidney Rigdon. I think he came there.

Question.Was this before or after the publication of the Book of Mormon?

Answer.The Book of Mormon had been translated and published some time before. Parley P. Pratt had united with the Church before I knew Sidney Rigdon, or heard of him. At the time the Book of Mormon was translated there was no church organized, and Rigdon did not become acquainted with Joseph and me till after the Church was established in 1830. How long after that I do not know, but it was some time.

Question.Who were scribes for father when translating the Book of Mormon?

Answer.Myself, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and my brother, Reuben Hale.

Question.Was Alva Hale one?

Answer.I think not. He may have written some; but if he did, I do not remember it.

Question.What about the revelation on polygamy? Did Joseph Smith have anything like it? What of spiritual wifery?

Answer.There was not revelation on either polygamy, or spiritual wives. There were some rumors of something of the sort, of which I asked my husband. He assured me that all there was of it was, that, in a chat about plural wives, he had said, "Well, such a system might possibly be, if everybody agreed to it, and would behave as they should; but they would not; and, besides, it was contrary to the will of the heaven."

No such thing as polygamy, or spiritual wifery, was taught, publicly or privately, before my husband's death, that I have now, or ever had any knowledge of.

Question.Did he have other wives than yourselve?

Answer.He had no other wife but me; not did he to my knowledge ever have.

Question.Did he not hold marital relation with women other than yourself?

Answer.He did not have improper relations with any woman that ever came to my knowledge.

Question.Was there nothing about spiritual wives that you recollect?

Answer.At one time my husband came to me and asked if I had heard certain rumors about spiritual marriages, or anything of that kind; and assured me that if I had, that they were without foundation; that there was no such doctrine, and never should be with his knowledge, or consent. I know that he had no other wife or wives than myself, in any sense, either spiritual or otherwise.

Question.What of the truth of Mormonism?

Answer.I know Mormonism to be the truth; and believe the Church to have been established by divine direction. I have complete faith in it. In writing for your father I frequently wrote day after day, often sitting at the table close by him, he sitting with his face buried in his hat, with the stone in it, and dictating hour after hour with nothing between us.

Question.Had he not a book or manuscript from which he read, or dictated to you?

Answer.He had neither manuscript nor book to read from.

Question.Could he not have had, and you not know it?

Answer.If he had had anything of the kind he could not have concealed it from me.

Question.Are you sure that he had the plates at the time you were writing for him?

Answer.The plates often lay on the table without any attempt at concealment, wrapped in a small linen table cloth, which I had given him to fold them in. I once felt of the plates, as they thus lay on the table, tracing their outline and shape. They seemed to be pliable like thick paper, and would rustle with a metallic sound when the edges were moved by the thumb, as one does sometimes thumb the edges of a book.

Question.Where did father and Oliver Cowdery write?

Answer.Oliver Cowdery and your father wrote in the room where I was at work.

Question.Could not father have dictated the Book of Mormon to you, Oliver Cowdery and the others who wrote for him, after having first written it, or having first read it out of some book?

Answer.Joseph Smith (and for the first time she used his name direct, having usually used the words, "your father," or "my husband") could neither write nor dictate a coherent and well-worded letter; let alone dictating a book like the Book of Mormon. And, though I was an active participant in the scenes that transpired, and was present during the translation of the plates, and had cognizance of things as they transpired, it is marvelous to me, "a marvel and a wonder," as much so as to any one else.

Question.I should suppose that you would have uncovered the plates and examined them?

Answer.I did not attempt to handle the plates, other than I have told you, nor uncover them to look at them. I was satisfied that it was the work of God, and therefore did not feel it to be necessary to do so.

Major Bidamon here suggested: Did Mr. Smith forbid your examining the plates?

Answer.I do not think he did. I knew that he had them, and was not specially curious about them. I moved them from place to place on the table, as it was necessary in doing my work.

Question.Mother, what is your belief about the authenticity, or origin of the Book of Mormon?

Answer.My belief is that the Book of Mormon is of divine authenticityI have not the slightest doubt of it. I am satisfied that no man could have dictated the writing of the manuscript unless he was inspired; for, when acting as his scribe, your father would dictate to me hour after hour; and when returning after meals, or after interruptions, he would at once begin where he had left off, without either seeing the manuscript or having any portion of it read to him. It would have been improbable that a learned man could do this; and, for one so ignorant, and unlearned as he was, it was simply impossible.

Question.What was the condition of feeling between you and father?

Answer.It was good.

Question.Were you in the habit of quarreling?

Answer.No. There was no necessity of any quarreling. He knew that I wished for nothing but what was right; and, as he wished for nothing else, we did not disagree. He usually gave some heed unto what I had to say. It was quite a grievous thing to many that I had any influence with him. . . .

Question.By whom were you baptized? Do you remember?

Answer.I think by Oliver Cowdery, at Bainbridge.

Question.You say you were married at South Bainbridge, and have used the word Bainbridge. Were they one and the same town?

Answer.No. There was Bainbridge and South Bainbridge; some distance apart; how far I don't know. I was in South Bainbridge.

Joseph Smith III, "Last Testimony of Sister Emma," Saints Herald 26, no. 19 (1 October 1879): 289-90.

Joseph was too uneducated to translate without inspiration.

[In 1884 E. C. Briggs reported that in the winter of 1856 Emma] remarked of her husband Joseph's limited education while he was translating the Book of Mormon, and she was scribe at the time, "He could not pronounce the word Sariah." And one time while translating, where it speaks of the walls of Jerusalem, he stopped and said, "Emma, did Jerusalem have walls surrounding it?" When I informed him that it had, he replied, "O, I thought I was deceived."

E. C. Briggs, "Brother Joseph Smith," Saints' Herald 31, no. 25 (21 June 1884): 397.
