Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Boice, James

(b. February 20, 1814)

Sees Joseph in a dream; tells of tensions prior to martyrdom, and of Joseph calling Saints together prior to his death and telling them the Twelve had the keys of the kingdom.

Shortly after James Boice embraced the Gospel he had a dream. He dreamed he saw the Temple in place, and Joseph Smith the Prophet dressed in a long white robe, standing with bowed head by the Temple, his hands and feet were clear as glass, looking up and gazing at the Temple he said "Brethren, the time has come to favor Zion, and Jackson County is ours. I will take with me fifteen hundred men, and there will not be a man to make afraid nor for a dog to bark."

Boice then awoke from the dream. In the year 1837 he with his family migrated to Kirtland, Ohio, and the following year they started for Missouri but were driven back by a mob and stopped at Barney Pike County Illinois. Two years later they went back to Ohio on business. After their interests had been transacted they started for Kirtland. While on the journey his wife was taken very ill in the town of Hudson; during her illness she was permitted to see beyond the veil, and for twenty four hours appeared as dead, after which she regained consciousness. She said that angelic spirits had declared to her that Joseph Smith was the great Prophet raised up to open this last dispensation.

And she bore a strong testimony of this latter-day work. She said she had only come back to stay four days, as she had promised a certain woman that she was willing she should rear her three little children, but how she desired that her husband should rear two of them, as she was going to take one of them with her.

In the evening of the fourth day at eight o'clock at the same hour that she became unconscious she passed peacefully away on February 14th 1840. After the services and the body had been laid to rest, Grandfather returning home found his healthiest son Thomas in a dying condition, not from any perceivable sickness. He soon passed away. Thus her words were fulfilled.

Boice resumed his journey and met the Saints at Quincy, Illinois who were gathering to hold their first conference after being driven from Missouri.

While in company with Brother Haddock, James Boice related his dream while in Canada. Brother Haddock answered, "Well, you can test the truth of that dream today, for if it was brother Joseph you will know him when you see him." Soon after Brother Boice looked up and saw a group of men conversing around themselves. As he beheld the sight of one of the men's faces he said, pointing, "There is the man I saw." "Yes," said Brother Haddock, "That is Joseph Smith."

. . . At the time of the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph and Hyrum, James Boice and his family were living a few miles from Carthage. He with others were called in haste to Nauvoo by the Prophet as he was going to prison and he desired to talk to them. They heard his instructions to the people from time to time. "Brethren, I have great sorrow in my heart for fear that I may be taken away from the earth with the keys of the Kingdom of God upon me, without sealing them upon the heads of men. God has sealed upon my head all the keys of the kingdom of God necessary to the organizing and building up of the Church of Zion and the Kingdom of God upon the earth, and to prepare the Saints for the coming of the Son of Man. Now brethren, I thank God that I have lived to see the day that I have been able to give you your endowments, and that I have sealed upon your heads all the powers of the Priesthood and Apostleship with all the keys and powers of which God has sealed upon me, and I now roll all of the labor, burden, and care of this Church and Kingdom of God upon your shoulders. I now command you in the name of the Lord Jesus to round up your shoulders and mare of this Church and Kingdom of God before heaven and earth, and before God and angels and man, and if you do not do it you will be damned."

"Biography of James Boice written by his granddaughter Rachel Boyce Olson, and read at the family reunion April 7, 1931 at Lovell Wyoming," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: The facts are elsewhere recorded a little differently: "Shortly after he embraced the Gospel he had a dream. He dreamed he saw the temple in place, and Joseph Smith the Prophet dressed in a long white robe, standing with bowed head by the temple, his hands and feet were clear as glass. Looking up and gazing at the temple he said, (Brethren the set time has come to favor Zion, and Jackson County is ours. I will take with me fifteen hundred men, and there will not be a man to make afraid or to make a dog bark).

"He then awoke because of the dream. In the year 1837 he with his family migrated to Kirtland, Ohio, and the following year they started for Missouri but were driven back by a mob and stopped at Barry, Pike county, Illinois. Two years later they went back to Ohio on business. After their interests had been transacted they started for Kirtland. While on the journey his wife was taken ill in the town of Hudson. During her illness she was permitted to see beyond the vail, and for twenty four hours appeared as dead, after which she regained consciousness. She related the following story (that angelic spirits had declared to her that Joseph Smith was the great Prophet raised up to open this last dispensation)." ("Biography of John Boice, written by his granddaughter Rachel Boyce Olson, and read at the family reunion April 7, 1931, at Lovell, Wyoming," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah). These two accounts differ on whether it was James or John Boice.
