Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, George A.

(June 26, 1817-September 1, 1875)

George A. quotes Joseph as saying that he had the inspiration to know the Smiths descended from Captain John Smith, the English explorer of Virginia.

There is a statement coming through George A. Smith, cousin of the Prophet and the Patriarch, to the effect that Joseph Smith the Prophet once declared that he was related to Captain John Smith, English explorer and colonizer of Virginia. This statement is said to be based on heavenly inspiration. If this is true, then the Smith family came out of Lincolnshire, for Captain John Smith was born at Willoughby, Lincolnshire. What little we know of Robert Smith would lend color to this statement, for the record shows that Robert left Boston in Lincolnshire by boat for London when he contemplated his migration to the United States.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1938), 15-16.

The first time George A. met Joseph he was heartily welcomed.

Friday, May 25 (1833), we arrived at Kirtland, Ohio, having traveled 500 miles. We found our brethren and sisters all well and very glad to see us. We were heartily welcomed by my cousin Joseph, the Prophet. It was the first time I had seen him. He conducted us to his father, who lived in a large log house. On the next day we hired a house from Brother Joseph Cox, and moved into it. Cousin Joseph took Brother Brown's family home with him.

"Memoirs of George A. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 9.

While riding through the woods Joseph says he feels depressed because of the bloodshed which had occurred there; they then encounter a ancient burial mound.

On Friday 16th (May, 1834) I got into the wagon to ride a short distance with Presidents Joseph and Hyrum Smith and Brother Ezra Thayer. We were traveling through a thicket of small timber of recent growth. Brother Joseph said, "I feel very much depressed in spirits. There has been a great deal of blood shed here at some time. When a man of God passes through a place where much blood has been shed, he will feel depressed in spirits, and feel lonesome and uncomfortable." We soon came out of the timber where a large farm had been cleared and to the left of the road was a mound sixty feet high, occupying about an acre of ground, set all over with apple trees which were growing in a very thrifty manner. We went to the mound and found that holes had been dug in it which disclosed the fact that it was filled with human bodies. Hyrum said that he believed that a great army had some time been slain and piled up and covered with earth. An ancient manner of burying the dead from a battlefield. The country round for miles was level.

"Memoirs of George A. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 12-13.

Modesty and grace enjoined, even when kneeling in prayer.

[Saturday, May 24, 1834, on Zion's Camp] Joseph counseled us through life to cultivate a modest and graceful demeanor, avoiding vulgarity. He said that many of the camp, when they kneeled to pray would take unseemly positions which was not right. "When we kneel to pray, we should be in a graceful position, such as would not cause a disgusting impression to arise in the mind of any spectator."

"Memoirs of George A. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 15.

Men must change their own disposition before expecting to change otherseven that of the serpent.

Monday 26th [May, 1834; on Zion's Camp] In pitching out tents we found three prairie rattle snakes on the ground and were about to kill them. Brother Joseph prevented us saying: "When will the lion lie down with the lamb and the venom of the serpent cease while men seek to destroy and waste the flesh of beasts; waging a continual war against reptiles, let man first get rid of his destructive propensities and then we may look for a change in the serpent's disposition." We then carried the serpents across the creek on sticks. During the journey we did not kill snakes or any kind of game unless we needed it.

"Memoirs of George A. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 15.

Joseph reproves the camp cook for not giving him the same sour bread others had received.

Joseph wrote a letter to the brethren in Missouri, dated "Camp of Israel, May 29, 1834," requesting some of them to meet us as soon as plausible, with information of the state of things in upper Missouri. Dr. Williams took the letter to the Springfield Post Office. At noon the Prophet discovered that a part of his mess had been served with sour bread, while he had received a good sweet bread from the same cook whom he reproved for his partiality. He said that he wanted his brethren to fare as well as he did and preferred to eat his portion of sour bread with them.

"Memoirs of George A. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 17.

On Zion's Camp Joseph preaches under the name of Squire Cook; he is acclaimed as a great reasoner.

Sunday June 1 [1834] At ten thirty this morning our trumpet, a common brass french horn, sounded in the camp for preaching. There were some two hundred or three hundred of the people from Jacksonville and the surrounding country gathered under the trees within our camp. A chest was brought out for the accommodation of the speakers. When Squire Cook (Joseph Smith) took standing professing to be a liberal free thinker he spoke to the people very freely about one hour on his particular views. His manner and style were very unassuming and affable. He was listened to with great attention and those present remarked that he was one of the greatest reasoners they ever heard. The free thinker was followed by Elder John S. Carter, who delivered a very eloquent address on "Practical Piety." [Then others, including Joseph Young, Brigham Young, Hyrum E. Johnson, also spoke]

"Memoirs of George A. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 18.

Joseph helps George A. prepare for a mission by giving him cloth to make clothes; Joseph advises that George give short prayers and sermons.

May 30, 1835 I was appointed on a mission to preach the gospel in the east. My circumstances were so reduced that I could not procure clothes to go in. Joseph and Hyrum gave me some grey cloth to make me a coat and snuff colored vest and pantaloons. [Others gave him other helps, as well. Then] . . .

I called to see Cousin Joseph, he gave me a Book of Mormon, shook hands with me and said, "Preach short sermons, make short prayers and deliver your sermons with a prayerful heart." This advice I have always denominated my "College Education."

"Memoirs of George A. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 29.

Joseph tells George A. never to be discouraged; he illustrates by saying if he were in Nova Scotia's pit he would persist.

Cousin Joseph came to see me. I told him I was almost discouraged, being afraid that my joints would be drawn out. He told me I should never get discouraged, whatever difficulties might surround me. If I were sunk into the lowest pit of Nova Scotia and all the Rocky Mountains piled on top of me I ought not to be discouraged, but hang on, exercise faith, and keep up good courage, and I should come out on top of the heap.

"Memoirs of George A. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 36.

Joseph convicted of casting out devils; he is then acquitted because he broke no law.

Forty-seven times he was arraigned before the tribunals of law, and had to sustain all the expense of defending himself in those vexatious suits, and was every time acquitted. He was never found guilty but once. I have been told, by Patriarch Emer Harris, that on a certain occasion he was brought before a magistrate in the State of New York, and charged with having cast out devils; the magistrate, after hearing the witnesses, decided that he was guilty, but as the statutes of New York did not provide a punishment for casting out devils, he was acquitted.

Journal of Discourses, 2:213 (March 15, 1855).

On the foolish reasons for which people apostatized: some because they were offered tea, others because Joseph played with children, and another because Joseph reproached him for screaming in prayer.

A mere handful of Saints commenced that work, but they were full of faith and energy, and willing, as they supposed, to sacrifice everything for the building up of Zion. In a few weeks some of them apostatized; the trials were too great, the troubles were too severe. I know persons who apostatized because they supposed they had reasons; for instance, a certain family, after having traveled a long journey, arrived in Kirtland, and the prophet asked them to stop with him until they could find a place. Sister Emma, in the mean time, asked the old lady if she would have a cup of tea to refresh her after the fatigues of the journey, or a cup of coffee. This whole family apostatized because they were invited to take a cup of tea or coffee, after the Word of Wisdom was given.

Another family, about the same time, apostatized because Joseph Smith came down out of the translating room, where he had been translating by the gift and power of God, and commenced playing with his little children. Some such trials as these, you know, had to be encountered.

I recollect a gentleman who came from Canada, and who had been a Methodist, and had always been in the habit of praying to a God who had no ears, and as a matter of course had to shout and halloo pretty loud to make him hear. Father Johnson asked him to pray in their family worship in the evening, and he got on such a high key, and hallooed so loud that he alarmed the whole village. Among others, Joseph came running out, saying, "What is the matter? I thought by the noise that the heavens and the earth were coming together," and said to the man, "that he ought not to give way to such an enthusiastic spirit, and bray so much like a jackass." Because Joseph said that, the poor man put back to Canada, and apostatized; he thought he would not pray to a God who did not want to be screamed at with all one's might.

Journal of Discourses, 2:214 (March 18, 1855).

On the trials experienced by Joseph and the early Saints: resisting the "law of redemption" (eternal marriage); Joseph says if he revealed what he knew, some Saints would seek his blood; some self-righteous Saints were too proud to understand fundamentals; fearing for his life, William Law has police cross-examine the city council; Joseph says he might live, except for a "right hand Brutus."

He there put us into another sieve, and sifted us good, and we were then driven from the State of Missouri, leaving the Prophet and a good many of his brethren in prison. We thus passed on from the year 1837 until the year 1843, when the Lord concluded that the people who had been gathered, since the scattering from Missouri, had been made acquainted with the principles of His kingdom so long, that they must have become strong enough for Him to reveal one sentiment more.

Whereupon, the Prophet goes up on the stand, and, after preaching about everything else he could think of in the world, at last hints at the idea of the law of redemption, makes a bare hint at the law of sealing, and it produced such a tremendous excitement that, as soon as he had got his dinner half eaten, he had to go back to the stand, and unpreach all that he had preached, and left the people to guess at the matter. While he was thus preaching he turned to the men sitting in the stand, and who were the men who should have backed him up, for instance, to our good old President Marks, William and Wilson Law, and father Cowles, and a number of other individuals about Nauvoo, for this occurred when the Twelve were in the Eastern portions of the United States, and said, "If I were to reveal the things that God has revealed to me, if I were to reveal to this people the doctrines that I know are for their exaltation, these men would spill my blood." This shows the improvement that had been, the advancement that had been made, and the light that had been attained. He also said, that there were men and women in that congregation who imagined themselves almost perfect, and who would oppose and reject the principles of exaltation, and would never fully realize their mistake until the morning of the resurrection. I was not there, and did not hear the discourse; but persons were there who could write two or three words of a sentence, and I profess to be good enough at guessing, to tell what the balance was.

In tracing the history of this Church through the records, I make myself acquainted with circumstances, and I cannot but see illustrated before the eyes of the whole people the fatherly care that God had to take in revealing to this people the law of exaltation. Finally, He revealed so much of it that William Law, one of the First Presidency, and one of the most sanctimonious men in Israel, got alarmed for fear that Joseph was going to kill him, and he called the whole of the Police before the City Council, and had them all sworn, and cross examined, to find out if Joseph had instructed any of them to kill him. I told some of the boys at that time, that he knew he had done something that he ought to die for, or he would not be so afraid of his best friends. Joseph said to the Council and Police, "I might live, as Caesar might have lived, were it not for a right hand Brutus;" and the illustration of that saying is most clearly shown by William Law's operations in bringing about the murder of the Prophet. The men who were in his bosom, shared his confidence, and professed to be his warmest and best friends, were the men to treacherously shed his blood.

Why? Because he had revealed one additional principle of the law of redemption, that is, that the man is not without the woman, nor the woman without the man, in the Lord.

Journal of Discourses, 2:216-17 (March 18, 1855).

Joseph arrested in 1843; William Law greets him with a Judas kiss and says if Joseph were to die property values would fall in Nauvoo.

In 1843 Joseph Smith was arrested two hundred and fifty miles from home; the Saints felt a great anxiety for his safety; hundreds of individuals went out of Nauvoo on horseback, and took possession of all the roads between the Mississippi and Illinois rivers, and some set out on a steamboat, with a determination to examine every boat on the rivers, and attack any one that had him on board; and some of the most rapid marches on record were performed on that occasion. Among others William Law started out with a party; when he met Joseph, he rushed up to him and took him in his arms, and hugged him, and kissed him before some fifty or a hundred witnesses. He must have loved him wonderfully, for, about half an hour previous to his meeting Joseph, he had got the idea that he had been shipped on board a steamboat into Missouri, and he was dreadfully excited. Brother A. P. Rockwood, or John Butler, can tell you how he talked. "O!" says he, "I would not have Joseph taken to Missouri and killed for any thing in the world, for property would fall more than one half its value in Nauvoo." There is the saying of a man who, like Judas, could kiss the Prophet, when probably there were not many men in the whole city that would have cared a farthing for all the property in the world, when compared with saving Joseph's life.

Journal of Discourses, 2:218 (March 18, 1855).

Joseph prophesies that opposition aids the growth of the kingdom.

Joseph prophesied that if they would let us alone, we would spread the Gospel all over the world, and if they did not let us alone, we would spread it anyhow, only a little quicker.

Journal of Discourses, 2:219 (March 18, 1855).

Joseph tells an anecdote to illustrate that we are not lost.

I recollect a story I heard Joseph once tell to a sectarian minister; he had been preaching to him some of the first principles of the Gospel; the minister acknowledged that the doctrines were strictly according to the New Testament, but gave a kind of a pious sigh, and said, "I am afraid there is something wrong at the bottom of it." Joseph replied, "I feel a good deal as the honest Irishman did, who landed in America, and started to go into the country, and see how it looked. As he was walking along the road, he came across a very pious minister of the Methodist order, who came up to the Irishman, and, thinking that he must say something about religion, as he sat in his two wheeled gig, says, 'Patrick, have you made your peace with your God?' 'Ah, faith, sir, and sure we never had a falling out.' That rather shocked the priest, and he gave vent to an unearthly grunt, and said, 'You are lost, lost.' 'Faith, sir, how can I be lost in the middle of the big turnpike?'" I tell you we are in the middle of the "big turnpike," and if we continue in it the keys of exaltation are with us.

Journal of Discourses, 2:220 (March 18, 1855).

Prophesies growth: meeting houses will always be too small.

I feel a little sorry this morning that our meeting house is so small; really it seems too bad that we have not a little more room, but it fulfills very clearly the early predictions of the first President of the Church, (Joseph Smith,) that we may build as many houses as we would, and we should never get one big enough to hold the Saints.

Journal of Discourses, 2:360 (April 8, 1855).

Joseph brought before a bishop's council; Saints are to be sifted and tried.

Mankind is capable of a great many extravagances; we very well remember the time when a very zealous man named Hawley arraigned Joseph Smith before Bishop's counsel in Kirtland, and charged him with having forfeited his office as a Prophet of God, because he had not prohibited the aged sisters from wearing caps. I attended the Council, which was held very late, and the man there advocated that he was cut off from the Church, for God had cut him off from the Church, as well as from his Apostleship, because he had suffered the men to wear little cushions on the shoulders of their coat sleeves. It being then fashionable to wear a little cotton on the shoulders, and in consequence of some of the brethren wearing such coats, the Prophet of God was cut off from the Church by this man, and persecuted as an impostor, and another was placed in his stead.

That man was possessed of such wisdom as man could reasonably manifest, yet he was so perfectly full of folly and of his own traditions and notions he had fancied over in his own head, that seemingly it was impossible for him to understand anything better; he was blinded, and lifted his hand against the Prophet of God. Instances of this kind have been continually accumulating, and it is one of the most perfect illustrations of the sayings of the Prophet, that He would sift His people as with a sieve. It has been a constant sifting from the time we entered the Church up to the present.

Journal of Discourses, 2:362 (April 8, 1855); see also Journal of Discourses, 7:114-15.

Joseph teaches a Campbellite preacher named Hayden that the wicked and adulterous seek signs.

When the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was first founded, you could see persons rise up and ask, "What sign will you show us that we may be made to believe?" I recollect a Campbellite preacher who came to Joseph Smith, I think his name was Hayden. He came in and made himself known to Joseph, and said that he had come a considerable distance to be convinced of the truth. "Why," said he, "Mr. Smith, I want to know the truth, and when I am convinced, I will spend all my talents and time in defending and spreading the doctrines of your religion, and I will give you to understand that to convince me is equivalent to convincing all my society, amounting to several hundreds." Well, Joseph commenced laying before him the coming forth of the work, and the first principles of the Gospel, when Mr. Hayden exclaimed, "O this is not the evidence I want, the evidence that I wish to have is a notable miracle; I want to see some powerful manifestation of the power of God, I want to see a notable miracle performed; and if you perform such a one, then I will believe with all my heart and soul, and will exert all my power and all my extensive influence to convince others; and if you will not perform a miracle of this kind, then I am your worst and bitterest enemy." "Well," said Joseph, "what will you have done? Will you be struck blind, or dumb? Will you be paralyzed, or will you have one hand withered? Take your choice, choose which you please, and in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ it shall be done." "That is not the kind of miracle I want," said the preacher. "Then, sir," replied Joseph, "I can perform none, I am not going to bring any trouble upon any body else, sir, to convince you. I will tell you what you make me think ofthe very first person who asked a sign of the Savior, for it is written, in the New Testament, that Satan came to the Savior in the desert, when he was hungry with forty days' fasting, and said, "If you be the Son of God, command these stones to be made bread." "And now," said Joseph, "the children of the devil and his servants have been asking for signs ever since; and when the people in that day continued asking him for signs to prove the truth of the Gospel which he preached, the Savior replied, 'It is a wicked and an adulterous generation that seeketh a sign,'" &c.

But the poor preacher had so much faith in the power of the Prophet that he daren't risk being struck blind, lame, dumb, or having one hand withered, or any thing of the kind.

Journal of Discourses, 2:326-27 (June 24, 1855).

Adulterer accuses Joseph of being a false prophet; his accusation proves his own guilt and Joseph's prophetic claim.

He [i.e., an adulterer] was in the Church, and he said he had proved the revelations of Joseph Smith to be untrue. "How did you prove them so?" "Why," said he, "one of Joseph Smith's revelations says, that if a man shall commit adultery, he shall lose the Spirit of the Lord, and deny the faith, and shall be cast out. Now," says he, "I have been guilty of that crime, and I have not apostatized, and consequently that revelation is not true, and that proves Joseph Smith is not a true Prophet." This was the darkness which his corruptions had brought upon him, and this is the kind of darkness which transgression will bring upon all men in this Church.

Journal of Discourses, 2:330-31 (June 24, 1855); see also John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, 1:372.

Joseph predicts elders will experience opposition and persecution in preaching the gospel.

The very first thing that Joseph told the brethren, when they were going out to preach, was, that their salary would be tar and feathers, abuse and persecution"You will be driven from house to house, and from country to country, and be hated of all men because of your religion;" and this has been fulfilled, and that too by the people in free America.

Journal of Discourses, 2:331 (June 24, 1855).

Prophet advises George A. to preach short sermons.

In the morning, as I was about to start on my first mission to preach the Gospel, I waited upon brother Joseph, and asked if he had any advice to give me. "Yes," said he, "George A., preach short sermons, make short prayers, deliver your sermons with a prayerful heart, and you will be blessed, and the truth will prosper in your hands." I was a boy of seventeen at the time, and I called this my college education.

Journal of Discourses, 3:23 (August 12, 1855); see also "Memoirs of George A. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 23.

Joseph compares the three measures of meal to the Three Witnesses.

In 1830, on the 6th day of April, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized with only six members. Joseph, in one of his letters in relation to Alexander Campbell, in December 1835, said that "the three measures of meal might be compared to the three witnesses who were called upon to testify of the Book of Mormon, and who selected and ordained twelve Apostles to go forth and be special witnesses to all the world."

Whether the application was really intended to be laid down as a rule I will not say, but it is very evident that when Joseph Smith laid the foundation of this kingdom he commenced depositing the leaven of truth, and that that leaven has continued to increase.

Journal of Discourses, 3:260 (April 6, 1856).

Joseph presides in the case of Sister Marsh, who stole cream strippings from Sister Harris; resultant feelings lead to apostasy; out of small things proceed great things.

You may think that these small matters amount to but little, but sometimes it happens that out of a small matter grows something exceedingly great. For instance, while the Saints were living in Far West, there were two sisters wishing to make cheese, and, neither of them possessing the requisite number of cows, they agreed to exchange milk.

The wife of Thomas B. Marsh, who was then President of the Twelve Apostles, and sister Harris concluded they would exchange milk, in order to make a little larger cheese than they otherwise could. To be sure to have justice done, it was agreed that they should not save the strippings, but that the milk and strippings should all go together. Small matters to talk about here, to be sure, two women's exchanging milk to make cheese.

Mrs. Harris, it appeared, was faithful to the agreement and carried to Mrs. Marsh the milk and strippings, but Mrs. Marsh, wishing to make some extra good cheese, saved a pint of strippings from each cow and sent Mrs. Harris the milk without the strippings.

Finally it leaked out that Mrs. Marsh had saved strippings, and it became a matter to be settled by the Teachers. They began to examine the matter, and it was proved that Mrs. Marsh had saved the strippings, and consequently had wronged Mrs. Harris out of that amount.

An appeal was taken from the Teacher to the Bishop, and a regular Church trial was had. President Marsh did not consider that the Bishop had done him and his lady justice, for they decided that the strippings were wrongfully saved, and that the woman had violated her covenant.

Marsh immediately took an appeal to the High Council, who investigated the question with much patience, and I assure you they were a grave body. Marsh being extremely anxious to maintain the character of his wife, as he was the President of the Twelve Apostles, and a great man in Israel, made a desperate defense, but the High Council finally confirmed the Bishop's decision.

Marsh, not being satisfied, took an appeal to the First Presidency of the Church, and Joseph and his Counsellors had to sit upon the case, and they approved the decision of the High Council.

This little affair, you will observe, kicked up a considerable breeze, and Thomas B. Marsh then declared that he would sustain the character of his wife, even if he had to go to hell for it.

The then President of the Twelve Apostles, the man who should have been the first to do justice and cause reparation to be made for wrong, committed by any member of his family, took that position, and what next? He went before a magistrate and swore that the "Mormons" were hostile towards the State of Missouri.

That affidavit brought from the government of Missouri an exterminating order, which drove some 15,000 Saints from their homes and habitations, and some thousands perished through suffering the exposure consequent on this state of affairs.

Do you understand what trouble was consequent to the dispute about a pint of strippings?

Journal of Discourses, 3:283-84 (April 6, 1856).

Prophet's grandfather hears of the Book of Mormon; he says he knew his descendant would revolutionize religion.

My grandfather, Asahel Smith, heard of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and he said it was true, for he knew that something would turn up in his family that would revolutionize the world. The news came to us in 1828; we then lived in New York. . . .

When I was about eleven years old, my grandfather received letters containing the news that Joseph, the son of uncle Joseph, had discovered, by the revelations of the Almighty, some gold plates, and that these gold plates contained a record of great worth.

It was greatly ridiculed and laughed at. A short time after this, another letter came, written by Joseph himself, and this letter bore testimony of the wickedness and the fallen condition of the Christian world. My father read the letter, and I well remember the remark he made about it. "Why," said he, "he writes like a prophet."

Journal of Discourses, 5:102-3 (August 2, 1857); see also "Memoirs of George A. Smith," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 2; Joseph Smith refers to these same sentiments in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 2:443.

Joseph discerns the character of William Law, whom he calls "the meanest man" in Nauvoo.

In Nauvoo we had another shower of dust around the Prophet. There was a man by the name of William Law, who was a Counselor to Joseph Smith, and a man of great gravity. He preached a great deal on the stand in Nauvoo, and told the people they must be punctual and pay their debts; and he repeated it over and over again. Sunday after Sunday he preached punctuality, PUNCTUALITY, PUNCTUALITY.

I was then on a mission in England; but when I got home, I would hear, Sunday after Sunday, these addresses. Thinks I, this is a very righteous fellow; it will be perfectly safe to deal with him; and everybody thought so.

The first time I suspected but what he was as straight as a loon's legat least in relation to his trading, was one day in his mill. Brother Willard Richards and myself met Bishop Smoot, and he offered to bet a barrel of salt that the Doctor was heavier than I was. We went into Law's mill to be weighed. I was weighed on the scales where he weighed wheat into the mill.

To my surprise, I did not weigh as much by twelve pounds as usual. I thought this was a curiosity. I saw there was another pair of scales on the other side of the mill where they weighed out flour. I weighed the Doctor twice, and he weighed me twice on both scales; and I found that if I had been a bag of flour, I should have weighed twelve pounds too much; and, if I had been a bag of wheat, I should not have weighed enough by twelve pounds.

The Doctor and myself soon discovered that the gain by this villainous fraud would supply the mill with wood and hands to tend it

Brother Joseph and I saw brother Law come out of his house one day, and brother Joseph said to me, referring to Law, "George, do you know that there is the meanest man in this town?"

"Yes," I said, "I know he is, but did not know you thought so."

"How did you find it out?"

He has two sets of weights in his mill. He also told me something about Law's visit to certain disreputable houses in St. Louis, and gave me to understand that he knew something about Law's hypocrisy and dishonesty in dealing, as well as myself.

Journal of Discourses, 7:116 (January 10, 1858).

Joseph prophesies that mob rule will increase in the United States.

When the Latter-day Saints were driven from Jackson county, in 1833, Joseph Smith prophesied that if the people of the United States would not bring to justice that mob and protect the Saints, they should have mob upon mob, mob upon mob, until mob and power and mob rule should be all over the whole land, until no man's life or property should be safe. This prophecy is being literally fulfilled.

Journal of Discourses, 9:18 (April 6, 1861).

Joseph tried in Missouri for treason, in part because he was preaching from Daniel; judge rules the Bible treasonous.

When the Prophet Joseph Smith was before the court of Judge Austin A. King at Richmond, Missouri, they wanted to prove the charge of treason against him. It was stated in evidence that he had preached from the prophecy of Daniel, where it speaks of the great image and the little stone, and had stated that the stone would strike the image upon the toes and feet and break it to pieces,that then it would become a great mountain and fill the whole earth. Judge King inquired of the witness if Mr. Smith did not say that the little stone spoken of was the Mormon Church. The witness answered in the affirmative. Judge King, turning to the clerk, said, "Write that down; that is treason." According to this decision, the doctrines taught in the Bible were actually treason. General Doniphan replied, "By G-d, Judge, you had better make the Bible treason, and done with it." They of course believed that the kingdom spoken of is a figurative kingdom; but we know that God has organized that kingdom, and it will roll forth with power and might until it overcomes all obstacles, and fills the whole earth.

Journal of Discourses, 9:74-75 (March 10, 1861).

Because of false spirits, Joseph is prompted to teach correct doctrine; unable to overcome prejudice, some apostatize.

There was at this time in Kirtland, a society that had undertaken to have a community of property; it has sometimes been denominated the Morley family, as there was a number of them located on a farm owned by Captain Isaac Morley. These persons had been baptized, but had not yet been instructed in relation to their duties. A false spirit entered into them, developing their singular, extravagant and wild ideas. They had a meeting at the farm, and among them was a negro known generally as Black Pete, who became a revelator. Others also manifested wonderful developments; they could see angels, and letters would come down from heaven, they said, and they would be put through wonderful unnatural distortions. Finally on one occasion, Black Pete got sight of one of those revelations carried by a black angel, he started after it, and ran off a steep wash bank twenty-five feet high, passed through a tree top into the Chagrin river beneath. He came out with a few scratches, and his ardor somewhat cooled.

Journal of Discourses, 11:2-3 (November 15, 1864).

Joseph rebukes an evil spirit possessing Ezra Booth; some are offended and apostatize.

Joseph Smith came to Kirtland, and taught that people in relation to their error. He showed them that the Spirit of God did not bind men nor make them insane, and that the power of the adversary which had been manifested in many instances was visible even from that cause, for persons under its influence became helpless, and were bound hand and foot as in chains, being as immovable as a stick of timber. When Joseph came to instruct these Saints in relation to the true Spirit, and the manner of determining the one from the other, in a short time a number of those who had been influenced by those foul manifestations, apostatized. Among the number was Wycom Clark; he got a revelation that he was to be the prophetthat he was the true revelator; and himself, Northrop Sweet and four other individuals retired from the Church, and organized the "Pure Church of Christ," as they called it, composed of six members, and commenced having meetings, and preaching, but that was the extent of the growth of his early schism. John Noah, another of this class, assumed to be a prophet, and in consequence thereof was expelled from the church.

Journal of Discourses, 11:4 (November 15, 1864).

Joseph rebukes an evil spirit possessing Ezra Booth; some are offended and apostatize.

Among the early baptisms in Northern Ohio, was a Methodist minister by the name of Ezra Booth. He was present when the Elders first received the ordination of the High Priesthood. They met together in June, 1831, in a log school house in Kirtland, a room about eighteen feet by twenty. While they were there, the manifestation of the power of God being on Joseph, he set apart some of the Elders to the High Priesthood. Ezra Booth was bound, and his countenance was distorted, and numbers of the brethren looked at him, and thought it was a wonderful manifestation of the power of God, but to their astonishment, Joseph came forward and rebuked the foul spirit, and commanded it to depart, in consequence of which Booth was relieved, and many of the brethren were greatly tried at such a singular treatment by the prophet of these wonderful manifestations of power.

Other had visions. Lyman Wight bore testimony that he saw the face of the Savior.

Journal of Discourses, 11:4 (November 15, 1864).

Joseph and missionaries go forth; Ezra Booth apostatizes, conspires against Church, and joins a mob which tars and feathers Joseph.

The Priesthood was conferred on a number of Elders, and thirty were selected to take a mission to the western boundaries of Missouri, and travel and preach two and two by the way, traveling without purse or scrip. They did so, building up churches. Joseph was required to travel by water, or at a more rapid rate to reach there, to meet the brethren and hold a Conference in the land of Zion. It was only a short time after the return from this mission, that Ezra Booth apostatized as did Jacob Scott, Symonds Rider, Eli Johnson and a number of others. The spirit of apostasy was little known, but when these men apostatized they became more violent, more cruel, and manifested a greater spirit of persecution than any other enemies. What seemed singular, Ezra Booth had been brought into the Church through the manifestation of a miracle. The wife of father John Johnson had been afflicted with the rheumatism, so as to be unable to raise her arm and hand for two years. Her husband had believed the work, and she also was believing. She went to Joseph Smith the Prophet to have him administer to her, Booth accompanied them, for he was well acquainted with the family, and the condition of Mrs. Johnson. When the Elders laid their hands upon her, she was instantly healed, so that she could use her arm and hand as well as ever she could previously. Booth knew this to be an instantaneous cure, and soon after witnessing this miracle, he was baptized, and ordained an Elder. He having formerly been a Methodist minister, commenced preaching the Gospel without purse or scrip, and he did so until he found, (using a common expression,) it did not pay. Under these circumstances he apostatized. While he was in apostacy he searched his cranium for some means to justify himself and published a series of lying letters in the Ohio Star, a paper printed in Revenna. These nine letters had been republished several times as evidence against "Mormonism;" and his apostacy culminated in collecting a mob who tarred and feathered Joseph Smith, and inflicted upon his family the loss of one of its number at Hyrum, Portage county, Ohio. Joseph Smith was occupying the room of a house brother Johnson was living in, at the same time; it was a two story building, had steps in front. The mob surrounded the house, the twins being afflicted with measles, Joseph was lying upon a trundle bed with one of them. The mob rushed in, gathered up Joseph while in his bed, took him out in his night clothes, and carried him out on to the top of the steps. Joseph got a foot at liberty and kicked one of the men, and knocked him down off the steps, and the print of his head and shoulders were visible on the ground in the morning. Warren Waste, who was the strongest man in the western reserve considered himself perfectly able to handle Joseph alone, but when they got hold of him Waste cried out, "do not let him touch the ground, or he will run over the whole of us." Waste suggested in carrying him to cross his legs, for they said that would make it easier for the Prophet, but that was done in consequence of the severe pain it would give to the small of the back. He was daubed with tar, feathered and choked, and aqua fortis poured into his mouth. Dr. Dennison had been employed to perform a surgical operation, but he declined when the time came to operate. The liquid they poured into his mouth was so powerful, that it killed the grass where some of it had been scattered on the ground. Joseph is reported by the mob to have said, be merciful, when they told him to call upon his God for mercy. They immediately, as he began to pray, heard an alarm which made them think they were about to be surprised, and left suddenly. Sidney Rigdon, who resided near by, had been dragged by the heels out of his bed at the same time, and his body stripped and a coat of tar and feathers applied. The next morning he was crazy, his head greatly inflamed and lacerated. Joseph found his way in from the light of the house, the mob having abandoned him. While he was engaged in getting off the tar by the application of grease, soap and other materials, Philemon Duzette, the father of our celebrated drummer, came there, and seeing the Prophet in this condition, took it as an evidence of the truth of "Mormonism," and was baptized. These circumstances exposed the life of the child, the measles struck in and caused its death, and the whole of this persecution was got up through the influence of those apostates; and it made it necessary to keep up a constant watch lest some violence should be repeated. Luke Johnson informed us that Warren Waste was afterwards a cripple, rendered so by weakness in the small of the back, and Dr. Dennison died in the Ohio Penitentiary where he was incarcerated for procuring an abortion, which caused death; Joseph soon after located in Kirtland.

Journal of Discourses, 11:4-6 (November 15, 1864).

In Joseph's absence Sidney preaches "the kingdom is rent"; Joseph returns and calms Sidney and others.

In Kirtland there were manifestations of evil spirits in high places, which might have been considered more dangerous than the manifestations in the early establishment of the Church. Sidney Rigdon, on one occasion got up to preach, and commenced by saying that the Church and kingdom was rent from them and given to another people. Joseph was absent, when he came home he found Sidney almost like a mad man. He labored with him and with the Church, and finally succeeded in convincing him that he was under the influence of a false spirit.

Journal of Discourses, 11:6 (November 15, 1864).

A self-appointed prophet named Hawley reproaches Joseph and disrupts public peace.

A man from the State of New York by the name of Hawley, stated that while he was working in his field, barefoot, the word of the Lord came to him, saying that he should start on the instant, and not stop to put on his shoes. He came six hundred miles to Kirtland, and went to Joseph with the message that he had suffered John Noah, a prophet of God, to be cut off from the Church, and that consequently he had lost his office; and he had also suffered the women to wear caps, and the men he allowed to wear cushions on their shoulders, and for these heinous sins he was cut off, and this man had come six hundred miles barefooted to bear the terrible message. You might suppose such an adventurer coming among us would be regarded as a madman by all, but at that time several men were ready to listen to him; a Bishop's Council was assembled and an investigation had. During the investigation, the subject of women wearing caps and veils and having their heads covered was canvassed, and the Bible ransacked by Oliver Cowdery and others. When the man was expelled from the Church for giving way to the power of false spirits, he rose up in a most solemn manner, and proclaimed to the Council that they had chosen darkness instead of light. This man went through the streets of Kirtland in the night crying in a most doleful voice, woe, woe to this people. I understand that brother Brigham, hearing this nonsense and noise in the street, jumped up out of his bed in the night, took with him a cow hide whip into the street, and told that noise person if he did not stop his noise he would certainly cowhide him, which caused him to cease to annoy the inhabitants with his folly.

Journal of Discourses, 11:6 (November 15, 1864).

On Zion's Camp Joseph reproves Sylvester Smith who then falsely accuses Joseph.

I remember well in Zion's Camp, Levi W. Hancock made a fife, from a joint of sweet elder, Sylvester Smith marched his company to the music of that fife. That fife may be considered almost the introduction of martial music among the "mormons." A dog came out and barked, when Sylvester Smith was going to kill the dog. Joseph said he was a good watch dog, Sylvester became wrathy and threatened; finally Joseph reproved him sharply, showing him that such a spirit would not conquer or control the human family, that he must get rid of it, and predicted that if he did not get rid of it, the day would come when a dog would gnaw his flesh, and he not have the power to resist it. Some months after the return to Kirtland, Sylvester Smith preferred a charge against Joseph the Prophet, for having prophesied lies in the name of the Lord, and undertook to substantiate that charge on the ground that the Prophet had said a dog should bite him, if he did not get rid of that spirit, when he had not power to resist. They were three days and parts of nights, with the High Council in Kirtland, in investigating this charge; one person spoke three hours in behalf of the Prophet. Sylvester published a confession which can be seen in the Church History, acknowledging his fault.

Journal of Discourses, 11:7 (November 15, 1864).

Hurlburt tried; Joseph discerns his falseness; the origin of the Spaulding manuscript.

The first Council I ever attended where the Prophet was present was at the trial of Doctor P. Hurlburt. This occurred in June, 1833. He had been cut off from the Church by the Bishop's Council, and a Council of Twelve High Priests, was organized to try the case on appeal. Hurlburt did not deny the charge, but begged to be forgiven, made every promise that a man could make that he would from that day live a virtuous life. Finally the Council accepted of his confession, and agreed that he might on public confession be restored to the Church again.

It was at the same Council that Daniel Copley, a timid young man, who had been ordained a Priest, and required to go and preach the Gospel, was called to an account for not going on his mission. The young man said he was too weak to attempt to preach, and the Council cut him off the Church. I wonder what our missionaries now would think of so rigid a discipline as was given at that time thirty one years ago, under the immediate supervision of the Prophet.

As soon as this Council had made this decision upon Hurlburt, Joseph arose, and said to the Council, he is not honest, and what he has promised he will not fulfill; what he has confessed are not the thoughts and intents of his heart, and time will prove it. Hurlburt stated to the Branch in Thompson, Ohio, that he had deceived Joseph Smith's God or the spirit by which he is actuated, I have proved that Council has no wisdom, I told them I was sorry I confessed and they believed it to be an honest confession, I deceived the whole of them and made them restore me to the Church. Hurlburt was the author of that work known by the name of "Mormonism Unveiled." Booth's letters were reprinted by Hurlburt, who is the author of "The Spaulding Story," a book which he intended to publish; and in delivering lectures he had said he would wash his hands in Joseph Smith's blood. He was taken before the court and required to give bonds to keep the peace towards all men, and especially towards Joseph Smith. These circumstances had some influence, and his fiends arranged that he should not publish the book, but put it into the hands of E. D. Howe, who resided in Painsville, Ohio. He agreed that he would give Hurlburt four hundred copies of the first printed and bound, for the manuscript. Hurlburt went round and got subscribers, to pay him when the book should be delivered, one dollar each for the four hundred. Howe got the books printed and refused to furnish Hurlburt with his share, until by a piece of legerdemain he got hold of his subscription list and got the four hundred dollars, and then he let him have the books. When Hurlburt went to supply his subscribers he found they had already been served. The Spaulding story in that country was considered so ridiculous, that the books could with difficulty be sold at any price; but it has now found its way into the scientific journals of the great world as a true history of the origin of the Book of Mormon, when it is very well known that no statement on this earth could be more incorrect or more untrue. Let "Mormonism" be true or false, the Spaulding story from beginning to end is an unmitigated falsehood. Solomon Spaulding was a Presbyterian minister; he entered into the iron trade in Conneaut, Ohio, but failing in business he took a notion to write a novel; he wrote a book called the Manuscript Found, he took his work to Pittsburg, to a man by the name of Patterson to get it printed, but he failed and never printed it. It was pretended that it fell into the hands of Sidney Rigdon, and that he converted it into the Book of Mormon, and induced Joseph Smith to publish it; whereas it is very well known that there had no connection ever existed between these parties. In the first place, Spaulding never wrote any such work; in the next place, Spaulding never had anything to do with Patterson, and Sidney Rigdon and him were perfect strangers to each other. The first knowledge that Sidney Rigdon had of Joseph Smith was when Parley P. Pratt met him in Ohio, and presented him a printed copy of the Book of Mormon; yet all this has found its way into scientific literature, and you will find it even in the North British Review. Hurlburt's failure to destroy "Mormonism" was so complete, understanding that he was backed by influential men in Mentor and vicinity, that it ended in their disgrace and discomfiture, and this was so complete, that the story in that country was hardly ever spoken of afterwards. Yet the Spaulding story lives among those who make lies their refuge, and under falsehood hide themselves.

Journal of Discourses, 11:8-9 (November 15, 1864).

Because Joseph read the Kirtland Temple dedicatory prayer, some apostatized.

When the dedication prayer was read by Joseph, it was read from a printed copy. This was a great trial of faith to many. "How can it be that the prophet should read a prayer?" What an awful trial it was, for the Prophet to read a prayer! The service of the dedication being over, it was repeated again on the next day, to accommodate those who had not been able to get in on the first day, and all those who had been there on the first day, excepting the authorities, being required to remain outside, till those who could not get in the day before were seated; the result of this arrangement was two days dedication.

Journal of Discourses, 11:9 (November 15, 1864).

Unrepentant adulterer falsely accuses Joseph and apostatizes.

There was an Elder named John Smith who lived in Indiana, who was quite popular in that part of the country as a preacher. He apostatized, but he did not know it. In talking about his faith and how firm it was, he said, "I have proven the revelation given to Joseph Smith untrue, which says if a man shall commit adultery he shall lose the spirit of God, and deny the faith. I have proven that not to be true, for I have violated that commandment and have not denied the faith." He was so blind that he could not see through the darkness that the spirit of adultery had placed upon his head, the great apostasy which seemed to shake the Church, and tried men's souls.

Journal of Discourses, 11:10-11 (November 15, 1864); see also George A. Smith, Journal of Discourses, 7:114; John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, 1:372; 7:325.

Apostate dishonesty destroys Kirtland Bank.

Some time after the finishing of the Temple, the brethren under the direction of the Prophet had established a bank in Kirtland, the paper to be redeemed by specie, and secured by real estate. The directors of that bank were members of the Church, and they were determined to sustain the credit of that money. The question has some times been asked, how much has that bank failed for; it did not fail for a single dollar, and yet when it failed there was perhaps a hundred thousand dollars of the bank paper out in circulation. Warren Parrish was the teller of the bank, and a number of other men who apostatized were officers. They took out of its vault, unknown to the President or cashier, a hundred thousand dollars, and sent their agents around among the brethren to purchase their farms, wagons, cattle, horses and every thing they could get hold of. The brethren would gather up this money and put it into the bank, and those traitors would steal it and send it out to buy again, and they continued to do so until the plot was discovered and payment stopped. It was the cursed apostatestheir stealing and robberies, and their infernal villainies that prevented that bank being conducted as the Prophet designed. If they had followed the counsel of Joseph, there is not a doubt but that it would have been the leading bank in Ohio, probably of the nation. It was founded upon safe principles, and would have been a safe and lasting institution. Parrish and his coadjutors professed to have discovered that Joseph was not a Prophet, and commenced making a noise about it, and went so far as to organize about thirty of the Elders, into a new church called the Parrish party, many of them had been a long time in the church. That may be considered the time that tried men's souls; for a man that would stand up in the streets and say he was Joseph's friend, could not get a greater compliment than being called a lick skillet. Joseph had few friends; but among the leading Elders of the Church, in Kirtland the High Council, one of the members of the first Presidency, some of the seven Presidents of the seventies, and a great many others were so darkened that they went astray in every direction. They boasted of the talent at their command, and what they would do. Their plan was to take the doctrines of the Church, such as repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, throw aside the Book of Mormon, the Prophet and Priesthood, and go and unite the whole Christian world under these doctrines. Where are they to-day? Like a rope of sand that has vanished to the four winds of heaven. Many of them have already in dust and ashes lamented their fate, they have never been able to prosper in any business, or take a leading part in any capacity. This is the result of that apostasy; and yet it was so great that Joseph himself and his friends had to flee from Kirtland. There was a council there when President Young, Brother Brigham as we called him, spoke in favor of Joseph, and Jacob Bump who had been a long time a Pugilist before he came into the Church, said "how on earth can I keep my hands off this man," Brigham said, lay them on if it will do you any good. The voice seemingly of an individual, was absolutely necessary to say that Joseph had a single friend. You look at times of danger, moral and physical, and you will find that the spirit of determination and strong will in the breast of a single man may save a most terrible panic and disaster. By management it was proved that Joseph had friends, and when he had gone to the state of Missouri, having fled from Kirtland, he was met with coldness by men who were in authority there. All this was the result of apostasy.

Journal of Discourses, 11:11-12 (November 15, 1864).

Joseph says "I teach them correct principles . . ."

It was a saying of Joseph Smith, that he taught the people correct principles and they governed themselves.

Journal of Discourses, 13:20 (April 6, 1869).

Anti-Mormon sentiment prevailed in the Kirtland area; Geauga Bank refuses to do business with Joseph.

For several years we had used the paper of Geauga Bank at Painesville, as money. A loan of a few hundred dollars was asked for by Joseph Smith, with ample security, but was refused, and Elder Reynolds Cahoon was told they would not accommodate the "Mormon Prophet," although they acknowledged the endorsers were above question, simply because it would encourage "Mormonism." So much of their specie was drawn by Joseph Smith during the three succeeding days, as greatly improved their tempers, and they said to Elder Cahoon, "Tell Mr. Smith he must stop this, and any favor he wants we are ready to accord him."

Subsequently application was made to the legislature of the state for a bank charter, the notes to be redeemed with specie and their redemption secured by real estate. The charter was denied us on the grounds that we were "Mormons," and soon a combination of apostates and outsiders caused us to leave Kirtland, the most of our property unsold; and our beautiful temple yet remains a lasting monument of our perseverance and industry. The loss sustained through this persecution was probably not less than one million dollars.

Journal of Discourses, 13:106 (October 8-9, 1868).

The "classical language," especially Hebrew, and the common literature of the day to be taught at the School of the Prophets.

Quoting George A. Smith, the record book says: "He said that the Prophet Joseph started a school there for the brethren to learn the classical language but more especially Hebrew and had hired an efficient professional linguist for that purpose and in this school they were also to learn all the common literature of the day."

Deseret Theological School American Fork City Record Book, 1868-1869, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Rehearses the spirit of persecution Joseph suffered in the early days of the Church: lawsuits, mobbings, tarring and feathering, slanderous press, mean spirited sermons.

[Tells of the organization of the Church with six members. Then says:] The family of Joseph Smith were in moderate circumstances. They were very industrious and held a respectable position in society; but on this occasion the tongue of slander was pointed at them; and very soon after the organization of the Church vexatious lawsuits were commenced and Joseph was taken before a magistrate and dismissed. He was again arrested and taken to an adjoining county and treated contemptuously, spit upon and insulted in various other ways. His case was investigated and he was again dismissed. This time the mob resolved to treat him to a coat of tar and feathers, from which, however, he was shielded by the officers in whose custody he had been held. It was looked upon, by many in those days, as a species of fun to treat Joseph Smith or the elders of the church, wherever they went, in a contemptuous manner. The pulpit and the press almost invariably joined in the outcry against the new Church, and the predictions were that in a few days it would be annihilated.

Deseret News, 30 June 1869, 247.

Joseph appears to Brigham in a vision, telling him to lead the Saints to the Salt Lake Valley.

The question is frequently asked, "How did you ever find this place?" [i.e., Salt Lake Valley]. I answer we were led to it by the inspiration of God. After the death of Joseph Smith, when it seemed as if every trouble and calamity had come upon the Saints, Brigham Young who was the president of the Twelve, then the presiding Quorum of the Church, sought the Lord to know what they should do and where they should lead the people for safety, and while they were fasting and praying daily on this subject President Young had a vision of Joseph Smith, who showed him the mountain we now call Ensign Peak, immediately north of Salt Lake City, and there was an ensign fell upon that Peak, and Joseph said "Build under the point where the colors fall and you will prosper and have peace." The pioneers had no pilot or guide, none among them had ever been in the country or knew anything about it. However, they traveled under the direction of President Young until they reached the valley. When they entered it President Young pointed to that Peak and said he "I want to go there." He went up to the point and said "This is Ensign Peak. Now brethren organize your exploring parties, so as to be safe from Indians; go and explore where you will, and you will come back every time and say this is the best place." They accordingly started out exploring companies and visited what we now call Cache, Malad, Toole, and Utah Valleys, and other parts of the country in various directions, but all came back and declared that this was the best spot.

Deseret News, 30 June 1869, 248.

Joseph tells Oliver the work will go on without him; Oliver apostatizes but repents; testifies of John the Baptist's promise.

It is said, and I presume correctly, that Oliver Cowdery remarked at one time to Joseph Smith, "If I should apostatize and leave the Church, the Church would be broken up." The answer of the Prophet was, "What and who are you? This is the work of God, and if you turn against it and withdraw from it, it will still roll on and you will not be missed." It was not long until Oliver turned away, but the work continued. God raised up men from obscurity to step forth and shoulder the burdens, and it was hardly known when and where he went. In about ten years he came back again, came before a local Conference at Mosquito Creek, Pottawatomie Co., Iowa, Oct., 1848, and acknowledged his faults. He bore testimony of the mission of the Prophet, Joseph Smith, and of the truth of the Book of Mormon; he exhorted the Saints to follow the authority of the Holy Priesthood, which he assured them was with the Twelve Apostles. He said, "When the Saints follow the main channel of the stream, they find themselves in deep water and always right, pursuing their journey with safety; but when they turned aside into sloughs and bayous, they are left to flounder in the mud and are lost, for the Angel of God said unto Joseph in my hearing that this Priesthood shall remain on the earth until the end."

Journal of Discourses, 13:347 (May 5, 1870); see also George A. Smith, Journal of Discourses, 17:199.

Joseph tells Oliver the work will go on without him.

Oliver Cowdery, previous to his apostasy said to President Joseph Smith: "If I should leave the Church it would break up." Joseph said to Oliver"What, who are you? The Lord is not dependent upon you, the work will roll forth do what you will." Oliver left the Church, and was gone about ten years; then he came back again.

Journal of Discourses, 17:199 (October 6, 1874); see also Journal of Discourses, 13:347.
