Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, Jesse Nathaniel

(December 2, 1834-June 5, 1906)

Jesse Smith's assessment of Joseph's character; he felt Joseph could discern his character.

I know that by nature he was incapable of lying and deceitfulness, possessing the greatest kindness and nobility of character. I felt when in his presence that he could read me through and through. I know he was all that he claimed to be.

"Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 1 (1 January 1892): 24.

Joseph gives young Jesse a Book of Mormon, a gift he highly prized.

In 1843, for a short time, I attended a school kept by a Miss Mitchell in Hyrum Smith's brick office. Passing the Prophet's house one morning, he called me to him and asked what book I read in at my school. I replied, "The Book of Mormon." He seemed pleased, and taking me into the house he gave me a copy of the Book of Mormon to read in at school, a gift greatly prized by me.

"Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 1 (1 January 1892): 24.

Quotes Jacob Hamblin as having heard the Prophet say children would rise in the resurrection as they had died, afterwards growing to full stature.

In conversation with the late Jacob Hamblin on Friday Jan. 11, 1884, he told me:

"Joseph Smith did say, for I heard him, that little children would come forth in the resurrection the same size or stature as they were when they died, but that afterwards they would increase to what would have been their full stature, if they had lived to attain to it."

[Signed] Jesse N. Smith

Snowflake, Feb. 15, 1894

"Jesse Nathaniel Smith (1834-1906) Statement 15 February 1894," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Heard Joseph warn citizens of Nauvoo of impending destruction; mentions sorrow at the martyrdom, and of seeing martyr's bodies.

I remember well the time that Joseph and Hyrum Smith went to Carthage. I also remember the visit of Gov. Ford to Nauvoo with his military escort and the speech he made near the Mansion from the unfinished frame building. I heard it. He charged the citizens of Nauvoo with insubordination among other things he said, "The torch is already lighted to demolish your beautiful city a little more misbehavior on your part and it will be applied."

I need not dwell on the scenes of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith; the subject has been treated on by others, the deep sorrow of a whole people who in their hearts called on God to avenge their wrongs.

I saw the martyrs at the mansion house as they were laid out before burial.

"Autobiography and Journal of Jesse Nathaniel Smith 1834-1906," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
