Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, Job F.

(December 2, 1828-January 13, 1913)

First meeting with Joseph is at the landing in Nauvoo.

Starting about the 5th of March 1843 we set sail on sailing ship "Yorkshire" from Liverpool for New Orleans, which port was reached in about ten weeks, reaching Nauvoo on the 31st of May following. At the landing we were met by the Prophet Joseph Smith and apostle Brigham Young, both of whom greeted us, the prophet referring us to Brigham for answer to questions they might wish to propound and for such advice as might be found necessary to give the company temporary homes.

Diary of Job Smith, a Pioneer of Nauvoo, Ill., and Utah, typescript copy, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 4-5.

Remembers Prophet's speech to the Saints after returning from the Dixon kidnapping.

About the last of June, 1843, we hailed the prophet's return from being arrested at Dixon, he being accompanied by a large cavalcade of horsemen who had met him for his protection on his way home with those who had endeavored to take him away to Missouri. He gave out word as he passed that he would deliver an address at the grove at 4 o'clock in the afternoon. We all, that is, all the men at work in the brick yard and apparently all the inhabitants of the city assembled to hear him. He gave an account of how he had been treated, and of points of law against the proceedings which were taken against him. The sympathy of the very large assembly went out in his behalf, and the names of Joseph Reynolds and Harmon Wilson will ever be remembered in execration for their brutal conduct towards him at the time of his arrest.

Diary of Job Smith, a Pioneer of Nauvoo, Ill., and Utah, typescript copy, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 5.

Tells of hearing of the martyrdom and the sadness it created; also tells of Joseph's speaking style and of how he walked on the stand while he spoke; also tells of his great mental powers.

On the morning of June 28th a horseman came riding past our home shouting with a loud voice the news of the assassination of our beloved prophet. The news appeared so horrible that weeping was general and many tears were shed for we all had learned to love and revere him as a man of God, and a prophet raised up in the last days to restore the everlasting gospel. This painful event did not disorganize the church, nor prevent the building of the temple, which was the object hoped for by the enemy. Well might the prophet with many of his followers have explained with the apostle Paul "if in this life only we have hope we are of all men most miserable." I had but limited personal acquaintance with him living as I did outside of the city, but I always heard his public discourses and noticed his personality, his manner and earnestness. The stand from which he spoke was, I think, between twenty and thirty feet long, and it was his custom in addition to his arm gesture to walk the stand from one end to the other and sometimes call upon the audience for an expression of approval which was usually answered by a loud "Aye" from the congregation. I have never but once since heard a preacher or lecturer exercise the mental power and earnestness manifested by that great man. He was large in stature and powerful in invective, and occasionally sarcastic. Other elders, chiefly the apostles such as P. P. Pratt, Orson Hyde, E. T. Benson, and others preached with great earnestness. I heard Sidney Rigdon once but his talk was very tame.

Diary of Job Smith, a Pioneer of Nauvoo, Ill., and Utah, typescript copy, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 6.

Elders commissioned to campaign for Joseph; many, including "lawyer politicians" surprised; remembers when Joseph threw off Sidney as a counselor.

During theses troublesome times the apostles and chief elders who could be relied upon were out in various parts of the United States distributing General Joseph Smith's "Views on the Powers and Policy of the United States" and presenting his name as a candidate in the next presidential election. The prophet in a discourse which I remember, referring to the attitude of some of the lawyer politicians on learning that "General Joseph Smith" was the Mormon prophet would roll up a big chew of tobacco around their mouths and exclaim with surprise, "Old Joe Smith, by Gd." I remember also the conference which was held under the east wall of the temple when he formally threw off elder Rigdon from being his first counselor.

Diary of Job Smith, a Pioneer of Nauvoo, Ill., and Utah, typescript copy, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 6.

Joseph discerns the spirit of apostasy in "old father Cole"; Smith tells of the destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor, of Joseph's last speech to the Nauvoo Legion, of William and Wilson Law fleeing Carthage in fright and advising two young boys of the massacre; Smith also saw the Prophet's body, which was hidden lest his enemies try to take his head to Missouri for reward monies.

There was at the time a very bitter spirit of apostasy among the professedly members of the Church and the words "Spiritual wife doctrine" were hissed forth from many mouths, and "Fallen Prophet" and other epithets. I remember one Sunday he was noticing that effect, and turning round towards a reportedly very pious and faithful old man sitting on the stand remarked "Why here is old father Cole turning against me" and some of my nearest friends are seeking my life.

About this time an opposition paper was started in Nauvoo, which the City Council saw fit to condemn as a "Nuisance" and forthwith "abate" it by throwing printing press, etc., from a second story out into the street. I went to the city that day and saw the debris. Of course the paper had published every wicked thing that hatred could hatch up. Nauvoo was now in a ferment. An armed mob seemed to be hourly expected and every able bodied man was expected to do military duty in guarding the city and especially the residence of the prophet and his associates. Uncle Bundy and myself were enrolled though we had no firearms, but we drilled with such weapons as could be improvised from farm tools. On the 22nd of June '44 we, the "Nauvoo Legion," were all lined up around a frame of a building and listened to that memorable speech uttered by the prophet wherein in response to the question asked of the Legion if they were willing to lay their lives down for him they loudly shouted "yes," he declared that he would lay down his life for them, which as the sequel speedily proved he did only five days afterwards. The massacre occurred about 5 o'clock in the afternoon. About six o'clock of the same afternoon William and Wilson Law came riding furiously from the direction of Carthage and in the direction of the Ford Madison Ferry across the Mississippi River. On their way they came across two boys herding cattle from Nauvoo to whom they communicated the newssaying Joe Smith and his brother Hyrum are killed, you better drive your cows home and tell your friends. Then drove on at full speed. There were obviously making their escape lest Mormon violence should overtake them. The name of one of the boys was Millet who related the circumstance to me in person.

The bodies of the two martyrs having been brought home for burial were received by many thousand weeping Latter-day Saints, myself being one of the number. I was in touch with people that were trusted for I had the privilege shortly afterwards of viewing the place where the prophet's body was concealed to prevent his head being taken to Missouri for rewards.

Diary of Job Smith, a Pioneer of Nauvoo, Ill., and Utah, typescript copy, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 7-8.

Recalls the transfiguration of Brigham Young and the powerful spirit he felt then.

Until the first week in August, everything seemed quiet, the pall of mourning overshadowed every other sensation. Sometimes during this week in August Sidney Rigdon returned and called the people together to listen to his oratory and special claims. I heard all his discourses and they were lengthy and to the point that the father of the church was dead and needed a guardian and that he was the man to fill that position.

But on the 8th of August the apostles appeared on the stand, having recently returned from the east. And to me it was a sensation. President Brigham Young arose to speak and every eye was turned towards him, and as he spoke I fancied it was the prophet's voice speaking through him, I scarcely remember much that he said in the way of reasoning, but the ring of his voice will never cease from my memory as he uttered aloud the words, "If you wish to know who is the president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints it is I." Historian's have given his remarks in full, but I merely write from memory. I also remember his coupling with the motion to sustain the twelve apostles as the presiding authority of the church, the further carrying out of the measures of the prophet in finishing the building of the temple and giving the people their endowments.

Diary of Job Smith, a Pioneer of Nauvoo, Ill., and Utah, typescript copy, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 8.

Tells of some of his experiences with the Prophet: first meeting at the pier, where Joseph deferred answering questions to Brigham; saw Joseph lead the Nauvoo Legion; saw Joseph returning from the Dixon kidnapping and Joseph prophesying the fate of those who opposed him; tells of owner of liquor store in Nauvoo hiding his sales; tells of Father Cole turning against him; tells of the Church seeking redress of Missouri grievances, of the tensions leading to the martyrdom; and also tells of the transfiguration of Brigham Young in a meeting where the Church membership was never "more thoroughly representative."

The first time that I saw him was on the banks of the Mississippi River on the 31st of May 1843. It was the usual landing place, and as a boat could be seen ploughing its way against a stiff current, a considerable crowd including the Prophet and Brigham had gathered to meet a company of expected immigrants.

After the landing of the small company of new arrivals, a general greeting including introductions was gone through in a very short time. One of the newcomers named Simmons thought to engage the Prophet's attention to answer a long string of inquiries, and did so in quite an unsophisticated and almost offensive manner, whereupon the Prophet referred him to President Young, and turning on his heel, and in an almost acrobatic manner made quick time towards home, to the amazement of those who expected to see the solemnity supposed to be so necessary for a prophet.

The next time that I can remember of seeing him was as he was coming home from the kidnapping experience he had been having at Dixon (the facts of which are well known), escorted by a troop of horsemen with a brass band and many people afoot. In the afternoon at four o'clock he addressed a great multitude of Nauvoo citizens at the "Grove," the usual preaching place. I remember his recital of the brutal treatment by the two men who attempted to steal him away under most cruel treatment. The two individuals whose names he made public on this occasion were Joseph Reynolds and Harmon Wilson. His discourse was a vindication of the rightfulness of the Writ of Habeus Corpus in the case of arrest a long way from home.

At one of his sabbath discourses during the summer I remember his reference to Doctor Foster's "Dry Bones," making remarks concerning them which I have failed to remember. By way of showing the light upon them I may refer to the revelation where William Law and Robert D. Foster were invited in the words, "Let my servant" so and so "pay stock" into the hands of the committee of the Nauvoo House, which by the same revelation the prophet "and his seed were to have place," and it was to be a house to "entertain strangers," etc.

But Robert D. grew weak in the faith and believed it would be a very profitable investment to be prepared to "entertain strangers," and therefore put up the framework of quite a large three story hotel building near the Temple. (The fact is, times had changed and trouble was brewing.)

The sale of liquor had been forbidden within city limits by the City Council, and no liquor store was allowed. One Sunday the prophet in his discourse took occasion to say that he never before knew that "Bakery" spelled "cider and whiskey" which he left the congregation to understand was sold behind that sign.

[The next two pages of the manuscript are missing.]

The mayor at once ordered the liquor spilled and the slight frame building was toppled over and rolled down over the brink of a deep hollow, so that whiskey selling received a set-back which, when it did appear again it tried to hide behind the sign of "Bakery."

That he was an athlete is generally known from many testimonies, and that he was fearless both physically and intellectually is also well attested. Some of his bitter enemies sat with him upon the stand, to which I remember his making direct reference when once during his discourse he turned around, and pointing to a venerable looking old man, he remarked, "Why here is old Father Cole turning against me."

As the public gathering of the saints were always held in the open air, there were of course no general Sunday gatherings in the winter; and I, living five miles out of the city, heard none of his discourses in the small gatherings. I remember being at a conference held for shelter under the east wall of the unfinished temple, and hearing the prophet declare that he could carry Sidney Rigdon as his councillor no longer. It will be remembered that Rigdon had moved with his family, contrary to the counsel given in a revelation, from Nauvoo to Pittsburgh, his native town. Later, or in the spring of 1844, the "stand" and seats were moved to a grove in front of a tannery called "Field's Tannery." There I listened to what I believe was his last sabbath discourse.

It will be understood that owing to the fact that he had sought in vain for assistance or redress for the robbing and driving of the Saints in Missouri from the chief executive of the nation, having been turned down with the cruel remark, "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you," and assigning a selfish reason, and it being an election year, he addressed letters to certain prominent men who either were already or expected to be candidates for the office of President of the United States, asking them what in case of their election to that high office would be their course of proceedure [sic] toward the Latter-Day Saints. The answers he received were very unsatisfactory, to which he made some scathing replies, especially as to Henry Clay, of whose recommendations he made reference by referring to some past inquiries the saints had suffered, as "little nipperkins of milk compared with Clay's great aqua fortis jars."

Following this in a caucus held in Nauvoo he was nominated for President and issued his "Views of the powers and policy of the United States" which were read to thousands in all the prominent cities. But with the lawyers and politicians he was so completely disguised that (on the stand I remember him) mimicing them in their comments on his "views," rolling up a big chew of tobacco in their mouths and exclaiming "Old Joe Smith, by Gaud."

And in that discourse in front of the tannery he declared that under their management "the Union would fall and come to the ground." His attitude on slavery was very bitter, picturing the colored man as holding up his manacled hands and exclaiming "O Liberty, where are thy charms, that poets have told me were sweet," but alas a few more weeks witnessed the death by unlawful violence of this prophet of the Most High God.

Now as to the fulfilment of this notable prediction concerning the government, we can well call to mind the condition of the government when the Lord called another notable man, whose name is now honored as second to none except George Washington to hold the helm of state and abolish slavery and save the Union.

It was, I think, in the same discourse delivered near the tannery that, referring to the mobbers of Missouri, he prophesied that some of them should suffer in a manner emblematically as shown by the Irish fable of "the Killkenny cats which fought one another so viciously that they each ate the other up so that nothing was left but the ends of their two tails." Perhaps it may be thought that this prediction could never by any possibility ever be realized. But let them read the unbiased account of the Donner party (which perished in the Sierra Nevada in 1846-7) in Bancroft's History of California; they will arrive at the conclusion that the picture drawn by the prophet was well taken. They started fighting among themselves and ended up by eating one another in the very deep snows of the Sierras. About half of them were rescued by parties from the western side of the mountains, and only a few of the remainder survived, having lived through the winter on human flesh.

Referring again to the discourse on the stand in front of the tannery, I remember it commenced to rain, and he stopped his discourse and asked the congregation if he should stop and dismiss the meeting, but many cried out "No, go on, go on," to which he replied then, "I will go on, let it rain or shine." Which he did.

Enemies within the city and mobs from without were at this time very threatening, and the Nauvoo Legion, in whose ranks I was enrolled, were on hand guarding the city and especially the residence of the prophet, and on the 22nd of June 1844 the Legion were all marched in a body and arranged in close order in front of the framework of a small building across the street from his residence. The prophet with a few others seated themselves on this framework, and all being ready, he addressed the assembly. He was in his military dress with his hat, epaulettes and sword. The report of his speech as written the next day from memory (or epitomy) accords with my own memory of his notable speech, especially his dramatically drawing his sword and pointing it towards the heavens, and his declaring that inasmuch as they, the members of the Legion, were willing to lay down their lives for him, he was willing to lay down his life for them. It was well understood that the city was threatened with destruction if the prophet was not given up, hence the question, the hearty response, and his final declaration.

I stood but a few feet from the frame building on which he stood, and I thought he said he should return to us again, and when a few days afterward the news came of his assassination, I could think of nothing but that he would shortly be resurrected as was his great prototype, the Savior. I wept bitterly at the dreadful news, and was not alone in that sensation. In common with may thousands of others I viewed his remains in the hall of his residence, with his brother Hyrum's, where they lay in their coffins ready for burial. Owing to a reward having been offered by his enemies in Missouri for his head, a mock funeral was held and his body secreted in an unsuspected place. It was my good fortune to be in touch with those who knew his temporary resting place, and with whom I viewed the place.

The "Laws,"men who were chiefly responsible for the murder, were seen on the evening of the event driving swiftly about 20 miles from Carthage to a ferry across the Mississippi river into another State to escape from expected Mormon revenge.

During the six weeks following the tragedy or until the arrival of the apostles from their mission in the east, it was an occasion of lo here, and lo there, among various aspirants for recognition as leaders for the people.

During the sixth week Sidney Rigdon arrived from Pittsburg, and issued a call for the people to assemble at the "Grove," which meeting I attended with thousands of others. His reasoning and oratory had considerable weight with the class of members who had joined the church and immigrated subsequently to the Missouri persecutions, but with the latter class it was different.

But before he had had sufficient opportunity to work up an influence necessary to put his claims to a vote, the apostles arrived from the east; and the notable gathering of practically all the members of the church from Nauvoo, and for many miles surrounding, so on the 8th of August assembled in conference. The church so far as I know has never met in a more thoroughly representative capacity than on that day. The apostles were there, together with all the organized quorums of the church, with its members male and female. The stand faced south. . . .

[The next page of the manuscript is missing.]

He broke forth in the voice and attitude of Joseph Smith the prophet and said, "Now if you want to know who is the President of this people, it is I." Now those who wish to sustain the twelve apostles as the presiding authority, and in carrying out the measures of the prophet and in finishing the temple, that the people may have their endowments, let them hold up their hands. The vote was unanimous as far as I was able to see. A vote was then asked for in favor of Sidney Rigdon, and I was told that seventeen persons voted for him, out of the many thousands assembled, but I did not see them.

I am not alone in remembering the voice of the prophet through President Young, for I have heard a great many persons offer the same testimony. Be that as it may, the prophet's shoes have been well filled and the gospel spread in spite of all opposition.

"My Recollections of the Prophet During the Last Year of His Life, from a Manuscript Written by Job Smith," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
