Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, John Lyman

(November 17, 1832-February 21, 1898)

Memory of Joseph praying, asking for a better meal and of the prayer being answered immediately.

In my early years I used to often eat at the table with Joseph the Prophet. At one time he was called to dinner. I being at play in the room with his son Joseph, he called us to him, and we stood one each side of him. After he had looked over the table he said, "Lord, we thank Thee for this Johnny cake, and ask Thee to send us something better. Amen." The corn bread was cut and I received a piece from his hand.

Before the bread was all eaten, a man came to the door and asked if the Prophet Joseph was at home. Joseph replied he was, whereupon the visitor said, "I have brought you some flour and a ham."

Joseph arose and took the gift, and blessed the man in the name of the Lord. Turning to his wife, Emma, he said, "I knew the Lord would answer my prayer."

From this time to his death I always revered and honored him, and when but a boy of ten or twelve years have in Nauvoo often said to him I was ready to die for him.

John Lyman Smith, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 6 (15 March 1892): 172.

Note: John Lyman Smith was the Prophet's cousin, a son of John and Clarissa Smith; he was a brother to George A. Smith.

Memory of Joseph warning a doctor to tie his Horse; the doctor ignored the warning and the horse ran breaking the carriage; the doctor then thought Joseph a Prophet.

When playing in the yard of the old white mansion, in Nauvoo, with Joseph and Frederick, two of his sons, a gentleman drove to the gate and asked if the Prophet Joseph Smith was at home; when he (the Prophet) sprang up from the grass plat, and, shaking the dust from his clothing, replied that he was. The gentleman then drove his one horse up to a tie post and left the lines lying loose, and got out and came into the house. When about half way to the house Joseph said, "Mr., I think you would do well to tie your horse; he might get a scare and run away and break your carriage."

The gentleman replied, "I have driven that horse for some years and never tie him. I am a doctor and cannot afford to tie up at every place I call."

Joseph repeated, "You had better tie, all the same. Your horse might get a scare and run away."

The doctor replied, "No fear."

Joseph seemed quite uneasy, and got up several times from his chair on the porch or stoop. Suddenly the horse started up the street and struck a wheel against a post and scattered the pieces for a block or more. The doctor sprang to his feet, and looking after the horse, cried out to Joseph, "I'll be dd if you ain't a Prophet!"

John Lyman Smith, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 6 (15 March 1892): 172-73.

Recollections of his cousin, Joseph Smith: recalls Joseph giving his father a pair of boots, and of caring for the family during sickness; tells of Joseph hiding in corn fields to avoid visitors; when the prairie grass cut and bloodied the feet of the Nauvoo Legionnaires, Joseph ordered a merchant to give them boots; Joseph blessed John Lyman that he would preach in many lands; saw martyred bodies.

Joseph the Prophet and his Brother Hyrum visited us all being sick with the chills and fever except mother. Father being out of his right mind most of the time. Joseph took off his shoes and put them on father's feet and rode away barefoot on horseback. The next day Joseph sent a team and took father to his house and nursed him until he recovered and sent to us many comforts and I always felt his kindness saved out lives.

. . . the Prophet Joseph Smith. He used to visit us often when the corn was growing all around the house and when the gate squeaked he would slip from the back door to the corn field and when the visitors were gone I took him word and he returned.

. . . [In 1844] the [Nauvoo] Legion were ordered to meet at Nauvoo. The prairie being wet and covered with sloughs and water with rain pouring down our company under command of Uriah H. Yager, Lieutenant. 75 of us started for Nauvoo. On our way we passed what was called the Lone [?] House where quite a troop of the mobbers were congregated. They commenced firing at our Company before we had come within two miles. Sometimes the bullets would plough the ground between men as we stationed 5 or 6 feet apart.

Orders were sent along the line to load extra but to hold fire until we could see them wink. Before we reached hailing distance they broke and run like a set of devils and we did not get a shot at all. My shoes were well worn off my feet. On arriving in Nauvoo we were quartered in Dr. Forsters big new brick house. My feet [were] bleeding so that every step would leave the blood marks. As I was on duty watching the forage piled by the fence, Joseph the Prophet rode up to me and enquired after father and mother and asked me why I kept my beet behind a log by which I was standing. When taking me by the hand [he] pulled me forward so I had to step upon the log. Many of my brethren's feet were in the same plight. The sharp prairie grass had cut our boots and shoes to pieces and our feet felt the marks on the leg every step. Joseph wept and called to a merchant name Lathrop across the street and said "Let these men have some shoes." When he replied "I have not shoes," Joseph replied quite sharp and quick, "Let them have boots, then," which was done.

Joseph laid his hands on my head as he sat on his horse and said some very comforting words and blessed me and said I should live to see Israel triumph and should travel much and preach this latter-day gospel in many lands. This was the last time I saw Joseph alive to speak to him.

. . . June 29th at 8 a.m. the doors of the Mansion were opened and it was estimated that by 5 o'clock p.m. ten thousand people were passed through the House and viewed the remains, my father and family passing also. I could not weep for the fountain was dried up for I would gladly have given my life for them, but so it was and it is not for me to judge, for God doeth all things well.

John Lyman Smith, "Journals of John Lyman Smith, Born November 17, 1832, Son of John Smith, a Cousin to the Prophet Joseph Smith," microfilm of holograph, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some spelling and punctuation has been modernized.
