Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, Joseph III

(November 6, 1832-December 10, 1914)

In letter to "Dear Cousin John" he recalls tender friendships of their youth; he also tells of family news and of a recent visit to Nauvoo; he tells how Nauvoo had changed from their boyhood; he also tells of the irreligious attitude of the sons of William Marks and asks that John visit him.

I know that I am asking considerable of you, but when I remember that you are some six weeks ahead of me in the race of life, and that we are both rapidly passing to the great beyond, to join the hosts that have gone before, I am reminded of the far off past when you and I used to ride through the streets of Nauvoo, you on the white horse and I on the black, the two most noted boys in the city. Some of those days come back like a flood to my memory, and I wonder how much of the past you may recall. Not many are left, Cousin John, of the band that we knew then. The Snyder boys, Edgerton, and John, the Haws boys (Alpheus and Albert), the Marks boys (William and Louellen), Jared Carter's boys, the Turney children, Sydney Rigdon's children (Sydney and Wycliff), the last named being at Salt Lake City now as I understand, the Laws (Richard and William), Edward Partridge, the Billings boys, the Decker boys, the Hancock's, Joseph Clapp, James and Henry Lawrence, the Lytles, the Phelps (James and Henry), Loren's brothers, (James and Henry), Allreads and others, most of which have gone on before, leaving but few of the little circle whom we knew, all admonished us that the places we occupy will soon be vacated for others now younger and stronger, who will take up with vigor the things we leave undone.

Please, cousin John, write me as fully as you can, or have some one do it for you, as I am having my letters written to you.

[He then includes a paragraph of news about Aunt Catherine Salisbury's family, and continues:] Cousin Don and his wife, and daughters, Mary Deam, Emma Peterson, Dr. of medicine at Ottuma, Iowa, and Grace, the unmarried daughter, made a visit to Nauvoo with wife and myself and our youngest boy, and had a picnic dinner on the banks of the river at the foot of Main St., which you will doubtless well remember. The stone to which I used to tie my boat still lies on the shore, the ring bolt is broken off, but it rusted end still remains in the hole drilled to receive it. The river still runs by the town, but the streets are grass grown, and nothing remains to mark where you folks used to live but the barn standing on the site where your barn stood, and the well in front of where the house used to stand. It would make your heart ache to see the desolation into which all the lower part of the flat is fallen.

But perhaps this will not interest you, cousin, but I have been trying to think up the things of those days for the purpose of writing a book of memories, and some of them come quite clear to my memory. You will probably remember, William and Leuellen Marks, who lived next door east you folks. They went into business in Mendota, Ill., were for a time engaged in the manufacture of the western cottage organ. William died at Sandwich, Illinois, leaving a small family, and Louellyn died at Mendota, not many years after William's death. What family he left and in what condition, I do not know. William gave me his father's book, as he said he neither cared for them nor the religion. Neither of them never paid any attention whatever to me, and so far as I know never engaged in any religious work at all. You will also remember John Brackenbury, I presume. He died at Riverside, California, but he has quite a family, most of whom are living here at Independence. I would like it if you could visit me this next Summer, should I be living, and we will talk those old days over. I am, dear cousin, Yours in the hope of life, Joseph Smith.

"Joseph Smith III to John Smith, Patriarch, Dec. 20, 1909," BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah.

Childhood memories: moving to Commerce; the Prophet purchases a farm; the Prophet is frightened by the discharging of pistol; the fearlessness of Old Charlie, one of the Prophet's favorite horses; with the Prophet he passes office of John P. Green; Porter Rockwell's remorse at the death of Joseph; memories of sitting on the stand with the Prophet and of Joseph correcting an elder; memories of the laying of the cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple.

I was not yet seven years old when my father [the Prophet Joseph Smith] and his family moved from Quincy to Nauvoo. Leaving Quincy in May, 1839, we removed to the vicinity of the little town of Commerce, which was located some three quarters of a mile up the Mississippi River from the home of Hugh White, whose farm father purchased. . . .

From . . . the fall of 1839 or 1840, more or less confusion of memory obtains because of the rapidity with which events transpired. Hugh White, the river pilot from whom father purchased the farm, had started to dig a well, but when he reached the solid rock he had desisted. Father had workmen dig into this solid stratum of rock, seeking for water, and while I was standing on the stone doorstep at the front of the house, a blast was fired in this well which threw one piece of some fifteen or twenty pounds in weight which just brushed the rim of my hat and struck a stone at my feet.

It seems to me now that it must have been about 1842 that what is called the military spirit took possession of the people at Nauvoo. One event connected with this is also vividly impressed on my mind. After the organization, the State had issued arms to some extent to the people of Nauvoo, and among them were the then fashionable horse pistols, or large pistols to be carried in holsters in front of the saddle. Father had two of these. Loren Walker, who afterwards married Uncle Hyrum's oldest daughter, Lovina, had charge of the firearms and military accouterments. One day, while I was sleeping he cleaned these pistols, loaded them, and laid them on the bed. On waking I saw these pistols and with a boy's curiosity I took one in my hands, not thinking about their being loaded, and pointing it at the ceiling above my head, I thought, "Now if this was loaded, I could hit such a place with it," and to my astonishment, on pulling the trigger, the weapon was discharged and the bullet went through the ceiling and the roof of the house. Father and a number of others were sitting in the room, and as some annoyance had been experienced from persecutors, the first thought was that someone had made an attempt upon father's life. The pistol had jumped out of my hand and the plastering torn loose by the shot had fallen plentifully on the bed. The men folks rushed out of doors to discover when the shot was fired, but found nothing. It occurred to Loren Walker where he had left his holster of pistols, and remembering that I was on the bed, he was fearful that by some means one of the weapons had been discharged and I had been hurt. So he rushed to the bed, parted the curtains, and found me staring at the hole in the ceiling, the pistol lying by me on the bed. He found I was not hurt, and it passed off as a rather laughable occurrence, a good deal like the story of the big hole that rumor said father had dug in the Hill Cumorah. This incident can be verified by the same evidence used to support the story of the one father dug: "The hole is still there."

Another remembrance touching this military spirit is, that after the organization had been effected and John C. Bennett was installed as general, Colonel Brower, a one-armed man who had been an army officer, had been secured to teach the use of the sword to those who chose to learn. A sham battle had been arranged on a parade day, and considerable excitement existed in the city from a rumor that an arrangement had been made by some persons at enmity with father to take advantage of the excitement, prevalent in the military maneuvers, and assassinate him. I remember hearing some talk about it, and one of the brethren in the church was appointed with a number of his comrades, to have special watchcare over father on that day. It was expected that this Colonel Brower was by some means implicated, and John P. Green, Hosea Stout, and another whose name I fail to recall, were especially careful not to lose sight of Colonel Brower. Colonel Brower was riding a fine black young horse of considerable spirit. He had lost his left hand, but managed to hold the reigns of the horse over the stump arm below his elbow, and indeed managed his horse quite cleverly, his sword arm being free. In some of the maneuvering, whether by accident or design, the spirited animal was either irritated or frightened, and ran away with Colonel Brower. I remember seeing him come down Water street on a keen run. Nothing was discovered of any plot to assassinate father that day that I ever learned of.

The rising generation was not exempt from the influence of the military spirit. A military captain by the name of Bailey, who had conceived the idea of the organization of the boys, succeeded to quite an extent, and after the Nauvoo Legion had grown to large proportions, he had at one time some six hundred of the boys under his command, divided into companies and pretty well trained. On one of these parades Captain Bailey was out with quite a fair proportion of the older boys, and perhaps without previous understanding the young fellows armed themselves with things to produce noise, tin pans and horns, with branches of shrubs and trees, and started to march from the hill down onto the plain where the maneuvering was taking place. A scout reported to the commanding general that there was an enemy in force marching on them, and a detachment of horses was sent to disperse them. As they approached the boys formed in a square, and when the horsemen came pretty close, they broke out with beating their pans, waving their branches, and shouting. The horsemen retreated and the boys resumed their march. A second detachment of horsemen was sent to disperse them; but as before they formed a square and again repulsed the horsemen. Father, being the commanding general, said to the officer of the day, "You had better summon Charlie," meaning the horse which he rode, and the officer in charge replied, "Very well, I direct you and Charlie to disperse the rebels." It may have been, as I now suppose, the spirit of sport that made the occasion notable, but father with his horse alone, for he would not accept company, started towards the approaching band of boys. They, as before, formed a square, and when the horseman was sufficiently near, raised a great shout, waved their branches, and blowed their horns; but the horse which father rode was of a different temper and he plunged among them, scattering them right and left, and had to be forcibly restrained by his rider from tramping them down.

The horse was possessed of the spirit of the ancient war horses. He was utterly without fear.

. . . [An incident] which makes me remember [John P. Green] was when I was with father on one occasion, passing through the city. We went to the office of John P. Green on the hillside, west and a little north of the temple, where his sign was upon the front of the house as a real estate agent and conveyancer. This sign remained for many years on the front of the house after the town was evacuated by the Saints.

. . . [I once saw Orrin P. Rockwell]. It was at dusk in the evening, just after the sun went down and before it was dark. I was in the door yard in the front of the house, not far from the fence on Water street, running by the north side of the lot, when I saw him coming up the street from the hotel side. I had always been fond of him, and so I climbed over the fence and met him at the street. After I shook hands with him, he broke into tears, and sobbed out, scarcely able to speak, "Oh, Joseph, Joseph, they have killed the only friend I ever had," and for some little time he could not compose himself to talk with me coherently.

I do not remember of the breaking of the ground for the building of the temple, but I do remember the meetings in the grove on the hillside near the temple, and going there to Sunday school. Here I was a scholar in a class of about sixty boys under the teaching of Almon W. Babbitt, who as my memory now recalls him, was a kind, friendly, pleasant teacher. Whatever he may have been in after years he was then a man of good presence and quite able to teach. I remember that at the meetings there, I felt myself fortunate, if I was permitted to sit with my mother or in the midst of the congregation; but generally, when father was at home, I was taken by him upon the stand. I remember hearing George J. Adams, Parley P. Pratt, Amasa Lyman, and Orson Hyde, and my father preach from the stand in the grove. I do not remember hearing Brigham Young or others preach. They may have done so, but father was usually the speaker. I remember the occurrence, stated by some as having taken place, that when one of the elders had preached quite a lengthy sermon, to which attention had been called, after it was delivered father said that he had but one fault to find with it, that it was not true.

I remember when the cornerstone [of the Nauvoo temple] was laid. The basement had been built and a rough floor laid preparatory to the assembling to witness the laying of the corner stone, and I was on the platform with my father and others. There were too many to remember. The whole area of the building was covered, and all around it in the yard, were members of the assembly standing and sitting upon benches of stone.

"What Do I Remember of Nauvoo?" Journal of History 3, no. 2 (April 1910): 132, 133-136, 138, 139, 142, 143. Lamoni, Iowa: Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Childhood memories: Mob activity in Nauvoo; visiting relatives; the Prophet cuffs Constable Bagbe; the Prophet hides in the home of Bishop Edward Hunter; his learning of the martyrdom and Emma's reaction; no memory of quarreling or harsh words between Joseph and Emma.

Probably the most interesting and most important of any of the recollections of my sojourn at Nauvoo would be those included in the busy time of 1843 and 1844, and before the exodus from the State, after the entrance of the mob into Nauvoo. Among these is the return of father from the scene of his arrest by the officers from Missouri, and his assistants from Hancock County, Illinois, near Dixon, Lee County, where my father and mother and their children were on a visit to my mother's brothers and sisters, Isaac and David Hale, Elizabeth Wassen, and Trial Morse. After the arrest of father he was taken to Dixon, and mother at once started with her family back to Nauvoo, with their intention of sending what assistance would be needed by father in his effort for freedom before the courts. We traveled by carriage, but just how long it took to make the journey I do not remember. . . .

I think we reached Nauvoo some time in the evening of the third day, and mother had ample time to get ready for the return of father with a cavalcade of horsemen who had been sent out to meet them on the way. I remember the coming of the men of that troop, when conditions seemed to have been changed, wherein father having been prisoner had become the custodian of the men by whom he had been arrested. I know it was a busy, striking scene, one that impressed itself upon me vividly, as the individuals composing it were covered with dust from the long ride, and there was a general brushing up and changing of apparel, to get rid of the travel stains upon the clothing and persons. I remember, that among these men were a number of persons with whom I was acquainted as a boy; among them, Lorenzo Wassen, a nephew of my mother; William Backenstos, who married a niece of my mother; his brother, Jacob Backenstos, who afterward became sheriff of Hancock County; Jonathan Dunham, and a number of others and the two men, Joseph H. Reynolds and a Hancock County officer whose name was Harmon G. Wilson. I was not present at the trial said to have taken place at the council.

I saw the altercation which history says took place between father and the constable by the name of Bagbe, in which it is said that father cuffed the constable's ears, the meaning of which I did not understand at the time.

It must have been in these days that I spent a portion of time with father while he was in seclusion at the house of Bishop Edward Hunter, at whose house he frequently stayed when avoiding arrest by those who were seeking to annoy and distress him. I remember Edward Hunter as a large, good-natured, energetic man, and the stay at this house was very pleasant. . . .

The memories from that time to the dreaded culmination are almost like the changing views of a kaleidoscope. About the first that now occurs to my memory was the appearance of the messenger announcing the death of father, who I think was Lorenzo Wassen, my mother's nephew, the son of Benjamin Wassen, and my mother's sister, Elizabeth. He came in covered with dust bringing the news. I remember the gather of the crowd at the Nauvoo Mansion, and recall seeing Dr. Willard Richards on a platform erected in the frame house or building across the road from the Mansion on the south side of Water street, and the congregations of thousands who gathered to listen to him and others detailing something of the tragedy and counseling quiet resignation. I did not hear his speech, or if I did, I do not remember it, as my mother and we children were in the living room in the Mansionmother overwhelmed with her grief, and we children sympathizing as children will without fairly comprehending the importance of such an event. I remember the hours of seclusion of the family from intrusion, the gloom and the dread of the time, awaiting until the bodies were brought home, they being placed in their coffins in the southwest corner of the dining room, and the gathering of the little group (my mother, and her children, my brothers, Frederick Alexander, and my adopted sister, Julia Murdock, and myself). Notwithstanding the grief and the oppression of the hour, the darkness of which I can feel even now, I recall the attitude of my mother. After leaning over the coffin, she placed her hand upon the cheek of my father, and in grief-stricken accents said, "Oh! Joseph! Joseph! O my husband! My husband! Have they taken you from me at last!" Friendly hands ministered to us, and mother was assisted to her room again, and we were alone while the multitude flocked through the house, taking a last look at him who in life had been their leader and their friend. I do not know much about the cavalcade which formed, nor was I a witness to the depositing of the bodies, or the boxes supposed to contain the bodies of father and Uncle Hyrum, in the temporary tomb, built in the hillside near the temple. I remember some of the rumors passed around as to the place the bodies were deposited, but I knew where the bodies were subsequently buried, for I was present upon one occasion when in the presence of two others, there was an opening of the place of deposit, and I saw the features of my father as they were exposed and a lock of hair was cut from his head, a portion of which I have in my possession today, in a brooch which my mother used to wear. . . .

It has been reported by those who pretended to be friends of father, that mother was quarrelsome and was antagonistic to my father, and frequently made trouble for him. I have this to say now, that tracing my memory back through the period of time in which my father was permitted to stay with his family, that I never heard any quarreling or harsh language between them under any circumstances, and that even disagreements between them were not conducted in a noisy or angry manner, that mother's language was quiet and temperate, and so was father's.

"What Do I Remember of Nauvoo?" Journal of History 3, no. 2 (April 1910): 334-38. Lamoni, Iowa: Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
