Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, Joseph F.

(November 13, 1838-November 19, 1918)

Truths revealed through Joseph became the foundation from which others worked.

I want to tell you another thing: Our Heavenly Father has never yet to my knowledge revealed to this Church any great principle through a woman. Now, sisters, do not cast me off or deny the faith, because I tell you that God has never revealed any great and essential truth for the guidance of the Latter-day Saints through any woman. "Oh! but," says one, "what about Eliza Snow's beautiful hymn, 'O my Father, Thou that dwellest,' etc? Did not the Lord reveal through her that great and glorious principle that we have a mother as well as a father in heaven?" No. God revealed that principle to Joseph Smith; Joseph Smith revealed it to Eliza Snow Smith, his wife; and Eliza Snow was inspired, being a poet, to put it into verse. If we give anybody on earth credit for that, we give it to the Prophet Joseph Smith. But first of all we give it to God, who revealed it to His servant the Prophet. God reveals Himself and His truths through the channels of the Priesthood.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 4:229.

Mothers to raise their deceased children after the resurrection.

Joseph Smith declared that the mother who laid down her little child, being deprived of the privilege, the joy, and the satisfaction of bringing it up to manhood or womanhood in this world, would, after the resurrection, have all the joy, satisfaction and pleasure, and even more than it would have been possible to have had in mortality, in seeing her child grow to the full measure of the stature of its spirit. If this be true, and I believe it, what a consolation it is! . . . It matters not whether these tabernacles mature in this world or have to wait and mature in the world to come, according to the word of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the body will develop either in time or in eternity to the full stature of the spirit, and when the mother is deprived of the pleasure and joy of rearing her babe to manhood or to womanhood in this life through the hand of death, that privilege will be renewed to her hereafter, and she will enjoy it to a fuller fruition than it would be possible for her to do here.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 4:251.

Boyhood memories of the Prophet: throwing the abusive Josiah Butterfield out of his house; addressing the Saints in the grove; riding Old Charlie; crossing the river before the martyrdom; commenting on young Joseph F.'s peeked condition.

I will tell you a little circumstance that I saw myself and you would think it very inappropriate of a Prophet, but there were reasons for it that perhaps it would be difficult for me to explain here. I was one day playing marbles in front of the Mansion with my cousin Alexander Smith. We were amusing ourselves on the sidewalk. The fence ran along within six or eight feet of the door of the Mansion, and we were playing at the gate just outside the stone steps, when all of a sudden the door flew open and I looked, and there came a great, big man right off the end of Joseph Smith's foot, and he lit on the sidewalk just by the gate. I saw that myself. Well, I wondered what in the world was the matter. Since I grew to be a man, I learned that this man was there insulting the Prophet, and abusing him in his own house, until the Prophet thought he had stood enough abuse from him, so he opened his door and invited him out; that he did not go as quickly as the Prophet wanted him to go, and he gave him the assistance of his boot, and helped him out. Well, now, some biased man would say: "Why, would a prophet of God do such a thing as that!" Some would be shocked beyond measure to think that the man who beheld the face of God and the face of His son Jesus Christwho had seen the glory that was manifested in the Temple at Kirtland, when Moses, and Elias, and Elijah, and others of the Prophets visited him, and Christ Himself also againand their countenances shone as the glory of God, almost beyond the brightness of the sunthat a man who had beheld these wonderful things, and who had been entrusted with the great mission of restoring the great revelation of salvation to the earth for the last time, should be seen to kick a man out of his house that was abusing him. But he was tried beyond endurance many a time by false brethren, by false accusers, by malicious persons, by wicked men, by mobs and murderers, and evil creatures that sought his life from the day that he received his first message from God until the day they succeeded in taking his precious life from the earth. There was never a moment of his life that he was free from such things as these, being hounded, and abused, and insulted by wicked men; and he had been less a man if he had not kicked Josiah Butterfield out of his house on that day.

I saw him on another occasion standing in a wagon in the grove near the temple site in Nauvoo. Perhaps there are some here that remember the circumstance. The wind was blowing unfavorably for the speaker to be heard by the congregation from the stand. A wagon was drawn round to the windward side, and he appeared and took his position in the wagon box, and from there he addressed the people. I remember this circumstance well. I also remember seeing him riding upon his horse Charley, which this picture before us suspended upon the wall here is supposed to represent. He was dressed in his uniform, as he appears there. The last time I saw him was when he crossed the river, he and my father, from Iowa back to Nauvoo, after they had started for the Rocky Mountains; for let me tell you that the Prophet Joseph contemplated journeying to these mountains for the purpose of looking out a gathering place for the people of God. Being constantly persecuted by his enemies, he laid his plans to slip out of their grasp and way, and come out to these mountains to explore them with a view to seeking out a place where the people of God could be gathered and worship God in peace and according to the dictates of their own consciences. But some of these false brethren, of whom I have been speaking, raised the hue and cry that only a false shepherd flew from the flock when the wolves approached. He was upbraided by some of those false brethren of being a false shepherd. When that word came to him he was wounded in his feelings, and so hurt that he turned round and said: "If this is all my friends care for my life, why should I care for it?" And he returned home and went, as he said, "like a lamb to the slaughter." I saw him and my father as they were rowed in a skiff across the Mississippi river, and watched them till they landed at the bank of the river near the old Times and Seasons printing office, watched them as they walked up the bank of the river on to Water street, and walked along and come into our house. Joseph sat down while my father washed and arranged his toilet. And while Uncle Joseph was sitting there, he took me on his knee and trotted me and played with me. In a little while my father came in. Joseph says, "What is the matter with this little boy?" Father said, "Nothing, I guess." He says, "He looks as though he hasn't a drop of blood in him." I remember it so well. Up to this time, you may remember, I had lived on milk, a good deal of it skim milk, and I suppose I was rather pale, a circumstance that arose through the prostrated condition of my mother, brought on by cruel persecutions in Missouri.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:28-29.

Note: The Prophet's account of throwing Josiah Butterfield out of his house is found in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 5:316.

Young Joseph F. recalls seeing the Prophet keeling over and studying the papyrus manuscripts from which the Book of Abraham comes.

The idea that "the translation [of the Abraham papyrus] came to him very largely as the result of persistent study" is borne out in a story that the late Preston Nibley used to tell of how in 1906 he visited the Nauvoo House in company with President Joseph F. Smith. President Smith (as Elder Nibley recollected with his remarkable memory) recalled with tears the familiar sight of "Uncle Joseph" kneeling on the floor of the front room with Egyptian manuscripts spread out all around him, weighted down by rocks and books, as with intense concentration he would study a line of characters, jotting down his impressions in a little notebook as he went.

Hugh Nibley, "A New Look at the Pearl of Great Price, Part I: Challenge and Response (Continued)," Improvement Era 71, no. 3 (March 1968): 17-18.

En route to Carthage, Joseph and Hyrum stop at Hyrum's; Joseph notes the pallid condition of young Joseph F.

The Prophet Joseph's statement that he was calm as a summer's morning as he went to Carthage jail has often been quoted. President Joseph F. Smith recalls a little incident of this memorable time, which illustrates how unruffled were the feelings of both Joseph and Hyrum, though they were on the way to their death. The President was then only five years old. In the evening, when the Prophet and the Patriarch returned from the Iowa side of the river, the little boy was playing on the bank. He saw the boat coming; but noticed that, instead of crossing above the bar where the channel was wide and the water still, the boat was crossing below the bar where the channel was narrower and the water swift. It was very unusual. When the company landed, the little boy took his father's hand and went with the brothers to the Patriarch's house. There, while the Patriarch was washing and shaving, the Prophet took little Joseph upon his knee and trotted him. Suddenly the Prophet said, "Hyrum, what's the matter with Joseph here; he's so white, there's no blood in him?" "Oh," answered the father jocularly, "he lives on skim milk." The fear of death could not touch such men as these.

Osborne J. P. Widtsoe, "Hyrum Smith, Patriarch," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 2 (April 1911):60.

Remembers early worship services in the grove near the temple, where people sat on benches; on one occasion, when rain fell, the people sheltered Joseph with umbrellas so that he could finish speaking.

My earliest recollection of a place of worship was in a little grove of trees in Nauvoo close to the site of the Temple. This was the first place I remember where Latter-day Saints met together for the worship of God. In this grove I remember attending a large number of meetings, and it seemed to me then that the Sabbath day came around pretty frequently. I used to go, in company with my mother and the rest of the children to the grove, and we used to sit on benches and listen to the speeches of such men as Brigham Young, Orson Pratt, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Hyde, and others of the twelve apostles; and also the Prophet Joseph Smith, and his brother, Hyrum Smith. In connection with those whom I have named, I recall having seen the bishop of that day, Brother George Miller, and other men of prominence.

A little incident that was of interest to me I recall occurred on one occasion when I attended a meeting at Nauvoo. The Prophet Joseph Smith, while holding services, stood in a wagon, where he delivered a discourse. During its delivery the rain began to fall, and it was not long before it became a regular deluge. Those who had umbrellas climbed into the wagon and held them over the speaker, and none left the grove until the services were over.

Liahona 7, no. 47 (14 May 1910): 752-53; also cited in Preston Nibley, Faith Promoting Stories (Independence, Mo.: Zion's Printing and Publishing Co., c. 1943), 7-8.

William Clayton wrote the revelation on marriage (D&C 132) and Joseph C. Kingsberry made a copy of it.

President Joseph F. Smith: "I want to tell you another little circumstance connected with Brother Joseph C. Kingsberry. He is the man that made the first copy of the revelation on celestial marriage, and is a man in whom the Prophet Joseph had absolute confidence as an honorable, honest man, and entrusted to him the personal care of a branch of his family. He is a man who never betrayed a trust that was ever imposed in him by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and I do not believe he ever betrayed a trust that any man ever imposed in him; and that is the kind of a man that will stand the test, and will obtain eternal life. Such as he are the type of men that will endure in the faith to the end, because they have integrity, and because when they know the truth they will do it, and they will not waver to the right or the left, if it should take their lives to keep in the straight path."

"Lest there should be a misunderstanding, I will say, it was William Clayton who wrote the revelation on celestial marriage, as the Prophet's scribe, as it flowed from the mouth of the Prophet Joseph. A copy of that document was placed in the hands of Bishop N. K. Whitney, and Brother Joseph C. Kingsberry made a copy of it."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:30.

As a child he knew Joseph Smith; he was a playmate of the Prophet's sons; they were neighbors.

I was only a child in those days, but I was just as familiar in the home of the Prophet as I was in the home of my father. We lived neighbors, only a few steps apart, and his boys and my father's boys were constant playmates and we were so closely associated with each other that they were in my father's house perhaps quite as often as we were in their father's house. As a child I knew the Prophet Joseph Smith. I can see him in my mind's eye today just as he seemed to appear to me than on many occasions.

Joseph F. Smith, "Boyhood Reflections of President Joseph F. Smith," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 7 (April 1916): 53.

Remembers seeing the Prophet forgive the debts of the Saints, and burn their debt notes.

Now, I am going to tell the little story that I remember. One day during cold weather, my father took me by my hand and led me down the road to a little brick building. It was not much larger than what you would call a beehive house, a little beehive, but it was the best they had at that time, and in it was a little sheet-iron stove. I remember the looks of it just as well as if I had seen it yesterday. There I remember the Prophet Joseph, my father, Brigham Young, Sidney Rigdon and Willard Richards and there were a number of others. I remember these more particularly for the reason that I became better and better acquainted with them as I grew up. I remember them all the way through. They met in that hovel to consider what they should do with the obligations that rested in their hands, from those that had been despoiled of all they possessed in the world. "What will we do with them?" they said. "They are impoverished; they are without everything or anything and they cannot pay their debts. What shall we do with these obligations? Shall we hold them against those people that have been robbed and plundered and despoiled of all they had and wait until they are able to pay and then collect it with usury? No, I guess not." That is my conclusion, for I saw them sit there and talk together for quite a long while and these piles of papers lay on a little table before the Prophet, and my father and others. By and by, I saw the Prophet gather them up one after another, a bundle here and a bundle there, and put them together; he opened the door of the stove and stuck them in, and I saw them burn. Now, I understand that the brethren did that to cancel the debts, the debts and obligations of those that were rendered incapable of meeting their obligations because of the persecution and robbery and plunder. I think now that it was a mighty fine thing to do. There was forgiveness in it, there was charity in it, there was mercy in it, for those that were helpless at the time. Many of them, I believe, grew up well furnished, well fitted, in later years. Some of them, of course fell away because of the persecutions that were brought upon them. Well, that was an incident that I remember very well.

Joseph F. Smith, "Boyhood Reflections of President Joseph F. Smith," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 7 (April 1916): 56.

The Prophet comments on young Joseph F.'s pallid condition; Joseph F. also remembers the

horse ride to Carthage.

Again, while I was a little boy, one day, I think it was just about the noon hour, we were anticipating, or my mother was anticipating the return of my father from somewhere for he and Joseph the prophet had been in concealment away from the mob, and I was looking for them. I went out on the bank of the river, close to the old printing office. I sat on the bank of the river, and presently I saw a skiff starting out from the other side of the river. The river there is a mile wide. They rowed on across the stream until they landed close to where I stood. Out of that little skiff the Prophet and my father alighted and walked up the hill. I joined the hand of my father and we went into the house and sat down; they chatted and talked with each other and while my father was changing his clothessI suppose his collar and cuffs and something of that kind, probablyJoseph the prophet sat there. He took me on his knee and trotted me a little and then he looked at me a little more carefully and finally he said, "Hyrum, what is the matter with Joseph here?"

"Well," he says, "I don't know; what do you think is the matter?"

"Why, he looks as though he had not a drop of blood in him."

"Oh!" Father says, "that is because he has been living on milk only," for up to that timeI was between five and six years of ageI had never eaten a thing harder than milk: I was living on it. I do not know whether that had the effect of making me white or pale, but that was the condition that I was in, and that was the remark the Prophet made. I never forgot it.

Two or three times after this, I saw them on their horses with a company of others, and I want to tell you that they were not mob-driven by force of arms as we saw represented here in a picture show of them. When they went to Carthage, Joseph Smith rode one of the best horses in the State of Illinois, and my father rode another. . . .

I saw the Prophet Joseph Smith myself get on his horse and there were my father and othersI don't now just recall exactly who they were, when they started to Carthage in June, 1844. I heard the voice of Dimmick B. Huntington at the window of the old chamber of my mother's home on the morning after the 27th day of June, 1844, saying to my mother, "Hyrum is dead!" I remember the exclamation that my mother made: I remember the gloom that seemed to hang over the City of Nauvoo. It was a misty, foggy morning; everything look dark and gloomy and dismal, not only to me, but I have heard scores of others say the very same thing. Now, these are some of the things I remember.

Joseph F. Smith, "Boyhood Reflections of President Joseph F. Smith," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 7 (April 1916): 57-58.

Advice to be the same person in public as in private.

The Prophet Joseph Smith laid down the following rule, "Never permit yourself to write down on paper anything that you would not like to have made public."

"Joseph F. Smith to E. Wesley Smith, June 17, 1909," in Hyrum M. Smith III and Scott G. Kenney, From Prophet to Son (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1981), 111.
