Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, Lucy Meserve

(February 8, 1817-October 5, 1892)

First met Joseph when he met the steamboat on which she entered Nauvoo; remembers Joseph's joy at seeing his sister and her child; heard Joseph preach on plurality of Gods and that the Saints should be merciful to their enemies; recalls Joseph going to Carthage and of not being able to pray for him; Joseph once greeted and blessed her brother to his great uplift.

I was born February 9th, 1817, at Bethel, Oxford County, Maine, and I was baptized August 12th, 1837. I first met the Prophet Joseph Smith on a steamboat, when I landed at the ferry in Nauvoo. The first words he said to our company were: "I guess you are all Latter-day Saints here, by the singing I heard when the boat landed." He then shook hands with each one in the company, and then took his sister, Lucy Millikan's seven months' old boy in his arms and sat down and wept for joy, as his sister was thought to be in a decline when she left home the year before with her husband. She was indeed the picture of health when she returned, which gave the Prophet double joy on meeting her with her son.

President Joseph Smith, the Prophet, looked the same to me when I met him as I saw him in a dream before I left home. I can bear testimony that many of his prophecies have come to pass; not only his alone, but others who have been ordained under his administration, have uttered prophecies that have been fulfilled, to the letter. One I will mention in particular. . . .

I heard the Prophet preach twice. Once at his mansion and once at the bowery. He spoke on the plurality of gods. He said, "There are lords many and gods many, but to us there is but one God;" but, said he, "there are gods to other planets. We read in the Bible," he continued, "Father, Son and Holy Ghost, these three are one" [See 1 John 5:7-8]. He said that was not the right rendering of that scripture. It should read "these three are agreed." He remarked that he would like to speak to the people two hours, but the rain made such a noise on the umbrellas (it was raining at the time) it would be useless. "But," said he, "I have brought the Laws and Fosters' prophecy to the ground, as they predicted I should never speak from this stand again; but I have." He then said, "Brethren and sisters, love one another; love one another and be merciful to your enemies." He repeated these words in a very emphatic tone of voice with a loud amen.

The next day he went to Carthage; and on the evening of the 27th of June such a barking and howling of dogs and bellowing of cattle all over the city of Nauvoo I never heard before nor since. I was at Brother David Smith's house. I knelt down and tried to pray for the Prophet, but I was struck speechless, and knew not the cause till the next morning. Of course the awful deed was already accomplished, when the spirit refused to give me utterance to prayer the evening before. The next day the bodies were brought and conveyed to the mansion. There I witnessed the awful scenethe Prophet and Patriarch lying in their gore, and thousands of men, women and children weeping all around.

The little children were very much attached to the Prophet, as he used to play with them as one of their equals. Indeed he was loved best by those who were the most acquainted with him. His daughter, Julia, told me that her papa talked to her before he left, and told her to be a good girl; and he particularly enjoined it upon her to never mistreat any of her playmates, and then he should be happy to meet her again. "Oh," said she, "how bad I should feel if I thought I should not be prepared to meet my dear papa!"

My two brothers, Freeborn and David Smith, came to Nauvoo in the fall of 1842. They were very much attached to the Prophet Joseph Smith. My brother David was passing his store one day and he said the man of God ran out, took him by the hand and said, "God bless you, Brother Smith." He said it made him feel so good to have the Prophet of God take so much pains to come out to shake his hand and bless him, he felt it through his whole system.

Lucy M. Smith, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 15 (1 August 1892): 470.

Heard Joseph preach on plurality of Gods; also heard him announce he had refuted the false prophesy of Laws and Foster that he would not speak from the Nauvoo stand again; remembers the mourning following the martyrdom and the kettles of bloody cloths near the martyred bodies; also tells of young Joseph not being afraid of the mobs and of Emma saying the Twelve were making bogus of Mormonism, which remark she heard while working for Emma.

I left home and worked in the cotton factory and earned money and went to Nauvoo, Illinois, and there visited with the Prophet and Patriarch, heard the Prophet preach at his mansion one evening and from the stand under the Bowery. He preached on the plurality of God, he said there are Lords many, and Gods many, but to us there is but one God, but there were Gods to other planets. He said that he would like to talk to us two hours, but he had brought the Laws and Fosters prophesy to the ground, as they predicted that he would never speak from that stand again. His last words were, "Brethren and Sisters, love one another and be merciful to your enemies." He repeated these words twice in a very emphatic tone of voice, with a loud Amen, while the rain was pouring in torrents from the clouds, but the audience remained quiet, we did not mind getting wet if we could hear the Prophet speak.

The next day he must go to Carthage to meet his fate from a wicked mob. That evening the murder was committed at Carthage, such a barking and howling of dogs, and bellowing of cattle all over the city of Nauvoo, I have never heard before or since. News came the next morning of the awful tragedy. In the afternoon I repaired to the Mansion, and there witnessed the awful scene, the Prophet and Patriarch laying in their gore with kettles of bloody water and cloths standing near, while every man, woman and child were in tears. I forbear to say more on the subject.

The Prophet's son David was born a few months after his father's death. When he was one year old I was at work for his mother. I spun rightly ten knotted skeins of fine marino yarn for which she paid me the money.

When young Joseph was thirteen years old he was very feeble in health with chills and fever, nose bleeding, etc., he used to sit in the room with me a great deal. His speeches led me to believe that he was indeed a saint, at that time. One expression in particular, Julia his adopted sister was rehearsing some of his mother's sayings, when Joseph spoke up and said, "There are two in this family who will be sorry for going against the twelve, as they do." Word came that the mob were threatening what they would do. Joseph would toss his head to one side saying, "Barking dogs never bite." He felt safe as long as he could hear them bark. I thought it smart for a boy of his years, only thirteen and sick at that. It was quite interesting to me to hear the wife of the Prophet talk about things that they had passed through in the first rise of the Church. She bore testimony of the birth of the Latter Day work as it came forth through the Servant of the Lord (Joseph Smith) but she accused the Twelve of making bogus of Mormonism. I could not endorse that, but I must keep silent as I did not wish to get up any litigation, as I did not wish her to detect who I was, as I was married to Apostle George A. Smith, on the 23rd of November previous, 1844. I worked for Sister Emma Smith in Sept. 1845. Went to the Temple the December following 1845. Had my endowments with my companion, and on the ninth of February 1846 crossed the Mississippi, and started to go we knew not where, but after a tedious journey of traveling through snow and mud and sluch for at least three months . . .

Lucy Meserve Smith, "The Papers of Lucy M. Smith, wife of George A. Smith, Daughter of Josiah Smith and Lucy Misserve Smith," handwritten copy with one or two word changes, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah; also in "Original Historical Narrative of Lucy Meserve Smith, Salt Lake City, Utah, August 14, 1888-9, Written by Herself," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
