Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, Mary Fielding

(July 21, 1801-September 21, 1852)

Tells of the escape of Joseph and Sidney from a mob and of Joseph's encouraging words in the Kirtland Temple the following day.

I was much pleased to see Sisters Walton and Snyder, who arrived here about noon, having left Brothers Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon about twenty miles from Fairport to evade the mobbers. They were to come home in Dr. Avard's carriage and expected to arrive about ten o'clock at night, but to their great disappointment they were prevented in a most grievous manner. They had got within four miles of home after a very fatiguing journey, much pleased with their visit to Canada and greatly anticipating the pleasure of seeing their homes and families, when they were surrounded by a mob and taken back to Painsville and secured, as was supposed, in a tavern where they intended to hold a mock trial, but to the disappointment of the wretches the housekeeper was a member of the Church, who assisted our beloved brethren to escape, but as Brother Joseph says, not by a "basket let down through a window," but by the kitchen door. No doubt the hand of the Lord was in it or it could not have been effected. The day had been extremely wet and the night was unusually dark, and you may try if you can conceive what their situation wasthey hardly knew which way to steer, as it had by that time got to be about ten o'clock. The first step they took was to find the woods as quickly as possible where they thought they would be safe; but in order thereto they had to lie down in the swamp or by an old log, just where they happened to be, their mad enemies, in every direction; sometimes so closely that Brother Joseph was obliged to entreat of Brother Rigdon, after his exertion in running, while lying by a log, to breathe more softly if he meant to escape. When they could run or walk they took each other by the hand and covenanted to live or die together. Owing to the darkness of the night their pursuers had to carry lighted torches which was one means of the escape of our beloved sufferers, as they could see them in every direction while there were climbing over fences or traveling through bushes or cornfields until about twelve o'clockwhen after traveling as they supposed in this manner five or six miles, they found the road which led homeward and saw no m ore of their pursuers. After traveling on foot along muddy, slippery roads still nearly five in the morning, they arrived safely at home almost fainting with fatigue. He (Brother Joseph) told us that he decreed in his heart, when first taken, that he would see home before sunrise, and, thank God, so it was! And notwithstanding all he had to endure, he appeared in the house of the Lord throughout the Sabbath in excellent spirits and spoke in a very powerful manner and blessed the congregation in the name of the Lord, and I do assure you the Saints felt the blessing and left the house rejoicing abundantly and returning their blessing upon him. Brother Rigdon, through his great weariness and a small hurt received did not attend the house, but is now well. I suppose all these things will only add another gem to their crowns.

"Mary Fielding Smith to Mercy R. Thompson," circa November 1837, in "A Valuable Document," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 8 (May 1891): 378-79.

Tells of the prophetic fulfillment of a curse uttered by Joseph on a Mr. Clarke, who chose to oppose the work.

I must now give you an account of a very affecting event which took place in Kirtland Sunday before last. You will, of course, remember a Mr. Clarke, a miller, who has been a great opposer of our Church. As he and his wife and some of their children and other friends were returning from the Presbyterian meeting house in a very nice carriage, about one minute after they passed the house of the Lord their horses took fright and started off the side of the hill, overthrew the carriage and hurt Mr. Clarke and one child considerably, but Mrs. Clarke so seriously as to prove fatal. She was buried on the Wednesday following. She has left six weeping children and a mourning husband indeed. On the day preceding the accident she was heard to speak very unfavorably of our Church, but is now gone to prove whether it is the Church of Christ or not. I great desire that the visitation may be sanctified to the family. I believe it not quite a year since Brother Joseph told Mr. Clarke that the curse of God would be upon him for his conduct towards him and the Church. You may remember that our people wished to purchase his place, but he would not see it on any reasonable terms and therefore kept it, and has been a trouble in the place, but has prospered so much in business as to say he never prospered better, and told a person some time ago that he was ready for another of Joseph Smith's curses. I feel inclined to think he will never be heard to utter such words again. May the Lord forgive and save him, and all others who raise their hand against the Lord's anointed, for I see more clearly than ever that this is no trifling sin in the sight of God. No, it is as great as ever it was in any age of the world. I sincerely wish that all the members of the Church had a proper sense of their duty and privilege in this respect.

"Mary Fielding Smith to Mercy R. Thompson," circa November 1837, in "A Valuable Document," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 8 (May 1891): 379.

Tells of the Prophet's return from his Canadian mission, his capture by a mob, his subsequent escape and preaching to the Saints on the following day; Joseph's prophesy to anti-Mormon (Mr. Clarke) is fulfilled.

I felt much pleased to see Sisters Walton and Snider who arrived here on Saturday about noon, having left Brother Joseph Smith and Rigdon about 20 miles from Fareport (Ohio) to evade the mobbers. They were to come home in Dr. (Sampson) Avards carriage and expected to arrive about 10 o'clock at night but to their great disappointment they were prevented in a most grievous manner. They had got within 4 miles of home after a very fatiguing journey, much pleased with their visit to Canada and greatly anticipating the pleasure of seeing their homes and families, when they were surrounded with a mob and taken back to Painesville and secured as was supposed in a tavern where they intended to hold a mock trial. But to the disappointment of the wretches the housekeeper was a member of the church who assisted our beloved brethren in making their escape, but as Brother Joseph Smith says not by a basket let down through a window, but by the kitchen door.

No doubt the hand of the Lord was in it or it could not have been effected. The day had been extremely wet and the night was unusually dark and you may try if you can to conceive what their situation was. They hardly knew which way to steer, as it had by that time got to be about 10 o'clock. The first step they took was to find the woods as quick as possible where they thought they should be safe. But in order to reach thereto they had to lay down in a swamp or by an old log just where they happened to be so determinedly were they pursued by their mad enemies in every direction. Sometimes so closely that Brother J. [Joseph] was obliged to entreat Brother Rigdon, after his exertion in running, while lying by a log to breath more softly if he meant to escape.

When they would run or walk they took each other by the hand and covenanted to live and die together. Owing to the darkness of the night their pursuers had to carry lighted torches which was one means of the escape of our beloved suffers as they could see them in every direction while they were climbing over fences or traveling through brush or corn fields until about 12 o'clock. When after traveling as they suppose in this manner 5 or 6 miles they found the road which led homeward and saw no more of their pursuers. After traveling on foot along muddy slippery roads till near 3 in the morning they arrived safe at home almost fainting with fatigue.

He, Brother J. [Joseph], told us that he decreed in his heart when first taken that he would see home before sun rise and thank God so it was. And notwithstanding all he had to endure he appeared in the house of the Lord throughout the Sabbath in excellent spirits and spoke in a very powerful manner and blessed the congregation in the name of the Lord and I do assure you the saints felt the blessing and left the house rejoicing abundantly returning their blessing upon him. Brother Rigdon through his great weariness and a small hurt received from a fall did not attend the house but is now well. I suppose all these things will only add another gem to their crown.

I did not think of taking up so much room in relating these circumstances but I have been as brief as possible. I must now give you an account of a very affecting event which took place in Kirtland Sunday before last. You will of course remember a Mr. (Wycom?) Clarke, a miller who has been a great opposer of our church. As he and his wife with some of their children and other friends were returning from the Presbyterian meeting house in a very nice carriage, about one minute after they passed the house of the Lord their horses took fright and started off the side of the hill, overthrew the carriage and hurt Mr. C. [Clark] and one child considerably but Mrs. C. [Clark] so seriously as to prove fatal. She was buried on the Wednesday following. She has left 6 weeping children and a mourning husband indeed. On the day preceding the accident she was heard to speak very unfavorably of our church but is now gone to prove whether it is the church of Christ or not. I greatly desire that the visitation may be sanctified to the family.

. . . I believe it is not quite a year since Bro. J. [Joseph] told Mr. C. [Clark] that the curse of God would be upon him for his conduct towards him and the Church. You may remember that our people wished to purchase his place, but he would not sell it on any reasonable terms and therefore kept it, and has been a trouble in the place but has prospered in business so much as to say he never prospered better and told a person some time ago that he was ready for another of Joseph Smith's curses. I feel inclined to think he will never be heard to utter such words again. May the Lord forgive and save him and all others who raise their hand against the Lord's anointed for I see more clearly than ever that this is no trifling sin in the sight of God. No it is as great as ever it was in any age of the world. I sincerely wish that all the members of the Church had a proper sense of their duty and privilege in this respect.

. . . I remain your very affectionate sister.

Mary Fielding

"Mary Fielding to Mercy Thompson, circa Sept. 1, 1837," in Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvay Derr, Woman's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1982), 64-67.

Tells of her strong feelings at the departure of Joseph and the Brethren and of Joseph's vision relative to the gathering of Israel and building up of Zion; she also speaks of Joseph's tearful response to Sidney Rigdon's sermon.

Brother Joseph (Smith) came to see us a few days since for the last time previous to his going on a journey to Missouri. I believe I felt as much at parting with him as an own brother. He, Brother Rigdon, Bro. Hyrum Smith, William Smith and others are all gone on a very important business and are not expected back for some months. May the Lord have mercy upon us and guide us in their absence and preserve us here from the power of the devil and them also while absent. Indeed we all need to pray much. For as the great wheels or stone rolls forward as it is now doing with great success the grand adversary who knows he has but a very short time, will most assuredly rage with all his might.

Some important things were shown to Brother Joseph in vision previous to his going off relative to the enlargement of our borders which has indeed become indispensably necessary for the inhabitants of Zion both here and in the west are crying the cities are too strait for us give place that we may dwell. The people are crowding in from all parts and as President Rigdon said in his last discourse here they will gather and earth and hell combined cannot hinder them for gather they will. Hence the necessity of planting new stakes which they received a command to do before they left and it is expected that after they have set in order the Church in the west they will fix upon 11 new stakes before they return but this is not spoken of in public for reasons you will be aware of. If this were generally known it would probably make there way much more difficult. We had a very affecting time the last Sabbath. Our dear brethren were present and took their leave of the Church. I suppose we had not much less than 1500 persons on the congregation. Brother Rigdon received directions from the Lord in the morning as to the discourse he should deliver that day before he left us and truly it was marvelous, it was great it was glorious far beyond my power to describe. The tears flowed plentifully from Brother Joseph [Joseph's] eyes during the service. When he looked over congregation and considered what had been done and then what was still to be done he seemed to be filled with feelings indescribable. I am truly sorry that I am so unable to give you an idea of what passed. O what feelings ran through my soul while he was pouring his blessings upon all the sincere and faithful saints. How I longed to have a share in them all. Brother Rigdon's address was upon the enlargement and future glory and purity of Zion when she arises and puts on her beautiful garments which must be before long.

"Mary Fielding to Robert B. and Mercy Thompson, circa Oct. 7, 1837," Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvay Derr, Woman's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1982), 67-68.
