Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smith, William

(March 13, 1811-November 13, 1894)

Joseph told of receiving the gold plates; he said nothing of the Spaulding manuscript.

I remember when Joseph called his father's family together, and told them that he had seen an angel, and what this angel had told him. When Joseph received the plates, he did not say they were the Spaulding manuscript.

William Smith, "The Old Soldier's Testimony," Saints' Herald 31, no. 40 (4 October 1884): 643.

Note: William Smith is the Prophet Joseph Smith's younger brother.

Gives account of the First Vision.

It will be remembered that just before the angel appeared to Joseph, there was an unusual revival in the neighborhood. It spread from town to town, from city to city, from county to county, and from state to state. My mother attended those meetings, and being much concerned about the spiritual welfare of the family, she persuaded them to attend the meetings. Finally my mother, one sister, my brothers Samuel and Hyrum became Presbyterians. Joseph and myself did not join; I had not sown all my wild oats. At the close of these meetings the different ministers began to beat around to see how many converts they could get to join their respective churches. All said, "Come and join us, we are right." . . . And here let me say, that it was at the suggestion of the Rev. M_____, that my brother asked of God. He said, "Ask of God." It was the church of Christ he was seeking for, what all should seek. God promised to give knowledge to all who lacked it, if they would ask. Accordingly he went and bowed in prayer to God. While he was engaged in prayer, he saw a pillar of fire descending. Saw it reach the top of the trees. He was overcome, became unconscious, did not know how long he remained in this condition, and when he came to himself, the great light was about him, and he was told by the personage whom he saw descend with the light, not to join any of the churches. . . .

William Smith, "The Old Soldier's Testimony," Saints' Herald 31, no. 40 (4 October 1884): 643.

Joseph told his family of Moroni's visit and of the gold plates; they looked forward with joy to his receiving them; when Joseph first went to the hill and saw the plates, he was forbidden to take them, as he had not been obedient; he was tempted by their monetary worth.

I well remember the effect produced upon my father's family, when he told them he was to receive the plates; how they looked forward with joy, and waited until the time should come. The circumstances that occurred, and the impressions made on my mind at that time, I can remember better than those which occurred two years ago. We were all looking forward for the time to come, father, mother, brothers and sisters. He did not receive the plates at the time he expected, but some four years afterward. He had not lived as directed. When he went to get the plates he found them as he was told he should. He took them from the stone box in which they were found, and placed them on the ground behind him, when the thought came into his mind that there might be a treasure hidden with them. While stooping forward to see, he was overpowered, so that he could not look farther. Turning to get the plates, he found they had gone; and on looking around found that they were in the box again; but he could not get them, and cried out, "Why can't I get the plates as Moroni told me I could?" The angel then appeared to him, and told him it was because he had not done as directed. That the plates could not be had for the purpose of making money. That he could not have them for four years.

William Smith, "The Old Soldier's Testimony," Saints' Herald 31, no. 40 (4 October 1884): 643.

Smith family disappointed when Joseph did not at first obtain the plates; they were industrious and never accused of idleness until Moroni came; while wrapped in a cloth, members of the family felt or handled the plates, which were heavier than stone or wood.

I remember how the family wept when they found Joseph could not get the plates at that time. It has generally been stated that my father's family were lazy, shiftless and poor; but this was never said by their neighbors, or until after the angel appeared and the story of the golden Bible was told.

After my father's family moved to New York State, in about five years they cleared sixty acres of land, and fenced it. The timber on this land was very heavy. Some of the elms were so large that we had to nigger them off. They were too large to be cut with a cross-cut saw. We built a frame dwelling house and out buildings. My brothers Joseph and Hyrum had to work. Joseph did not have time to make gold plates.

The time to receive the plates came at last. When Joseph received them, he came in and said: "Father, I have got the plates." All believed it was true, father, mother, brothers and sisters. You can tell what a child is. Parents know whether their children are truthful or not. The proof of the pudding is not in chewing the string, but in eating the pudding. Father knew his child was telling the truth. When the plates were brought in they were wrapped in a tow frock. My father then put them into a pillow case. Father said, "What, Joseph, can we not see them?"

"No, I was disobedient the first time, but I intend to be faithful this time; for I was forbidden to show them until they are translated, but you can feel them."

We handled them [the plates] and could tell what they were. They were not quite as large as this Bible. Could tell whether they were round or square. Could raise the leaves this way (raising a few leaves of the Bible before him). One could easily tell that they were not stone, hewn out to deceive, or even a block of wood. Being a mixture of gold and copper, they were much heavier than stone, and very much heavier than wood.

William Smith, "The Old Soldier's Testimony," Saints' Herald 31, no. 40 (4 October 1884): 643-44.

Gives setting and circumstances surrounding the First Vision: a time of great religious excitement, which even embraced the Smith family; Mother Smith in particular influenced her family to want to "get religion."

The people in our neighborhood were very much stirred up with regard to religious matters by the preaching of a Mr. Lane, an Elder of the Methodist Church, and celebrated throughout the country as a "great revival preacher."

My mother, who was a very pious woman and much interested in the welfare of her children, both here and hereafter, made use of every means which her parental love could suggest, to get us engaged in seeking for our soul's salvation, or (as the term then was) "in getting religion." She prevailed on us to attend the meetings, and almost the whole family became interested in the matter, and seekers after truth. I attended the meetings with the rest, but being quite young and inconsiderate, did not take so much interest in the matter as the older ones did. This extraordinary excitement prevailed not only in our neighborhood but throughout the whole country. It extended from the Methodists to the Baptists, from them to the Presbyterians; and so on until finally, almost all the sects became engaged in it; and it became quite the fashion to "get religion." My mother continued her importunities and exertions to interest us in the importance of seeking for the salvation of our immortal souls, until almost all of the family became either converted or seriously inclined.

William Smith, William Smith on Mormonism (Lamoni, Iowa: Herald Steam Book and Job Office, 1883), 6-7.

Joseph told his family of Moroni's visits, and they believed; at first Joseph could not obtain

the plates, but later, after his marriage, he was able to.

[Following the visitations of Moroni to Joseph Smith,] we were all gathered. He [Joseph Smith] arose and told us how the angel appeared to him . . . He continued talking to us sometime. The whole family were melted to tears, and believed all he said. Knowing that he was very young, that he had not enjoyed the advantages of a common education; and knowing too, his whole character and disposition, they were convinced that he was totally incapable of arising before his aged parents, his brothers and sisters, and so solemnly giving utterance to anything but the truth. All of us, therefore, believed him and anxiously awaited the result of his visit to the hill Cumorah, in search of the plates containing the record of which the angel told him. He went, and upon his return told us that in consequence of his not obeying strictly the commandments which the angel had given him, he could not obtain the record until four years from that time.

During this four years, I spent my time working on the farm, and in the different amusements of the young men of my age in the vicinity. I was quite wild and inconsiderate, paying no attention to religion of any kind, for which I received frequent lectures from my mother and my brother Joseph. He occupied himself part of the time working on the farm, and part of the time in Pennsylvania where he courted a young lady by the name of Emma Hale, whom he afterwards married. At the end of the appointed time he went and obtained the plates which were pointed out to him by the angel. The story being noised abroad, he was pursued while on his way home with the plates, by two persons who desired to obtain the possession of the plates to convert them into money. However, he escaped to the house and brought the plates with him, wrapped up in a tow frock. He could not permit us to see them, because he said the angel told him not to do so, and he was determined to obey strictly this time; for he had disobeyed before and was compelled to wait four years before he could come into possession of the plates.

William Smith, William Smith on Mormonism (Lamoni, Iowa: Herald Steam Book and Job Office, 1883), 9-11.

William Smith sold a lot Joseph had given him in violation of his promise to Joseph; Joseph then refused to transfer the property and conflict between them then ensued.

[William Smith] asked Joseph to give him a city lot near the Temple. Joseph told him he would do it with great pleasure, if he would build a house and live upon it; but he would not give him a lot to sell. William replied he wanted it to build and live upon. The lot was well worth $1000. In a few hours afterwards, an application was made by Mr. Ivins to the recorder to know if that lot was clear and belonged to William Smith, for William had sold it to him for $500. Joseph hearing of this, directed the clerk not to make a transfer; at which William was so offended that he threatened Joseph, who deemed it prudent to keep out of the way, until William left on a steamboat for the East accompanied by his family. He spent his time mostly in the various Branches of the Church, and collected a good deal of money for the Temple which he used for his own accommodation.

In all his missions the course of conduct he pursued towards the females subjected him to much criticism.

"History of William Smith," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 1 (7 January 1865): 8.

William, Hyrum, Samuel, and others in the family handled but did not see the plates as Joseph was instructed not to permit others to see them.

[The following is from an interview conducted by "E. C. Briggs and others" of the Reorganized Church, with William Smith:]

"I did not see [the plates] uncovered, but I handled them and hefted them while wrapped in a tow frock and judged them to have weighed about sixty pounds. I could tell they were plates of some kind and that they were fastened together by rings running through the back. Their size was as described in mother's history.

" . . . Father and my brother Samuel saw them as I did while in the frock. So did Hyrum and others of the family."

" . . . Didn't you want to remove the cloth and see the bare plates?" said Brother Briggs.

"No," he [William] replied, "for father had just asked if he might not be permitted to do so, and Joseph, putting his hand on them said: 'No, I am instructed not to show them to any one. If I do, I will transgress and lose them again.' Besides we did not care to have him break the commandments and suffer as he did before."

"Did you not doubt Joseph's testimony sometimes?" said Brother Briggs.

"No," was the reply, "We all had the most implicit confidence in what he said. He was a truthful boy. Father and mother believed him, why should not the children? I suppose if he had told crooked stories about other things we might have doubted his word about the plates, but Joseph was a truthful boy. That father and mother believed his report and suffered persecution for that belief shows that he was truthful. No, we never doubted his word for one minute."

William Smith, "Another Testimony," Deseret Evening News, 20 January 1891; see also "William B. Smith's Last Statement," Zion's Ensign, 13 January 1894, 6.

Joseph and the entire Smith family were hard workers and were never accused of laziness until Joseph announced he had seen visions.

"Well," said Brother Briggs, "It is said that Joseph and the rest of the family were lazy and indolent."

"We never heard of such a thing until after Joseph told his vision, and not then by our friends. Whenever the neighbors wanted a good day's work done they knew where they could get a good hand and they were not particular to take any of the other boys before Joseph either. We cleared sixty acres of the heaviest timber I ever saw. We had a good place. We also had on it from twelve to fifteen hundred sugar trees, and to gather the sap and make sugar and molasses from that number of trees was no lazy job. We worked hard to clear our place and the neighbors were a little jealous. If you will figure up how much work it would take to clear sixty acres of heavy timber land, heavier than any here, trees you could not conveniently cut down, you can tell whether we were lazy or not, and Joseph did his share of the work with the rest of the boys.

"We never knew we were bad folks until Joseph told his vision. We were considered respectable till then, but at once people began to circulate falsehoods and stories in a wonderful way."

William Smith, "Another Testimony," Deseret Evening News, 20 January 1891.

Joseph was influenced by local revivals and the impact of James 1:5 to go out into the

woods and pray to know which church to join.

"What caused Joseph to ask for guidance as to what church he ought to join," asked Brother Briggs.

"Why, there was a joint revival in the neighborhood between the Baptists, Methodists and Presbyterians and they had succeeded in stirring up quite a feeling, and after the meeting the question arose which church should have the converts. Rev. Stockton was the president of the meeting and suggested that it was their meeting and under their care and they had a church there and they ought to join the Presbyterians, but as father did not like Rev. Stockton very well, our folks hesitated and the next evening a Rev. Mr. Lane of the Methodists preached a sermon on 'what church shall I join?' And the burden of his discourse was to ask God, using as a text 'If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally . . ." And of course when Joseph went home and was looking over the text he was impressed to do just what the preacher had said, and going out in the woods with child-like, simple trusting faith believing that God meant just what He said, he kneeled down and prayed; and the time having come for the reorganization of His church, God was pleased to show him that he should join none of these churches but if faithful he should be chosen to establish the true Church."

William Smith, "Another Testimony," Deseret Evening News, 20 January 1891.
