Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Smoot, Margaret S.

(April 11 [or 16], 1809-September 1, 1884)

Tells of mob attack against the Saints in Missouri, and of fleeing to Quincy, Illinois for protection; present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

This state of things did not last long however, for in 1838 a mob organized under the Governor's Exterminating Orders came against us with a force of from Two too Three thousand strong, surrounding our city, invaded our homes and took our Prophet and his Brother Hyrum, together with others of our leading men and thrust them into Prison; treated them as criminals, while the Saints were forced to sign a treaty, requiring us to surrender our arms, sign over our property to assist in defraying the expenses of the war, and immediately leave the State, which we done in the dead of winter, going without even time to dispose of our homes and lands, which we had brought from and paid the government for, with the means of honest toil.

In company with my husband and only child left this scene of sorrow and moved into Quincy, Ill. A distance of Two hundred miles, which place we reached March 1st 1839, and for a time received protection and succor. I wish to state here that myself and husband were partakers of these sorrows, and listened to the cruel and unjust orders of the Governor of the State. Our arms and means of protection were wrested from us and placed into the hands of our enemies. The sufferings and privations of this period of my life cannot be portrayed by mortal tongue, protection was refused us under the boasted liberty of our country, for which many of our Fathers fought and bled. My own Father served under General Sumpter, and my Grandfather an officer under General George Washington, and closely associated with him in the Revolutionary War. . . .

I was present upon the occasion when the Twelve Apostles with Pres. Brigham Young at their head, took the presidency of the Church by the unanimous vote of all Israel there assembled and personally witnessed the supernatural power shown through Brigham Young, and was firmly convinced that he was the legitimate successor to the martyred Prophet, and was ready and willing from that moment to obey his counsel, and receive his revelation, as I was those of Joseph Smith.

Margaret S. Smoot, Autobiography, Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley. Some spelling and grammar has been modernized.

Present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

I was present upon the occasion when the Twelve Apostles with Pres. Brigham Young at their head, took the presidency of the Church by the unanimous vote of all Israel there assembled and personally witnessed the supernatural power shown through Brigham Young, and was firmly convinced that he was the legitimate successor to the martyred Prophet, and was ready and willing from that moment to obey his counsel, and receive his revelation, as I was those of Joseph Smith.

Margaret S. Smoot, Autobiography, Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley; see also microfilm of holograph, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some spelling and grammar has been modernized.
