Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Snow, Eliza Roxey

(January 21, 1804-December 5, 1887)

In scrutinizing Joseph's face during her first meeting with him, Eliza concluded "his was an honest face."

In the autumn of 1829 I heard of Joseph Smith as a Prophet to whom the Lord was speaking from the heavens; and that a Sacred Record containing a history of the origin of the aborigines of America, was unearthed. A Prophet of Godthe voice of God revealing to man as in former dispensations, was what my soul had hungered for, but could it possibly be trueI considered it a hoaxtoo good to be true.

In the winter of 1830 and '31 Joseph Smith called at my father's, and as he sat warming himself, I scrutinized his face as closely as I could without attracting his attention, and decided that his was an honest face. My adopted motto, "prove all things and hold fast that which is good," prompted me to investigate, as incredulous as I was; and the most impressive testimonies I had ever heard were given by two of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon, at the first meeting of the believers in Joseph Smith's mission, which I attended.

Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," Relief Society Magazine 31, no. 3 (March 1944): 134; also in Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal (Salt Lake City, Utah: Nicholas G. Morgan Sr. Foundation, 1957), 5-6.

Tells of boarding in the Prophet's home and of teaching his family in school; Joseph had a kind, affectionate temperament, but was unafraid to offer right rebuke when needed.

In the spring of 1836, I taught a select school for young ladies, and boarded with the Prophet's family. At the close of the term I returned to my parental home, where friends and acquaintances flocked around me to inquire about the "strange people" with whom I was associated. I was exceedingly happy in testifying of what I had both seen and heard, until the 1st of Jan. 1837, when I bade a final adieu to the home of my youth, to share the fortunes of the people of God.

By solicitation, on my return I resided in the family of Joseph Smith, and taught his family school, and had ample opportunity to mark his "daily walk and conversation," as a prophet of God; and the more I became acquainted with him, the more I appreciated him as such. His lips ever flowed with instruction and kindness; and although very forgiving, indulgent, and affectionate in his temperament, when his God-like intuition suggested that the welfare of his brethren, or the interests of the kingdom of God demanded it, no fear of censureno love of approbation could prevent his severe rebuke.

Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," Relief Society Magazine 31, no. 3 (March 1944): 134.

Married to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

To narrate what transpired within the seven years, in which we built and occupied Nauvoo, the beautiful, would fill many volumes. That is a history that never will, and never can "repeat itself." Some of the most important events of my life transpired within that brief term, in which I was married, and in which my husband, Joseph Smith, the Prophet of God, sealed his testimony with his blood!"

Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," Relief Society Magazine 31, no. 4 (April 1944): 209.

Joseph taught Eliza, and later Lorenzo Snow, the doctrine of plural marriage, even disclosing that he was commanded by an angel to announce the doctrine.

While my brother [Lorenzo Snow] was absent on this, his first mission to Europe, changes had taken place with me, one of eternal import, of which I supposed him to be entirely ignorant. The Prophet Joseph had taught me the principle of plural, or Celestial Marriage, and I was married to him for time and eternity. In consequence of the ignorance of most of the Saints, as well as people of the world, on this subject, it was not mentioned only privately between the few whose minds were enlightened on the subject.

Not knowing how my brother would receive it, I did not feel at liberty, and did not wish to assume the responsibility of instructing him in the principle of plural marriage, and either maintained silence, or, to his indirect questioning, gave evasive answers, until I was forced, by his cool and distant manner, to feel that he was growing jealous of my sisterly confidencethat I could not confide in his brotherly integrity. I could not endure thissomething must be done. I informed my husband [Joseph Smith] of the situation, and requested him to open the subject to my brother. A favorable opportunity soon presented, and, seated on the lone back of the Mississippi river, they had a most interesting conversation. The Prophet afterwards told me that he found that my brother's mind had been previously enlightened on the subject in question, and was ready to receive whatever the spirit of revelation from God should impart. That Comforter which Jesus said should "lead into all truth" had penetrated his understanding, and while in England had given him an intimation of what at that time was, to many, a secret. This was the result of living near the Lord, and holding communion with Him.

It was at the private interview referred to above, that the Prophet Joseph unbosomed his heart, and described the trying mental ordeal he experienced in overcoming the repugnance of his feelings, the natural result of the forces of education and social custom, relative to the introduction of plural marriage. . . . [Thus the Prophet hesitated] until and angel of God stood by him with a drawn sword, and told him that, unless he moved forward and established plural marriage, his Priesthood would be taken from him and he should be destroyed! This testimony he not only bore to my brother, but also to others.

Eliza R. Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret News Co., Printers, 1884), 69-70.

Feelings on the martyrdom.

The awful tragedy of the 27th of June, 1844, is a livid, burning, scathing stain on our national escutheon. To look upon the noble, lifeless forms of those brothers, Joseph and Hyrum Smith, lying side by side, after having been brought home from Carthage, where they had been slaughtered in their manhood and in their innocence, was a sight that might well appall the heart of a true American citizen: but, what it was for loving wives and children, the loyal heart may feel, but let language keep silence!

Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," Relief Society Magazine 31, no. 4 (April 1944): 210; also in Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal (Salt Lake City, Utah: Nicholas G. Morgan Sr. Foundation, 1957), 13.

Joseph prophesied Eliza would visit Jerusalem.

Some years before the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and long before the thought had entered the mind of President [Brigham] Young to propose a visit to the "Holy Land," the Prophet said to me, "You will yet visit Jerusalem." I recorded the saying in my Journal at the time, but had not reviewed it for many years, and the, to me, strange prediction had entirely gone from my memory.

Even when invited to join the Tourist-party, although the anticipation of standing on the sacredly celebrated Mount of Olives inspired me with a feeling no language can describe; Joseph Smith's prediction did not occur to me until within a few days of the time set for starting, when a friend brought it to my recollection, and then by reference to the long neglected Journal, the proof was before us. While on the tour, the knowledge of that prediction inspired me with strength and fortitude.

[Eliza then tells of leaving Salt Lake City in October of 1872 with a small group led by President George A. Smith, and of visiting "Europe, Asia, Africa, Egypt, Greece, Turkey" and the Holy Land, including Jerusalem, and of returning home in July, 1873, having fulfilled the prophecy of Joseph Smith.]

Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," Relief Society Magazine 31, no. 9 (September 1944): 504.

Joseph prophesied the Saints would go to the Rocky Mountains.

On the 20th of February, 1844, the Prophet Joseph Smith instructed the Twelve Apostles to send a delegation and make explorations in Oregon and California, and seek a good location to which we can remove after the Temple is completed, and "where we can build a city in a day, and have government of our own."

. . . Previous to this, the Prophet had remarked to me that he anticipated moving to the Rocky Mountains with all his family, where he could live in peace and worship God unmolested. But other scenes and prospects awaited us.

Eliza R. Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret News Co., Printers, 1884), 76.

Mobbings to persist; Constitution to hang as if by a thread but to be saved by the sons of Zion.

I heard the Prophet Joseph Smith say, if the people rose and mobbed us and the authorities countenanced it, they would have mobs to their hearts' content. I heard him say that the time would come when this nation would so far depart from its original purity, its glory, and its love of freedom and protection of civil and religious rights, that the constitution of our country would hang as it were by a thread. He said, also, that this people, the sons of Zion, would rise up and save the constitution, and bear it off triumphantly.

Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall, 1877), 401.

Eliza R. of the tribe of Judah.

Sister Eliza, it will be remembered, was declared by the Prophet to be of the royal seed of Judah.

Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall, 1887), 483.

As a gift, Joseph gave Eliza his watch.

When the Prophet came into the Relief Society [organizational meeting, on March 17, 1842, Eliza] asked him concerning the time, and taking out his own watch he laid it upon the table beside her and said, "Here is a timepiece and you may keep it, from me." That watch was presented by Sister Snow to her beloved friend and nephew, President Joseph F. Smith.

"The Mother of Mothers in Israel: Eliza R. Snow," Relief Society Magazine 3, no. 4 (April 1916): 184.

Note: This article also contains a photograph of the watch.

Note: While organizing Gunnison's first Primary, Eliza R. Snow showed the children the watch, which Joseph was wearing, according to this article, when he was shot at Carthage. See William G. Hartley, "Childhood in Gunnison, Utah," Utah Historical Quarterly 51, no. 2 (spring 1983): 122.

Joseph prophesied the world would come to Zion to buy the finest fabrics.

Eliza R. Snow remembered hearing Joseph Smith say "that the time would come when the people would come to Zion to buy the finest of fabrics."

Chris R. Arrington, "The Finest of Fabrics: Mormon Women and the Silk Industry in Early Utah," in Utah Historical Quarterly 46, no. 4 (fall 1978): 378. Originally found in Deseret News, 1 August 1876.

Joseph said the Relief Society was to save souls as well as help the poor.

[Eliza R. Snow] again spoke of the Relief Society: said, when Joseph Smith first organized it, he said our "duties were not only to look after the poor, but to save souls."

M. F. C. Morrison and A. Louise Hasler, "Report of the Meeting Held in Mt. Pleasant, San Pete County, August 7, 1880," Woman's Exponent 9, no. 9 (1 October 1880): 71.

In a Relief Society meeting, Bathsheba Smith quotes Joseph as encouraging the sisters to use parliamentary procedures; Eliza R. Snow heard Joseph promise Sister Whitney would not lose the gift of tongues if she used it wisely.

Sister Bathsheba Smith referred to the Prophet Joseph instructing the sisters to conduct their meetings in accordance with parliamentary usages.

Sister Whitney sang one of her sweet songs of Zion in the language which was spoken and sung (the Prophet Joseph said) by our first parents in the Garden of Eden. Sister Snow explained that Joseph Smith told Mother Whitney "If she would use the gift with wisdom it should remain with her as long as she lived." Sister Zina then gave the interpretation. The theme of which was rejoicing and praise to the Great Author and Giver of good.

"R. S. Reports," Woman's Exponent 9, no. 7 (1 September 1880): 54.
