Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Boss, Nancy

(March 26, 1829-August 20, 1888)

Worked as a servant girl in the home of Col. Levi Williams, who led mob which killed the Prophet; she heard mob plotting the martyrdom; mob considered murdering her; saw mob's cowardice following martyrdom; tells of her escape from Williams's home.

Nancy Boss, was born in Davison County, North Carolina on the 26th March 1829, daughter of Phillip and Obedience Brown Boss. Her father passed away in the year 1835, leaving grandmother with 9 childrensix sons and three daughters. She moved with her children to Brown County, Illinois in 1838 where she and her family allied themselves with the Mormon Church and gathered at Nauvoo in 1842. At the time of the Prophet Joseph's death, Grandmother was employed as a servant girl at the home of Col. Williams, the man who led the mob that killed the Prophet. She cooked the dinner for the mob before they started to the jail. Knowing she was a Mormon girl, Col. Williams refused to let her leave the house. She said before she went there to work for Williams, the mob burned her mother's house.

Her mother seemed to be a person who could make friends, seemed she was loved and respected by all who knew her. They called her Aunt Biddy. One of her friends, [a] non-Mormon, warned her to get out and leave her home as the mob intended to burn it. That night she took her children, some being quite young, and took what things they could carry, went down to the swamps to sleep thinking it would be safe for them there. Said the mosquitoes nearly ate them up. Their home wasn't burned that night, but was burned to ashes the next night.

So grandmother and the children, that were old enough, had to seek for employment; and she was real glad to get work at Col. Williams, not knowing, of course, that he was the leader of the mob. While at Williams' home he threatened her life if she attempted to make her escape. She told how the mob carried on like so many demons, and heard them plan the martyrdom. The night before they killed the Prophet they painted their faces black and drank whiskey, acted as if they had gone mad. She said her room was upstairs, and she was sitting on the stair steps she heard Williams say, "Every nit makes a louse, let's kill her." She was so badly frightened she sat by her window and watched, did not know at what moment they would come upstairs and kill her, and likely would have done so, but her time had not come to die, she was needed in the service of the Lord. The next night after the mob had murdered the Prophet they came back to Col. Williams' home and they seemed very much frightened. They knew they had committed a terrible, wicked crime and they didn't know what was going to happen to them. She said they acted like crazy men. She, in some way, got word from her husband, Capt. James Brown, that he would be down in the woods at a certain place and would wait for her. She put a few things in a small bundle and threw them out of the window and took a bucket as though she were going after water. After she got out she dropped the bucket, took her little bundle and made for the woods as fast as her feet would take here. She didn't know at what moment they would shoot her, no doubt prayers were being offered up for her safety. She found her cousin, mounted on his horse and they made their escape safely.

Samantha D. R. Rose, "Short Sketch of My Mother's Life," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Also in, "A Copy of the History of Delana (Rawson) Rose," in "History of Daniel H. Rosen," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
