Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Snow, Erastus

(November 9, 1818-May 27, 1888)

Joseph "at times" hid the plates under the hearth in Alva Beaman's home.

During the winter of 1837-38 I first became acquainted with the family of Alva Beaman, who youngest daughter, Artimesia, I subsequently married. Her father was the first President of the First Elders Quorum organized in the Church, was an early associate of the Smith family in the State of New York, and assisted the Prophet Joseph in hiding the plates under the hearth in his own home, at times when his enemies were searching for him.

Franklin R. Snow, "Autobiography of Erastus Snow," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 14 (April 1923): 106.

Visited Joseph in Liberty Jail and was appointed by him to plead their case in court; as he did the Prophet prophesied that Erastus and those with him would not be hurt.

[Shortly after December 13, 1838] I took a load of my mother-in-law's furniture, with her team, to sell at Liberty, and while there I visited, in connection with several more of my brethren, the Prophet Joseph and those confined in Liberty jail with him. I, with four others, was locked up on a charge of attempting to liberate the Prophet Joseph. When brought up for examination a few days after, I managed my own case, plead my own cause and was discharged. The other four employed two lawyers. All were bound over to court and I was accepted as their bondsman. During this time Joseph prophesied that not a hair of [our] heads should be hurt, as he saw [me] pleading in court.

Franklin R. Snow, "Autobiography of Erastus Snow," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 14 (April 1923): 107.

Note: Threats upon the lives of Erastus and those in his party made the Prophet's prophesy all the more welcome. Erastus Snow was not a trained attorney, but pled the case because the Prophet asked him to. So effective was his presentation, which he made without the assistance of an attorney, that after the trial "the attorneys flocked around him, wanting to know where he had studied law, stating that they had never heard a better plea." ("Erastus Snow," Utah Historical and Genealogical Magazine 3 [January 1912]: 30-31. See also Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 3:256.)

Joseph taught Erastus Snow the doctrines of baptism for the dead and plural marriage.

[Shortly after the April Conference, 1843] I had a very enjoyable visit for about a month with the Prophet and my kindred and brethren. It was during this visit that the Prophet told me what the Lord had revealed to him touching upon baptism for the dead and marriage for eternity, and requiring his chosen and proved servants to take unto themselves wives, and introduced several of those who had been sealed to himself and others of the first elders of the Church. Foremost among the former was my wife's sister Louisa, whose integrity, devotion, and purity of soul were known to all her acquaintances.

Franklin R. Snow, "Autobiography of Erastus Snow," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 14 (April 1923): 109.

Tells of unexplainable feelings of grief and sorrow which overcame him at time of the martyrdom.

Although at the time I was ignorant of the awful tragedy which had occurred, I felt resting down upon me a more dreadful pressure of sorrow and grief and sense of mourning than I had ever before felt, but knew not why. Under the influence of that feeling I assigned to Elder Alfred Cordon and the other elders under my charge, the duty of filling our outstanding appointments, and I took stage for Salem, Massachusetts, where I knew President Brigham Young and others of the Twelve Apostles were to meet in conference the following Saturday and Sunday.

During the following week the news of our sad bereavement reached us through the mail.

Franklin R. Snow, "Autobiography of Erastus Snow," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 14 (April 1923): 110.

Joseph gave the keys of the kingdom to the Twelve.

The Prophet Joseph has organized the quorums, has set in order the Priesthood, and conferred the keys and powers thereof upon his brethren, and said to the Twelve Apostles, "Upon your shoulders shall rest the burden of this kingdom, to bear it off in all the world. The Lord is going to let me rest."

Journal of Discourses, 19:101 (September 9, 1877).

Nephi of the tribe of Manasseh; Ishmael of Ephraim.

The Prophet Joseph informed us that the record of Lehi, was contained on the 116 pages that were first translated and subsequently stolen, and of which an abridgment is given us in the first Book of Nephi, which is the record of Nephi individually, he himself being of the lineage of Manasseh; but that Ishmael was of the lineage of Ephraim, and that his sons married into Lehi's family, and Lehi's sons married Ishmael's daughters, thus fulfilling the words of Jacob upon Ephraim and Manasseh in the 48th chapter of Genesis, which says: "And let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the land."

Journal of Discourses, 23:184 (May 6, 1882).

On the broad reach and beauty of the U.S. Constitution.

God spoke by the mouth of the Prophet Joseph Smith, in a sermon delivered by the Prophet at Nauvoo a short time before his death, on the powers and policy of this government of the United States and the freedom and liberty secured in the American Constitution, that it was broad and ample in its provisions, extending human freedom to every soul of man and protecting them in every natural right; and he classed among others the Jew, the Mohammedan, and the oppressed of every nation who desired to find an asylum under the broad folds of the Constitution.

Journal of Discourses, 23:301-2 (October 7, 1882).

Joseph: "I teach them correct principles . . ."

This is the explanation the Prophet Joseph Smith gave to a certain lawyer in his time who came to see him and his people and expressed astonishment and surprise at the ease with which he controlled the people, and said it was something that was not to be found among the learned men of the world. Said he: "We cannot do it. What is the secret of your success" "Why," said the Prophet, "I do not govern the people. I teach them correct principles and they govern themselves."

Journal of Discourses, 24:159 (June 24, 1883).

Plural marriage ordained to bring children into the homes of the Saints and give them ascendancy over the earth.

Abraham was blessed of the Lord to multiply and increase in the earth greatly. When the Lord determined to bless and multiply Abraham and His seed, He commanded that they should take of the daughters of Eve for wives and multiply and increase in the land. I do not say that plural marriage was not practiced prior to this time, but I say from and after Abraham it was enjoined upon Israel, the seed of Abraham, for a wise and glorious purpose in Him, namely, that of increasing them and giving them the ascendancy among the nations of the earth, as I once heard the Prophet Joseph remark. In speaking of these things, and inquiring wherefore God had enjoined plural marriage upon Abraham and his seed, his answer was, because He had purposed to multiply and increase them in the land and make of them a great people and give them the ascendancy over other peoples of the earth, and that because, as he said of Abraham, He knew that He would serve Him and command his seed after Him.

Journal of Discourses, 26:217-18 (May 31, 1885).

Joseph interprets Peter's words to mean that Jewish leaders were more culpable than the masses in Christ's crucifixion.

I well remember hearing the Prophet Joseph, in speaking upon this subject to a vast assembly of Saints in Nauvoo, when he asked the privilege of giving expression of Peter's words more clearly, as it was shown unto himthe English version was a little obscurehe used this language, or rather I will repeat it in the sense of the Scriptures in the original saying unto the people: "I wish ye rulers had done this ignorantly as did those whom you ruled." Now the Prophet wished to draw the line of distinction between those who did sin ignorantly and those who sinned understandingly with their eyes wide open. He held that the rulers were more responsible than the masses who consented thereto; that there was more hope for the masses than the rulers.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:67.

Joseph interprets Peter's expressions dealing with salvation for the dead.

This last quotation [in 1 Pet. 3:18-20], taken in connection with this verse of the next chapter will indeed explain the cause why the gospel was preached unto them that are dead, the object and purpose of it: "That they may be judged according to men in the flesh," while they "live according to God in the spirit."

Here also I beg to introduce an explanation given by the Prophet Joseph, on this last verse; he quotes it in his translation in this wise: "For this cause is the gospel preached unto the dead that they would receive it and live according to godliness in the spirit, that they might be judged according to the works done for them by men in the flesh." We will perceive by this explanation given by the Prophet Joseph that it reflects understanding upon our minds clearer in relation to the ordinances in behalf of the dead: That as many of the dead unto whom the gospel is preached receive it and live according to godliness in the spirit world, that they may be judged according to the ordinances and works performed for them by their kindred or their heirs in the flesh.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:68-69.

Faithful elders to preach the gospel in the spirit world.

Joseph Smith said that the faithful elders of Israel, when their labors in the flesh are completed, then they rest from those labors they leave behind, while their spirits are still active upon another class of labor in the spirit world. They rest from earthly labors and pursue spiritual labors which will qualify them to go on to higher degrees of glory and soar in loftier regions of intelligence.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:71.

Spirit of Elijah touches nonmembers of the Church to organize genealogical societies.

Here I will remark that about the time this doctrine was revealed to the prophet Joseph Smith, and began to be agitated among the Latter-day Saints, a "New England Genealogical and Historical Society" was organized in Boston, Mass., for the accumulation and gathering of records and genealogies of those who had died, and gathering data and information which would bind the links of kindred one to another. Scientific men, organized laborers and societies; I say scientific men because some were scientific who have been directing these organizations for the gathering of data pertaining to their history, their fathers and kindred. All such information that has thus been gathered is being and will be, used by the Latter-day Saints and thus prove a great blessing to many people. Thus the Lord is moving upon that class of men who are willing to be instruments in his hands to assist in the accomplishment of this great and mighty work he has begun.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:72-73.

Must pay tithing to be worthy of temple participation.

It was after due consideration on these great principles [of temple work and salvation for the dead] that the Prophet Joseph laid down the doctrine, that those who were covetous and refused to bring their tithes and offerings to aid in this great work of building temples for the redemption of the dead, should be accounted unworthy to officiate in these temples, unworthy to enter the baptismal font and there officiate for and in behalf of their dead kindred; for the Lord will not accept those works at their hands.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:73.
