Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Snow, James [Chauncey] Chaney

(January 11, 1817-April 30, 1884)

Helped electioneer for Joseph in the campaign of 1844; also present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

May 17, 1844, he left his home in Illinois to go on a special mission, on which he was instructed also to electioneer for Joseph Smith, who was a candidate for the presidency of the United States.

. . . . After the martyrdom the Elders went forth to comfort the Saints in the freshness of their grief over their martyred Prophets. Brother Snow, together with other missionaries, was called home shortly after the martyrdom, and he was present at the meeting when the mantle of Joseph fell upon Brigham Youngan event of which he often testified afterwards. Together with his family he left Nauvoo in 1846, to go to the Valleys of the Mountains.

"Snow, James Chaney," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:795.

Notes from his diary on what Joseph Smith said; he gives no context, nor explanation, but simply inserts these comments on the priesthood as if they were Joseph's thoughts.

Adam holds the keys of all the dispensations in all the world and set Adam to watch over them all and to send angels to administer to those who shall be heirs of salvation. Abel received his body and became an angel and came to polish (?) Adam cannot receive a fullness of joy until Christ delivers the kingdom to his Father. Enoch administers in all the dispensations and appeared unto Jude those that are translated are in a terrestrial situation to be ministering angels unto many planets. When all the ordained are rested [the] sons of Levi and Moses will offer an offering in righteousness. Elijah because he hold the authority of the ordinances of restoring all things in the kingdom of God. Sacrifice is again to be offered which was before the days Moses

"Journal of James Chaney Snow, 1817-1837," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: The above conforms to the original typescript from which it is taken and is thus somewhat incoherent.

Present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

He was present at the meeting when the mantle of Joseph fell upon Brigham Young, an event of which he often testified afterwards.

Roxie la Preal Clap Monson, "Biography of James Chauncey Snow," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
