Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Snow, Lorenzo

(April 3, 1814-October 10, 1901)

First time Lorenzo saw Joseph he went to hear Joseph preach; Joseph "simply his bore testimony" of his experiences, including the First Vision.

The first time I saw Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the Lord, I was seventeen years of age. It was in 1831, in the fall of the year. It was rumored that he was going to hold a meeting in Hiram, Portage County, Ohio, about four miles from my father's home, where I was born and brought up. Having heard many stories about him, my curiosity was considerably aroused and I thought I would take advantage of this opportunity to see and hear him. Accordingly, in company with some of the members of my father's family, I rode over to Hiram in our carriage.

When we reached there the people were already assembled in a small bowery; there were about two hundred and fifty or two hundred people present. I had heard something about the "Mormon" Prophet and felt some anxiety to see him and judge for myself, as he was generally believed to be a false prophet. The meeting had already commenced and Joseph Smith was standing in the door of Father Johnson's house, looking into the bowery and addressing the people.

I made a critical examination as to his appearance, his dress, and his manner as I heard him speak. He was only twenty-five years of age and was not, at that time, what would be called a fluent speaker. His remarks were confined principally to his own experiences, especially the visitation of the holy angel, giving a strong and powerful testimony in regard to these marvelous manifestations. He simply bore his testimony to what the Lord had manifested to him, to the dispensation of the Gospel which had been committed to him, and to the authority that he possessed. At first he seemed a little diffident and spoke in rather a low voice, but as he proceeded he became very strong and powerful, and seemed to affect the whole audience with the feeling that he was honest and sincere. It certainly influenced me in this way and made impressions upon me that remain until the present day.

As I looked at him and listened, I thought to myself that a man bearing such a wonderful testimony as he did, and having such a countenance as he possessed, could hardly be a false prophet. He certainly could not have been deceived, it seemed to me, and if he was a deceiver he was deceiving the people knowingly; for when he testified that he had had a conversation with Jesus, the Son of God, and had talked with Him personally, as Moses talked with God upon Mount Sinai, and that he had also heard the voice of the Father, he was telling something that he either knew to be false or to be positively true.

I was not at that time what might be called a religious boy, but I was interested in what I saw and heard there. However, being busy in other directions, it passed measurably out of my mind until some three or four years later. After completing my classical studies at Oberlin College I went to Kirtland to continue my study of Hebrew with Dr. Joshua Seixas.

LeRoi C. Snow, "How Lorenzo Snow Found God," Improvement Era 40, no. 2 (February 1937): 82-83.

On Lorenzo's first actual meeting with Joseph, Joseph invites Lorenzo to dine at the Smith home; he does and is impressed that Joseph is very relaxed and conversational; then he attended Hebrew class and high school with the early brethren; he desired earnestly to know if Joseph was a true prophet.

Soon after arriving in Kirtland [circa June, 1836] I was on the street with my sister, Eliza. Joseph Smith came along. He was in a great hurry and stopped just long enough to be introduced and shake hands. He turned to my sister and said: "Eliza, bring your brother over to the house to dinner." She was then boarding at his home and teaching his private school. As he left us I watched him just as far as I could see him and then turned to my sister and said: "Joseph Smith is a most remarkable man; I want to get better acquainted with him. Perhaps, after all, there is something more to Joseph Smith and to Mormonism than I have ever dreamed."

Accordingly, the next time I saw the Prophet was at his own house in Kirtland following his invitation to me to take dinner with him. I remember this meeting and conversation as if it were but yesterday. He sat down at one end of the table and I sat next to him. Eliza sat on the other side. He seemed to have changed considerably in his appearance since I first saw him at Hiram, four and a half years before. He was very ready in conversation, and had apparently lost that reserve and diffident feeling that he seemed to have before. He was free and easy in his conversation with me, making me feel perfectly at home in his presence. In fact, I felt as free with him as if we had been special friends for years. He was very familiar.

I became perfectly acquainted with Joseph Smith, the Prophet, sat at his table frequently, and had many conversations with him. I had joined Professor Seixas' Hebrew class, which was my principal reason for coming to Kirtland. I was also attending high school in the temple and preparing myself for some eastern college or university. A professor by the name of Haws was teaching us. Wilford Woodruff and other brethren attended this school.

I listened to the teaching of the Gospel and received these truths with an open heart. I was determined not to rest there. I was exceedingly anxious to know without doubt that Joseph Smith was a true prophet.

LeRoi C. Snow, "How Lorenzo Snow Found God," Improvement Era 40, no. 2 (February 1937): 83.

Heard Joseph preach when filled with the Spirit of God; at a meeting in the Kirtland Temple Joseph announced Lorenzo sought baptism and appointed John F. Boynton to baptize him.

I heard the Prophet discourse upon the grandest of subjects. At times he was filled with the Holy Ghost, speaking as with the voice of an archangel and filled with the power of God, his whole person shone and his face was lightened until it appeared as the whiteness of the driven snow. . . . Finally my prayers were answered and I was convinced of the truth sufficiently to want to be baptized to get a knowledge for myself of the testimony that Joseph Smith had seen God. . . .

On Sunday, June 19, 1836, in the Kirtland Temple, Joseph arose in the pulpit just before the meeting closed and said: "A young man by the name of Lorenzo Snow wishes to be baptized, and Brother John Boynton (who was then one of the Twelve Apostles) will baptize him." After the meeting I was baptized in the stream that ran through Kirtland, and I was confirmed by Hyrum Smith who, with some others, laid hands upon me.

LeRoi C. Snow, "How Lorenzo Snow Found God," Improvement Era 40, no. 2 (February 1937): 84.

Prophet taught Lorenzo about Celestial, including plural, marriage; he also told him that the principles of honesty were already implanted in his soul and that they would lead him aright; Joseph further disclosed that God had given Lorenzo additional divine power.

At the interview on the bank of the Mississippi, in which the Prophet Joseph explained the doctrine of Celestial Marriage, I felt very humble, and in my simplicity besought him earnestly to correct me and set me right if, at any time, he should see me indulging in any principle or practice that might tend to lead astray, into forbidden paths; to which he replied, "Brother Lorenzo, the principles of honesty and integrity are founded within you, and you will never be guilty of any serious error or wrong, to lead you from the path of duty. The Lord will open your way to receive and obey the law of Celestial Marriage." During the conversation, I remarked to the Prophet I thought he appeared to have been endowed with great additional power during my mission in England. He said it was true; the Lord had bestowed on him additional divine power.

Eliza R. Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret News Co., Printers, 1884), 70.

Joseph approves Lorenzo's gospel insight that men can become as God.

[In consequence of some things that the Patriarch, Joseph Smith, Sr., had promised Lorenzo, and because of things he read in the New Testament, his meditations led him to conclude that: "As man is God once was; As God is, man may become." In sharing this conclusion with the Prophet Joseph, Joseph said:]

Brother Snow, that is true gospel doctrine, and it is a revelation from God to you."

Thomas C. Romney, The Life of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City, Utah: S. U. P. Memorial Foundation, 1955), 35; see also LeRoi C. Snow, "Devotion to a Divine Inspiration," Improvement Era 22, no. 8 (June 1919): 656.

Under the law of consecration, the individual, not the bishop, decides how much to consecrate.

Now, this law, the United Order, was given in 1831-2. Men were commanded consecration of property. Bishop Partridge, seeing there was some misunderstanding, wrote to Joseph for an explanation in regard to the matter. Joseph in answer, says that in matters of consecration it should be left to the judgment of the consecrator how much he should give and how much retain for the support of his family, and not exclusively to the Bishop, for, if so, it would give the Bishop more power than a king possessed. There should be a mutual understanding between them, otherwise it should be left to a council of twelve High Priests. Now where is the Latter-day Saint, that cannot see a liberality, a generosity, in this matter, and be willing to submit to this tribunal. I would be willing to submit to the high council of this Stake of Zion, or the high council of any other Stake of Zion, and say, "Here is my property, say how much I ought to retain for my wives and children, and how much shall go into the common property of the Church? But I think my bishop and myself could settle the business at once." Joseph says in that explanation, "it is not necessary that you should descend to particulars in regard to these matters."

Journal of Discourses, 20:371 (October 19, 1879).

"Hosannah Shout" introduced in the Kirtland Temple.

Apostle Lorenzo Snow, at the request of President Cannon, instructed the congregation as to the order of ceremony at the laying of the capstone of the Temple. "The words of the shout, Hosanna!" he said, "to be uttered upon, or after, the laying of the capstone to-day were introduced by President Joseph Smith at the Kirtland Temple, and were there used at a solemn assemblage where the power of God was manifested and the vision of the Almighty was opened up to the brethren. This is no ordinary order, but isand we wish it to be distinctly understooda sacred shout, and employed only on extraordinary occasions like the one now before us [i.e., laying of the capstone of Salt Lake Temple]."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 3:40.
