Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Snow, Sally Adams

(May 29, 1825-February 13, 1905)

An account of Joseph hurting his hand while hiding the plates under the hearthstone and of Mother Smith caring for the hand; saw mummies in Kirtland; heard Joseph preach in Nauvoo; present on 8 August 1844 when Brigham Young was transfigured.

"At the age of thirteen I, with my parents, left Lower Canada for the purpose of gathering with the Saints in Missouri. Enroute we stopped a week in Kirtland, Ohio, and visited the Mother of the Prophet Joseph Smith. It was then perilous times for the people and Joseph himself was in hiding. However, while we were there he appeared and preached to the assembled Saints Sunday. His followers hung on his words as thought they were the words of the Lord. One incident related by Sister Lucy Smith I well remember. While Joseph was translating the Book of Mormon from the gold plates his enemies were pursuing him with vindictive hate. Being hard pressed at one time and fearing the plates would be stolen from him he rushed into his Mother's room to hide them under the hearth. In his hurry he mashed his hand with the rock hearth. Sister Smith pointed out the rocking chair in which he sat while she did up his hand."

Acting according to counsel we remained at Twelve Mile Grove, Illinois, during five years, and then in 1843 we proceeded to Nauvoo. There we heard the Prophet speak several times. His voice was the voice of inspiration.

I well remember that June day 1844 when the announcement reached Nauvoo that the Prophet and Patriarch had been killed by a cruel mob. The news fell like a thunderbolt upon the Saints. Their grief was indescribable. Many thought that he, like the Savior, would rise again and become their leader. With hundreds of others I visited the room where the remains lay in state. Thousands of hearts were wrung with profound sorrow. The scene left an impression upon my mind of awful solemnity. The memory of the occasion can never by erased. This sad occurrence marked the culmination of the devil inspired persecutions of two of God's greatest and truest noblemen."

While in Kirtland, Ohio, Mother (i.e. Sally) visited the Kirtland Temple and viewed the Egyptian mummies which Joseph the Prophet had purchased from the French antiquarian, Mr. Chandler.

Mother had told of being at the meeting August 8, 1844 when Brigham Young spoke in the voice of the martyred Prophet. He assumed the form and appearance of Joseph, so that the thousands at that meeting believed for the moment that President Smith actually stood before them.

Chloe Louise Snow Gardner, "Brief Sketch of the Life of Sally Adams Snow," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: Chloe Louise Snow Gardner is the daughter of Sally Adams Snow.
