Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Somerville, William

(April 4, 1817-April 25, 1878)

As Joseph's bodyguard, he was struck with a bullet intended for Joseph.

[William Somerville] also was called to serve as a bodyguard for the Prophet Joseph Smith. On one occasion while William was serving in this capacity, an assassination attempt was made on the life of the Prophet. The bullet missed the Prophet, but hit William in the knee. Since the bullet was lodged in an area difficult to reach with surgery, it was decided to leave the bullet in the leg, where it remained throughout his life.

Loras Burke Tangren, "A Record of William Somerville, Son of Andrew Somerville and Margaret Fuller, born near Lanarchshire, Scotland, April 4, 1817," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

As Joseph's bodyguard, he slept with his feet against the door and with side arms in hand; he also tells of Joseph relieving him of his guard duty, saying he was protected by the faith of the children.

William Somerville served as a bodyguard to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and, with side arms in hand, lay on the floor of the bedroom in the Nauvoo House in which Joseph slept, placing his feet against the door, which opened inwards toward the bedroom, so that anyone entering would have to waken him before being able to reach the Prophet.

On one occasion, while on a guard duty assignment, the Prophet came to him and told him that on that particular night his guard service would not be needed, as it had been revealed to him that the little children had been praying for his welfare and the Lord had heard their prayers and would honor their faith by protecting him.

"History of William Somerville," in Oscar W. McConkie, Memorabilia. Copies in private family possession.

Note: Entries in Memorabilia stretch from the early 1930s through the early 1960s. Oscar W. McConkie is the son of Emma Somerville McConkie, the daughter of William Somerville. His entries regarding Joseph Smith represent the teaching and tradition of his mother, which she obtained from her father.
