Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Staines, William C.

(September 26, 1818-August 3, 1881)

Before meeting Joseph, he saw him in vision and thus recognized him upon meeting him; heard Joseph preach.

I arrived in Nauvoo, April 12th, 1843. The next day the Prophet Joseph preached to us and blessed us. I had seen him in a vision while crossing the sea, and when I saw him that day he had on the same hat and coat that I saw him in when at sea. I heard him preach a number of times and saw him in and around the city, giving counsel, and I always believed in him from my first seeing him until his death, that he was the leader of this dispensation and God Almighty's prophet.

"Reminiscences of William C. Staines," The Contributor 12, no. 4 (February 1891): 122.

Saw Joseph in a vision before meeting him; describes the depth of mourning at the martyrdom; was present when Brigham Young was transfigured.

The day after landing at Nauvoo [Staines] met the Prophet Joseph Smith, who he recognized instantly, having seen him in a vision while crossing the sea. The next day he heard him preach for the first time. At Nauvoo he was employed a good deal upon the Temple. He happened to be in St. Louis when the Prophet and his brother were slain, and when told of the tragedy was unable to speak to his informant for some moments, so deep was his emotion. Returning to Nauvoo he beheld the bodies of the martyrs lying in state. He says: "I have seen England mourning for two of her kings and for the husband of her queen, when every shop in London was closed, when every church bell tolled, when every man who drove a coach, cab or conveyance of any kind had a piece of crape tied to the handle of his whip. Accompanied by brother Amasa Lyman, I rode for miles through the city, while the burial services were being performed at Windsor Castle. It was indeed a solemn sight. I have seen this nation mourn for its chief magistratePresident Lincoln. But the scene at Nauvoo was far more affecting. The grief and sorrow of the Latter-day Saints was heart-felt. It was the mourning of a community of thousands, all of whom revered these martyred brethren as their fathers and benefactors, and the sight of their bleeding bodiesfor their blood had not ceased to flow as they lay in their coffinswas a sight never to be forgotten. The mourning I witnessed for kings and for our nation's chief was only here and there manifested by tears; but for the two who suffered for their religion and their friends, the whole people wept in going to and from the sceneall, all were weeping." Mr. Staines was one of those who attended the memorable meeting where Brigham Young was recognized and accepted by the Saints as the lawful successor to the martyred Prophet. "Brigham's voice," says he, "was as the voice of Joseph; I thought it was his, and so did the thousands who heard it."

"William C. Staines," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:117-18; also in "William Staines," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
