Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Stevenson, Edward

(May 1, 1820-January 27, 1897)

In 1834 Joseph preached in Pontiac, Michigan, where his testimony was received because Satan had not yet prejudiced the minds of the people; Joseph told of the First Vision and the coming of Moroni, whom, he said, came in fulfillment of John's prophetic promise in Revelation 14:6-7; Joseph also prophesied that if those present would repent, they would speak in tongues and experience spiritual gifts.

In 1834 Joseph Smith the Prophet preached with such power as had not there ever before been witnessed in this nineteenth century. The brother of the Prophet, Hyrum, also the father of them, Joseph senior, were with him. Let me as a living witness speak of the moving, stirring sensation created in this town [i.e., Pontiac] and surrounding country of the then Territory of Michigan. The Church was only in its infancy then, and much less evil spoken of; less opposition was met and fewer lies were in circulation respecting the Saints. Infidelity was scarcely thought or spoken of, and skepticism very rare in that period. Consequently there were more who were willing to listen, reflect upon and digest the new doctrines, and eventually to obey it.

There have been alterations and improvements made regarding the schoolhouse, but these are the exact premises where people thronged in large numbers, more than could be able to find even standing space, in and around the house. Not the least disturbance or resistance was offered until Satan came also; but the good word had taken deep root, as seed sown on good ground, which could not be rooted out. I can very well remember many of the words of the boy Prophet as they were uttered in simplicity, but with a power which was irresistible to all present, although at that time I could not understand how it was that so few comparatively obeyed it. Three elder brothers of mine, as well as our neighbors, repeatedly in my hearing spoke highly of the new doctrinesthat they were scriptural, so plainly set forth, and that, too, with such force as never before was experienced in this section of country. Here are some of the Prophet's words, as uttered in the schoolhouse. With uplifted hand he said: "I am a witness that there is a God, for I saw Him in open day, while praying in a silent grove, in the spring of 1820." He further testified that God, the Eternal Father, pointing to a separate personage, in the likeness of Himself, said: "This is my Beloved Son hear ye Him." O how these words thrilled my entire system, and filled me with joy unspeakable to behold one who, like Paul the apostle of olden time, could with boldness testify that he had been in the presence of Jesus Christ!

The young Prophet further said that in 1823, three years after his first vision, while praying in his father's house (I have been so highly favored of the Lord as to have been in the very house where the servant of God said he was fervently praying), when suddenly the house was filled with light brighter than the noon-day sun, in the midst of which there stood an angel, who said he was sent from the presence of God, as a messenger to him. The angel instructed him regarding a marvelous work that God was about to bring to pass, and that he, Joseph, was the one who was selected to be God's servant and mouthpiece to bring about and establish the great and marvelous work. "Three times," said the young man, "did this angel continue his visits during the same night, each time repeating the same instructions, only extending some little, and quoting several passages of scripture relating to the great work which was to come forth." In closing the last visit the angel invited the boy to meet him on a neighboring hill, two miles away from his father's house, where he would give him still further instructions and permit him to see a book of gold plates containing a history of two nations who had previously inhabited this great land of America. So plainly was this made known that on the next day Joseph said he was able to find the exact place, and met the angel as requested.

More than two hours were occupied during that evening meeting, and so absorbing and interesting was the discourse that no one seemed to be weary, or to realize so much time had been consumed. A succession of meetings were held, in which the Prophet was joined, and very interestingly, too, by the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon. During his visit to this branch the Prophet testified that he was instructed to organize a Church after the pattern of the Church which Jesus organized, with Twelve Apostles, Seventies, Elders, gifts and blessings, with signs following, as found recorded in the sixteenth chapter of Mark, which he read and explained; adding that God had fulfilled the words of John the Revelator, "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come." The angel had done his work; the true Church was set up with, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, with gifts, etc.; "And as a servant of God," said Joseph, "I promise you, inasmuch as you will repent and be baptized for the remission of your sins, you shall receive the Holy Ghost, and speak with tongues, and the signs shall follow you, and by this you may test me as a Prophet sent of God."

Edward Stevenson, "The Home of My Boyhood," Juvenile Instructor 29, no. 14 (15 July 1894): 443-45.

Quotes Joseph as saying reformers good men, "honest, true Christians"; saw them by the aid of the Urim and Thummin; speaks of need to get inspiration to interpret Apocrypha; admired Stevenson home in Michigan; baptism by immersion a command.

I very well remember the Prophet on one occasion dining at our house, and recollect some of his conversation. He was looking over a copy of the Book of Martyrs, which was in the house. In doing so he remarked, "Many of those who suffered death at the fiery stake were honest, true Christians according to the light they possessed." He requested to have the loan of the Book of Martyrs, which he said he would return to us in Zion. He did return it at Far West, Missouri, remarking as he did so, "I have seen those martyrs by aid of the Urim and Thummim; God has a salvation for them."

His words of sympathy increased my love, which was already strong, for him.

Opening the Bible to the Apocrypha, he said, "There are many precious truths in these books,just as true as any of the Biblebut it requires much of the Spirit of God to divide the truths from the errors which have crept into them." He also spoke of a great work to be done in England, "for," said he, "there are many of the house of Ephraim in that land, who are waiting for the fullness of the Gospel." This was several years before any missionaries were sent to England, where afterwards the elders met with such great success.

While he was quietly relating his experience, visions, trials, and heavenly communion, we felt greatly blessed and favored, and felt honored in imparting to him of our hospitality in return for his rich and comforting words, knowing that we were entertaining one of the greatest prophets of god that ever graced His footstool. Although but a lad, I was pleased to see and hear him, and going into our garden I plucked some of our best apples for him. After dinner the Prophet walked about the premises and much admired our home, particularly the clear, mirror-like lake, with its surroundings, which was a part of our homestead.

. . . the Prophet instructed us that he received command from heaven that baptism by immersion was the only acceptable mode.

Edward Stevenson, "Incidents of My Early Life," Juvenile Instructor 29, no. 18 (15 September 1894): 570.

Helped bodyguard the Prophet in Far West.

As a youth of eighteen, he took an active part in the defense of Far West, where, thinly clad and shivering with cold, he stood guard over the Prophet night after night.

"Edward Stevenson," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:115.

Adam was older than Methuselah.

Father Adam began his work and finished what was to be done in his time, living to be one thousand years old with the except of about six months. Truly the Bible gives Methuselah the credit of being the oldest but the Prophet Joseph had it revealed to him otherwise. It is only an error of man in translating the record.

Joseph Grant Stevenson, "The Life of Edward Stevenson," master's thesis, Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1955, 73.

First saw Joseph in Pontiac, Michigan, in 1834; Joseph promised if men obeyed the gospel, gifts would follow and prove him to be a prophet.

I first saw Joseph Smith at Pontiac, Michigan, in 1834, when he visited the Pontiac Branch. The meetings were crowded. The Prophet stood at a table for a pulpit. Before he got through, he was in the midst of the congregation with uplifted hand. His countenance seemed to assume a heavenly whiteness. He testified with great power concerning the visit of the Father and the Son, and the conversation he had with them. Never before did I feel such power. Though only a small percentage of those who saw and heard him accepted the restored gospel, there was not one who dared to dispute it. Many were heard to say, "Well, if Mormonism is true, it will stand; if not true, it will fall."

A prediction made by the Prophet was afterwards literally fulfilled. Joseph said, "If you will obey the gospel with honest hearts, I promise you in the name of the Lord that the gifts as promised by our Savior will follow you, and by this you may prove me to be a true servant of God."

I both saw and heard the gifts follow those who believed and obeyed the gospel.

In Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 85.

Joseph said the reformers mentioned in Foxe's Book of Martyrs were "devoted followers of Christ" and that "much of the Apocrypha was true"; many thousands in England yet to accept the gospel.

During the Prophet's visit, he came to our house. My heart swelled with love as I selected and presented him with some of our choice apples. While looking over our copy of a large English Book of Martyrs, he expressed sympathy for the Christian martyrs and a hope for their salvation. He asked to borrow the book, promising to return it when he should meet us again in Missouri. On returning it he said, "I have, by the aid of the Urim and Thummim [Seer Stone?], seen those martyrs. They were honest, devoted followers of Christ, according to the light they possessed. They will be saved."

The Prophet also looked over our large Bible and remarked that much of the Apocrypha was true, but it required the Spirit of God to select the truth out of those writings.

Finally, in speaking of the latter-day work, he said, "There are thousands of good people in England and those old countries who are waiting for the fullness of the gospel, and it will not be long before they will flock to Zion, for Ephraim dwells largely in those parts."

In Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 85-86.

Saw the playful side of the Prophet: playing checkers, wrestling, and organizing a sham battle.

I have often seen the Prophet indulge in a game of checkers. He was cheerfuloften wrestling with Sidney Rigdon. One time he had his pants torn badly, but had a good laugh over it. In Missouri, when mob forces oppressed the Saints, we were encamped in Adam-ondi-Ahman, mostly around campfires without tents. One night the snow fell four or five inches. The Prophet, seeing our forlorn condition, called on us to form into two partiesLyman Wight at the head of one line and he (Joseph) heading the other lineto have a sham battle. The weapons were snowballs. We set to with a will full of glee and fun.

In Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 86.

Saw Joseph point to the site of Adam's altar and designate Jackson county as the site of Eden.

I stood with Joseph Smith and others when he pointed out the sacred spot of Adam's altar. Turning to the lovely valley below us, in a large bend of Grand River, he said, "Here is the real valley where Father Adam called his posterity together and blessed them."

He also stated that the Garden of Eden was in Jackson Countythe Center Place of Zion where a great temple will be reared.

In Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 86.

Saw both the Prophet's tender heart and stern military demeanor; Joseph did not claim to be perfect but to speak for the Lord.

Twelve days after the Prophet escaped from Missouri, a General Conference of the Church was held at Quincy, Illinois. His soul was filled with emotion, and it seemed as though he could not utter his feelings, only with a flood of tears. He looked calm, however, and a halo of brightness hovered about him. He was of a tender heart, as well as of a stern and firm disposition when occasion required it. I have known the Prophet to weep with tender affection, and have seen him with his sword drawn, as a military officer, when he was mighty as well as powerful.

After the Prophet had looked over the congregation, he said, "To look over this congregation of Latter-day Saints who have been driven from their homes and are still in good faith, without homes, as pilgrims in a strange land, and to realize that my life has been spared to behold your faces again seemed to be so great a pleasure that words were only a vague expression of my soul's gratitude."

I have heard the Prophet say that he did not claim perfection, but possessed human weaknesses. He said, "When I speak as a man it is Joseph only that speaks. But when the Lord speaks through me, it is no more Joseph Smith who speaks; but it is God, and let all Israel hear."

In Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 86-87.

Interpreted a sign in the heavens as a prediction of war; reinterpreted the Lord's Prayer; said the righteous dead shall continue their work and must build on the foundation of Christ to be perfected; also said Paul's use of the plural expression, "baptisms" referred to baptisms for living, the dead, and rebaptisms; said he would not be sacrificed before his time.

Joseph Smith, Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards saw a light in the heavens, in the southwest quarter of the sky, and a broad sword, from half past seven to nine o'clock. The Prophet said, "As sure as there is a God who sits enthroned in the heavens, and as sure as he ever spoke by me, so sure will there be a speedy and bloody war; and the broad sword seen this evening is a sure sign thereof."

We very often went to Nauvoo to meetings. I have never heard or seen a man so filled with inspiration as the Prophet. He was full of light. I began to believe that he possessed an infinity of knowledge. I looked upon him as upon no other man. I have often heard him speak under divine influence, and I have felt as though I have been lifted in spirit beyond mortality, and that I was looking upon a simile of God, and at times I found myself in tears of joy. Others have I seen in the same condition, and at times even those not members of our church.

The Prophet gave rich instructions relative to preaching the gospel by the Spirit and power of the Holy Ghost. He also explained several passages of scripture. He taught that the Lord's prayer should state, "Leave us not in temptation"not, "Lead us not into temptation." (Matthew 6:13.) John's revelation on Patmos should read, "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, . . . and they shall continue in their work"not, "and their works do follow them." (Revelation 14:13.) The epistle to the Hebrew saints should say, "Therefore not leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go unto perfection"not, "Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ." He said that the plural term "baptisms" in this passage had reference to baptism for the living, baptism for the dead, and rebaptism. (Hebrews 6:1-2.)

I loved to hear the Prophet teach us. On one occasion he said, "Oh! how I would delight to bring before you things you never thought of, but poverty and the cares of the world prevent. But I am glad I have the privilege of communicating to you some things which, if grasped closely, will be a help to you when earthquakes bellow, the clouds gather, the lightnings flash, and the storms are ready to burst upon you like peals of thunder. Lay hold upon these things, and let not your knees or joints tremble, and your hearts faint."

He was cheerful and comforting. He said, "I shall not be sacrificed until my time comes; then I shall be offered freely."

In Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 87.

After Joseph gave the Twelve the keys, he felt a great release and freedom.

I heard the Prophet state, while preaching on a stand erected on the east side of the Temple, that he now saw the time he had long desired to see. "Now I am a free man," he declared. "There are men now prepared to carry out the work of the kingdom of God here on earth, and it will roll on forever. Thank God I have lived to see this day."

I never saw him so full of power. It thrilled through my whole system.

In Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1974), 87-88.
