Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Stewart, Andrew Jackson

(September 12, 1819-December 5, 1911)

Account of his conversion and first meeting with the Prophet, who had already instructed the elders to baptize him; he was appointed to campaign for Joseph's presidential bid; he was later appointed as one of those to find a place for the Saints in the Rockies; he was not present for the martyrdom but did attend the funeral.

The last time I saw the Prophet, Joseph Smith, was on June 12, 1844. I was with him every from the 7th to the 12th.

I heard much about the Prophet in the years 1839-1840, about the time Saints were driven out of Missouri. I was brought up in the Presbyterian faith, but we were living in Fox River Township, Van Buren Co., Iowa, and as there was no Presbyterian Church near us, we associated with the Methodists and went to their Camp Meetings, where I was generally called on to help sing as I was teaching both a Sunday and night school, now sectarian. There being no day school in our immediate neighborhood. On one occasion, while I was at a Methodist Camp Meeting, during intermission we were discussing the manner and form of baptism, when the Presiding elder came up to the crowd, listened a while, and then said:

'Bro. Stewart, we don't want any of Old Joe Smith's doctrines discussed here.'

I answered, saying I was quoting from the Bible, and stepping up to the stand, opened a Bible with his name on it, which I saw lying on the stand, 'it is in your Bible what I have quoted.'

'Well,' he said, 'that is Old Joe Smith's doctrine.'

I was anxious to know if that was really 'Mormonism.' Soon after this several families of Latter-Day Saints from Missouri, moved into our neighborhood, and I began to question them about Mormonism. This was is in 1840-41. Until 1844 I continued teaching night school, and the Bible in Sunday School. Finally, in 1843 I heard the first Mormon Elder preach the same doctrine as we had been reading in the Bible. Other testimony I also received of the establishing of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints was from the visitation of angels on Nov. 20, 1843, of which I may write about in another letter.

About Feb. 10, 1844, Two Elders, Wm. Coray and Wm. G. Rule, came to my house, asking to stay over night. I said they could. During the evening they asked if they could get a house in the neighborhood to preach in. I offered to get a house and give notice of the meeting as I also had a testimony to bear. After several meetings my wife and I presented ourselves for baptism, and were baptized on Feb. 18, 1844, and on Feb. 22 fifteen others, including nine of my relatives were baptized, and a branch of the church organized, with my brother B. F. Stewart presiding. Afterwards the elders explained that they had been sent by the Prophet to baptize me and my family, and to stay until this mission was accomplished; and also ask me to return to Nauvoo with them, to see the Prophet. This I did on March 10, 1844. Bro. Wm. Coray introduced me to the Prophet, at his home. After spending five days in Nauvoo, mostly with the Prophet, Joseph Smith requested me to attend the April Conference and be ordained to join the Quorum of Seventy, and take a mission. Among the things discussed by the prophet and his Council was 'the going to the mountains," which made a great impression on me, that I could not forget, as I thought Nauvoo was the proper place. I returned home to Fox River Township, but could not forget the thought of the Church going away to the Wilderness of the mountains, to get away from its enemies.

My anxiety about being ordained to the priesthood April Conference and preaching the everlasting gospel, the salvation of the people, bore heavily on my mind. Finally, April 6, I went to Nauvoo, Ill., and April 7, I went to the meeting at the Grove, east of the Temple plot. A great many people were present. Meeting was in progress when I arrived, but I found a seat near the stand. Joseph the Prophet was preaching. When he sat down he saw me and said:

'Here is Brother Stewart from Fox River, Iowa,' and he presented my name to the conference, and it was voted that I should be ordained a seventy and take a mission. He told Pres. Joseph Young to ordain me, and me to join the third quorum of seventy. John D. Lee, clerk, gave me license. The prophet appointed me to go to New York with Brigham Young on a mission, and stump the state of New York on politics, for Joseph Smith to be President of the United States.

'For,' he said, 'the Saints could not build up the Church in the United States, but would have to go and find a place in the Mountains, where they could find a place to live in peace and in five years they would not be disturbed or be driven away again.' He said he had a company made up but he wanted me especially, as I had been west on the Indian Land to the Missouri River.

Late in the evening of June 22, Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and Willard Richards left Nauvoo and crossed the Mississippi river to find the place for the Saints.

I had a very fine horse, the Prophet wanted to buy him. I would not sell the horse, but would make him a present of it. He asked me if I had other horses to ride and pick and could I fit myself for the trip proposed? I told him I could and was glad to go west instead of east to New York.

During the time I stayed in the city, I called on the Prophet every day, and ws introduced to some of the company who had agreed to go with him. I don't know but one man now living, of that company. He is Samuel Richards. I was so surprised that we would have to [go].

The Prophet said there were others to take missions, but they would be taken up in their quorums.

At this conference there were a great many others appointed on missions, they were to go home and get ready as soon as possible.

On the 20th of May I was ready to go with Brigham Young. But some of my friends, who came to see me off, in looking over my farm, persuaded me to stay until after I had harvested a field of new kind of wheat. Well, I consented to stay, but when we went to cut the grain, there was not a kernel in the ground in the entire field; it was all blasted.

I got ready the second time June 9, 1844 to go on my long-planned mission to New York. Arrived in Nauvoo, June 10, to find all excited over the destroying of the Nauvoo Expositor. I went immediately to see the Prophet, reported as ready for my mission, and to learn how and where I was to join Brigham Young. The Prophet said he was glad I had come, but he wanted to change my mission, and take me with him to find a place for the Saints [to] go into the mountains, or wilderness and leave that great city and the temple that was being built, because of his anxiety to get the temple built, and give endowments before we left.

The plan the Prophet proposed was this,I was to go home to Fox River, fifty five miles west, on the road from Nauvoo to the mountains, take the horse I had given him, get ready and he would cross over the Mississippi River with a few men, come to my place the first night, and the next night go on, for it was only fifteen miles to the Indian boundary land, which was outside of the United States. He said he would start in about a week, and the company could come on later. This was June 12, 1844.

I went home, taking the horse with me, and got ready for the trip to the mountains.

I heard that the Prophet had crossed the river for the mountains, and expected him every night until I heard that he was martyred. I immediately started for Nauvoo; while on the west side of the river, I stopped with my old friends, who said that Joseph & Hyrum Smith and Willard Richards had got as far as their place, but their supposed friends who had followed them, had persuaded them to return.

When Joseph left, he said, I leave void of offense toward God and man. I have no lease of my life. I go as a lamb to the slaughter." He said many other words in that strain.

I went on to Nauvoo, arriving at the close of Joseph and Hyrum Smith's funeral.

Andrew J. Stewart

April 5, 1908

Andrew Jackson Stewart, "Scrap's from an Old Timer's Journal," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
