Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Stoddard, Charles Henry

(April 21, 1837-September 2, 1907)

As a young boy in Nauvoo, Charles Henry Stoddard carried food and messages for the Prophet; once told a stranger he was preparing a kite to fly food to Joseph, who "went to heaven on Hyrum's white horse"; he also worked for William Law and heard him conspire against the Prophet; he warned Joseph; he also tells of Law seeking to shoot the Prophet but his six-shooter misfired.

Hannah R. Larson whose maiden name was Hannah R. Stoddard and Adessa Larson Christensen who is the daughter of Hannah R. Stoddard Larsen, depose and say:

Charles Henry Stoddard was born on the 21st of April, 1837 [1827?], in Newark, New Jersey, his parents being Israel Stoddard and Sarah Woodward. As a boy he was employed by the Prophet Joseph Smith, in Nauvoo, Illinois. While the Prophet was in hiding, he carried food to the Prophet and delivered messages to and from the Prophet. The Prophet trusted him implicitly. Upon one occasion, when in the street fixing a kite, with other boys, a man came up and inquired where the Prophet was, to which Charles replied, "He went to heaven on Hyrum's white horse and we are fixing this kite to send his dinner to him." No one suspected his important duties because of his youth.

While employed by the Prophet Joseph, William Law requested Charles to come and work for him. He did not want to. After consulting with the Prophet, he decided to do so. During his employment with William Law, many private matters were talked of by Law and his associates in the presence of the boy, without any hesitation, perhaps thinking that the boy would not pay any attention to what was said. The boy was nevertheless on the alert and took full cognizance of what was going on.

Upon retiring one evening, in a lean-to attached to a building which was partly vacant and partly used for storage purposes, the lad was awakened by conversation being held in the vacant portions of the building. This building was a rendezvous of the bitter apostates and enemies of the Prophet among whom was William Law, who seemed to be a ringleader. The lad listened thru a hole in the leg structure thru which light was also emerging, and learned that these men were plotting against the Prophet's life. He heard Law tell this group of apostates that he would have Charles clean, oil and load his gun which was one of his regular duties. After the group had disbanded and had all left the building, the lad dressed and hurried to the home of the Prophet and told him all that he had seen and heard and asked the Prophet what he should do. The Prophet told him to return and act as nothing had happened, and to do as his employer requested, and admonished him to load the gun well. He told the boy that they could not hurt him until his time had arrived. The boy did as requested. The next morning Mr. Law requested him to clean, oil and load his six-shooter, which was faithfully done as the Prophet advised. When the opportune time arrived, Law aimed the revolver at the Prophet with the intention of killing him. He pulled the trigger but the gun misfired as did all of the other five loads in the six-shooter. He cursed because the gun did not discharge, and blamed the boy for not loading the weapon properly. The boy replied that he had done it to the best of his ability. Law then aimed at a post and all six loads were discharged.

Years afterwards when Charles Henry Stoddard had emigrated to Utah, and living in Richmond, Utah, Joseph Smith, the son of the Prophet Joseph and also the president of the Reorganized Church, visited Stoddard and stayed over night in his home. This statement Hannah R. Stoddard also affirms as she saw him in Richmond.

The foregoing data has had from information told to Hannah R. Stoddard by her grandfather Charles Henry Stoddard, and by oft repeated stories recited to Adessa Larson Stoddard, by her grandfather George Henry Stoddard, the oldest son of Charles Henry Stoddard and Anna Telford, and is related to the best of their knowledge and memory.

In Witness to the truthfulness of the foregoing statement the parties first before mentioned have hereunto signed their names.

Signed: Hannah R. Larson____________

Signed: Adessa Larsons Christensen____

Town of Ashton )

ss

State of Idaho )

Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State of Idaho, appeared Hannah R. Larson and Adessa Larsen Christensen and affixed their signatures to the foregoing statement.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto affixed my Notorial Seal, this 5th day of October, 1949.

Hiram E. Fuller

Notary Public

"Hannah Rebecca Larson Stoddard, Affidavit, Oct. 15, 1949," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
