Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Stout, Allen Joseph

(December 5, 1815-December 18, 1889)

When imprisoned by Missourians at Far West, Joseph prophesied the brethren would not be hurt.

The Church in that settlement all went into Far West that day because Sampson Avard told them that the mob would be upon them by night and kill them, but the mob fled as fast the other way, and one John Estes, went to Richmond and swore that the Mormons had fallen on Captain Bogart and killed all of his men, but him, and that they were ravaging the country, upon which testimony the governor issued his extermination orders. Soon after this, General Lucas came and surrounded Far West, and the Saints surrendered their arms to him because he was sent by the governor, and soon General Clark came with an army of 1500 men and took charge of the city and got the names of as many as the apostates would give him. These apostates would hand in the names of such as they had malice against. Now these dissenters had sold the leaders of the Church into the hands of General Lucas when he first surrounded the city. And Lucas had a court martial held composed of officers, priests and privates, and the prisoners were all tried in a lump and all sentenced to be shot the next day on the temple foundation. This was all done without the knowledge of the prisoners, or any testimony on their part. And when they were notified of their doom, Lyman Wight said he would believe it when he saw it. And Joseph Smith said, "Be of good cheer, for not a hair of our heads will be hurt." But it happened that General Doniphan revolted from Lucas and told him that neither he nor his men should have nothing to do in such cold-blooded murder, and that put a stop to the matter for the present, and the prisoners were taken up to Jackson County.

"Journal of Allen Joseph Stout (1815-1848)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 9-10.

Says Joseph wrote the Nauvoo Legion from Carthage, asking for their protection.

And while they were in jail, Brother Joseph wrote an official order to Jonathan Dunham to bring the Legion and reserve him from being killed, but Dunham did not let a single man or mortal know that he had received such orders, and we were kept in the city under arms, not knowing but all was well, until the mob came and forced the prison and slew Joseph and Hyrum Smith and wounded John Taylor severely.

Their dead bodies were brought to Nauvoo where I saw their beloved forms reposing in the arms of death, which gave me such feelings as I am not able to describe. . . .

"Journal of Allen Joseph Stout (1815-1848)," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 19.

In 1841 he traveled 500 miles in ten days to help rescue the Prophet from a mob; he says Joseph issued an order from Carthage for the Nauvoo Legion to come to his aid, but a man named Dunham refused to deliver the message; he also tells of seeing dead bodies lie in state and of his desire to avenge the murderers.

July 4, 1841, Allen received a letter from Hosea in Nauvoo reporting the bad news that the Missouri mobs were trying to kidnap the Prophet Joseph. The safety of the Prophet was Allen's first consideration. Accordingly, Allen hastened back to Nauvoo, covering the 500 miles in ten day. In Nauvoo Allen learned that the Prophet had been released on Habeus Corpus. During the following fifteen months Allen worked at odd jobs, first fishing, then carpenter work. October 20, 1842, he received a commission as Third Lieutenant in the Nauvoo Legion. About the same time he was initiated and passed various degrees in the Masonic Lodge. That same winter (1842-43) he suffered a severe spell of sickness. He met and fell in love with Mr. Anderson's daughter, Elizabeth. The bride's parents opposed the marriage so they went to a friend's home and were married by Charles C. Rich, July 17, 1843.

Meanwhile, in June 1843, the Prophet was kidnapped by an angry Missouri mob. This caused a great deal of excitement in Nauvoo. Allen with eighty two others, took the boat "Maid of Iowa," descended "the Mississippi River to the mouth of the Illinois River then up that stream" seeking diligently for the Prophet. At Peru they learned that the Prophet was safe at Nauvoo. A few days after their return Allen was promoted to captaincy, First Company, Nauvoo Legion, July 8, 1843.

[Tells of going to Wisconsin to obtain lumber to build temple; worked as a carpenter on Seventies Hall; May 1, 1844 their first child was born]

. . . Difficulties with the mob once more broke out. The agents of the Evil One were determined to capture and kill the Prophet. Captain Allen Stout and his fellow Legionnaires were equally determined to protect his life and person. This necessitated taking up and remaining under arms day and night for many weeks. Allen writes that after Joseph and Hyrum were taken to Carthage and jailed the Prophet wrote an official order to Jonathan Dunham to bring the Legion to Carthage to save "him from being killed, but Dunham did not let a single man or mortal know that he had received such orders, and we (the Legion) were kept in the city under arms not knowing but all was well, 'till the mob came and forced the prison and slew Joseph and Hyrum Smith." If this statement of Allen is true it serves as a real contribution to Church History since even B. H. Roberts in his complete account makes no mention of Dunham's knowledge of the Prophet's request. If Jonathan really received this official order from Joseph why didn't he dispatch the entire Legion to Carthage? That action may have save their lives. It was probably divine will that Dunham did not take the fatal step.

Allen relates that the dead bodies were brought to Nauvoo, there he "saw their beloved forms reposing in the arms of death, which gave me such feelings as I am not able to describe. But I there and then resolved in my mind that I would never let an opportunity slip unimproved of avenging their blood upon the head of the enemies of the church of Jesus Christ. I felt as though I could not live; I knew not how to contain myself, and when I see one of the men who persuaded them to give up to be tried, I feel like cutting their throats out. And I hope to live to avenge their blood; but if I do not I will teach my children to never cease to try to avenge their blood and then teach their children and children's children to the fourth generation as long as there is one descendant of the murderers upon this earth."

Wayne Stout, "Allen Joseph Stout: A Great Champion of Mormonism," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
