Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Stout, Hosea

(September 18, 1810-March 2, 1889)

Tells of a midnight attempt by William Law and others to kidnap Joseph but of being refused admission to Joseph's house by Shadrach Roundy and Josiah Arnold.

A party of men with William Law at their head came at midnight under the pretence to see the mummies, but really to kidnap the Prophet. The Prophet, having been forewarned, sent for Shadrach Roundy, who was Captain of the Police and told him to pick a trusty man and be on guard with him at his house as there was a party coming to kidnap him [and] that they would be there about midnight and they were coming by water. Brother Roundy took Josiah Arnold who was a member of the police and stationed him at the gate whilst he took his beat by the river, thinking the mob would come that way. But hearing a noise at the gate he hurriedly went to the gate and found William Law with several others just entering. Brother Roundy with a hickory cane forced them back outside the gate, then William Law, who was very angry, insisted upon being admitted as the gentlemen with him desired to see the mummies and he must see Brother Joseph.

Brother Roundy, at last, went to see Brother Joseph, who told him to go and tell Law that they could not be admitted and they would not get in unless they passed over his and brother Arnold's dead bodies. Their valor and trustworthiness saved the Prophet's life as they had intended to kidnap him and take him to Missouri. I learned these facts from Shadrach Roundy and Josiah Arnold and know it to be the truth.

[Signed, Hosea Stout]

"Statement by Hosea Stout, Sept. 1887," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.

Recalls the day of the martyrdom and the gloomy spirit it caused.

November 4 [1844], Monday. Today was the presidential election and the brethren all concluded to vote for Polk and Dallas for President and Vice-President of the United States. However, it was with peculiar feelings that I went to the polls. I thought of the man whom we had elected as the man of our choice for President of the United States: our beloved Prophet Joseph Smith whose voice seemed yet to sound in the air, teaching this nation the way they might be saved and the means to pursue to avoid a disunion and overthrow of our government. I well remembered the never to be forgotten 27th of June, 1844 when fell a sacrifice to the violence of a mob while the constituted authorities of this state winked at their deeds, after the honors of the governor and faith of the state had been pledged for his protection and his blood, is now to be seen on the floor of the jail at Carthage where it cries to God for vengeance on this nation who rejoice at his fall. It is no wonder then, that it was with little confidence that I took part in the election for I could but vote for those, who, if they had not approved of the murder of our own candidate had remained silent and each party was willing to truckle to us for our votes and say all is well. It was a dreadful alternative; truly the corruption of this nation is great. After the election I met the police and we had a reorganization and came home about dark.

"Diary of Hosea Stout (1844-1870)," 8 vols., typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 1:6-7.

Tells of the trial of John C. Elliot, one of the mobbers who murdered Joseph and Hyrum.

February 12 [1845]. Went to a trial. A man named John C. Elliot who had been engaged in the murder of Joseph and Hyrum [Smith], came in town and put up with William Marks, who done all he could to secret him, but he was found out and arrested and brought before A. Johnson, D. [Daniel] H. Wells and Isaac Higbee, and examined found guilty, and sent by the Sheriff, who was present, to Carthage, to lay in the lonesome jail which he had stained with the best blood in the world. As soon as he was arrested [William] Marks used all his influence to notify the mob and raise an excitement against us, and several lawyers and other men from Warsaw came to his trial, and used every stratagem in their power to get him discharged. One of the lawyers gave the court to understand that if they committed him to jail, that it might cause some of our best men to be slain, thus threatening us with a mob if we attempted to put the law in force against willful murderers. But the court took a bold and decided stand in favor of the Laws.

"Diary of Hosea Stout (1844-1870)," 8 vols., typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 1:23.
