Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Bracken, James B.

(January 14, 1816-March 31, 1900)

Says Joseph pointed out altar in Adam-ondi-Ahman built by Adam; with brethren they made covenant never to accept peace terms at sacrifice of truth and right; also reproved the brethren for stealing.

In the fall of '38, on the occasion of our going down to wish David Patten to take the cannon, when we got to the rock in the Valley of Adam-Ondi-Ahman, which the Prophet Joseph told us was an altar that Adam built, Joseph formed a circle of the brethren present, he himself in the centre. And he drew his sword, and called upon us to do likewise; this being done, we entered into a Covenant never to accept of terms of peace at the sacrifice of truth and the right. That was the substance of the Covenant.

On another occasion when the mob was on us, and some of the brethren would do things they should not have done, such as appropriating to their own use things that did not belong to them, Joseph called us together and said that he felt to mourn because of the acts of men, some he said, are doing things that will cause the blood of the brethren to run. He referred to stealing.

I saw George M. Hinkle when he betrayed the Prophet, and took him into the camp of the mob. I also saw Joseph Smith a day or two later, when they brought him back and were taking him to Jackson County, when they said we would never see our Prophet any more. Many of the brethren tried to get to the wagon to shake hands with the Prophet but the mob would not allow that privilege, so the Prophet raised his hand toward the brethren and said, "Good-bye," and passed on in silence.

"Statement of James Bracken, Nov. 6, 1881," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Describes Joseph as a "noble looking and acting man"; also present when George M. Hinkle betrayed Joseph to Missouri mob; heard Joseph speak many times in Nauvoo.

The first time I saw the Prophet Joseph Smith was in June, 1838, in the town of Far West, Caldwell County, Missouri. I went to a meeting and he preached to the people, teaching them the principles of salvation.

Soon after Joseph's arrival trouble commenced, and the same fall there were several thousands of State troops sent to Far West with exterminating orders from Governor Boggs. I never saw a nobler looking or acting man than Joseph Smith appeared on that occasion.

I saw George M. Hinkle when he betrayed the Prophet, and took him into the camp of the mob. I also saw Joseph Smith a day of two later, when they brought him back, and were taking him to Jackson County, when they said we would never see our Prophet any more. Many of the brethren tried to get to the wagon to shake hands with the Prophet but the mob would not allow that privilege, so the Prophet, raised the wagon cover and put out his hand toward the brethren and said, "Good-bye," and passed on in silence.

I saw no more of the Prophet until I got to Illinois, where I heard him talk many times in public and private, and here bear my testimony that Joseph Smith was a true Prophet of God, and that he brought forth the fullness of the gospel in the last days.

James B. Bracken, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 7 (1 April 1892): 203.
