Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Stowell, William Rufus Rogers

(September 23, 1822-May 30, 1901)

Tells of his first meeting with Joseph which fulfilled a dream he had previously had; it was disappointing in that he saw Joseph drink; he told Joseph of a land purchase which Joseph rejected but he still felt the confirmation that Joseph was a prophet; he also tells of a post-martyrdom dream in which he saw and was blessed by the Prophet.

On approaching Nauvoo, he met some dissatisfied people who belonged to the Church. They gave him some very unsatisfactory reports about the Prophet, Joseph, and the Church. He arrived in Nauvoo the 23rd of November 1843.

Before leaving Westerfield, he had corresponded with Stephen Perry by letter. Mr. Perry lived on Parley Street, and so William spent the night at Mr. Perry's home. The morning after his arrival, he inquired the way to the temple. Nearing the temple, he saw a hill and recognized the fulfillment of his dream.

The next thing of interest to him was to see the prophet, Joseph Smith. He felt and believed he would recognize him on sight. The complete realization of his dream served to strengthen his idea. He walked down toward the Nauvoo Mansion which he had learned was for the entertainment of strangers. (NOTE: At that time, a hotel was often called a house of entertainment.) He entered the bar-room, and since the weather was cold, stood before the fire. Several men were in the room, but none of them filled the conception he had of the prophet. People were entering and leaving frequently. In a short time a man came in and William had the impression he was the Prophet. He walked to the bar, took a drink, took out a pocket handkerchief and wiped his slips with the nonchalance of an habitual customer. (NOTE: This was before the command forbidding the use of liquor, was revealed to the Church.) This act seemed so inconsistent to William with the character of a Prophet of God, that he queried in his mind what it meant. "Could it be possible that a prophet of God would patronize a place were intoxicating liquor was sold?" But he still decided, this was he.

While he was thus querying, the man walked to the fire. Bystanders courteously parted to let him pass; some called him Brother Joseph. That satisfied William this was indeed the prophet. About 40 miles out of Nauvoo, a man had sent a message by William about some land he wanted to sell. The message included terms of sale, etc. Not wishing to deliver the message in a crowd, William waited an opportunity. In a short time, the prophet walked to the back of the room and sat down by himself in a booth that stood against the wall. William followed, sat down in the booth, introduced himself, and delivered his message. Joseph listened attentively until William was through. Then abruptly he rose from his seat, took a long step or two and declared with great emphasis that he asked no odds of any man anyhow. He turned to face William, and said, "Young man, you have done well to fully deliver the message, but we do not want the land." This first recognition of and interview with Joseph Smith, was not, in William's mind, very flattering.

In a day or two, he was walking down a sidewalk of one of the streets of Nauvoo when he met Joseph and passed with the usual salutations. Suddenly Joseph turned and said, "Stowell, brother Stowell, I would like to talk with you." At the same time, he turned toward the fence, leaned his arm on top of it, and rested his head in his hand. William assumed a similar attitude, facing him. When Joseph began to talk, William realized that here indeed was a prophet of God. Instruction in doctrine, words of wisdom, and counsel flowed from him with force and the power of Divine inspiration. The words sank deep into the heart of the young man and helped to mold his future and to make his life useful. . . .

. . . When Joseph Smith and his brother were assassinated, Elder Stowell was still at his home in Westfield. Mr. Lancaster, his former employer, came to him with a newspaper which told that Joseph Smith had been assassinated in Carthage jail. Elder Stowell says, "While I felt to mourn deeply the loss of our noble leader, my faith was not in the least shaken in the doctrines and principles that the prophet had planted in the earth. The Spirit of gathering with the Saints and sharing their fortunes, whatever they might be, was still upon me as I continued to labor diligently in preparing for the journey to Nauvoo."

. . . [Following the martyrdom, while feeling a gloom at the Prophet's death, William had a dream. James A. Little writes:] Several days passed with this feeling still at his elbow, when he had a dream or vision which he relates in this way:

"To me, it was very plain and distinct. I came up to the east side of Joseph's mansion. It was not the one in which I had seen him before, but larger and more grand and beautiful. There were broad steps in front the whole length of the building, extending to the top of the basement. There were two broad folding doors, twelve or fourteen feet in height, opening to the inside. A doorkeeper stood there to inquire my business. I told him I wanted to see the Prophet, Joseph Smith. He turned to go into the house and bade me follow. We passed two doors on the right of a spacious hall and came to a third which he opened and directed me to go in and there I would find Joseph. He then returned to his former position. The building was the most beautiful I had ever seen. Everything in the room which I entered was of the purest white. I saw a bed in the corner to my right on the far side of the room. The Prophet lay on the bed on his back. As I came to the bed, he reached out his hand. I passed my right hand across his body, laid it on his left shoulder and kissed him.

A little one side of the pit of his stomach, I saw a bullet hole where he had been shot. From it, diagonally down to his right hip, was the appearance of a strip of fresh blood about as wide as a man's finger. Otherwise, everything about him and his surroundings was beautiful and clean.

Joseph immediately got up and together we walked through the hall to the platform in front of the house. There, by a hitching post, I saw my horse and buggy. At the time I did not own one, but it appeared that I did. I said, "Brother Joseph, will you go back with me?" He said he would and got into the buggy while I was unhitching the horse. We conversed pleasantly as we traveled along. The streets, with their ruts and undulations seemed as natural as those I traveled daily.

Arriving at my gate, we went into the house and I introduced him to my mother and sisters. This privilege offered me much satisfaction. After a little, Joseph went to the door and looked across the city toward his residence as though he wished to go home, but I was not yet satisfied. I desired his blessing and asked, "Joseph, will you bless me?"

"I will," he replied. I sat down on the stump of a maple tree nearby and he laid his hands on my head and pronounced many choice blessings on me. He also declared that the blessings of God should be upon my efforts in rolling the Latter-day work on. And at the end, he said with great emphasis, "AND YOU SHALL BE BLESSED."

When he awoke in the morning, he said to his mother, "Be of good cheer, mother, Joseph is alive and all is well." The darkness and despondency that had brooded over him had passed away. This was about the 15th of September [1844], his mind was at rest, and with his usual courage and energy, he began to labor to provide for the family and to make their home more pleasant.

James A. Little, "Biography of William Rufus Rogers Stowell, 1893," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
