Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Strong, Ezra

(April 4, 1820-1894)

A Brother Willice prophesied that Christ would come within five years; Strong refused to sustain the prophecy or doctrine as true; some of the brethren came repeatedly to persuade him, but he refused to relent; Joseph returned from Missouri and "spake as never man spake" and announced young Strong was correct. Joseph also spoke of the doctrine of love and proposed that Brothers Brewster (Bruster) and Norris be restored to full fellowship. His motion carried.

At a certain time one Bro. Willice preached at Father's house, and said that "Jesus Christ will come in the brightnefs of His glory, when the wicked will be consumed, all the righteous will be caught up to meet Him inside of five years." Such teaching produced no Love, gave no Joy, no light nor happynefs. An impression came over me that the Bro. Willis had stated that which was not true.

After meting was out, I said that, "The doctrine taught of Christ comeing was not trueWas false." Father reprimanded me sharply then for my doubt of the comeing of Christ in side of five years. Bro. Willice then rose and said, "If Christ did not come inside of five years; I will burn the Bible, Book of Mormon, and say good-by to religion; But I kneed not say if He does not come, for I know by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost that He will come inside of five years; which I now prophecy in the name of Jesus Christ." Of such force was His language; that I began to doubt as to my own position. Then there came a thought to test by the rule of love and light, all things which claim to be of God; and by this rule His prophecy was falce.

Again, when Joseph and his Bro. Hyrum were gon to Missouri, when the Bruster and Norris party were cut off from the Church, there came a mighty rush of Light to my mind; and a great love for those Bruster and Norris Bretherin and Sisters. While they were defending themselves; the rule to test all things claiming to be of God, was upermost in my mind. I saw many who did not know of themselves, the kind of Spirit that was moveing them. Others were acting for Mastery. All seamed to be moved by a zeal without knowledge, therefore "Blind leading the Blind."

When the contrary "vote" was cald(after a unanimus voice was given to cut them off from the Church) I was constraned by this Ever abiding Love and Light of God's Spirit, to lift my hand in Their favor, at the same moment I looked round and saw no one voting with me; then raising my hand High, then Sprang to my feet, tiptoed and whirled round two or three times, with both hands Extended; with one hand Only becides mine. Some three hours or lefs after There came three Teachers to my Father's house, desiring to correct the Great evol of His son Ezra who had voted against the Kingdom of God.

Father then asked if I had voted as they Said. Then I said I did not. They then thought to prove me a liar. They rehearced my lifting my hand, then higher; and then glorying in my shame had Sprang to my feet and tiptoed, and quivered my hands while whirling round and round; thus voting against the Kingdom of God when it was to fill the Earth, and you deny voting against God and His Kingdom, do you? Yes, I do, was my reply. Father asked me if I voted, and in the maner they "described." Yes, I voted as described But for the Kingdom of God, and All the Church voted against the Light and truth of Heaven!

As I thus answered my Father, there came a Spirit upon me which made my Soul burn with Joy and gladnefs.

Then I repeated that "I know I voted for God and His Kingdom, and I know the Church all voted against the Light and truth of God."

After counciling me to repent, and asking Father and Mother to try to reclaim their Son, they left, Saying they would come again. Again three Teachers came. And as before with kindnefs of heart, and a desire for my welfare, sought to turn my mind from the "Light of Heaven"; to the Darknefs of an ignorant, blind and Superstitious zeal. Again 3 teachers, Beloved Brethren came, but to no good.

They asked F. and Mother what they were going to do with their Son Ezra? To which both answered, "We will sustain our Son Ezra, he is a Strange boy. We were then notified that if we did not repent, make restitution and confes our faults, we would be cut off from the Church and given over to the buffeitings of Saton.

Joseph and Hyrum Smith returned from Missouri; and the Church came together.

Joseph then Spake as never man had Spoken before, showing the Love of God. Portraid the gather to gether of Saints, and Siners. Drew a figer of the gospel net in which the good would be with the bad; And of the tares growing with the wheat. And of the Saints so living, that the teares, Seeing their good works, might be led to Glorify God. Joseph Said"The duty of the Saints is to bind together Humanity. To throw round all the arm of Love. Not to be zealous; fore "There is a way that seameth right unto man but the end Thereof is death." Many take the influence of zeal to be the Spirit of God, but it is not. The evol Spirit, often deceive; and lead man astray. They are trying to divide the Saints.

But we are cald-upon to hunt for the one that is mising from the fold, whether Saint of Siner. And now Bretheren I wish to say some things about the Bruster and Norris Brothers and Sisters. I met with them before going to Missouri. The Spirit of Love, Joy and peace rested on us, and the Holy Ghost bore witnefs of their faith in God, and NOW I learn they are all cut off from the Church. I want some one to make a motion that all of them be restored to full fellowship (without baptism) as though no action had ben taken against them."

Motion put, and carryed unanimously. Then Joseph said:

"That little boy (as I have ben told) that tiptoed, whirled around and quivered his hands in your midst, had the Spirit of the Lord God of Isriel upon him. . . . zeal without knowledge is that way."

"Ezra Strong Notebook (ca. 1882-1884)," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
