Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Tanner, John

(August 15, 1788-April 13, 1850)

A wealthy man almost impoverished by giving of his means to the Saints; Joseph prophesied that his children should never want for bread.

The founder of [the Tanner family] in Mormonism was John Tanner, of Warren County, New York, a flourishing farmer, one of the few well-to-do persons who attached themselves to this unpopular cause almost at its inception, and contributed generously for its support and advancement. His liberality to the poor Saints, when moving to Kirtland, Ohio, their first gathering place, with his donations for the building of the Temple there, and for other sacred enterprises, well-nigh impoverished him. Having expended the greater part of ten thousand dollarsa large fortune at that timein helping on the work, he found himself comparatively a poor man, though previously he had been considered wealthy. The Prophet comforted him with the prediction that his children should never want for bread.

"Joseph Smith Tanner," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:379.

Returns a note for a $2,000 loan to Joseph and the grateful Prophet promises him that his "children shall never beg bread."

At the April conference, 1844, Father Tanner was called to take a mission to the Eastern States. Before starting he went to Nauvoo to see the Prophet Joseph Smith, whom he met in the street. He held the Prophet's note for $2,000, loaned in 1835, to redeem the Kirtland Temple farm, and in the course of the conversation he handed the Prophet his note. The Prophet, not understanding what he meant by it, asked what he would have him do with it, and Father Tanner replied, "Brother Joseph, you are welcome to it." The Prophet then laid his right hand heavily upon Father Tanner's shoulder and said, "God bless you, Father Tanner, your children shall never beg bread." He went upon his mission, and was in the East when the Prophet and Patriarch were assassinated; he returned early in the fall of that year.

"John Tanner," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
