Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Tanner, Nathan

(May 14, 1815-December 17, 1910)

Present when the Prophet had a vision of the course Zion's Camp march should take; was with Joseph when he crossed the river to go west prior to returning to Carthage.

He assisted Zerubbabel Snow in the commissary department [of Zion's Camp] , and became very intimate with the Prophet. He was with him on one occasion while he was wrapped in vision, and saw the future of the country over which they were traveling. . . .

At Nauvoo he was one of the explorers chosen by the Prophet to accompany him on his proposed journey to the Rocky Mountains. Nathan, his brother John and other select souls were in waiting for Joseph and his companions, when, on the night of June 22, 1844, they crossed the Mississippi, preparatory to proceeding westward; a plan frustrated by their return and martyrdom.

"Nathan Tanner," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:635-36.

Tells of his father's conversion; his father's leg healed by Jared Carter; later, his father joined Zion's Camp; he heard Joseph prophesy that if faithful, they would be blessed, but if not, cursed; also saw Joseph while in a vision; loaned money en route to Kirtland; his nonmember brother-in-law gave Joseph about $3,000 for the temple; apostates control the meeting in the Kirtland Temple, but Tanner initiates opposition to them; he goes to Missouri and witnesses troubles at Gallatin; troubles with the mob; Hinckle betrays Prophet; closes with his testimony.

My father, through hardships and exposure, had contracted a disease that broke out in sores on his leg, similar to a fever sore. This had troubled him for years, and finally became so bad that he was deprived the use of it. For some five months he had not borne his weight on it, and for months had not put it to the floor. He had a council of Doctors to examine it, and they decided that the leg could not be saved, and must be amputated or it would prove his death. To this he could not consent, but said that he and his leg would go together. At this he set out making arrangements to settle up his business affairs. He heard that a strange people called Mormons, who were going about turning the world upside down, were going to preach about seven miles from where he lived. Fearing that they might get away with some of the Baptist brethren, of whom he had the watch-care, he had his horse and cart made ready; and he had to have his foot bolstered up as high as his seat to keep the swelling from going into the foot. When he heard the Mormons, he found that they had the truth, and he told his Baptist friends that they had better not fight against it, lest they unhappily find themselves fighting against God.

He bought a Book of Mormon and took it home with him. He heard Elders Simeon Carter and Jared Carter preach. Elder Carter told him that if he read that Book and believed it, he should see an alteration in his leg. He read the book over and over again and compared it with the Bible. When he had decided that it was the work of the Lord, he set his foot on the floor and ordered his horse and cart, and went to notify the people of a meeting at his house the next day. He was out five hours. Then the Elders came, and when they learned that father had made up his mind that the Book was what it was represented to be, Elder Jared Carter asked him if he had seen any change in his leg. Father then remembered that when he decided that it was the work of the Lord, he put his foot down for the first time in months. Elder Carter then asked father if he would be afraid to put his foot down if he (Carter) commanded him in the name of the Lord to rise and walk. Father did not reply, and the Elder said, "In the name of Jesus Christ I command you to arise and walk," at the same time clapping his hand on father's shoulder. At this father arose to his feet. Said the Elder, "You need not be afraid to put down your foot. Remember, you do it in the name of the Lord." Father laid aside his crutch and walked back and forth from the front porch through a long hall and into a long kitchen. All this time he wept and praised God for His mercy in bringing the Gospel and its attending blessings. The next day my father, mother and myself were baptized. This being the first case of healing that we had ever seen, it caused a great deal of wonder and surprise, and the news went far and wide.

The fore-going circumstance occurred on or about the 10th day of September, 1831, a little more than a year and five months after the organization of the Church. I was then sixteen years of age, and well remember every circumstance. It was a trying time for me. I was soon called to shoulder the responsible office of a Deacon. I had never seen a deacon who was less than sixty years old, and who hair was not white as snow, and with a face as long as a donkey. My hair was pretty white. I was a white headed boy, but when I came home from the meeting where I was ordained, I tried to be as old as I could, for I felt I was a boy. I drove up to my father's door where a crowd was waiting. Here my horse was taken by the bit, and I was helped out of the carriage. I had to go through a formal introduction as "Old Deacon Tanner." It would not do to smile or be vain; no, a Deacon must be grave, sober, and above anything of that shape. I lived through it all the same.

The Gospel had the same effect as it did in Jesus' day. It brought not peace, but division. From this time those who were on the Lord's side were glad to gather with their friends. Our house was soon filled with the Saints, and father soon found what the Lord wanted of him. The Gospel must be preached, the Elders must be furnished, the poor must be gathered to Zion, and he went in to do all he could. He fitted up four families with teams and wagons to go to Zion (Missouri). Money was sent to commence the Kirtland Temple. The Zion's Camp required men and means. J. J. Tanner and myself took old Brother Putman, and his wife and seven children, together with Lyman Johnson, Amasa M. Lyman, and others to Kirtland. By the way, we also took Brother Kimball and family from Genesee, N. Y., to Buffalo, where they took water.

We were organized in the Zion's Camp at New Portage, Ohio, fifty miles west of Kirtland. Here we furnished three teams, save one horse put in by H. Y. Sherwood. Allow me to say here that the September prior to this, J. J. Tanner and myself made a trip to Kirtland where we got acquainted with the Prophet Joseph and the leading men of that day. The Temple was then fairly commenced.

In the Zion's Camp, Hon. Zerubbabel Snow and I served the Camp as Commissary General. I furnished team and carriage for that purpose. We performed our duty as such the best we could, and enjoyed the trip and acquaintance of our brethren. Here we had the pleasure of the company of the Prophet and Hyrum, Brigham, Heber, Martin Harris, the Johnsons, Pratts, and many others of whom we cannot [make] mention. Here I heard Joseph prophesy when we were organized that if the brethren would be humble and obedient to the will of the Lord, they should not be lost, even a man; but if they became rebellious and wicked and disregard[ed] the word of the Lord, they would die off like sheep with the rot. Our Camp was blessed with good health on the road all the way until we got through and God gave the revelation saying our offering was accepted like unto Abraham's, that we were not required to go any further. At this, some of the Camp became angry and said that they would rather die than return without a fight, and drew their swords and went a short distance from the camp and gave vent to their wrath on a patch of Pawpaw brush, and mowed them down like grass. At this very time the cholera set in, and our men died off like sheep with the rot. It seemed as though the Lord took those who were most fit to go. It was a sorrowful time, and one long to be remembered. We had to put them into the ground in their blankets without a coffin or much ceremony. Here we saw the words of Joseph fulfilled to the letter as also in many other cases. I had the pleasure of seeing him in a vision when he saw the country over which we had traveled in a high state of cultivation. This was while he was riding, and when he camped, he had a wagon run out in the middle of the corral of wagons, and got up into it, and told the camp what he had seen while in the Spirit. It was glorious and grand to hear. Brother John and I stayed in Missouri one year and then returned to Kirtland.

On our return to Kirtland, in consequence of a disappointment in getting money due us as we had expected, we were short of money for traveling purposes. We thought when we got tired of riding, and our horses needed rest, we would work a few days in the harvest field. The weather became wet, raining a little every day so that we could not get a day's work, and when our money was all gone but a dime, we were near Indianapolis, Indiana. We saw an old man sitting on a fence leisurely. He accosted us kindly, and according to the custom of the country, inquired where we were from and where we were going. When we answered him, he said, "Then I take you to be Mormons." "Yes, Sir," was the frank reply. "Well," he said, "I want you to go over to the house and feed and have some dinner, and I want to send for the Kirtland paper." To this we readily consented. When dinner was over, and we were ready to start, our old friend asked if it were not expensive traveling on horse-back, much more so than traveling with a buggy and buying our supplies in quantity. We told him it was much more so than we expected. He said, "You are young men. Allow me to ask if you are not short of money." On telling him we were, and how we happened to be so, he hauled out a handful of silver and said, "Allow me to make you a present of this." "No, Sir," was the ready reply, "We have never taken a gift and have no need to do it now. If we were in reach of home, our father has plenty, and we are out for the first time. If you have confidence in us to load us the money, we could send it back as soon as we arrive in Kirtland." To this he said, "You can have what money you want to take you home." I then thought I would take as little as we could do with lest he should think we were a little roguish, and I put the sum plenty low. He said, "That is not enough; you had better have another ten dollars." And we found the old man right. This good old man was father EldredgeGeneral H. S. Eldredge's father. "But," he said, " Don't send back the money. I will come out there in the fall and I can get it then."

He did comehe and his son Johnand stopped with my father two weeks, and they were most welcome visitors. In that time they were both baptized, and took their money home with them. This act of kindness will never be forgotten.

When we arrived in Kirtland, we found our father and family well. Brother John married and returned that fall, and Sidney and family went that fall. I remained and went to school in the winter, and studied the Hebrew. I attended the school of the Prophets, generally in the Kirtland Temple, where the Spirit of the Lord was daily felt.

The following spring, 1836, on the 6th day of April, I went with my father and brother Amasa M. Lyman, to Brother Joseph Smith's, and there under the hands of Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, Amasa M. Lyman and my father, I received a father's blessing. It was one of great importance to me. I think it was on the following day that Brother Amasa M. Lyman, Reuben H. Hadlock, Harlo Redfield, Myself and others started on a mission to the Eastern States. After we got off a little distance, we commenced preaching. We separated, and each went by himself. I preached, baptized, and built up a branch of the Church in Albeion, Ausweego [Oswego] County, New York. From there I went to Bolton, New York, and married, and returned in the fall of the same year. I was twice mobbed in the time before I was twenty-one years old.

My father-in-law and family (Old Father Wm. Smith) and Amos Perry came back with me. We arrived in Kirtland Sunday Morning, just in time to hear the morning service. Joseph spoke. He had purchased a farm that lay in the bounds of the city, and had gone on Saturday to pay for it. The party refused paper money as it was not lawful tender, so Joseph had to raise the specie in three days of lose the purchase. He called on the brethren to see if the gold or silver specie could be raised. My brother-in-law did not belong to the church, but knowing that I knew that he had the money, he asked me what I would do if I were in his place. I told him that I should take it and lay it down, but that I did not wish to advise him. He deiced he would give it if I would go with him. So I went, and he pulled out his sack of specie, mostly silverI think about $3,000shouldered it up, and carried it through the isle the whole length of the Temple, and rolled it off his shoulder on the table. Then I introduced him to Joseph. The Lord would answer Joseph's call. I doubt whether Mr. Perry ever got all his money back; but he was blessed, and raised a large family of lovely children, and left them plenty when he died.

At this time Kirtland flourished; property raised in value. Every man was trying to build. The hammer was heard on the house roofs all over the city at a late hour every night, and every one seemed to prosper. The Kirtland Bank was established and strove to be maintained by the saints. But when we seemed to prosper, all Hell, combined with all outside influences that could be raised against us, was marshaled. While we strove to maintain the credit of the bank, others strove to draw out all the specie and bank notes or other securities. While Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and John Taylor were gone to Canada to raise money to redeem our paper, an article was drawn up by Brother Goold, one of the seven presidents of Seventies, and presented to the Seventies assembled in the upper story of the Temple for their sanction. It declared that the seventies disapproved of the circulating of Kirtland money in any way, or the passing of it; and that they would disfellowship, disapprove of, and raise their hand against all such parties whoever or wherever they may be.

This article was to be printed and sent out the next day to the four winds. This article was presented to the Seventies for sanction, and a vote called and a unanimous vote expected. But when to Elder Goold's surprise, the opposite vote was called, one hand was raised. Brother Goold said there seemed to be one opposing vote, a young man back in the audience. I arose and said that I had some very grave objections, and that was why I could not raise my hand against the Heads of the Church. I knew that Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and John Taylor were then in Canada raising money to redeem our bank paper, and it would simply be cutting off our own heads and we would hear from it when Joseph returned if we did it. At this, several arose and said they wished to resign their votes. At this Brother Jos. Young said, "Hold on! I think we will all resign our votes." And it was done.

Bro. Warren Parrish was in the Bank as cashier, and when Joseph and the other Brethren that were with him returned, it was late at night, and being very tired, they did not go up to the Bank until late the next morning. Before they got to the Bank, Parrish had issued so large a sum of money for twenty-five cents on the dollar that it could not be redeemed. Many of the Brethren had such confidence in the Bank that they sold everything they had to redeem the paper. I sold my last team and wagon, my last cow, and my watch out of my pocket for Kirtland money.

At this time Joseph had to go to Missouri. Hyrum incurred the redeeming of the paper. Mobs began to howl. Our printing office was assailed, and I was called to guard there. My wife, not being accustomed to seeing men running balls and preparing to stand against mobs, was alarmed, and in consequence of that, lost her firstborn a premature birth. Over the child's grave grows a rose planted by a friend long years after her death.

Now times began to be hard. Property went down when people had to leave. All business stopped, and money was hard to raise. The Church could not pay the money borrowed, and father had come into Kirtland with plenty, and had laid down his money to redeem the Temple Block. He had furnished the community store with about $3,000, and had given his note for the church farm and had taken their indemnified bonds against those notes. The Church could not pay anything. Father had bought a couple of farms for himself, and had to send to New York to his son-in-law to sell his property there, and let father have the money to raise these notes that were given for the Church farm. This left father without anything. He had signed notes with Joseph and the Church which we took up after we came to Nauvoo of Iowa. We were so hard pushed for means that Brother Amasa M. Lyman and myself were forced to go to Shardon [Chardon] Jail for the simple sum of fifteen dollars and be locked up. I don't know as either his family or mine was ever told of it before. But that shows the ups and downs in life. Brother Amasa and I went to Far West by the help of a friend. Father and family left Kirtland with a borrowed team, and had only one old broken down stage horse, and an old turn pike cart, a cag of powder, and $7.50 each.

The old wagon broke down on the road. His little daughter died and was buried on the way before he reached Far West. Brother Amasa and I reached Far West in the fall of 1837. He we met Brother Sidney and John and their families. He we had to begin without means and go to Fort Leavenworth and work for $10.00 per month, or $16.00 and board ourselves. This was the only way we had of raising a dollar to buy an acre of land.

Here everybody was trying to live and gather the comforts of life around him. All seemed to prosper and be happy. At this time the mob began to howl as usual. The saints ust not be allowed to prosperno, never. People were moving into Far West from Clay, Ray, and Van Buren Counties, and Far West became a place of considerable rate. Many began to buy up land and build in Davies County. But the mobs grew worse and worse. They undertook to prevent our voting at the polls at Galliten, by force, but our old friend Butler of Spanish Fork, with a hard stick of timber, dealt a few blows right and left that settled the matter at the time. Then the mob gathered and burned houses and drove the Saints out in the night from one place to another. I have picked up women and children that were sulking in the night in the brush to save their lives, or keep out of the hands of the mobs. We were obliged to go and fetch in the families that were scattered, or in the out settlements, and guar those we could not fetch until they could be brought out. This took a good deal of guarding. I have stood picket guard in the storm and held my horse by the bridle and my rifle in hand, when I feared I should never see another rising sun, but must perish at my post.

I remember riding one cold chilly night about forty miles, and at daylight I came to a farm that would satisfy my hunger. I found an old seed cucumber in the garden that had been frozen and thawed, and settled down to half its ordinary size. I made a fine breakfast of it; I thought it could not be better. At this time Brother H. S. Eldredge and his brother-in-law, Chase, arrived from Indiana. Bro. Harris was sick and made his home at my place for a time, and my wife care for him as a friend. He had a fine pair of horses that he put in my care as he was not able to ride or look after them. This enabled me to do good service in gathering the poor from Davies County and also in defending our settlements. This occupied my whole time. Brother Sidney Tanner, Jacob Gates, and George Grant, and my myself rode side by side with Capt. Fear Not till his horse failed and he gave us the word, "Go ahead boys; rake them down," and we saw them going down the banks into the Grand River. It was as rough a ride as Old General Putman had when he rode down the stone tavern. Sidney Tanner and I were in the company that took the cannon from the mob. Brother Amasa M. Lyman and Brother Dunn had been taken prisoners. There were abused by the mob and made to ride on the cannon. Amasa's arms were lashed to his body and he had only the use of them below the elbow. Two big ruffians were asked if they could cut a Mormon's head off, and if so, they were to try that man. Think of a man in this condition with only his bare hands to ward off sharp bowie knives. Brother Lyman and Dunn were released and came to our camp. A company was soon on the march after the cannon. The enemy was camped at one corner of a forty acre lot and we came to the opposite corner and divided our company, sending fifty men on each side of the field, and we made a charge on their camp. The side Brother Sidney and I were on had been partly cleared. There had been log heaps piled up, and a second growth of young hickorys had grown up. We had to ride in open ranks, so if they fired the cannon on us, it would take but little effect as they could only hit one man. I well remember Bro. Sidney as I rode by his side through brush and over the log heaps. He lost his hat and his thin white hair floated in the air as his horse leaped a log heap clearing twenty feet from where she rose. He was a young man, full of life and vigor, and he knew no fear.

But the mob got wind of our coming, and buried the cannon. They were prepared to flee at the first alarm. There were two old men that followed after them. Old father Tubs and a roan mare, and when she drew near those in the rear, the old man could not hold her, so he drew his sword and sailed in. They scattered and threw off their sacks of bread to lighten up as they went, and old father Brace, with his old plough horse, gathered up the sacks of bread, and we helped eat it. We found plenty of honey and made a very good dinner. But in the mean time, our horses were restless and pawing, and by the by we struck on the cannon. They had buried it in front of a black house. I asked the lady if she knew where the cartridges were and she answered the same. Just then I was standing in the door and looked through the wide cracks of the puncheon floor and saw the cartridges. I told some of my menI had charge of a small company or divisionto come and take up the floor and take out these cartridges. It was soon done. We pressed a wagon, took a couple of prisoners, and hurried back to our camp. Every effort was being made by the mob to drive and plunder our people about this time. A wagon loaded with government arms had been obtained by the mob, and was on the way for the mob. It was discovered where they had broken down. They were taken by our men, and also two prisoners with them, and brought into Far West. Brother John J. Tanner was along on this occasion. The mob was now gathering and we were forced to watch our stock as they were killing our cattle and feeding on our crops. I had killed a fat cow to keep it from the mob, and sent my brother Albert to Far West, a mile and a half, for some salt, and told him not to go within gun shot of any brush as the mob was taking every good horse they could get by any means, fair or foul. The boy went and on his return some men came out of the brush and called to him but he made good his retreat. He came up to the door and my wife saw him as he rode up. He told her that the mob was after him. She loosed the other horse that was tied to the wagon, and held them both by the halter. Two men rode up and said, "The mob has not taken your horses yet." She answered, "No Sir, nor do I mean they shall." Seeing my wife so firm and determined, they seemed ashamed to force the halters out of the hands of a woman and rode off. When the mob was near Far West (10,000 strong) they proposed to meet a party of our men and make a treaty, about seven miles out. Brother John M. Hinkle, or Colonel Hinkle, and one hundred men went out to meet them. I was one of the number, and when we arrived at the point designated to meet them, they were not there. But we soon found that they had passed us and were within five miles of our city. We had no choice afforded us now, but to take a round about road and ride three miles to their one, or attack them from the rear, and we were not warranted to do that. So we with our old mares and plough horses started on a fifteen mile heat. We made the trip as soon as they, and were on the ground in time. But we had left some young colts behind on the way. When we rode in we were me by Brother Joseph Smith who formed us in a line and straightened our pants, telling us to be calm as a summer's morning. This was a common word with him. By this time the mob had come into the lower part of the city, and were marching up and forming in line just below us. When Brother Joseph had us straightened out, and our arms all ready for us, we were ordered to present arms, and every man to pick his man and hold site on him. But we should not fire until he gave the order. We were about twenty rods off, and with arms at a pre-sent and our men picked, we were ordered, "Forward, march." I thought [we] were pretty close then, and so did the mob, for they drew off at a double quick step and in not very good order. Col. Hinkle, on a pretense of having an offer of a compromise with the mob, turned over Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and they were sentenced to be shot. We were then called to arms, and learned it was to surrender and lay down our arms. This seemed hard. Brother Alexander McCray drew his sword and went through the six clips right in front of their armed forces. He indignantly threw it into the ground nearly to the hilt, and turned and walked away proudly. I expected to seem him filled with shots. Then their guards were placed around the city.

Prior to this, when the mob was coming into the city, they took several prisoners. My father was taken, and my Brother Myron was a small boy then and was with my father. As father went to show the boy a path that would lead him home, that he might inform his mother and family, Captain Odell struck my father over the head with a rifle, inflicting a wound sever inches long, laying the skull bare. It was dressed by Wm. E. McClellan, and father was released to help carry Brother Carey to his wife. He had been killed by the mob.

I had charge of our guards that night, and let my father and others through. My father was so covered with blood, that I only knew him by his voice. I helped bear Brother Carey to his family. After our city was guarded by the enemies, the families out side were in a helpless state, unprotected, and we could not go [to] them by day or night.

My wife had an only child, a little girl about a year old. It lay sick, and my wife expected it would die in her arms. She dug its little grave under the floor in case it died before they were compelled to run before the mob, and she still kept it wrapped in mantle and hood in case they had to run before it died.

While we were guarded in the city, the mob was turned loose to abuse and tantalize us as much as they pleased. A table was brought out on the public square, and we were marched up to it at the point of a bayonet, and required to sign away every thing we had to pay the expenses of the mob that drove us. And then they took our acknowledgment that it was our free voluntary act and deed. After signing this article I said, throwing down my pen, "It looks like a free volunteered act and deedat the point of a bayonet as they were presented to us." I was hit in the left side of the breech of a rifle which took my senses and I was carried off the ground. We hears our sentence and had our choice. They had taken our prophet and patriarch and sentenced them to be shot, and had required all they could findanything against us to be given up for imprisonment or death. The balance could have their choice to leave the state in six months, or be exterminatedmen, women, children. This was a fine order to be sanctioned by a state in our republic. Sister Carey, after having her husband killed by the mob, made two trips, two hundred miles in the dead of winter with a four horse team to move her family out of the state.

One morning as I was walking across the Public Square in company with two or three of our brethren, seven of the mob on horse-back , well armed with rifles laying across the horns of their saddles, accosted me and said, "How are you this morning, my man. Do you feel as much like fight as common?" "About the same," was the reply. "Well, come ahead then, God damn you," he said, and drew his rifle on me. I threw my old hat on the ground and said, "You poor pusillanimous, cowardly curto draw fire arms on a bare-headed man. Get down off your horse and come at me two at a time, and if I don't thrash the ground with you, then God damn me." They said they brought their arms to fight with, and I told them that they needed them.

You will pardon me for my rough expressions, as I did not know I had anything to live for. My prophet and patriarch had been led off and sentenced to be shot, my father's head split to the skull, my wife and child, I did not know if they were dead or alive, and no protection for life or property in the least. Now we had to leave our homes in the winter, without compensation. We left lands fenced, and in a good state of cultivation, for $1.25 an acre, just what it cost in the wild state, and many left cribs of corn, potatoes, baled up for winter and wheat crops on the ground. The poor had to go if they had to walk, and carry their food. Banishment was preferred to death. Women in all the varied circumstances of their sex had to go. If there is justice in Heaven, let the Gods record our credits. Our families were there and helped the poor all they could. No Tanner was ever known to shirk in the days of hardships, and trials. No Tanner was ever known to turn States evidence against his friends to curry friendship from his enemies. There is a saying among the large fraternity, that a man who pleaded his own case had a fool for a client. But I prefer the saying of the musician"It's a poor musician who cannot blow his own trumpet." I claim the right to blow my own trumpet. We stayed in Illinois two years and then settled in Iowa. Here we made large farms some seven miles south of Mt. Rose on the road to Keokuk, on the Mississippi River. Here we remained until after the death of the Prophet and Patriarch, and the expulsion from Nauvoo. We with the rest crossed the plains.

It was my lot to be appointed commissary, and it occupied nearly all my time being off on business for the camp, three or four weeks at a time, buying and selling and trading for the camp, and without any salary. Men were supposed to do all they could for the love of the cause, and their brethren in those days.

I must beg pardon for intruding on your time. I have intended to show the young of our family that their fathers and mothers had been through all the troubles and trials of the church, and had done their share toward building up the Church and Kingdom of God. Our cause was that of which we have reason to be proud, and hope that our children may never disgrace the name of their fathers in all coming time.

"Incidents in the Life of Nathan Tanner," typescript copy, Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2-17.
