Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Taylor, Pleasant Green

(February 8, 1827-May 16 [or 20], 1917)

William Green only heard Joseph speak once, but he knew He was a prophet; when in Nauvoo, Joseph gave William's family eleven acres of land; Pleasant Green often guarded Joseph's Home, including on the day he went to Carthage.

About this time, the Mormons were being persecuted and driven and were having a very bad time. At this time the Prophet Joseph Smith and some of the other general authorities came to see what they could do to help and advise the saints. They held many meetings while there and William and his family attended one of these meetings. William only heard the prophet once and he knew that Joseph Smith was truly a prophet and that the gospel that he taught was true. And he was whole heartedly with the Saints as long as he lived. He and his father gave up many homes and possessions. They with the other Saints were driven and suffered cold and hunger and William became ill and died. Before his father died, Pleasant Green was baptized by Isaac Allred and confirmed a member of the church by his father. After his father's death, there was a great responsibility placed on members of the family to take care of their mother, as she wanted to follow the Saints as they went farther West. They were in destitute conditions by the time they arrived in Nauvoo, as they had lost all their possessions to the mob. But in Nauvoo, Joseph Smith gave them 11 acres of land about ¾ of a mile from the Nauvoo Temple. They soon built a comfortable home for their mother. Pleasant Green was only 12 when his father passed away, so he was very young for all these experiences. He had many faith promoting experiences all through his life. He worked every 10th day on the Nauvoo Temple, he was a member of the Nauvoo Legion, and also a member of the police force. He often stood guard at the home of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was there when Joseph and Hyrum were taken to the Carthage Jail. He was present when they brought the bodies back to the sorrowing people. He was present when Brigham Young was chosen to be present, and Pleasant Green told many times how the mantle of Joseph fell on Brigham Young, and they all knew that he was a true Prophet of God. He was only 15 years old when he went to the Nauvoo Temple and received his endowments. . . .

"Pleasant Green Taylor," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-2.
