Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Taylor, William

(September 2, 1823-May 10 [or 17], 1910)

Prophet hid from his enemies in the home of Taylor's father; though sick, his brother John was encouraged by Joseph to get up and join him and he was healed; Joseph hid from his enemies at Taylor's home; he told William that he trusted the Lord's promise that he would be protected.

I always carry with me my old copy of the Doctrine and Covenants, the second edition of that work, and printed in Nauvoo, 1844and in section 105 of that book, I read:

"Forasmuch as the Lord has revealed unto me that my enemies, both in Missouri and this State, were again in the pursuit of me; and inasmuch as they pursue me without a cause, and have not the least shadow or coloring of justice or right on their side in the getting up of their prosecutions against me; and inasmuch as their pretensions are all founded in falsehood of the blackest dye, I have thought it expedient and wisdom in me to leave the place for a short season, for my own safety and the safety of this people. . . . When I learn that the storm is fully blown over, then I will return to you again." [D&C 127:1]

This was all that was made public in regard to the Prophet's hiding place, few ever knew where it was, but it was at my father's home on the Henderson River.

My first acquaintance with the Prophet Joseph Smith began in this way. It was on my nineteenth birthday, he appeared at my father's house in the woods, accompanied by my brother, John Taylor, [afterward President John Taylor] S. Roundy, and J. D. Parker, about the middle of the night, September 2, 1842. How they ever found their way in the darkness is a mystery, for I, who was very familiar with the country, could not have come by so circuitous a route even in the daylight.

Late in the night the Prophet had gone to my brother John's house in Nauvoo and said to him:

"I want you to go with me to your father's."

My brother said: "But I can't go, Brother Joseph; I am sick in bed!"

The Prophet replied:

"I'll come in and help you dress, and you'll find no inconvenience from going out."

So Brother John got up, dressed and started out with him, and by the time they reached our home, none of us could tell that he had been the least sick.

The four stayed at our house a few days and then the Prophet sent the other three back to Nauvoo to see if anything was going wrong at that place. In a few days they returned. During their absence the Prophet and I spent most of our time during the day in the woods, near our house on the Henderson bottom, walking around, shooting squirrels sometimes, or doing anything we could to amuse ourselves. I was the Prophet's only companion in these tramps through the woods, and I have often thought it strange, that though there were many people in that part of the country we never met anyone when we were out.

During the stay of Brother Joseph at my father's, Brother William Clayton came to see him, and reported the revelations which the Prophet had at this time, and they were some of the grandest that ever were given to him. Section 106, old edition; section 128 present edition. Every word of this divine revelation is full of doctrine and a completeness of the Holy Spirit. And it is such a perfect expression of the glad tidings of joy that the everlasting gospel brings; verse 23:

"Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; and all ye seas and dry lands tell the wonders of your Eternal King! And ye rivers, and brooks, and rills, flow down with gladness. Let the woods and all the trees of the field praise the Lord; and ye solid rocks weep for joy! And let the sun, moon, and the morning stars sing together, and let all the sons of God shout for joy! And let the eternal creations declare his name forever and ever! And again I say, how glorious is the voice we hear from heaven, proclaiming in our ears, glory, and salvation, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life; kingdoms, principalities, and powers!"

I do not remember exactly how long the Prophet remained at our home, but it seems to me it was about two weeks, but in this short period, owing to the nature of the circumstances surrounding us, I had more real close association with him than I would have had in a lifetime under different conditions. It is impossible for me to express my feelings in regard to this period of my life. I have never known the same joy and satisfaction in the companionship of any other person, man or woman, that I felt with him, the man who had conversed with the Almighty. He was always the most companionable and lovable of mencheerful and jovial! Sometimes on our return home in the evening after we had been tramping around in the woods, he would call out:

"Here, mother, come David and Jonathan."

Much has been said of his geniality and personal magnetism. I was a witness of thispeople, old or young, loved him and trusted him instinctively.

I said to him once:

"Brother Joseph, don't you get frightened when all those hounding wolves are after you?"

And he answered:

"No, I am not afraid; the Lord said he would protect me, and I have full confidence in His word."

I knew the danger, and whatever happened to him would happen to me, but I felt no more fear than I now feel. There was something superior to thoughts of personal safety. Life or death was a matter of indifference to me while I was the companion of the Lord's anointed!

He said to me often:

"I'll never forsake you, William," and I knew he wouldn't.

William Taylor, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 547-48.

Note: William Clayton ("History of the Nauvoo Temple, ca. 1845," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 27) puts the date of the Prophet staying at the Taylor home as 7 October 1842. We assume that William Taylor's memory of Joseph visiting on his birthday is the reliable one; Clayton was writing after the fact, and though likely relying on notes, less likely, in this instance, to be correct.

Joseph's familiarity with the spirit world; witnessed the deep love between Joseph and Hyrum; testifies of Joseph's prophetic calling.

He seemed to be just as familiar with the spirit world, and as well acquainted with the other side, as he was here.

Never in all my life have I seen anything more beautiful than the striking example of brotherly love and devotion felt for each other by Joseph and Hyrum. I witnessed this many, many times. No matter how often, or when or where they met, it was always with the same expression of supreme joy. It could not have been otherwise, when both were filled to overflowing with the gift and power of the Holy Ghost! It was kindred spirits meeting!

The events in this period of my life are as bright and fresh in my memory as if they had happened but yesterday; and my devotion to the Prophet was akin to that felt by all who came under his influence. My whole being is a testimony! There is not a fiber of my whole system but what declares, Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the living God! As I know that I live, I know that my testimony is true.

William Taylor, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 548.
