Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Telford, John

(March 2, 1802-January 19, 1896)

Describes the meanness of the Missouri mob and their demand that Telford and his family deny Joseph Smith if they wanted peace; Telford refused and suffered much hardship; also tells of a Missourian intimidated by the mob.

" . . . At one time during this distressing period [Missouri persecutions] when he and all his family, except Robert, were down in bed with chills and fever, the mob came and ordered them out of their homes. The victims of this fever were very ill every other day, but John and his wife were fortunate that their worst time occurred on alternate days, so when one was too sick to get up, it was possible for the other to help take care of the children.

"On the day that the mob came, John was so helpless and ill that it aroused the sympathy of one member of the mob who objected to the heartless treatment imposed upon them by the mobbers, and he interceded for them, and got the mob to consent to let them remain in their home until the following day. But when morning came, conditions were even worse and neither John nor his wife were able to get up when the mob returned. This only added to the fury of the men and they threatened to burn the family with the house unless they would denounce Joseph Smith as an imposter. This they refused to do, although the mobbers devised every means to get them to discredit the Prophet. When their efforts failed, they prepared to carry out their inhuman threats, but the man who had interceded for them on the previous day, defied the mob, and carried the family out of the house, against the blasphemous threats of the mobbers.

"He helped them to get away in safety by marching with his gun, between their wagon and the anger-crazed mob, for a mile, while their home and their crops and all their possessions were consumed by fire. Even the great stacks of sacked wheat that were piled in the yard during the harvest were also burned by the infuriated mob.

"Sick and destitute, this family of exiles left their stricken community and looked in vain for food and shelter, as the mob had threatened the residents in all the surrounding country with like treatment, if they sold food to the Saints or assisted them in any way.

"In one of the outlying districts, John attempted to buy food for his family, but the farmer told him that even there the mob had threatened the same violence against everyone who aided the Mormons. He said: 'I pretend to be human, but I dare not sell you anything or I, too, would be forced to flee with my family.' The farmer was alone and going into the field, but he told John that there was meat in the smoke house and flour and potatoes in the bins. . . . And with a hurried, 'Good-day, Sir,' he went into the field. So, John took a few slices of bacon, a little flour and potatoes; put his money under the door and hurriedly went away before anybody discovered that he had received assistance.

"It probably was in Missouri where this occurred, as John owned a farm in that state and was in Independence at the time of the Hauns Mill Massacre, on October 30, 1838."

Effie Lenore Telford, "History of John Telford," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
