Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Terrel, William

(b. December 17, 1818)

Terrel, a nonmember, says he knew Joseph personally and certifies he was a man of good character; his wife and family were also of good character; thought Joseph did not preach polygamy; at Carthage he saw Joseph jump from his jail window, crawl to the well, and say "God's will be done"; he refers to the Nauvoo Expositor as "the Higbee Press."

January 3, 1902

Statement of William Terrel of Roscoe Co., Mo. Questions by Jas. Moler

Ques: What is your age?

A.: I am 83, past. I was born December 17, 1818.

Q: Were you acquainted with Joseph Smith the founder of the Latter Day Saint Church?

A.: I knew Mr. Smith and his family very well. I first heard Joseph preach in the year 1837 near Bloomington, Ill. We lived in that country at that time, I was personally acquainted with Joseph Smith from 1837 until his death in the year 1844. I was present when Joseph was killed at Carthage Jail in Illinois. I was in the Jail yard, had Just been relieved off guard, and was leaving for my quarters when I heard the report of a gun, and as I looked around I saw Joseph jump from the jail, I saw him crawl up against the well curb, and heard him say in a low but distinct voice, "God's will be done."

Q.: What do you know about the character of Joseph Smith?

A.: It was good. He was honest, a gentleman in every respect. No one who personally knew him could say any evil of him. My Father Josiah Terrel was a minister of the U. B. church, he was acquainted with Joseph Smith, and I heard him say that Joseph Smith was a Christian gentleman.

Q.: What do you know about Polygamy or Spiritual wifery being taught by Joseph Smith?

A.: There never was any such doctrine as that taught in the church, during the life of Mr. Smith as I was associated with them and had ample opportunity of knowing if such a doctrine had even been introduced by Mr. Smith.

Q.: Were you ever connected with the Latter Day Saint church?

A.: I never was I rather held to the faith of the U. B. Church, as was taught by my Father.

Q.: What do you know about Joseph Smith's wife and family?

A.: I knew Emma the wife of Joseph Smith to be one of the best women that I ever saw. The family were honest, charitable, well respected moral upright and good citizens, notwithstanding the false reports of the enemies of the church circulated through the Higbee Press which was set up for the purpose of destroying the work established by Joseph Smith. I wish to say right here in regard to the Mormons stealing and taking property claiming it to be the Lords is as false as can be. One day while my Father was away preaching we were feeding some 18 head of fine cattle, three men rode up to our house and told my mother that they had come for some cattle, they drove off four of the best ones, My Father came home that day, and at once started in pursuit of the cattle thieves. He overtook them at the Ferry Boat at Burlington, Iowa. They were not Mormons, but were stealing on Mormons credit. Those cattle thieves were prosecuted, and sent to State prison. The facts are the Mormons, as they were called were too nice a people to do such things as that.

"William Terrel, Statement January 3, 1902," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar and spelling have been modernized.
