Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Terry, James P.

(January 1, 1830-August 12, 1918)

Weaknesses of the Saints prevented Joseph from telling them more; some would have even sought his life if more were disclosed.

My first recollection of the Prophet Joseph Smith was in 1842 or '43. I knew him well from that time on until his death, and often heard him preach. He was preaching one Sunday in the grove west of the temple. I was standing or sitting on the framework back of the stand. In his speaking he said: "If I should tell you or the Latter-day Saints what I know, as good a man as old Father C____ sitting here on the stand would want to take my life."

James P. Terry, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 28, no. 10 (15 May 1893): 331.

Joseph refused to preach to an inattentive, distracted group of Saints.

At another time when he was speaking, a flock of wild geese flew over in close proximity to the meeting, when all eyes were turned to them. The Prophet said: "If you think more of the quacking of a flock of geese than of my preaching, all right," and sat down. If my memory serves me right, the meeting was dismissed immediately.

James P. Terry, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 28, no. 10 (15 May 1893): 331.

Heard Joseph's last public speech, in which he promised to defend the Saints until the wrongs against the Saints are redressed; also tells of seeing the dead Prophet and Patriarch.

I was at the last meeting where the Prophet ever spoke in public. He was dressed in his regimentals or uniform. He stood on the little frame building on the corner of the lot across the street south of the Mansion House. While speaking he said, as nearly as I can recollect, drawing his sword: "As I draw my sword here today, the sword of the Almighty is drawn in the heavens, and it will never be returned until the wrongs committed against me and the Latter-day Saints have been redressed."

I knew him in life; I saw him in death, and how vivid the recollection of that scene, when the Prophet and Patriarch lay in the Mansion House in the cold embrace of death, while thousands of the Saints passed through the hall and took the last and sorrowful look at the men they loved so well. Though but a boy, I seemed to have as great a love and affection for him as any person I ever saw; and I testify in the fear of heaven that he was a true Prophet.

James P. Terry, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 28, no. 10 (15 May 1893): 331-32.
