Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Thatcher, Moses

(February 2, 1842-August 21, 1909)

Honoring Brigham's position as president of the Twelve, Joseph seeks his counsel.

In June, 1837, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, and others were called to go on a mission to England. Heber was exceedingly desirous that Brigham should accompany them; but Joseph the Prophet said, "No; I shall keep him with me." The wisdom of that decision was soon verified. Brigham publicly and privately testified that he knew by the testimony of the Holy Ghost that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the Most High God, and had not transgressed and fallen as apostates declared. In consequence of that testimony his own life was threatened, and he left Kirtland in December following. Later the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon fled from the fury of mobs, and joined him in Indiana, where Joseph sought to get a job sawing and cutting wood. Failing to secure work, and being weary, he came and said: "Brother Brigham, I am destitute of means to pursue my journey, and as you are one of the Twelve Apostles who hold the keys of the kingdom in all the world, I believe I shall throw myself upon you and look to you for counsel in this case." At first Brigham was unable to think Joseph was in earnest, but on finally being convinced that he really was, he said: "If you will take my counsel, Brother Joseph, you will rest yourself, and be assured you shall have plenty of money with which to pursue your journey." That simple incident, trifling in itself goes to show in what estimation the great modern prophet held the wisdom and strength of his friend and predicted successor, even in those early days. God verified, too, the words of his apostolic servant, and Joseph was soon supplied with "plenty of money to pursue his journey."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:285; see also Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 3:2, for the Prophet Joseph's account of this experience.
