Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Thomas, Martha

(February 20, 1808-September 5, 1895)

Illustrates how disobedience to the Prophet's counsel leads to hardship and apostasy.

Henry Thomas had moved to his home, our farms joined. He heard Mr. Thomas was coming home soon. Brother Joseph had sent word for the Saints to travel the upper road and cross at Quincy. Henry said it would not do as there were no farms and we would starve. "The lower road," he said "was in good order and plenty of provisions to sell." "Well" said I, "We will go to the upper road." "You will see when Dan comes," he said, meaning his brother. We traveled the upper road and he the lower. The Missourians would not sell them anything; they suffered much for want of food so he wrote and told us afterward.

He traveled the lower road till the day of his death. He never gathered with the church again. I speak of these things that the young and rising generation may take warning and obey counsel.

"Martha Pane Jones Thomas Autobiography (1812-1847)," in Daniel Stillwell Thomas Family History (Salt Lake City, Utah: Kate Woodhouse Kirkham, 1927), 23-24.

Joseph was commanded to build the Nauvoo Temple; Martha attended the laying of the cornerstone.

Brother Joseph escaped from prison, went up the river, bought a town site called Commerce, afterward, Nauvoo, here he called the Saints together. In the spring of 1840, we moved to Nauvoo, found our dear friend and leader, Henry G. Sherwood was the surveyor. He had a good lot in reserve for us. There was very near enough timber on it to build a house and fence it. I think it was in [1841] Brother Joseph told us the Lord had called on us to build a house [Nauvoo Temple] to His name, that we might be blessed therein. I was at the laying of the cornerstone. The Saints rejoiced to think we were privileged to build a house to the "Most High God," who is our Father in Heaven.

"Martha Pane Jones Thomas Autobiography (1812-1847)," in Daniel Stillwell Thomas Family History (Salt Lake City, Utah: Kate Woodhouse Kirkham, 1927), 29-30.

Quotes Joseph's definition of visions and his saying that true visions leave indelible impressions on the mind.

There were a great many questions asked Brother Joseph about how he kept the pattern of the temple in his mind so perfect, etc. He said I will answer these questions today.

[He said] When a true spirit makes known anything to you, in the daytime, we call it a vision. If it is a true spirit it will never leave you, every particular will be as plain fifty years hence as now.

"Martha Pane Jones Thomas Autobiography (1812-1847)," in Daniel Stillwell Thomas Family History (Salt Lake City, Utah: Kate Woodhouse Kirkham, 1927), 30-31.

Joseph said if he revealed too much many would seek his blood.

I now speak of a sermon the Prophet preached in 1843. I think it was on Celestial marriage, though he did not give it a name. He commenced with the old Bible, and clear through showing what they had done and how they were blessed. He said we were good people and loved him and he loved us and the Lord had made known many great and marvelous things to him. We were anxious to know what they were. He said, "If I were to tell you, the best friends I have, apparently, would shed my blood," and so they did, that is they joined hands with the ungodly and were murderers.

"Martha Pane Jones Thomas Autobiography (1812-1847)," in Daniel Stillwell Thomas Family History (Salt Lake City, Utah: Kate Woodhouse Kirkham, 1927), 31.

Heard Joseph teach the law of Celestial Marriage; tells of the fate of one who rejected it.

A few words to my posterity stating facts concerning the Prophet Joseph, and his sayings. He showed so plainly to my mind that the law of Celestial Marriage was one of the great laws in God's Kingdom. Whenever He had a people that He acknowledged, organized by Him with the gifts and blessings of the Holy Priesthood, celestial marriage was a leading ordinance in that Kingdom. I watched him carefully; he was very careful how he spoke to us. I said to myself, if that was the law of God in the beginning it will be in the ending. After we were dismissed I walked along with Sister [blank]. She said "What do you think of that sermon." I said, "I think it is the truth from Heavenif it was the law anciently and this is the same God and the same Kingdom, it will be established again, whether you or I live to see it or not." "Well," she said, "I hope it will never come in my day. I do not believe a word of it." Sure enough, she did not live long enough to see or understand the principles or the laws of God in this dispensation. Be careful what you say concerning the sayings of the Servants of God in these last days, for I have seen many fall by speaking lightly of these things.

"Martha Pane Jones Thomas Autobiography (1812-1847)," in Daniel Stillwell Thomas Family History (Salt Lake City, Utah: Kate Woodhouse Kirkham, 1927), 30-31.

Lived to see Joseph's prophecy on the Civil War fulfilled; Joseph also prophesied Christ would not come for forty years.

I lived to see this prophecy fulfilled; also concerning the Millerites. They were preparing a place for the Savior to come and meet with them, on a certain day, in that month in Illinois. They were making great preparations by cleaning a certain piece of ground and spreading carpets, etc. Brother Joseph was speaking on the "Resurrection" and the "Second Coming of the Son of God." "You can go and tell Brother Miller he won't come on that day nor the next, nor the next year. In the name of Jesus Christ I prophesy he won't come in forty years." In a moment I desired to live forty years more, and he has not come; I am just as anxious to live to see the next saying of the Prophet fulfilled concerning his coming, as I was the first. He was enquiring of the Lord concerning his second coming; the answer was, "If you live to be (I think it was eighty) years old you will see the face of the Son of God." I am in my seventy-eighth year. I want to live to see that saying fulfilled. But it matters not. If I am faithful I will see him when he does come. Another saying of the Prophet, which I heard for myself, for I write nothing only what I can testify to.

"Martha Pane Jones Thomas Autobiography (1812-1847)," in Daniel Stillwell Thomas Family History (Salt Lake City, Utah: Kate Woodhouse Kirkham, 1927), 32-33.

Saints to protect and sustain the U.S. Constitution from the vales of the Rocky Mountains; many within the sound of his voice, he predicted, would travel to the Rockies and help build up Zion there.

Speaking of the Constitution of the United States, he said: "Those men who now sit in the judgment seats would pick the laws of the Constitution until it would be in shreds, then raise the cry, our Constitution is crumbling to pieces and will fall." "No!" said the Prophet, "we will sustain it. Where?" Turning on his heels majestically pointing he said, "In the Far West, beyond the Rocky Mountains, in the valleys, hid up like a nest of kittens in the grass, we will use the flag and support the Constitution, and," said he, "there are many in this congregation who will go there and help to settle them and establish a Zion, a place of rest." Then I began to enquire, where are the valleys of the mountains? How can we ever get there? Sure enough, when the time came we were willing because we were obliged to, as Brother George A. Smith once said, in my hearing. Brother Joseph also said there were some whose blood would be shed, many would die on the way. So it was, for we mourned with those that mourned.

"Martha Pane Jones Thomas Autobiography (1812-1847)," in Daniel Stillwell Thomas Family History (Salt Lake City, Utah: Kate Woodhouse Kirkham, 1927), 33-34.

Her dying son, Morgan, sees Joseph in a vision and is promised a martyr's crown.

In Winter Quarters we buried our oldest son, Morgan, but, my readers, the clouds of sorrow never gather so black but what there is a bright star, to be seen by those that trust in the Lord. Brother Joseph Young came to see Morgan the evening before he died. At first he could not speak to him. He went to one side and gave vent to his feelings. He then came to his bed side, spoke to him, saw he was perfectly conscious. He laid his hands on his head and, said, "Morgan be calm as a summer's morn, be quiet, all is well with you. It matters not whether you live or die, for there is no power in heaven, earth or hell that will cheat you out of a martyr's crown." Many other things did he say, but they have left me. He lay calm and quiet all night, perfectly rational. At nine the next morning he breathed his last without a struggle, or moan, as though he was going to sleep. [Note: Morgan Melican Thomas acquired stone cutter's consumption while working on the temple at Nauvoo.]

"Martha Pane Jones Thomas Autobiography (1812-1847)," in Daniel Stillwell Thomas Family History (Salt Lake City, Utah: Kate Woodhouse Kirkham, 1927), 34-35.
