Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Thompson, Mercy Rachel

(June 15, 1807-September 15, 1893)

Joseph performed her wedding ceremony and spoke simply, without ostentation.

My first introduction to the Prophet Joseph Smith, was in May, 1837, at Kirtland, Ohio; and on the 4th of June, following, I again met him at Brother John Gaylard's house in Kirtland, where a small company of friends had gathered to witness the ceremony of my marriage to Robert B. Thompson, the Prophet performing the ceremony.

There were present on this occasion several of the Twelve Apostles with their wives, also the aged Patriarch Joseph Smith and his wifefather and mother of the Prophetand also my brother Joseph Fielding and my sister Mary, who soon afterward became the wife of Hyrum Smith.

After the marriage ceremony was over we listened with joy and profit to the words of instruction and counsel which fell from the inspired lips of Joseph Smith, each word carrying to our hearts deeper and stronger convictions that we were listening to a mighty Prophet of God. And yet there was not the slightest appearance of ostentation or conscious power on his part; he was as free and sociable as though we had all been his own brothers and sisters, or members of one family. He was as unassuming as a child.

Mercy Thompson, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 13 (1 July 1892): 398.

An account of visiting Joseph and Hyrum in the Liberty Jail.

About the 1st of February, 1839 by the request of her husband, my sister [Mary Fielding Smith, wife of Hyrum Smith] was placed on a bed in a wagon and taken a journey of about 40 miles to visit him in prison [Liberty Jail]. Her infant son, Joseph F., then being about 11 weeks old. I had to accompany her, taking my own babe along, then [being] near[ly] months old. The weather being extremely cold we suffered much on the journey. We arrived at the prison in the evening. We were admitted and the doors closed upon us. A night never to be forgotten. A sleepless night. I nursed the darling babes, and in the morning prepared to start for home with my afflicted sister; and as long as memory last will remain in my recollection the creeking hinges of that door which closed upon the noblest men on earth. Who can imagine our feelings as we traveled homewards? But would I sell the honor bestowed upon me of being locked up in jail with such characters for gold? No! No!

Mercy Rachel Thompson, "Autobiographical Sketch," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Commanded by revelation to become a plural wife of Hyrum Smith.

On the 11th of August 1843 I was called by direct revelation from heaven through Brother Joseph Smith the Prophet to enter into a state of plural marriage with Hyrum Smith the Patriarch. This subject when first communicated to me tried me to the very core. All my former traditions and every natural feeling of my heart rose in opposition to this principle. But I was convinced that it was appointed by Him who is too wise to err and too good to be unkind. Soon after marriage I became an inmate with my sister in the house of Hyrum Smith, where I remained until his death.

Mercy Rachel Thompson, "Autobiographical Sketch," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Her inspiration to help raise money for the temple was confirmed by the Prophet, who promised it would be a blessing to her.

At one time after seeking earnestly to know from the Lord if there was anything that I could do for the building up of the Kingdom of God, a most pleasant sensation came over me with the following words: "Try to get the sisters to subscribe one cent per week for the purpose of buying glass and nails for the Temple." I went immediately to Brother Joseph and told him what seemed to be the whispering of the still, small voice to me, [and] he told me to "go ahead and the Lord will bless you." I then mentioned [this] to Brother Hyrum, who was much pleased and did all in his power to encourage and help, by speaking to the sisters on the subject in private and [in] public, promising them that they should receive their blessings in that Temple . . .

Mercy Rachel Thompson, "Autobiographical Sketch," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Accompanies Mary Fielding to visit Joseph and Hyrum in Liberty Jail.

In February 1839, while Joseph and Hyrum Smith, with four other brethren were incarcerated in Liberty Jail, I accompanied my sister Mary from Far West, to visit them. It would be beyond my power to describe my feelings when we were admitted into the jail by the keeper and the door was locked behind us. We could not help feeling a sense of horror on realizing that we were locked up in that dark and dismal den, fit only for criminals of the deepest dye; but there we beheld Joseph, the Prophet, the man chosen of God, in the dispensation of the fullness of time to hold the keys of His kingdom on the earth, with power to bind and to loose as God should direct, confined in a loathsome prison for no other cause or reason than that he claimed to be inspired of God to establish His church among men. There also we found his noble brother, Hyrum, who, I believe was not charged with any other crime than that of being a friend to his brother Joseph. There also were four other brethren whose offenses were similar to that of Hyrum's. The night was spent in fearful forebodings, owing to a false rumor having gone out that the prisoners contemplated making an attempt to escape, which greatly enraged the jailor and the guards.

Under these circumstances we were constrained to bid adieu to the Prophet and his brethren, and hasten our departure from Liberty. My sister was in very delicate health, having with her babe [Joseph F. Smith] only three months old, whom his father then saw for the first time.

Mercy Thompson, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 13 (1 July 1892): 398.

Recalls her husband's service as Secretary to the Prophet and the love they held for each other; remembers hearing the Prophet preach in public and private, even reproving the brethren for too much contention in debate.

The next time I saw the Prophet was on his arrival at Quincy, Illinois, after his almost miraculous escape from Missouri, with his fellow- prisoners, in April, 1839. Soon after this, arrangements were made for the Saints, who had been expelled from Missouri, to settle at Commerce, afterwards Nauvoo, where I became more intimately acquainted with the Prophet in consequence of my husband being employed as his secretary, and to whom the Prophet became very much attached, so much so that one day he jocosely said to me, "Sister Thompson you must not feel bad towards me for keeping your husband away from you so much, for I am married to him;" they truly loved each other with fervent brotherly affection.

I have seen the Prophet under a great variety of circumstances, in public, in domestic and social life and in sacred places.

I have seen him as if carried away by the power of God beyond all mortal conception, when speaking to the Saints in their public gatherings; and in less public places I have heard him explaining to the brethren and sisters the glorious principles of the gospel, as no man could, except by prophetic power.

I have seen him in the lyceum and heard him reprove the brethren for giving way to too much excitement and warmth in debate, and have listened to his clear and masterly explanations of deep and difficult questions.

To him all things seemed simple and easy to be understood, and thus he could make them plain to others as no other man could that I ever heard.

In a social gathering of the Saints at the Bowery near the site of the temple, I saw him rejoicing with the people, perfectly sociable and without reserve, occasionally uttering jokes for their amusement and moving upon the same plane with the humblest and poorest of his friends; to him there were no strangers and by all he was known as the Prophet and a friend of humanity. Still he had enemies, and they were always bitter, who wolf-like toward the lamb, hated him not so much as they thirsted for his blood, because their deeds were evil and their natures and their appetites had fallen to crave for violence and delight in vengeance.

Mercy Thompson, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 13 (1 July 1892): 398-99.

Recalls Joseph's tender nursing of his sick wife and his deep sorrow at the death of Robert B. Thompson and others; recalls Joseph gathering flowers for her infant daughter.

I saw him by the bedside of Emma, his wife, in sickness, exhibiting all the solicitude and sympathy possible for the tenderest of hearts and the most affectionate of natures to feel. And by the deathbed of my beloved companion, I saw him stand in sorrow, reluctantly submitting to the decree of Providence, while the tears of love and sympathy freely flowed. Joseph took charge of the funeral ceremonies, strictly adhering to my husband's wish that there should be no military or other display at his burial as had been but a short time before on the occasion of the burial of Joseph's brother, Don Carlos, both having been officers in the legion.

Don Carlos died August 7th, 1841, Joseph's little son, Don Carlos, died about August 18th, now, Robert B. Thompson, his faithful secretary, on the 27th of the same month, so that Joseph could feel the import of the lines of Dr. Young addressed to death.

Thy shafts flew thrice and thrice my peace was slain; Yea thrice, ere thrice yon moon had filled her horn.

This indeed was a time of sorrow, but I can never forget the tender sympathy and brotherly kindness he ever showed toward me and my fatherless child. When riding with him and his wife Emma in their carriage I have known him to alight and gather prairie flowers for my little girl.

Mercy Thompson, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 13 (1 July 1892): 399.

Heard Joseph preach to the Relief Society; also remembers his promise to Mary, before Carthage, that the Lord would care for her; remembers receiving her endowments and of Emma officiating.

I have been present at meetings of the Relief Society and heard him give directions and counsels to the sisters, calculated to inspire them to efforts which would lead to celestial glory and exaltation, and oh! how my heart rejoiced!

I was present at a prayer meeting held in the upper room of the brick- store building, at a time when his enemies were seeking his life.

At another timea time never to be forgottenI was present at a meeting when Joseph knelt down with the small congregation surrounding him, when every sentence he uttered seemed to convey to my mind, and to the minds of others present, the impression that this was our last meeting togetherand so it was.

It seemed to me that there was nothing forgotten or omitted by him, at that time, which pertained either to himself or the Church generally.

A few days after this he called at his brother Hyrum's to take leave of the family previous to their crossing the Mississippi River, intending to go west to the Rocky Mountains to seek out, if possible, a place of peace and safety for the Saints. His parting words to my sister Mary, as she wept at their going, were these:

"Sister Mary, don't feel bad, the Lord will take care of you, and He will deliver us, but I do not know how." The two brothers then started to cross the river, not knowing whether they would ever see their homes again or not. But on account of the feelings expressed by some of the brethren, who should have been their truest friends, and by their urgent request, sent after them, the brothers returned to Nauvoo the following day. Watching from a chamber window I saw them being rowed in a skiff across the river, until they landed, and walked up the riverbank to Hyrum's house, where they both entered, Joseph seating himself, while Hyrum made some changes in his clothing, when they both went on to the mansion.

Although I did not know that the brothers had returned home to be taken as "lambs to the slaughter," my feelings were indescribable, and the very air seemed burdened with sorrowful forebodings.

The awful scene at Carthage followed in a few days, and here all men must draw the veil, for until all the truth concerning these good men, and this black deed of their murderous foes, can be told and understood the history of this time will not be written. But the day will come when God will speak, and the martyrs and their history shall be known.

I received my endowments by the directions of the Prophet Joseph, his wife Emma officiating in my case, and in his instructions to me at that time he said:

"This will bring you out of darkness into marvelous light."

Mercy Thompson, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 13 (1 July 1892): 399-400.
