Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Thompson, Sherwood

(January 1824-1907)

Warned his sister against marrying a "Mormon preacher," saying that Oliver Cowdery, the Whitmers, W. W. Phelps, and other leaders had apostatized; that Joseph was seeking to grab the land of others; that his new translation of the Bible was unnecessary; promises her property and care for her for life if she does not marry.

Oh may the overruling powers of heaven Direct me whilst I wright

Dear Sister I now with grief take my pen in hand but with joy to to let you know I am in good health and hope that these few lines may find you enjoying the same. I received your letter the 7 of January Stating that you was all well, but Oh Dear Sister what followed it was knews that rung tears of grief from the eyes of your Dearest friend from youre dear Brother from the only brother you have in this world and Oh Dear Sister remember that whilst I am now wrighting the tears roll down my cheek after the thought of having a Sister of [mine] and an only Sister to join in wedlock with a Mormon preacher. God forbid that my life should be spared for to hear that my dearest and only Sister had married a mormon! oh dear Sister if you only knew the anguish that now prays upon my [illegible] you would never consent to marry a mormon. most dearly beloved Sister you told me the reason of your engaging in matrimony but if youre parents were caled from the this world to a far better one you know that you have relation that is able everything in abundence and you know that you have connection that is well off and now dear Siser if you will renounce youre mormon preacher and concent to be brought to this part of the country I will come and fetch you here and I will bind myself under bonds to maintain you as long as you live besides that I will give you a warrantee deede of forty acres of land and I now call upon god to witness the pledge elder Dustin a mormon preacher was her at Jameses (?) this last fall and he told James that oliver Cowdery had quit the mormons on the account of Joseph Smith prophising of things that did not come to pass as he propised they would and also all the whitmores has quite them and Mr. Phelps has quit them and that they are also quitting them in Illinois where they now live and he told James that Elder marks moved to Illinois and that the prophet had got away all his property and he is now a living there a poore man; and also all the smartist men that believed in Joseph Smith when he first established his doctrine are now a quitting them and also we candidly believe that Joseph Smith's church is that beast that Josh wrote of comming up out of the earth and we believe that the mormon book is that beast which John spoke of which had two horns like a [illegible] and he spake like a dragon which you will find recorded in Revellation the 13th chapt beginning at the 11 verse which you can read for youre self and we believe that Joseph Smith is a trying to build himself up and make himself a king as it were by getting other mens property and reducing them to severe poverty I have now given you a short history of Joseph Smith and his followers which has proved him and kept him the prophet has translated our bible over and he is again to have it printed as soon as he can get money from the brotheren to get materals to print it with its verry strange that god some [illegible] years ago did not call upon men that was qualified to translate the bible correct but now this illiterate being of Joseph Smith in these last days to correct it we believe that thousands have been wafted to the mansions of eternal bliss by the instructios of our old bible and we believe it is good enough yet for all the inhabitance of the earth without Joseph Smith's new bible for we believe our bible is a divine revellation from god Joseph Smith, bible to be his own works you now have our minds in full hoping that you will judge candidly so Dear Sister I must leave you to choose for your self but if you go on and marry that mormon preacher I must say to you as bird (?) did to his friends: Read this letter Dearest Sister tis the last you'll have from me so if you marry the mormon preacher dont wright to me again you must never expect to see me again for I shall never come to see you nor I dont want you should come and see me so I must draw to a close by bidding you farewell and if you marry as you said I must bid you fairwell a long fairwell

Dear Sister Fairwell Fairwell, a long Fairwell

Eunice E. Thompson

Sherwood R. Thompson

[Envelop reads:]

Mrs. Eunice E. Thompson

Readford

Wayne County

Michigan

Branch Mich

Jan. 14th [1841]

"Sherwood R. Thompson to Eunice E. Thompson, January 14, 1841," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
