Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Brown, John

(October 23, 1820-November 4, 1896)

Heard Joseph preach; Joseph instructed those going to preach in southern states to baptize Negroes if they had their master's consent, but not to ordain them to priesthood office.

I collected my bills and started for Nauvoo by steamboat and embarking at St. Louis, arriving in Nauvoo a few days before the October conference 1841. There was but one person in the city whom I had ever seen before and that was the man who baptized me. I soon became acquainted and found that I had got among my true friends. I was present at the laying of the corner stone of the Nauvoo house, attended the General Conference, saw and heard the Prophet preach [and] his brother Hyrum and all the leading men of the Church who were in the City at that time. Instead of seeing anything to discourage all went to confirm me and I drank deeper in the spirit of the work. Hyrum Smith gave me a patriarchal blessing and ordained me an Elder.

. . . The Prophet Joseph in giving us instructions in relation to our labors in the southern states said that if any of the colored race received the Gospel we were to baptize them if their masters were willing but we were not to ordain any of them to the Priesthood. This opened to my mind a field of reflection. The sectarians did not exclude the colored race from the ministry, but authorized them to preach. How is this, if Joseph is an impostor, he in this matter would doubtless have followed the tradition of the age especially as he sprang from Vermont and was traditioned in the ideas of that portion of the country in which abolition and anti-slavery doctrines prevailed. This to my mind was an additional evidence of the divinity of his mission and like all of his moves was a bold departure from the establish systems and notions of men.

"Sketch of the Life of John Brown, Written by Himself," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.
