Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Tracy, Nancy Naomi Alexander

(May 14, 1816-March 11, 1902)

Traveled to Kirtland to meet the Prophet and loan him money; he insists on the right to pay back the loan: "business is business"; later, when the Tracys were leaving for Missouri, Joseph sold land in order to pay back the loan.

We began preparations for our journey [in the Spring, 1835]. We had a fine span of horses and a new wagon and decided to go by land. It was about 400 miles. So we bade adieu to home, friends, and relatives and all that was dear and started for the home of the Saints. Philinda Colvin, my husband's cousin, went with us. It was really a pleasure trip. We stopped at hotels every night but two and were ten days on the road. We arrived at our destination none the worse for traveling. We rented a room from Lyman Sherman, moved into it, and on the Sabbath following went to the meeting. It was held inside the temple walls. For the first time we saw Prophet Joseph and heard him preach. There was no work to be had so my husband went to work on the temple. He sold our horses and lived on what money we had. There was one day when the Prophet Joseph came to our room for my husband. Oliver Cowdery was with him. He wanted some money, for he was encumbered. My husband readily gave him the desired amount of fifty dollars, and he sat down to write a note. My husband told him he did not want a note and that his word was sufficient. Joseph made the reply, "Brother Tracy, business is business and we want to do it correctly." He gave the note payable one day after date. He said, "When you think you need the money, let me know in time, so I can get it for you." Brother Tracy told him he should not need it until the next spring. We got very well acquainted with the prophet. We attended all the meetings and had a good time in general. . . .

[Later] While this [i.e., the dedication of the Kirtland Temple] was going on, we had just come to Kirtland, so we were not partakers in this persecution. But we intended, when the right time came, to go up to Missouri. So in the spring, after the dedication of the Temple, there were many of the elders sent out on missions, and my husband took a short mission back to New York to bear his testimony once more to his friends of the truths of the Gospel, for he was full of the spirit of it. He intended, to ask council of the prophet about going to Missouri. He returned somewhere about the middle of June and went to Brother Joseph to see what he should do. Brother Joseph bowed his head for a moment, and then said, "It is the will of the Lord for you to go to that land, and you will need the money I owe you, and you shall have it although I do not know how I am going to get it. Before get ready and let me know a day or two before you start."

So the preparation began. We bought a large yoke of oxen, lengthened the reach to the wagon, made the bed long, so there would be two beds made up lengthwise with a space in the center and a door at the side, for we were going to take another family in our wagon, Brother Dimick Huntington, wife, and three children. There were two other families going in company with us, William Corey and Ezra Parish. Four families with three wagons, each with one yoke of cattle, we were ready to start out. Brother Joseph sold half an acre of land and came and paid the money, saying, "I told you you should have it."

"Life History of Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy, Written by Herself," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8-9.

Recalls the organization of the Relief Society and of the Prophet speaking to the sisters; on one occasion he was so filled with the Spirit that his face shone; he spoke on Celestial marriage.

The work on the [Nauvoo] temple was progressing, Elders were being sent out to the nations to preach the Gospel, emigrants from different parts flocked in, and everything prospered. About this time the Relief Society was organized with Emma Smith, president, with two counselors, and Eliza R. Snow, secretary. This was for the relief of the poor and for every noble purpose that came within woman's sphere of action. I united with this society. There was much valuable instruction given in these meetings. Sometimes Emma would bring the prophet in to give instructions. One in particular, I remember, he opened the meeting by prayer. He was so full of the Spirit of the Holy Ghost that his frame shook and his face shone and looked almost transparent. This was about the time that the order of the Celestial marriage was given by revelation to him. He had taught it to a few who would hear it, but I heard him say at one time when he was preaching (turning to those that sat behind him), "If I should reveal to these, my Brethren, who now seem to be my bosom friends, what God has revealed to me, they would be the first to seek my life." And it was so. Even when this law of Celestial marriage was taught, these very men, William Marks, the Laws, and others, turned vipers against him.

"Life History of Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy, Written by Herself," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 24-25.

Attends the laying of the cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple; she sees Joseph place scriptures therein.

One day I looked over toward the temple and saw a large crowd gathered with some two or three women present; so I thought I would go over. I put on my bonnet and shawl and made my way over. Brother Joseph was there and seemed busily engaged over something. Finally, he looked up and saw us women. He said for the brothers to stand back and let the sisters come up. So they gave way, and we went up. In the huge chief corner stone was cut out a square about a foot around and about as deep lined with zinc, and in it Brother Joseph had placed a Bible, a Book of Mormon, hymn book, and other church works along with silver money that had been coined in that year. Then a lid was cemented down, and the temple was reared on the top of this. It made me think of the prophets in ancient days hiding up their records to come forth in some future generation. At any rate, it was for some wise purpose, but I never heard any explanation on it. The building progressed rapidly, and I was present when the cap stone was laid and heard the last ring of the trowel. The Saints turned out enmass. The address on that occasion was pathetic and grand, being delivered by Brigham Young.

"Life History of Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy, Written by Herself," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 26.

On the Prophet's counsel, Sister Tracy joins her husband on his mission to campaign for the Prophet's bid for the U.S. presidency.

My husband had been in the employ of Amos Davis, a merchant in Nauvoo, for one year, and I had been teaching school. At this time, my husband was one who was chosen to go and preach the Gospel and also produce this pamphlet wherever he went. He was to go the state of New York. Consequently, he would go and visit his birth place. I got an idea that I would like to go with him and see my relatives. I had been away about ten years, and I had now four children. It seemed quite an undertaking, but I felt equal to the task; so my husband asked counsel of Brother Joseph. He told him to take me along, and I would prove a blessing to him. Therefore, we prepared to go; my husband went to Mr. Davis and got his wages, and besides, Mr. Davis made him a present of a nice suit of clothes, a hat, and fine boots and gave to me a dress pattern.

When we were ready, we went down to the landing. There were quite a number of elders going. Brother Joseph and Hyrum were at the landing to see the brethren off.

"Life History of Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy, Written by Herself," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 27-28.

Witnesses the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

As soon as we arrived, we went right home and prepared to go to meeting for that day was appointed for us to choose a first presidency to lead the Church. The saints convened in a grove. Sidney Rigdon and his followers were on hand to contest their right to be the leaders of the Saints. At one time he was one of Brother Joseph's counselors, but he was not righteous, and Joseph shook him off saying that he had carried him long enough and he would carry him no longer. Therefore, it was out of the question to have such a man lead the people.

Brigham Young was the man chosen and sustained by unanimous vote to be the mouthpiece of God to the Saints. I can testify that the mantle of Joseph fell upon Brigham that day as that of Elijah did fall upon Elisha, for it seemed that his voice, his gestures, and all were Joseph. It seemed that we had him again with us. He was sustained by the voice of the people to be the prophet, seer, and revelator.

"Life History of Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy, Written by Herself," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 30-31.

Witnessed transfiguration of Brigham Young.

When we returned to Nauvoo, behold it was in mourning for these two great and good men [i.e., the martyred Joseph and Hyrum]. There was no more rest for us in Nauvoo. Again we were destined to become exiles. Brigham Young now became the President of the Church and the departed spirit of Joseph rested down upon him insomuch that all felt as though it was Joseph himself in their midst and he began to plan for the people to leave Nauvoo, to seek an asylum far away in the West where we could worship God and none to molest for we could not dwell here in peace any longer. The same spirit that was in the hearts of the Missourians was predominating in Illinois. Brigham Young stood firm in the midst of house burning and plundering and all kinds of persecutions, preparing for the removal of this body of people for the church was increasing in numbers continually they had now taken up the line of march across the Mississippi River.

Nancy Tracy, Narrative, Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley; see also microfilm of holograph, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
