Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Tyler, Daniel

(November 23, 1816-November 7, 1906)

Joseph confirms that Tyler's mother's vision was real, and that she saw Michael the Archangel.

A short time prior to his arrival at my father's house my mother, Elizabeth Comins Tyler, had a remarkable vision. Lest it might be attributed to the evil one, she related it to no person, except my father, Andrews Tyler, until the Prophet arrived, on his way to Canada, I think. She saw a man sitting upon a white cloud, clothed in white from head to foot. He had on a peculiar cap, different from any she had ever seen, with a white robe, underclothing, and moccasins. It was revealed to her that this person was Michael, the Archangel. She was sitting in the house drying peaches when she saw the heavenly vision, but the walls were no bar between her and the angel, who stood in the open space above her.

The Prophet informed her that she had had a true vision, and it was of the Lord. He had seen the same angel several times. It was Michael, the Archangel, as revealed to her.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 3 (1 February 1892): 93.

Remembers the Prophet's explanation of spiritual rebirth.

During his short stay he preached at my father's residence, an humble log cabin. He read the 3rd chapter of John, and explained much of it, making it so plain that a child could not help understanding it, if he paid attention. I recollect distinctly the substance of his remarks on the 3rd verse"Except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God."

The birth here spoken of, the Prophet said, was not the gift of the Holy Ghost, which was promised after baptism, but was a portion of the spirit, which attended the preaching of the gospel by the elders of the Church. The people wondered why they had not previously understood the plain declarations of scripture, as explained by the elders, as they had read them hundreds of times. When they read the Bible it was a new book to them. This was being born again, to see the Kingdom of God. They were not in it, but could see it from the outside, which they could not do until the Spirit of the Lord took the veil from before their eyes. It was a change of heart but not of state; they were converted, but were yet in their sins. Although Cornelius had seen an holy angel, and on the preaching of Peter the Holy Ghost was poured out upon him and his household, they were only born again to see the Kingdom of God. Had they not been baptized afterwards they would not have been saved (see Acts, 10th chapter). Explaining the 5th verse, he said "To be born of water and of the Spirit" meant to be immersed in water for the remission of sins and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost thereafter. This was given by the laying on of the hands of one having authority given him of God.

His discourse was, I think, entirely on the first principles of the gospel, and he quoted many passages of scripture, but I do not recollect any other so clearly defined as those I have quoted. I have given his exact language, as near as I can recollect it, after a lapse of over fifty yearsnearly sixty years. The joy that filled my juvenile soul no one can realize except those who have had a foretaste of heavenly things. It seemed as though the gates of heaven were opened and a living stream flowed directly to the holy man of God. It also filled the house where we were sitting. To this day, when I think of it, which is quite often, and always when I hear those scriptures referred to, a thrill of joy and of testimony permeates the inmost recesses of my soul.

About the time the doctrine of rebaptism for members in the Church was first revealed in Nauvoo, Joseph, the great seer and revelator to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, made some remarks on the subject.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 3 (1 February 1892): 93-94.

The Prophet corrects the erroneous translation of Hebrews 6:3: "Therefore, not leaving . . ."

On one occasion he read, among other scriptures, Hebrews, 6th chapter, 1st and 2nd verses, as follows:

"Therefore, leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, of faith toward God,

"Of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment."

The Prophet said the first verse should read: "Therefore, not leaving the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, etc." This explanation not only made the entire subject of the two verses clear but reconciled them with other scriptures. Notwithstanding Paul is made to say "leaving," etc., the inference is clear that if the foundation of repentance, baptism and the laying on of hands should be relaid they would have to perform those works over again, as every careful reader of the text must see. This also corroborates a revelation to the Church of Ephesus: "Remember, therefore, from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do the first works." All latter-day Saints know that the first works after repentance are baptism and the laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost. Here we find a presiding elder of a branch or ward of the Church commanded to perform these works over again, under pain of removal if he failed to obey the divine behest. Many more passages might be quoted to the same effect, but these are sufficient for my purpose. Joseph's translation not only reconciles the text with itself, but also with other scriptures, as already shown, and as was explained by the Prophet.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 3 (1 February 1892): 94.

Brother Haun ignored Joseph's warning and the Haun's Mill massacre resulted.

Everyone has probably heard or read of the terrible martyrdom at Haun's Mill. At this late date some may be led to inquire why did not the Prophet foresee this and avert the terrible calamity. The older Saints, or those of long standing in the Church, understand all of the particulars, but there are our young folks and future generations who, not understanding some unpublished facts, would be liable and almost certain to marvel, as some already do. This is not strange, as the history of the Church shows that the man of God was in Far West, only about twenty miles distant.

Well, my young brethren and sisters, the following are a few of the facts. Brother Haun owned the mill, a grist mill, which took his name. From two to four days prior to the massacre the citizens of the little settlement assembled in a mass meeting, and appointed Brother Haun a committee of one to go to the city for advice to know what to do. The whole country was under arms and excitement. The Apostle David W. Patten, with Brothers Gideon Carter and O'Banion, had already sealed their testimony with their blood. Under these circumstances it was quite natural that small settlements should begin to inquire what was best for them to do.

Brother Haun repaired to the city, and as the Prophet was but a private citizen and minister of the gospel, in the legal sense, he first went to Captain John Killian, of the Caldwell County militia, informed him of his appointment, and inquired what he and his brethren should do.

"Move into the city was the prompt reply."

Brother H."What! and leave the mill?"

Captain K."Yes, and leave the mill."

Brother H."What! to the mob?"

Captain K."Yes, to the mob."

Brother Haun then left the Captain and went to "Brother Joseph," as the Prophet was familiarly called. He asked him the same questions, and received the same answers, word for word.

"But," responded the selfish mill-owner, "Brother Joseph, we think we are strong enough to defend the mill and keep it in our own hands."

"Oh, well," replied he, "if you think you are strong enough to hold the mill you can do as you think best."

What more could he say? His method had always been when his counsel was asked to give it freely and leave parties to receive or reject it. He could not, nor would not if he could, take away people's agency.

Brother Haun returned and reported that Brother Joseph's counsel was for them to stay and protect or hold the mill. The rest the reader knows, or can become acquainted with by reading the published account of the terrible tragedy. The foregoing facts I had from the late Captain Killian in person.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 3 (1 February 1892): 94-95.

Note: See also John D. Lee, Mormonism Unveiled (St. Louis, Mo.: N.D. Thompson & Co., 1881), 78-79.

The great humility in the Prophet's prayer; Joseph prophesied that those who thought he was in transgression would be shown that he stood approved.

At the time William Smith and others rebelled against the Prophet, as recorded in his history, when the walls of the Kirtland Temple were raised but a few feet above the ground. I attended a meeting "on the flats," where "Joseph" presided. Entering the schoolhouse a little before meeting opened, and gazing upon the man of God, I perceived sadness in his countenance and tears trickling down his cheeks. I naturally supposed the all-absorbing topic of the difficulty must be the cause. I was not mistaken. A few moments later a hymn was sung and he opened the meeting by prayer. Instead, however, of facing the audience, he turned his back and bowed upon his knees, facing the wall. This, I suppose, was done to hide his sorrow and tears.

I had heard men and women prayespecially the formerfrom the most ignorant, both as to letters and intellect, to the most learned and eloquent, but never until then had I heard a man address his Maker as though He was present listening as a kind father would listen to the sorrows of a dutiful child. Joseph was at that time unlearned, but that prayer, which was to a considerable extent in behalf of those who accused him of having gone astray and fallen into sin, that the Lord would forgive them and open their eyes that they might see arightthat prayer, I say, to my humble mind, partook of the learning and eloquence of heaven. There was no ostentation, no raising of the voice as by enthusiasm, but a plain conversational tone, as a man would address a present friend. It appeared to me as though, in case the veil were taken away, I could see the Lord standing facing His humblest of all servants I had ever seen. Whether this was really the case I cannot say; but one thing I can say, it was the crowning, so to speak, of all the prayers I ever heard. After the prayer another hymn was sung.

When Joseph arose and addressed the congregation, he spoke of his many troubles, and said he often wondered why it was that he should have so much trouble in the house of his friends, and he wept as though his heart would break. Finally he said: "The Lord once told me that if at any time I got into deep trouble and could see no way out of it, if I would prophesy in His name, he would fulfill my words," and added: "I prophesy in the name of the Lord that those who have thought I was in transgression shall have a testimony this night that I am clear and stand approved before the Lord." The next Sabbath his brother William and several others made humble confessions before the public. What their testimonies were, I never knew.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 4 (15 February 1892): 127-28.

Joseph prophesied that many of the elders of the Church would be martyred.

In a discourse in Far West, Missouri, Joseph Smith said, "Many of the elders of this Church will yet be martyred." I do not recollect what preceded or came after, but those words I well remember, and when the massacre took place at Brother Haun's mill, I felt in hopes that that was the fulfillment of the prediction. Subsequently, when he and his brother Hyrum were martyred in Carthage Jail, I hoped that that would be the entire amount of those who would seal their testimony with their blood; but alas, several have since had their blood shed for the testimony of Jesus; many more are living martyrs, and I again hope that the Lord will turn away the wrath of our enemies and not suffer this sore trial to be repeated. Whether or not, we must submit to His will and acknowledge His hand in all things as well in sore trials as in our happiest moments.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 4 (15 February 1892): 128.

Joseph warns the brethren against apostasy; nonetheless, some fall.

At or near the close of the endowments, the Prophet addressed us. Among other things he said: Brethren, for some time Satan has not had power to tempt you. Some have thought that there would be no more temptation. But the opposite will come; and unless you draw near to the Lord you will be overcome and apostatize.

A few months later, four of the Apostles were cut off from the Church for apostasy, and the standing of one or two others was very doubtful. Numbers from other quorums also fell away and were cut off.

Daniel Tyler, "Incidents of Experience," in "Scraps of Biography," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 33.

While in Missouri, Joseph prophesied that the brethren would obtain government arms, which they did. They then returned them to the government.

I will mention one prophecy among the many predictions of the Prophet Joseph Smith that was literally fulfilled.

During the persecutions in the fall of 1838, one of the brethren happened to be a stranger in Richmond, Ray Co., Missouri, a distance of some thirty or forty miles from Far West, in Caldwell County, where the Saints dwelt. About sundown he saw men loading guns into a carriage, and learned that they were to be taken that night to the mob in Daviess County, to fight the "Mormons." He feigned to be traveling in the opposite direction, and took a circuitous route to Far West, but did not arrive there until about eight o'clock the next morning. He related what he had seen of the actions of the mob, and a call was immediately made for ten volunteers to accompany Captain Allred, of the militia, to intercept and take the arms. To do this we had about twenty miles to ride across a trackless prairie, to reach the road leading from Richmond to Daviess County, where the mob was quartered. The man with the guns had a good, smooth road, free from rocks or obstruction of any kind, and, to all human appearance, might have reached his destination before we obtained the news of his having the arms.

When all were mounted, the Prophet Joseph said to Brother Allred, "I want you to ride as fast as your horses can carry you," (pointing the direction, that he might not reach the road in rear of the carriage) "and you will get those arms." These last words inspired faith in the little band, and even the horses did not seem to become weary.

When we neared the road, we cast our eyes towards Richmond, and at a distance of about half a mile we discovered a black-covered carriage standing in the road, without any team attached to it. On nearing it, we saw that it was empty. We examined and found that one of the axles was newly broken in two. Here was the carriage described, but where were the guns? We soon discovered a trail in the high grass where something heavy had been dragged from near the carriage. We followed this train a short distance and found a wooden box, containing seventy-four United States yagers [i.e., rifles]. While consulting how to get them to the town, we looked in the direction of the mob and discovered two men coming, about as fast as they could drive, in a lumber wagon. When they discovered us, supposing us to be mobs, they swung their hats and shouted "hurrah!" two or three times, and our little troop responded in the same way.

They got very near before they discovered their mistake. Brother Allred directed the teamster to drive along side of the box. He then told the two men to get out and put it into the wagon, and then follow him. We returned the way we came, and reached our destination about sundown, when, after the guns were taken from the wagon, the men and team were released. The prediction of the prophet was fulfilled, and the long-range guns, which were the best then known, designed for our destruction, were in our hands.

Joseph, knowing that the guns were government property, sent a dispatch immediately to notify General Atchison and Colonel Doniphan of Clay County, what had been done. They directed that the arms should be delivered over to them, they pledging their honor that they should not be used against our people.

The prophet's patriotism would not allow him to retain government property, although it had been obtained by our enemies for our destruction. If this was not a test of loyalty I fail to see an opportunity where a test could be given.

Daniel Tyler, "Incidents of Experience," in "Scraps of Biography," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 33-34.

Joseph predicts rain and ends the meeting; the Saints run to their homes to avoid getting wet.

At a conference in Nauvoo, Illinois, in the afternoon, while Sidney Rigdon was preaching one of his most powerful and eloquent sermons, the heavens began to gather blackness. He observed this and said to the Prophet, "Is it going to rain?" He answered, "Yes, and we had better dismiss the meeting, and let the people go home and not get wet." The conference was held under a large tree. The speaker replied, "I wish you to know I am not through, for I am as full of preach as my skin can hold," and sat down.

President Smith said to the audience. "You had better hurry home as soon as the meeting is dismissed, or you will get wet. We are going to have a heavy rain." The services were dismissed without singing, I think, when all started for their homes. Those who lived nearby reached their residences, while those from the suburbs had either to run into neighboring houses or take the pelting wind and rain.

The writer, with several others, who resided in the eastern part of the city, while running at the top of their speed, reached an empty cabin just as the rain began to pour, where we remained fully a half hour, until the clouds moved away. The next day being fair, Elder Rigdon finished his discourse.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 4 (15 February 1892): 128.

Under blackened heavens, the Legion got uneasy, fearing rain; Joseph promised it would not rain.

On another occasion, when the Nauvoo Legion was on parade, the heavens began to blacken as if to rain. The people began to get uneasy, and some were preparing to leave. Joseph arose in his saddle and shouted, "Attention, Legion! Don't break the ranksit is not going to rain. If it rains enough to wet through your shirt sleeves, the Lord never spoke by my mouth!"

It had already begun to sprinkle rain, but it ceased, the clouds passed away and drill continued as long as it was desirable. There are probably many living now who will remember these latter circumstances.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 4 (15 February 1892): 128.

The Prophet tells that most of his persecution came because of false brethren and apostates; he quotes the false witness of his jailer at Liberty.

Soon after the Prophet's arrival in Commerce (afterwards Nauvoo) from Missouri prison, Brother Isaac Behunnin and myself made him a visit at his residence. His persecutions were the topic of conversation. He repeated many false, inconsistent and contradictory statements made by apostates, frightened members of the Church and outsiders. He also told how most of the officials who would fain have taken his life when he was arrested turned in his favor on forming his acquaintance. He laid the burden of the blame of false brethren. Among the officials he mentioned the name of Mr. Tillery, jailor at Liberty, Clay County, Missouri. Tillery said to him in substance:

"Mr. Smith, you should not blame us for your incarceration. Had it not been for Sidney Rigdon's 'salt sermon' on the 4th of July, and Dr. Avard's testimony about Danites you would have been released long ago. In fact you never would have been arrested.'

As to the 'salt sermon' (Fourth of July oration) it was understood by the Saints at the time that the Prophet did not approve of it; and with regard to Sampson Avard's statements, they were known to have been made through malice, because the Prophet had condemned and exposed his wicked intentions. Those who testified through fear subsequently returned to the Church. Some of them weeping and expressing a willingness that the Lord would remove them by death if that would remove the stain they had brought upon themselves by swearing falsely to shield themselves from the threatened death if they said aught in the Prophet's favor.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 16 (15 August 1892): 491.

An account of repentance and forgiveness: a wayward Saint returns, is greeted by Joseph, and they both weep for joy.

One scene, I was informed after it occurred, was particularly touching, and showed the goodness of the good man's heart. A man who had stood in high in the Church while in Far West, was taken down with chills or ague and fever. While his mind as well as body was weak, disaffected parties soured his mind and persuaded him to leave the Saints and go with them. He gave some testimony against the Prophet. While the Saints were settling in Commerce, having recovered from his illness, he removed from Missouri to Quincy, Illinois. There he went to work chopping cordwood to obtain means to take himself and family to Nauvoo and present to the injured man of God if, peradventure, he would forgive and permit him to return to the fold as a private member. He felt that there was salvation nowhere else for him and if that was denied him all was lost as far as he was concerned. He started with a sorrowful heart and downcast look. While on the way the Lord told Brother Joseph he was coming. As soon as he turned to open the gate the Prophet sprang up from his chair and ran and met him in the yard, exclaiming "O Brother ________, how glad I am to see you!" He caught him around the neck and both wept like children. Suffice it to say that proper restitution was made and the fallen man again entered the Church by the door, received his Priesthood again, went upon several important missions, gather with the Saints in Zion and died in full faith.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 16 (15 August 1892): 491.

Once having received the gospel, one cannot thereafter ever be neutral.

When the Prophet had ended telling how he had been [roughly and unfairly] treated [by apostates], Brother Behunnin remarked: "If I should leave this Church I would not do as those men have done: I would go to some remote place where Mormonism had never been heard of, settle down, and no one would ever learn that I knew anything about it."

The great seer immediately replied: "Brother Behunnin, you don't know what you would do. No doubt these men once thought as you do. Before you joined this Church you stood on neutral ground. When the gospel was preached good and evil were set before you. You could choose either or neither. There were two opposite masters inviting you to serve them. When you joined this Church you enlisted to serve God. When you did that you left the neutral ground, and you never can get back on to it. Should you forsake the Master you enlisted to serve it will be by the instigation of the evil one, and you will follow his dictation and be his servant."

He emphasized the fact that a man or woman who had not taken sides either with Christ or Belial could maintain a neutral position, but when they enlisted under either the one or the other they left the neutral ground forever.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 16 (15 August 1892): 492.

Remembers Joseph's instructions on baptism, in which he reconciled apparent Bible differences.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was a great reconciler of discrepancies in passages of scripture which were or seemed to be in conflict with each other. Until the writer heard the great expounder of Bible doctrines explain the following passages he concluded there must be a wrong translation in one verse of the other. The verses read as follows:

"I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire" (Matt. 3:11)

Here [said Joseph Smith] we have baptism with water, baptism with the Holy Ghost, and baptism with fire, three in number. The question naturally arises, how can this passage be reconciled with the following:

"There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism" (Eph. 4:4-6).

Had one of these passages been found in the Bible and the other in the Book of Mormon what a howl would have went up from our Christian friends of other denominations! It would have been pointed to by both press and pulpit as a plain contradiction between the two books, and as a matter of course the latter would have been condemned as false. How different was the case with the great reconciler of one truth with anotherthe man who always accepted facts and rejected falsehoods no matter when they came! He said, while speaking on the subject of baptism, in Nauvoo: "There is but one baptism; it takes the baptism of water, of the Holy Ghost, and of fire to constitute one full baptism." With this explanation where is the conflict, where is the ground of cavil, where the contradiction? There is none. Three abstract truths mentioned by John the Baptist in the first scripture quoted are combined in one great whole by St. Paul in the Second.

I recollect a so-called Christian minister once quoting St. Paul to prove that water baptism was not essential to salvation, because the apostle said "one baptism," and that was the baptism of the Holy Ghost; but he had forgotten that Christ said, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven." In fact, many have tried to explain away the seeming contradiction in the two passages of scripture referred to, but Joseph Smith is the only man I have ever heard or heard of ever gave an explanation that was not subject to objection or in conflict with the scriptures.

Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 28, no. 10 (15 May 1893): 331-32.
