Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Vogel, George William

(b. March 21, 1842)

As a young nonmember in Kirtland, he remembers his kindly parents hiding Joseph and Hyrum from a mob in their wine cellar; Joseph gave his father a Book of Mormon.

[Born in Piqua, Miami Co., Ohio, and "raised by God fearing parents, Methodists, as good as ever lived." Helped his father as a cooper; then fought for "Old Glory" in Civil War, then moved west, to Walsenburg, Colorado, where he ranched, mined, and the hotel business.]

"Up to this time, 1892, I had never met an Elder of the Church of Latter Day Saints, nor heard the Gospel preached although born as you might say, under the shadow of the Temple at Kirtland. Often heard my parents tell about "Joe Smith," as they called the Prophet, who had often been in Father's house. In fact at the time of the Kirtland uprising against the Mormons and the great persecutions when the mob was after the Prophet and the Patriarch Hyrum, Father hid them both in his wine cellar and no doubt saved their lives. Am thankful to know and say my parents did all they could in giving aid and relief to the suffering at that time, although Methodists. In those days road or highways were scarce and bad to travel, being principally cut through the dense and heavily timbered lands. The main road from Kirtland West and South to Cincinnati branched from Piqua to the latter City Cincinnati, south, thence West to St. Louis into Missouri via Indianapolis, Indiana. I remember the Prophet Joseph gave father a Book of Mormon, one of the first publications issues. Today if I had it money could not buy it but it got lost after Father's death some way. Father sold to Samuel H. Smith, the Prophet Joseph's brother, a little corner out of the field, the S. W. corner, probably four or five acres to build a home thereon, where Samuel lived for years. After the Kirtland persecutions he became a Deacon in the Presbyterian Church at Piqua. . . ."

"Life History of George Wm. Vogel," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
