Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Walker, Charles Lowell

(November 17, 1832-June 11, 1904)

God revealed the law of Plural Marriage while Joseph and Oliver translated the Book of Mormon; Oliver wanted to practice it, Joseph said no; Oliver went forward without permission and lost the Spirit of God and fell into apostasy.

[July 26, 1872 . . . Brigham Young] Said that while Joseph and Oliver were translating the Book of Mormon, they had a revelation that the order of Patriarchal Marriage and the Sealing was right. Oliver said unto Joseph, "Brother Joseph, why don't we go into the Order of Polygamy, and practice it as the ancients did? We know it is true, then why delay?" Joseph's reply was, "I know that we know it is true, and from God, but the time has not yet come." This did not seem to suit Oliver, who expressed a determination to go into the order of Plural Marriage anyhow, although he was ignorant of the order and pattern and the results. Joseph said, "Oliver if you go into this thing it is not with my faith or consent." Disregarding the counsel of Joseph, Oliver Cowdery took to wife Miss Annie Lyman, cousin to George A. Smith. From that time he went into darkness and lost the spirit.

A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 1:349.

Tells of Emma refusing to send Joseph horses as he requested.

[Sunday, November 12th, 1876; Wilford Woodruff] said that Joseph Smith had sealed his testimony with his blood. [He] referred to the time when the Prophet Joseph crossed the river from Nauvoo and sent for his horses, his wife Emma locked the stable down and refused to let them go; said that if Brother Brigham had been there at [that] time he would have smashed the doors into kindling and sent the horses to Joseph.

A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 1:434.

Heard Wilford Woodruff quote Joseph as saying that life beyond the veil is so wonderful, men would seek death in order to get there had God not placed a strong desire to live in each human being.

[November 12, 1876, Wilford Woodruff] referred to a saying of Joseph Smith, which he heard him utter (like this): That if the people knew what was behind the veil, they would try by every means . . . to get there. But the Lord in his wisdom had implanted the fear of death in every person that they might cling to life and thus accomplish the designs of their Creator.

A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 1:595-96.

Parts of the earth will be taken away but be restored; the earth is to be placed in orbit next to Kolob and be second in size to it.

[October 18, 1880] Brother Everett said that he heard Joseph say that the earth had been divided and parts taken away, but the time would come when all would be restored and the earth would revolve in its original orbit next to Kolob and would be second in size to it.

A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 2:505.

Quotes Joseph as saying the Saints would go to the Rockies then return to build Zion in Missouri; also remembers Joseph drawing a line in the sand with his cane to show the route the Saints would follow to the Rockies; says Joseph said the Constitution would hang by a thread.

[January 20, 1881] Father McBride spoke in a very edifying manner on the joining together of Ephraim and Judah, of Joseph Smith marking out the way the saints would travel to the Rocky Mountains (the saints then being at Nauvoo) and when they got there being able to live their covenants. He, Joseph, referring to the order of Celestial Marriage, said the Kingdom would not be established in the mountains, but in the own due time of the Lord the saints would return and build up the waste places of Zion, and the Lord would establish his Kingdom upon the earth no more to be thrown down. Said that 56 years should wind up the scene and the Savior should come to his people. It being Feb. 14th, 1835. Said that the saints could not wear the garments of the Holy Priesthood in peace while living in the states but would go to a place were they could, marking the route with his cane in the sand they would take. Showed that the Savior would not come with power and great glory, as it is spoken of [in] the scriptures, to take vengeance of the wicked and them that knew him not but would come and pay his saints a visit in some holy place prepared for him, and about that time the government of the U.S. and the Constitution would be broken and hanging on a thread as it were, and the Saints of the Most High would step forward and save it from being tramped down by men of misrule.

A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 2:522.

In Joseph's last speech to the Nauvoo Legion, he said he was willing to die for them; also called upon the elements to aid in the redemption of Zion; once drew a line in sand, indicating the path the Saints would follow to the Rocky Mountains.

[January 26, 1881, Father McBride] Spoke of the time when the Prophet Joseph spoke to the Nauvoo Legion and asked them who they would have for their leader? It was moved, seconded, and carried that he, Joseph, be commander of the armies of the heavens and the earth and the savior of the nineteenth century, also United States President. [He] said the Lord had revealed unto him that he had many friends. [He] said how bad he had felt to see his brethren barefooted guarding him. It had made his heart bleed. He had tried to mortgage his house to get means to make them comfortable but could not do it. [He] said that for their faithfulness he knew they would be true, and they should be called the first Elders in the Church. [He] asked how many would die for him; they all said they would. Then, said he, "I will die for you." [He] drew his sword and raised it up to heaven and said it should never be sheathed again until Zion was redeemed. "And this day," said he, "I turn the key, and I call upon lightening, the thunders, the hurricanes, the tempests, the hail, the pestilence, and all the elements to aid and conspire to the redemption of the Zion of our God." He spake thus about the 23rd day of June 1844, a few days before he was murdered in Carthage Jail by a wicked and ruthless mob; and little did those few faithful half clad men think they were going to lose their much beloved Prophet so soon. Father Everett testified to these things being present at the time. Brother McBride also related that Joseph marked with his cane in the sand the track the saints would take to the Rocky Mountains. Says Joseph, "will you establish the kingdom there? No, but it will be set up and the saints will live their covenants," meaning the marriage covenant. [He] said we should travel on through the mountains, describing the Valley of the Great Salt Lake just as though he had lived there, designating where the soldiers camp would be and the burying ground.

A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 2:524-25.

Note: Karl and Katherine Larson wrote: "Brother McBride here makes is appear that Joseph Smith marked the route that the Saints would take to the Rocky Mountains at the same time he last addressed the legion . . . although this seeming error could be attributed to C. L. Walker's hasty recording of McBride's remarks. On Feb. 20, 1844, Joseph wrote: "I instructed the Twelve Apostles to send out a delegation and investigate the locations of California and Oregon Utah was then spoken of as part of California, and hunt out a good location, where we can remove after our temple is completed, and where we can build a city in a day, and have a government of our own, get up into the mountains, where the devil cannot dig us out, and live in a healthful climate, where we can live as old as we have a mind to" (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 6:222.

Joseph quoted as saying the Saints would build settlements stretching back to Nephite locations in Central America and that archaeological ruins are evidence of the once great Nephite civilization and that Moroni dedicated temple sites in St. George, Nauvoo, Jackson County, Kirtland, and elsewhere.

[January 26, 1881, Father McBride quoted Joseph] Saying we should make stations and build up settlements all the way to new, and old Mexico until we crossed the Isthmus and get back to the place where the covenant was broke [i.e., the United Order] by the old Nephites. [He] spoke of the Great Temple in Central America unfinished, showing marks of the work being stopped while in the course of erection; that pillars and other curiously worked stones were found in the quarry quite a distance from the temple exactly corresponding with those already fitted and placed in the grand and massive structure, showing plainly that some unexpected event transpired causing a stoppage in the work. This temple was situated by the River Copan anciently called the River of Nephi. Told of the U.S. government trying to prove Joseph a false prophet and the Book of Mormon also false by sending out Stevens and Catherwood to explore the ancient ruins and monuments, works, etc., but all they did only proved the Book of Mormon to be an authentic record of the ancient people of this vast continent of North and South America, and they (Stevens and Catherwood) admit that the continent was once inhabited by vast and mighty people who were acquainted with and understood the arts of agriculture, manufacture, sculpture, quarrying, stone cutting, masonry, painting, engraving, writing, shipping and commerce, and war as the implements of war and industry exhibited when exhumed from the ruins which are all over the land. Spoke of the route the old Nephites took traveling to Cumorah from the south and south west; of having to bury their treasures as they journeyed and finally burying the records and precious things in the Hill Cumorah; of Moroni dedicating the Temple site of what we now call St. George, Nauvoo, Jackson Co., Kirtland and others we know not of as yet. He also spoke of the law of consecration given tot he Saints when but few in numbers and the neglect of the saints in the early days of the Church to observe and obey this great law, hence being subject to drivings and persecutions. It was truly a feast to me and I enjoyed myself much.

A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 2:525-26.

Joseph quoted as saying the Ten Tribes are on an orb in space, where they cannot be seen even by telescope.

[March 6, 1881, Brother Jacob Gates] Said he heard Joseph Smith say when he was at Bishop Partridge's house in Far West, Missouri, concerning the ten lost tribes, they are hid from us by land and air. Said Bishop Partridge, "I guess they are by land and water," [speaking] in a doubting manner as if Joseph did not know what he was talking about. "Yes," said Joseph, "by land and air; they are hid from us in such a manner and at such an angle that the astronomers cannot get their telescopes to bear on them from this earth."

A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 2:539.

Joseph quoted as saying the Ten Tribes were taken away and lodged on an orb in space and that the earth at the creation was ninety times larger than it now is.

[Jan 10, 1881] At night paid Sister Eliza R. Snow a short visit and had some conversation with her on the dividing of the earth. She told me that she heard the Prophet Joseph say that when the 10 tribes were taken away, the Lord cut the earth in two, Joseph striking his left hand in the center with the edge of his right to illustrate the idea, and that they (the 10 tribes) were on an orb or planet by themselves, and when they returned with the portion of this earth that was taken away with them, the coming together of these two bodies or orbs would cause a shock and make the "earth reel to and fro like a drunken man." She also stated that he said the earth was . . . ninety times smaller now than when it was first created or organized.

A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 2:540.

Heard Joseph testify of the First Vision, saying God the Father appeared first and touched his eye, enabling him to see the Son.

[February 2, 1893] Brother John Alger said while speaking of the Prophet Joseph Smith, that when he, John, was a small boy he heard the Prophet Joseph relate his vision of seeing the Father and the Son, [and] that God touched his eyes with his finger and said "Joseph, this is my Beloved Son, hear Him." As soon as the Lord had touched his eyes with his finger he immediately saw the Savior. After meeting, a few of us questioned him about the matter and he told us at the bottom of the meeting house steps that he was in the house of Father Smith in Kirtland when Joseph made this declaration, and that Joseph while speaking of it put his finger to his right eye, suiting the action with the words so as to illustrate and at the same time impress the occurrence on the minds of those unto whom he was speaking. We enjoyed the conversation very much, as it was something that we had never seen in church history or heard of before.

A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 1:755-56.

Note: It was mid May 1831, that Father Smith moved onto a farm in Kirtland which had been purchased by the Prophet Joseph, and it was on January 22, 1838, that Mother Smith gave the Prophet's cousin, Elias Smith, power of attorney to sell all their Kirtland holdings. Thus we suppose that it was somewhere between May 1831 and January 1838 that the above mentioned account of the First Vision occurred. Since John Alger was born November 11, 1820, he would have been between ten and a half and eighteen years of age. As Alger describes himself as "a small boy," we are left to guess that Joseph's expressions were made closer to 1831 than 1838.

Joseph taught freedom of religion for all.

He said also that he had heard the Prophet Joseph Smith say many times that if he, Joseph, were the Emporer of the whole world, he would let every man, woman, and child worship God as they pleased and would protect them in the free exercise of religion.

A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 2:881.
