Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Walker, William Holmes

(August 28, 1820-January 9, 1908)

In an evening visit to the Prophet's home, he witnesses Joseph's family devotional, which included singing and prayer.

[About the Spring of 1840 my father, John Walker] sent me to Nauvoo on some business with President Joseph Smith, the Prophet. I arrived at his house about nine o'clock, just as his family was singing, before the accustomed evening prayer. His wife Emma, leading in the singing. I thought I had never heard such sweet, heavenly music before. I was equally interested in the prayer offered by the Prophet. Much pleased with my visit, and business accomplished satisfactorily, I returned home in a few days.

The Life Incidents and Travels of Elder William Holmes Walker, and His Association with Joseph Smith, the Prophet (N. p.: Elizabeth Jane Walker Piepgrass, 1943), 8.

Joseph teaches Walker the doctrine of plural Marriage.

I rode seventy-five miles to arrive at Nauvoo. I went to Joseph Smith's, and was made welcome. . . .

The next morning the Prophet invited me to hitch up my horse with one of his, in a buggy, and ride with him. We were riding all day through the city and county making a number of calls on business and pleasured combined. On this occasion the subject of celestial, or plural marriage, was introduced to me. As we returned home he remarked, "If there was anything I did not understand, to hold on a little, and I would understand it."

The Life Incidents and Travels of Elder William Holmes Walker, and His Association with Joseph Smith, the Prophet (N. p.: Elizabeth Jane Walker Piepgrass, 1943), 8.

Worked with Joseph in the fields; also tells of Joseph requiring, as mayor, that a poor lawbreaker pay his debt; then gave him a horse as assistance.

I returned again to Joseph Smith's, and was as a member of his family, taking an interest in his domestic affairs: remaining three years without asking any compensation. I went into the hayfield with him, and he assisted in moving grass, with a scythe, many a day, putting in ten hours good hard work. Very few if any, were his superior in that kind of work. The more extensive my acquaintance and experience became with him, the more my confidence in him increased. I was entrusted, by him, with important business. On one occasion, when mayor of the city of Nauvoo, it became his duty to fine a negro for violating the city ordinance, with regard to selling liquor. The negro pled for mercy; [he] said that his object in doing so, was to raise money to send for his family. The mayor would not shrink from his duty and he fined him $75.00 but, if he would not be guilty of doing so again, he would make him a present of a horse, to assist him. Which he accepted.

The Life Incidents and Travels of Elder William Holmes Walker, and His Association with Joseph Smith, the Prophet (N. p.: Elizabeth Jane Walker Piepgrass, 1943), 8-9.

Walker says he once cared for the Urim and Thummim; he saw many visitors come to meet the Prophet, including Joseph H. Jackson, who described himself as "the wickedest Man on earth."

The Urim and Thummim [the Seer Stone] were once placed in my charge, for the time being, and many other important trusts were confided to me. Which I am happy to say, were held sacred to myself.

The Prophet had a great many called, not only those of his own faith. True and well tried friends, and those from different parts of the earth came to make a permanent home in Nauvoo, who were anxious to see him. But strangers from all parts of the country, traveling up and down the river, almost invariably made it a point to call and see the Prophet, as they called him. On one occasion a man by the name of Jackson called. Not finding him at home I heard him say to Mrs. Smith, "You tell the Prophet, that the wickedest man on earth called to see him." Future developments proved that he told the truth for once.

The Life Incidents and Travels of Elder William Holmes Walker, and His Association with Joseph Smith, the Prophet (N. p.: Elizabeth Jane Walker Piepgrass, 1943), 9.

Note: It is difficult to discern exactly what Walker refers to here, as Joseph returned the Urim and Thummim to Moroni shortly after completing the Book of Mormon translation, an event which occurred many years before Walker was with the Prophet in Nauvoo as here described. Walker's more likely reference is to the Seer Stone.

Tells of Joseph, seated at a dining table, receiving the inspiration to evade his enemies and of an episode in which he took Joseph's horse, leaving the impression that Joseph had gone west.

It was quite a common occurrence, in those days, for officers to suddenly appear with an arrest for "Old Joe Smith," on some flimsy, trumped up charge. One day in the summer of 1842 I was sitting at the dinner table with the Prophet, when, without a word being spoken by any person present, he arose suddenly, from the table, and went out of the room. No sooner had he closed the door than an officer entered by another door, having come up the river bank. He (Joseph) walked some twenty rods across the block, in a path leading to the brick store, in full view of another officer. Then he disappeared, without being discovered by either. On another occasion some officers came into the city and put up at the hotel, just above his residence. Joseph gave me directions to take his horse, "Joe Dunkin," (named after Governor Dunkin), put on his military bridle, saddle, and portmanteaus (this article costing $100.00), and ride up Main Street to the upper-landing, cross on the ferry boat to Montrose, [and go] from there to Keokuk. From that, the report started that I had taken the horse to Joe Smith, and he had gone on west. Meantime I returned to Nauvoo with the horse, but no one knew that the horse had returned, neither friend or foe.

The Life Incidents and Travels of Elder William Holmes Walker, and His Association with Joseph Smith, the Prophet (N. p.: Elizabeth Jane Walker Piepgrass, 1943), 9.

Joseph secures permission to take Lucy Walker as a plural wife.

In the spring of 1843, my father, being away on a mission, the Prophet asked my consent, for my sister Lucy in marriage. I replied, that if it was her choice, that if she entered into the celestial order of marriage of her own free will and choice, I had no objection. This of course was in contrast with my former education and traditions. It also was in contrast with my former education and traditions. It also was altogether different from the course generally pursued by monogamists. Instead of taking a course to deceive and prostitute and bring about her ruin, he took a straightforward, honorable, and upright course, in no way depriving her of her agency.

When father returned from his mission, the matter being fully explained in connection with the doctrine received his endorsement and all parties concerned received his approbation.

The Life Incidents and Travels of Elder William Holmes Walker, and His Association with Joseph Smith, the Prophet (N. p.: Elizabeth Jane Walker Piepgrass, 1943), 9-10.

A stranger insults one of the hired girls in the Mansion House, and Joseph throws him out for the offense.

On August 31st [1843] the Mansion House was finished, and furnished, which was commenced the year before, and the Prophet and his family moved into the Mansion. I had charge of the House under his direction. An incident occurred which would go to show how detestable he felt towards, and the contempt he had for any person of questionable character. In regard to his private life, as to purity, honesty, virtue, charity, benevolence, liberality, refined and sensitive feelings and nobility of character, his superior did not exist on earth.

On the 15th of September the Mansion was opened as a hotel. Not long after the opening of the House, one afternoon a stranger came and registered his name. Just before supper he insulted one of the hired girls. The Prophet heard of it after the stranger had retired. The next morning he was in the bar room to meet him as he came down from his room. Mr. Smith said to him, "Sir: I understand that you insulted one of the employees of this house last evening." He began to make all kinds of apologies, but nothing of this kind would answer the purpose. He told the stranger to get his baggage and to get away from there as soon as possible, in such unmistakable language, and in a tone of voice that almost made his hair stand straight on his head. The man offered to pay his bill. "I want you to get. I want none of your money, or any other man's of your stamp." Upon this the stranger cut a lively exit.

The Life Incidents and Travels of Elder William Holmes Walker, and His Association with Joseph Smith, the Prophet (N. p.: Elizabeth Jane Walker Piepgrass, 1943), 10.
