Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Wasson, Lorenzo D.

(ca. 1818-July 1857)

Wasson tells of living with Joseph; says Joseph offered the Hales land near Nauvoo; also that he had strong irreligious feelings and prejudice against Joseph which were banished by meeting and observing him; he says no false prophet would endure the persecutions Joseph did; this letter also includes an addendum by Joseph, inviting David Hale to move and live near Nauvoo.

Aunt Emma received a letter from you and was much pleased with it as well as uncle Joseph. I was pleased with the respect you showed to uncle Joseph, for I think it is no more than he merits from those that should be his friends, as he never has injured us or laid a straw in our way as I know of, but has ever expressed the greatest degree of friendship. He offers to each of you brothers 80 acres of land if you will come to the City of Nauvoo. The land is in Iowa Territory, in what is called the "Half Breed Tract"; it is said to be of superior quality of both timber and prairie, well watered and I have no doubt that he feels a little pride in being situated in affluent circumstances that he can offer the benevolent hand to the relatives of his that are most dear to him. When I came to Nauvoo, and finally always ever since I knew uncle Joseph, I have entertained a strong irreligious unprovoked prejudice against himand no doubt we all have. But since I came here my prejudice has left me like the chaff before the wind. The doctrine that the Mormons promulgate, and their construction of the scriptures is, I think, correct as far as I have become acquainted with it. Where is the man that knows that he is propagating a religion that is false, and founded on hypocrisy, that will not forsake it when placed at the point of fifty bayonets and summoned to renounce his faith or die imprisoned for months, and fed on human flesh seasoned with arsenic and tarred and feathered and various other fiendish devilish tortures inflicted up on him? I ask where is the man that will stand the torture of fire and fagot if he is not sure he is doing the works of righteousness? There is not a man in Christendom among all the sons and daughters of Adam, I will venture to say. I have heard recapitulated the bloody tragedy that was enacted in Missouri by a drunken and inhuman mob. Picture to yourself women and children wandering houseless and homeless in the bleak prairies in cold winter weather, robbed of all their worldly treasures, without food, and scarcely clothes to cover their backs. It is enough to melt the hardest heart that is susceptible of feeling. But I must close my epistle. Were I to follow the Mormons through all their scenes of prosperity and adversity it would swell the pages of a volume like that of Josephus. But the Mormons have found shelter in Illinois; they have settled on the banks of the Mississippi in Illinois and Iowa. They are now in a prosperous condition. Yours respectfully

Lorenzo D. Wasson

[To this letter, Joseph wrote an addendum:]

Mr. David Hale

As Lorenzo and Emma have given me space for a few lines, I gladly embrace it, to send to you And yours my sincere and heartfelt respects, and I do honestly think if you come to this country, and settle it would be much to your advantage. I will do what Lorenzo has stated and even more, I will help you to improve the land; also, we want to see you all very much settled in this country.

Yours respectfully,

Joseph Smith.

"Lorenzo Wasson to David Hale, Feb. 1841," with an addendum by Joseph Smith, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling, punctuation and grammar have been modernized.

Note: Lorenzo D. Wasson was a nephew of Emma Smith.
