Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Watkins, William

(February 7, 1827-September 18, 1911)

Frequently heard the Prophet speak and said he spoke with great power.

We attended Sabbath meeting at Nauvoo and frequently heard the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon with others of the Apostles and leaders address the Saints. Nauvoo was flourishing, although the Saints were generally poor. They were exerting themselves to the utmost to build the temple.

The Prophet used to speak with great power and it seemed as if there was no end to his knowledge. . . .

"Autobiography of William Watkins," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 1.

Illinois man tells Watkins Joseph will be killed rather than elected president.

I was then [June, 1844] seventeen years of age. I started on foot to Warsaw, twenty miles from Nauvoo. When near Golden Point, a man with team overtook me and invited me to ride, which I readily accepted. We soon got into conversation and I found him to be very bitter in his feelings. He said Joe Smith will never occupy the presidential chair for if he gains the election he would be killed before he could get there. He however cooled down and I rode with him to Warsaw. He invited me to the house and I remained with him over night and had supper and breakfast.

"History of William Lampard Watkins," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2.

Witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

A meeting was appointed for August 8th [1844] by which time Brigham Young and most of the other apostles had returned home. It was at this meeting Sidney Rigdon made a lengthy and tedious speech presenting his claims, telling the people what wonderful things he had planned for them. It was a solemn time, for he was a man who on account of his experience and talents had been sustained as Joseph's counselor by the people, although contrary to the Prophet's wish for some time past, but the darkness was soon dispelled, for Brigham Young explained before the people on that day, the order of the Priesthood. He was filled with the power of the Holy Ghost. He stood before the people as the Prophet Joseph Smith often had done and we heard the voice of the true shepherd, for he spoke with the voice of Joseph. His manner and appearance were like unto Joseph's and it was manifested to all those present upon whom the responsibility rested to carry on the work of God and lead the Saints.

I sat in that assembly and did not realize for a time but that I was still listening to the Prophet Joseph, so great and marvelous was the manner in which the manifestation before the entire congregation was made, that when the proposition was placed before the people to decide whom they would sustain as the leader of the Church, the Twelve Apostles with Brigham Young as their president were almost unanimously sustained.

"Autobiography of William Watkins," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 3.
