Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Welch, John

(January 6, 1823-November 8, 1910)

Knew Joseph and heard him speak many times; was present when Brigham Young was transfigured.

I was well acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith and heard him speak both in public and in private many times. I was present at the meeting in the grove at Nauvoo August 8th, 1844, when Sidney Rigdon made the claim that it was his right to assume the leadership and presidency of the church. I saw Brigham Young, then the President of the Twelve Apostles, stand up to speak to the people and he spoke with the voice of Joseph Smith; and I further declare and testify that he, Brigham Young, had the appearance of the Prophet Joseph Smith while he, Brigham Young, was talking; that I was convinced then, and have never doubted in all the intervening years from that time up to the present, that Brigham Young was the right man and the man chosen of God to lead the Church.

"John Welch Deposition, July 5, 1902," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: Attached to this typewritten deposition in the handwriting of Heber Boden is the following note: "John Welch is my Grandfather. He and his wife, my Grandmother, Eliza Billington Welch, have both frequently borne this testimony to me. (Signed) Heber Wallace Boden, December 17, 1933."

Both he and his wife saw the transfiguration of Brigham Young; he made pen knives for Joseph and Hyrum.

John Welch and Eliza Billington were married in Nauvoo, May 18, 1845. They were both well acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, in life, and were permitted to view their remains after the martyrdom. John Welch was one of the guards over the bodies as they lay in state. They were both present at the meeting held August 8, 1844 where the mantle of the Prophet fell upon Brigham Young, and they knew Brigham Young had been called by divine authority and power, and these facts they related many many times to their children and grandchildren-children, greatly strengthening and adding to the testimonies of those who listened. During his residence in Nauvoo, John Welch made a fine pen knife and presented it to the Prophet Joseph, and another to his brother, Hyrum, the Patriarch. He had engraved their names on the plates under the tortoise shell handles. He was also a member of the Nauvoo Legion.

"John Welch and Eliza Billington Welch," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah; also in "John Welch Biographical Sketch," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
