Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Wells, Emmeline Blanche

(February 29, 1828-April 25, 1921)

In going to Nauvoo with the Saints, she heard much of Joseph's character; she went with great anticipation of meeting him; upon seeing him for the first time, she was "electrified"; she knew instantly he was a Prophet.

Journeying from my home in Massachusetts to Nauvoo, Illinois, with a company of Latter-day Saints, we were joined in Albany by some elders returning from missions in the eastern states. Among them was the late Jacob Gates, who was accompanied by his wife, with whom I became well acquainted en route. Sister Gates talked a great deal about the Prophet Joseph, whom she knew intimately, and when she saw that I was specially interested in him, promised me that she would introduce me to him on our arrival in Nauvoo. She also told me many things concerning his life and mission that I had not known before; and I listened carefully to all the elders' conversation for they were full of zeal and the spirit of the Latter-day work; and of love for the Prophet Joseph. To me it was a continuous revelation; although Sister Gates seemed to think it impossible for one so young and inexperienced to realize the greatness and wonderful power of the Prophet Joseph Smith; in time I came to understand the feeling when I tried to explain to others the power he possessed that impressed the people with whom he came in contact.

As we neared our destination in sailing up the Mississippi, the elders, there were eight of them now, (four more who had been laboring in Kentucky having joined us at Louisville) were full of enthusiasm at the thought of seeing the Prophet again. But not once in all the conversation did I hear a description of his personal appearance. There were no photographs in those days, and I had not formed any idea of him except of his wonderful power. I think in looking back upon that time, I must have been in a state of mingled emotions of astonishment and awe, not knowing what I should do or say on my arrival.

At last the boat reached the upper landing, and a crowd of people were coming toward the bank of the river. As we stepped ashore the crowd advanced, and I could see one person who towered away and above all the others around him; in fact I did not see distinctly any others. His majestic bearing, so entirely different from anyone I had ever seen (and I had seen many superior men) was more than a surprise. It was as if I beheld a vision; I seemed to be lifted off my feet, to be as it were walking in the air, and paying no heed whatever to those around me. I made my way through the crowd, then I saw this man whom I had noticed, because of his lofty appearance, shaking hands with all the people, men, women and children. Before I was aware of it he came to me, and when he took my hand, I was simply electrified,thrilled through and through to the tips of my fingers, and every part of my body, as if some magic elixir had given me new life and vitality. I am sure that for a few minutes I was not conscious of motion. I think I stood still, I did not want to speak, or be spoken to. I was overwhelmed with indefinable emotion.

Sister Gates came to me and said,

"I'll introduce you to the Prophet Joseph now, he is here."

I replied, "I don't want to be introduced to him."

She was astonished, and said curtly, "Why, you told me how desirous you were of meeting him."

I answered, "Yes, but I've seen him and he spoke to me."

"But he didn't know who you were!"

I replied, "I know that but it don't matter," and Sister Gates walked away without another word of explanation. I was in reality too full for utterance. I think had I been formally presented to the Prophet, I should have fallen down at his feet, I was in such a state of ecstacy. The one thought that filled my soul was, I have seen the Prophet of God, he has taken me by the hand, and this testimony has never left me in all the "perils by the way." It is as vivid today as ever it was. For many years, I felt it too sacred an experience even to mention.

Emmeline B. Wells, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 555.

Heard all of Joseph's last sermons; met him many times, and always received a confirming witness that he was a prophet.

It was my good fortune to go immediately on my arrival [in Nauvoo] to a home where the Prophet Joseph was almost idolized, and I heard of the wonderful power he possessed, and everything concerning him it was possible to learn.

I heard him preach all his last sermons, and frequently met him and shook hands with him, and always felt in my inmost soul, he is indeed a man unlike all others.

In the Prophet Joseph Smith, I believed I recognized the great spiritual power that brought joy and comfort to the Saints; and withal he had that strong comradeship that made such a bond of brotherliness with those who were his companions in civil and military life, and in which he reached men's souls, and appealed most forcibly to their friendship and loyalty. He possessed too the innate refinement that one finds in the born poet, or in the most highly cultivated intellectual and poetical nature; this extraordinary temperament and force combined is something of a miracle and can scarcely be accounted for except as a "heavenly mystery" of the "higher sort." To quote Tennyson (with a slight alteration),

"Whereof the man who with us trod

This planet was a noble type

Appearing when the times were ripe

That friend of men who lives with God."

Emmeline B. Wells, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 555-56.

Describes the Prophet's magnetic and powerful presence.

It seems to me I could fill pages upon pages describing my own thought of this magnificent personage, and with what I have heard from those who knew him, so much better and more intimately. But this I will say in closing this imperfectly written reminiscence. He was beyond my comprehension. The power of God rested upon him to such a degree that on many occasions he seemed transfigured. His expression was mild and almost childlike in repose; and when addressing the people, the glory of his countenance was beyond description. At other times the great power of his manner, more than of his voice (which was sublimely eloquent to me) seemed to shake the place on which we stood and penetrate the inmost soul of his hearers, and I am sure that then they would have laid down their lives to defend him. I always listened spellbound to his every utterancethe chosen of God in this last dispensation.

"A combination and a form, indeed

Where every God did seem to set his seal,

To give the world assurance of a man."

Emmeline B. Wells, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 556.

Testifies of Joseph; she sang for him; he patted her on the head; she saw the transfiguration of Brigham Young and remembers intense mourning following the martyrdom.

I think I may say with all propriety, that I have never doubted; that I knew the Prophet Joseph intimately and well; that I have sung for him, and recited for him, and he has patted me on the head when I was quite a young girl.

. . . I well remember the transfiguration of Brigham Young, when the people stood up in the grove, all with one accord, and declared that he was the Prophet Joseph Smith risen from the dead, which I witnessed standing in a wagon. I think that that has been one of the greatest things that has ever happened in this Church.

. . . The day that the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum were martyred you can never imagine, and when they brought forth the bodies to Nauvoo, the heavens wept, the rain poured down in torrents, and it was truly a morning that I can never forget.

"President Emmeline B. Wells," Relief Society Magazine 6, no. 8 (August 1919): 459-60.

On first meeting the Prophet, she obtains a lasting testimony; she also witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

The first important event that followed [her journey west from Massachusetts and parting with her mother] was her meeting with the Prophet Joseph Smith at Nauvoo. She was thrilled by his very hand shake, and received, she declares, a testimony of his divine mission. This was not many weeks before the martyrdom. She heard him deliver his last sermons and addresses, and noted the wondrous power that accompanied them. During that troubled period she developed the abiding faith that helped her through the trying ordeals then unfolding in her history.

Immediately after the Prophet's death her husband's father and mother left the Church and moved from Nauvoo. They wished to take their son and his wife with them, and made them liberal offersfor they had considerable wealthbut the young couple refused to go. Before and after the martyrdom Mr. [James Harvey] Harris [Emmeline's husband] stood guard many nights as a member of the Nauvoo Legion, and he and his wife were present at the memorable meeting when "the mantle" of Joseph fell upon Brigham in the eyes of the assembled Saints.

"Emmeline B. Woodward Wells," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:587.
