Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Wells, Lydia Ann Alley

(January 1, 1828-August 6, 1909)

Recalls hearing Joseph preach; she felt she could remember what he said as if it were yesterday.

In October of the same year they started with their family of seven children for Nauvoo but did not arrive until the first of January, 1843; on account of the Mississippi River being frozen over, we were obliged to remain at Alston, Illinois, for about six weeks, then we started again and got as far as Quincy and went by team the rest of the way. There we had the privilege of seeing the Prophet Joseph Smith and listening to his voice and to the words of inspiration that fell from his lips. I shall never forget them. They are as vivid to my mind as if it were but yesterday they were uttered. I can testify of his Divine Mission and know for a surety that he was a prophet of the Most High God.

"Lydia Ann Alley Wells," in Kate B. Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1958-77), 8: 191-92.

Note: Lydia Ann Wells was one of the plural wives of Daniel H. Wells.

Recalls hearing Joseph teach; remembers vividly what he said; she saw the dead Prophet and Patriarch.

In October of the same year they started with their family of seven children for Nauvoo, but did not arrive until the first of January, 1843. On account of the Mississippi river being frozen, we were obliged to remain at Alton, Ill., for about six weeks, when we started again and got as far as Quincy, and went by team the rest of the way. There we had the privilege of seeing the Prophet Joseph and listening to his voice, and to the words of inspiration that fell from his lips. I shall never forget them, they are as vivid to my mind as if it were but yesterday they were uttered. I can testify of his divine mission and know for a surety that he was a prophet of the most high God. I was there at his martyrdom, and shared in the great sorrow with the people of God. I looked upon the faces of the prophet and patriarch in death, and shall never forget them.

"A Sketch of the Life of Lydia A. Alley Wells, by Herself," Relief Society Magazine 10, no. 7 (July 1923): 324.
