Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Brown, Mary McRee Black

(b. October 17, 1819)

Left Nauvoo for health reasons on the advice of Joseph and her doctor; she recovered; saw transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Mary became very ill, and the doctors told her she would go as her husband had unless she went away from that climate. Mary refused to go but sent for the Prophet Joseph and he brought Brigham Young with him, and blessed her, and told her to go home to her husband's people until spring. They told her she would recover and would live to do much good.

She took the advice of the Prophet and went back to Mississippi. While there, she made peace with her father, who felt more favorable towards his daughter. Her step-mother, who had always been so good to her, stood by her in her trials, as she was called upon to give up her last little daughter, leaving her with one little son five years old. During all this time her brothers and sisters ignored her.

. . . At the conference of the Church called by the authorities to put a leader in Joseph's place, Mary saw Sidney Rigdon as he put forth his claims, and when Brigham Young stood up in the pulpit, Mary exclaimed with many others, "The prophet has come back!" for the mantle of Joseph had fallen upon Brigham and I have heard her testify to that many times.

Mary B. Brown, "Mary McRee Black Brown," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: In a second manuscript the story reads: "In Nauvoo Bro. Black worked on the Temple for two years and then engaged in mercantile business, but he died of malaria in 1845. The colder climate of Nauvoo not suiting them and being the cause of the death of the young husband, by advice of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Mary Black, with a little daughter and her five year old son, George David, returned to her parents in Mississippi." (Mary B. Brown, "Mary McRee Black Brown," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.)
