Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Westover, Eliza

(May 15, 1829-January 20, 1923)

On arrival at Nauvoo, she was met by Joseph and Brigham; Joseph loved children; he often rode past her father's home; she remembers the gloom at the martyrdom; she also witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

In 1841 we left our native home for Nauvoo arriving there in May, traveling by canal, rail, and steamboat.

The first to greet us on landing were the Prophet Joseph Smith and Brigham Young. After shaking hands and bidding us welcome, Brother Joseph's first question was had we a place to go. There were four families in the company, for two of my sisters were there.

Brother Joseph was a great lover of children. I had never met him, but I had a bow and one of his sweet smiles. I used to love to hear him preach, although then I was but a child. He was always interesting.

We lived on the main street going east out of Nauvoo, less than a mile from the temple. Seldom a week passed but that Brother Joseph would go by either horseback or in his family carriage with his family. He was a noble looking man.

Oh, Lew, I could tell you things that I am not able to write for my strength will give out.

Brother Joseph with the other brethren and with heavy guard rode past our house on their last ride. Then word came that our Prophet and Patriarch were killed. What a gloom was over that city. Every one was in tears. We were a flock of sheep without a shepherd.

The question was a general one, "What shall we do without a leader and Prophet?" I was fifteen years old and felt so sad. I was to meeting when Sidney Rigdon declared himself our true Prophet and leader. Very few responded to the call. I am happy to say none of my father's family felt that he was. Soon after, President Young came from the east where he was on a mission. I was to meeting when he said he was our Prophet and Seer. When he spoke it was in Brother Joseph's voice. I gave a jump off my seat and said, "Our Prophet has come to life. We have our President back."

I looked up and there stood Brother Joseph just as plain as I ever saw him alive. For a minute I heard Brother Joseph's voice and saw his features; then a mist seemed to pass from Brother Brigham's face and go up; then there stood Brother Brigham talking to us.

Hundreds saw the same thing that I did, but not all that were present. I forgot to tell you that I saw Brother Joseph and Hyram after they were in their coffins, the cruel bullet hole in Brother Hyram's face. It was a sad day for the saints in Nauvoo.

"Eliza Westover to Lewis B. Westover," 16 July 1916, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
