Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Westover, Mary C.

(See note following Mary E. Shumway Westover entry)

At the memorial service for Elder King Follett, Joseph prophesied the rains would not bother the Saints if they had faith; she also remembers seeing the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum following the martyrdom.

I was very small when we lived in Nauvoo, but I must have seen Joseph Smith many times for I always attended the meetings. The most striking thing I remember of him was a prophecy he made, which I saw fulfilled immediately. I was at the funeral service of King Follet [Follett], which was held in the Nauvoo Grove. There was a heavy thunderstorm arose and as it increased the people became frightened and started to go home; but before anyone left the Prophet arose and told the multitude if they would remain still and pray in their hearts the storm would not molest them in their services.

They did as they were bidden, the storm divided over the grove. I well remember how it was storming on all sides of the grove, yet it was as calm around us as if there was no sign of a storm so nearby.

I thought as I sat there that the Lord was speaking through Joseph. My testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel has grown as my years have increased, and I hope to retain it till the end of my life and even till the end of the world. I can testify that I have seen Joseph Smith and he was a true Prophet of God and the gospel he established is the same as that of Jesus Christ.

I remember well the time when the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum were brought to Nauvoo, for they passed our house on their way to the mansion. Though but a child, I thought of the persecutions they had passed through for the gospel and they even died as martyrs for the truth. I know they were men of God, Prophet and Patriarch, true and faithful. May we be worthy to meet them in the world to come is my constant prayer.

Mary C. Westover, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 545.
