Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Westover, Mary E. Shumway

(October 27, 1836-December 8, 1932)

Remembers seeing a large shining sword in the sky, which the Saints interpreted to mean their enemies were coming; she heard Joseph give the King Follett Discourse, where the faith of the Saints stayed the storm; she tells of a little boy with a kite who said he was flying food up to heaven for the Prophet.

We lived in Nauvoo for three years. Being a child of seven I remember seeing many things of which we now read in Church History. One incident which stands out in my memory is the one of seeing a bright shining sword in the sky. The Saints took the appearance of the sword as a warning that their enemies were again coming to persecute them.

I also remember of hearing the Prophet Joseph speak many times. One time in particular I remember. It was at a funeral for a man who had been killed by a rock that fell upon him while he was at work building the Nauvoo Temple. The funeral was held out-of- doors in a grove of trees. During the services a heavy thunderstorm came up. As large drops of water began to come down several people arose to leave the funeral to find shelter. But the Prophet called them back and asked that all pray in their hearts that the storm cease, and that it should be so. They all did as the Prophet asked, and while every head was bowed in prayer a strong wind came up that parted the storm directly above our heads. Part of the storm went to the North and the rest went to the South. Not one soul got wet.

One day an officer came into town looking for the Prophet. He ran across a small boy who was out sailing a kite. The Officer asked the child if he knew where the Prophet was. The boy answered, "Yes, he went up to Heaven this morning on Uncle Hyrum's white horse, and I'm sending this dinner up on my kite."

When the Saints were driven out of Nauvoo my father was the first one to take his family across the Mississippi River.

Mary E. Shumway Westover and Eva Westover, "The History of Mary E. Shumway Westover," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-2.

Note: This appears to be the same Mary Westover as that listed above as Mary C. Westover. The historical discrepancies in this account, we surmise, arise from her age, a supposition we make based on the fact that a granddaughter helped her write the account. Mary is the daughter of Charles Shumway.
