Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

White, Catherine Foutz

(December 25, 1831-April 19, 1910)

Recalls childhood memories of living in Missouri, of the Haun's Mill massacre, and of seeing Joseph and Hyrum; she also saw them lying dead.

"My parents joined the Church in Ohio when I was about four years old. The family then moved to Caldwell County, Missouri, and settled within two miles of Haun's Mill. I well remember the evening of the tragedy there, October 30, 1838. On hearing the firing of guns, mother gathered the children together and started for the woods. We called on a Sister Myers who went with us into the woods. About forty of us spent the night in the timber, hiding from the mob. Toward morning some of the brethren made a fire, as the weather was chilly. Soon a messenger arrived, bringing the sad news of the massacre of the brethren. On our way back to our homes, we called at Sister Myers and found her husband mortally wounded. He had crawled on his hands and knees a distance of two and one-half miles. I went with my mother and family to Haun's Mill and saw the dead and wounded. My father was shot through the thigh, but he finally recovered. Although I was only seven years old, the terrible sight of the dead and wounded made an everlasting impression upon me. The following spring (1839) we moved out of the State of Missouri and settled temporarily in Quincy, Illinois, Thence we moved to Commerce (afterwards Nauvoo). I well recollect the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum. I heard them preach while they were alive and saw them in their coffins after they were dead. In the spring of 1846, we left Nauvoo for the West. I remember that while we crossed the Mississippi river one of the oxen yoked to his mate jumped off the boat and swam close to the boat while crossing the river, without pulling his mate into the water. Our family stopped in Garden Grove until the spring of 1847, when we made our way to Winter Quarters and were organized for crossing the plains. We started from the Elkhorn in June, 1847, in Bishop Edward Hunter's hundred. My father was captain of fifty. After a long, perilous journey we arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley on October 1, 1847. Here my father died February 14, 1848, leaving my mother with five children to make her living as best she could. I became acquainted with one of the Mormon Battalion boys by the name of Samuel S. White, in the fall of 1848, and became his wife September 27, 1849. We resided in Salt Lake City until the spring of 1851, when we moved to Pleasant Grove, Utah . . ."

"White, Catherine Foutz," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 2:736-37.
