Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

White, Joel William

(March 10, 1831-1910)

As a young boy, he met the Prophet following a meeting in the Kirtland Temple; he recalls Joseph socializing following that meeting and also recalls another meeting in Nauvoo where the Prophet announced he had given the keys to the Twelve and they were responsible for the kingdom.

When 4 (?) my parents then went to Kirtland in 1835. While there I remember [illegible] going to meetings in the Kirtland Temple and there seeing the Prophet Joseph my first recollection of seeing him was after meeting one day my mother was talking to Sister Smith when the Prophet came up shaking hands with mother and also with me my mother telling me that was the Prophet.

[We moved ] to La Harpe near Nauvoo, in 18143; there I remember of seeing the Prophet, and hearing him speak and seeing him on the parade ground. I remember taking great delight in seeing him at the head of the Nauvoo Legion, parading on his horse, and I thought how grand he looked. I remember one sermon in particular I heard him make where he said "I have the Church fully organized now and roll it off my shoulders on to the shoulders of the Twelve apostles and if I am taken away the Twelve apostles will bear it off; and should they all be taken it will fall on the shoulders of the Seventiesbut that shall never be. He was martyred soon after preaching this sermon. After his death was a dark gloomy time for the saints. The mob soon raised [itself] and the saints were driven into Nauvoo, just taking what they could load into our wagons and taking what cattle we could went into Nauvoo. The affairs between the saints and the mob were soon settled, and we went back to our homes living seemingly in peace until in 1846; the saints were compelled to leave Nauvoo. We then went and crossed the river and started West to the Rocky Mountains camping in the Des Moines River working at what we could get to do during the summer and in the fall started on to Winter Quarters to join the saints already there.

"Autobiographical Sketch of the Life of Joel William White 1831-1910," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-2.
