Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

White, John Stout

(February 15, 1818-June 5, 1907)

Knew the Prophet; he asked Mother Smith to see the Urim and Thummim; he was shown the seerstone; he remembers the incarceration in Carthage and Joseph's sham funeral.

When the Church was organized they (John Stout White & wife, Ann Eliza Adelaide Everett) joined it and moved to Nauvoo with the rest of the Saints, therefore they met with all the persecutions of that noble band of sufferers. Mother was then a girl about eleven years old. One incident I remember she told me of was that she, her mother, brother and sister had moved in with her Aunt Fannie Redfield. They moved in closer together for protection. One day the mob was burning the homes as they came to them. They were about to put the torch to their house and someone sent the word that the Mormons were coming. They left and for the time being they had a short respite from persecution. My mother was personally acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and all his people, in fact they were neighbors. She used to deliver milk to Mother Smith as they called the Prophet's mother. She saw the Egyptian mummies including Pharaoh's daughter, the same that rescued Moses in the rushes. Mother Smith had a large cupboard or sideboard. She had the mummies in a row in this sideboard. They were cured with spices. My mother begged Mother Smith to show her the urim and thummim. Mother Smith told her she was only a little girl and wouldn't remember. She showed her the peep stone.

My mother was there when they put the Prophet and his brother Hyrum in Carthage jail. Although she was only a girl her memory was clear and all the incidents pertaining to their tragic deaths. She said they had scrubbed and tried in every way to get the stain of his life blood from the spot where Brother Hyrum fell on the hearth stone, but it never would come off. She went to their sham funeral. She said the caskets held bags of sand. The bodies were in other coffins laid away in some unknown graves.

"A Pioneer Story Told by a Pioneer (Mrs. J. H. Hess)," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Note: Mother Smith never had possession of the Urim and Thummim and could not therefore have shown it. Joseph returned it to Moroni. Perhaps she could have shown a seerstone.
