Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Whitmer, David

(January 7, 1805-January 25, 1888)

Whitmer tells of the day the Church was organized; he shows the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon on which Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, Emma Smith and Christian Whitmer had written as scribes; he saw Moroni, the gold plates, the brass plates, the Urim and Thummin, and the sword of Laban.

Hudgins House, Richmond, Ray County, Missouri

December 23, 1877

Orson Pratt,

Salt Lake City,

Dear Brother: I have just returned from the third interview with David Whitmer, since our arrival at this place, night before last. David looks pretty well preserved, and weighs heavier than ever before 152 lbs; and stands 5 feet 10, fair, and prominent features. Brother Hyrum Clark and myself met him at his own fireside and were made welcome, and he was very free to converse, each interview lasting several hours. I asked him in regards to the names of the six members at the organization of the Church on the 6th day of April, 1830, and he gave them as follows: 1st Joseph Smith, 2, Oliver Cowdery, 3rd, David Whitmer, 4th, Hyrum Smith, 5, John Whitmer, 6, Christian Whitmer and as near as he could remember, about 12 N. [sic] dinnertime. He also said there were 40 or 50 persons present many of whom were in the Church.

He showed us the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon written by four different persons, Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, Emma Smith, and Christian Whitmer. It was clean and well-cared for, written on foolscap, and about two inches thick. It came into his hands from Oliver Cowdery at his death, who lived at this place at the time of his death, and now he is by the side of both the father and the mother of David Whitmer, and some others of the Whitmer family, about half a mile north of Richmond. We visited the spot today. The city now contains about 2,000 inhabitants. A large courthouse stands in the same square on the spot where the old stood about 40 years ago. Some of our brethren will remember the old one. The old log jail is substituted by a blacksmith and wagon shop. A shock of earthquake rent the new courthouse in 1862, but it still stands. We asked David Whitmer in regards to his faith in the Book of Mormon. He smiled and his countenance lit up, saying, "As I know the sun shines so I know an angel appeared while Joseph, Oliver and myself sat upon a log in a clearing about 11 o'clock in the morning," a light first appearing which grew brighter until the angel stood before them and placed upon a table before them and placed upon a table before them the plates of gold, also the brass plates, the Urim and Thummim (or interpreters) the ball or compass and the sword of Laban. He said there could be nothing to induce him to deny these things. He further stated that he knew that Joseph was a prophet, and did receive revelations and that he organized the Church on the rock of the Twelve Apostles.

David has just two children, a son 44 years of age, [and] a daughter, both living here, the latter a widow. David will be 73 years of age in January, and his brother John, 2 years and 6 months older and lives at Far West.

I had a very pleasant interview today with General Doniphan and attended the Christian Church of which he is a member. General Atchison is still alive and two other members of the bar, all of which lived at Liberty, Clay County, Missouri, at the time of the expulsion of our people from Jackson County when Clay County received them. We had the opportunity today of explaining some of our views at our hotel in the presence of General Doniphan and others, and also several times while on the cars.

With kind regards, E. Stevenson.

Journal History, 23 December 1877, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 3.

David Whitmer shows the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon and names the first 6 members of the Church; he testifies of angel, plates, the Urim and Thummim, and a voice from heaven; David Whitmer also quarreled with Joseph over the name of the Church; he further mentions he saw Joseph and Oliver in company with one of the Nephites.

Shady Grove,

Hickman County, Tenn.

President John Taylor,

Salt Lake City

Dear Brother:

I am happy to say that Brother Clark and myself arrived at this place December 28th, 1877, in safety and in good health. We stopped over at R. and L. Junction, Missouri, five miles from Richmond, Missouri where after putting up at the Hadgin's Hotel, we found David Whitmer, the only surviving one of the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon. With the exception of rhumatism he seems to enjoy good health, possessing fair and prominent features. After being kindly received we held four hours conversation, and met again, and spent four hours more in the evening; the next day Sabbath, two hours more. We found him quite communicative and cheerful, and seemed pleased to receive us. After some conversation he showed us the original manuscript copy of the Book of Mormon written by Martin Harris, David Whitmer, Emma Smith and Christian Whitmer, it was about two inches thick, of foolscap and clean and well preserved. It fell into his hands through the death of Oliver Cowdery, who died and was buried north of Richmond where lie the remains of Peter Whitmer and his wife-both are father and mother of David Whitmer. We asked him regarding the manner of the six at the organization of the Church, April 6th, 1830 he stated as follows:

1st, Joseph Smith, Jr., 2nd, Oliver Cowdery, 3rd, David Whitmer, 4th, Hyrum Smith, 5th, John Whitmer, 6th, Christian Whitmer. There were about forty of fifty present, many of whom had been baptized, this took place about noon.

I also desired him to state his present faith in regard to the Book of Mormon and the organization of the Church. He stated in the most pristine times that he saw an angel, golden plates, and the Urim and Thummim, etc. The plates were opened leaf by leaf, he saw the characters and heard a voice from heaven bearing record, that he also knew that the Prophet Joseph did translate the Book of Mormon by the power of God, that he did receive revelation and that the Church was built on the Rock, and that it was revealed that there were to be Twelve Apostles, long before they were chosen and ordained. From his only son David, who was born at Liberty, Clay County, Missouri, in 1833, I learned that the first difficulty or dispute between his father and the Prophet was in 1836 about the name of the Church, objecting to calling it the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, he wishing it to be called the Church of Christ. He related many very interesting items of seeing one of the Nephites in company with the Prophet and Oliver, when Joseph's countenance became almost transparent, etc.

Since our arrival at this place we have held several meetings at Shady Grove, Lady's Bend, 10 miles north, and Greenfield's meeting house, three or four miles south, and also in the evening at the Groves, the continuation of the subject of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon in fulfillment of prophecy, one Baptist preacher being present three times. Tomorrow we start out in the new field to break in new ground. Brother R. R. Church and family are very kind to the elders in furnishing houses and taking care of them. In this he is doing a good work.

Edward Stevenson

Journal History, 7 January 1878, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2-3.

David Whitmer was plowing his field when he was approached by Joseph to be a witness; he heard a voice from heaven; the angel then appeared, showing the plates.

In reply to a question by me [Edward Stevenson], as to his present views as a witness to the plates of the Book of Mormon, he said: "I was plowing in my field, when I heard a voice saying, 'Blessed is the name of the Lord and those that keep his commandments.' After I had plowed one more round, the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery came along, and said, 'Come and be one of the witnesses.' We passed through a clearing and sat on a log. While there a light appeared, which grew brighter, until an angel stood before them with the plates and other things. The angel turned the leaves so that we could see the engravings, etc. We then heard a voice saying that those things were true and that the translation was correct. This was about 11 o'clock in the morning."

"Edward Stevenson to the Editors of the Salt Lake Herald, 21 January 1878."

Note: The above information, which Edward Stevenson gleaned from his interviews with David Whitmer, adds insights not recorded in some of Stevenson's other accounts.

Some history of David Whitmer, who testifies to having seen the angel, plates, etc.; he describes the plates, which he saw by the power of faith; the plates were returned to the custody of the angel who placed them in a large cave; Joseph translated them by using the Urim and Thummim; war and tribulation was predicted.

[Dr. Poulson, living in Ogden, wrote to the editors of the Deseret News concerning a visit he had had with David Whitmer. The News published those portions of the letter it thought would be of interest to its readers in its issue of August 16, 1878.]

Ogden City, August 13, 1878.

Editors Deseret News:

Several persons have inquired of me about David Whitmer, especially since the publication in the News of a letter about the late John Whitmer. If the Deseret News will give the space in its columns it will afford me pleasure to write what I know about him from my visit to Richmond, Missouri, and also my personal conversation with him.

He is now 73 years old but is a wonderfully well-preserved man, tall and erect as a pine, well proportioned, with a military bearing, Roman nose and dark eyes full of fire and expression. His forehead is broad and large, and his head nearly bald, but well-balanced.

In company with a son and grandson, Mr. Whitmer keeps a livery and feed stable at Richmond, Missouri, the old grandfather is principally relieved from business, but he makes his regular trips down to the stables, and to the minute as in olden times.

David Whitmer's sister [Elizabeth Ann] was married to Oliver Cowdery, whose remains rest in the graveyard at Richmond, and who practiced law in that town from 1838 to 1849, [only intermittently] when he died in full faith and bore testimony about his visions. On his deathbed he requested to be buried without any display or large attendance, and he wanted no gravestone to be erected over his ashes. David Whitmer said his brother-in-law was, in many respects, a peculiar man. David's brother, Jacob Whitmer, one of the witnesses, lived and died in Richmond, and his grave is only a short distance from Cowdery's. On Jacob's grave is erected a fine marble stone. On the top of the stone appears his name and next we discover the cut of the Book of Mormon laid open, with a blooming rose resting on the divine, and the book resting upon the closed-up Bible. Jacob Whitmer died April 21, 1856, aged 56 years, 2 months and 26 days.

After a self introduction to David Whitmer and some general conversation, I remarked to him:

IYou are one of the Three Witnesses?

HeI am one of them.

IAnd you saw the angel, and he showed you the plates?

HeThe Book of Mormon is true, as true as any record can be, I saw the angel, and I saw the sword of Laban, and the breastplate, and the Urim and Thummim, and the plates and the director, and the angel stood before us, and he turned the leaves one by one.

IDid the angel turn all the leaves before you as you looked on it?

HeNo, not all, only that part of the book which was not sealed, and what there was sealed appeared as solid to my view as wood.

IHow many of the plates were sealed?

HeAbout half of the book was sealed. Those leaves which were not sealed, about the half of the first part of the book, were numerous, and the angel turned them over before our eyes. There is yet to be given a translation about Jared's people's doings and of Nephi, and many other records and books, which all has to be done, when the time comes.

IHow large were the plates?

HeAbout eight inches wide and six or seven inches long, as they appeared a little wider than long, and three rings kept the plates together; one above, one in the middle, and one below, so the angel could turn every leaf entirely over. The thickness was about of a common sheet of tin used by tinsmiths.

IHow did the engravings look?

HeThere were characters. We copied some, and if you visit my brother John, one of the Eight Witnesses, who wrote for Joseph, John can show you some of the old manuscript which he borrowed from me. I must have it returned to me again, as it belongs to the Church, in connection with other records.

IMartin Harris, who died lately in Smithfield, Utah, gave a testimony in Salt Lake City Tabernacle that he saw the plates by faith and the power of God.

HeMartin Harris is correct. He was not by us at all when he first saw the angel. First when we told him what we had seen, and were the second time in prayer all together, and when the angel appeared for a second time, we saw Martin Harris by us, and he saw, and we saw it, and our testimony which we give to the world is true exactly as you read it, we saw by the gift and power of God. As we were praying, the angel stood before us in his glory, and all things were before us on a table, and we heard the testimony about the plates, and we were commanded to bear that testimony to the world, and our testimony is true. And when the angel had finished his words, and shown us the plates one by one, which were to be translated, then the vision was closed at once, and exactly as it came even so did the sight disappear.

IBut these things which you saw were material things, how could they come and vanish away again?

HeIt is the power of God. He does those things and his angels know how to do it. It was wonderful to us, but it was by the power of God. He had appointed his angels to be the guardians of the plates and other things, and the angel knew how it was done.

IDid the Eight Witnesses not handle the plates as a material substance?

HeWe did not, but they did, because of the faith of Joseph became so great that the angel, the guardian of the plates, gave the plates up to Joseph for a time, that those Eight Witnesses could see and handle them.

IDid not Joseph, at an earlier period, have the full possession of those plates?

HeYes, he did do in the commencement, but the persecution grew so hot that the angel took possession of the records, and showed those things, as he did, to Cowdery, Harris and me, and in the presence of Joseph, and afterwards he was allowed to show the plates to the Eight Witnesses.

IWhere are the plates now?

HeIn a cave, where the angel has hidden them up till the time arrives when the plates, which are sealed, shall be translated. God will yet raise up a mighty one, who shall do his work till it is finished and Jesus comes again.

IWhere is that cave?

HeIn the state of New York.

IIn the Hill Cumorah?

HeNo, but not far from that place. I saw the place where the plates were found, and a great many did so, and it awakened an excitement at the time, because the worst enemies of "Mormonism" stirred up the confusion by telling about the plates which Joseph found, and the "gold bible" which he was in possession of, so he was in constant danger of being robbed and killed.

IHow did the place look?

HeIt was a stone box, and the stones looked to me as if they were cemented together. That was on the side of the hill, and a little down from the top.

IHow did you know Joseph to be at that time?

HeHe was a very humble and meek man, and very simple, indeed. He did the will of the Lord, and an arduous task it was to translate the Book of Mormon.

IDid Joseph use the Urim and Thummim when he translated?

HeThe Urim and Thummim were two white stones, each of them cased in as spectacles are, in a kind of silver casing, but the bow between the stones was more heavy, and longer apart between the stones, than we usually find in spectacles. Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, Emma, and my brother John each at different times wrote for Joseph as he translated.

IWhen will the temple be built at Independence?

HeRight after the great tribulation is over.

IWhat do you mean by that?

HeA civil war more bloody and cruel than the rebellion. It will be a smashing up of this nation, about which time the second great work has to be done, a work like Joseph did, and the translation of the sealed plates, and peace all over.

IWill you live and see those things?

HeIt was said to us, that the second great work should commence when nearly all the witnesses to the first plates had passed away, so I may live and see those things take place.

IYou are in good health?

HeI am in very well indeed for my age. I am not troubled with anything except a little rheumatism or what it is in my hops. I was thrown from a buggy, and feel ever since some weakness over my hips.

This conversation was mostly written down word for word half an hour after the interview with David Whitmer, esq., who will recognize it as his words, and I send it that the public may form a better idea about this truly remarkable man.

Yours truly,

P. P. Wilhelm Poulson, M.D.

"P. W. Poulson to Editors of The Deseret News," Deseret News, 16 August 1878, 2.

David Whitmer saw the gold and other plates in June 1829; he tells of his fields being plowed by unseen helpers so that he could join Joseph; he also tells of going to Pennsylvania and of Joseph's seeric recital of his journey; he also saw Moroni "going to Cumorah"; Moroni later appeared to Whitmer's mother; David Whitmer received the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon from Oliver Cowdery, who died at Whitmer's home; Whitmer also tells of Oliver's rebaptism and final testimony.

[The following interviews of David Whitmer by Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith, took place at Richmond, Missouri, on the 7th and 8th of September, 1878. Elders Pratt and Smith had traveled east from Salt Lake City to visit historical sites of the Church. On their way they stopped at Richmond, Missouri, to interview David Whitmer, the last surviving witness of the Book of Mormon.]

At Richmond we [Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith] put up at the Shaw House (before the cyclone a three-story brick building, but has been restored since the tempest, only two stories), now kept by Mr. Warren Ewing, son-in-law to the original proprietor, Mr. S. Shaw, once a freighter to Utah, now dead. On Saturday morning, September 7th, we met Mr. David Whitmer, the last remaining one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon. He is a good-sized man, 73 years of age last January, and well-preserved (he was born January 7, 1805). He is close-shaven, his hair perfectly white and rather thin; he has a large head and a very pleasant, manly countenance that one would readily perceive to be an index to a conscientious, honest heart. He seemed wonderfully pleased, as well as surprised, at seeing Elder Orson Pratt. Said he would not have known himhe had grown so fat and stout; he remembered him as a slender, bashful, timid boy. After a few moments conversation he excused himself, saying he would return again to see us. This meeting was in the barroom of the hotel. When he called again he was in company with Colonel Childs, a middle-aged man, and a resident of the place. By invitation we accompanied them to Mr. Whitmer's office, where we were introduced to Mr. David J. Whitmer (eldest son of David), Mr. Geo. [George] Schweich (grandson of the old gentleman), Mr. John C. Whitmer (son of Jacob Whitmer), Colonel James W. Black, of Richmond, and several others. A couple of hours were very pleasantly passed in conversation, principally on Utah matters, when we parted for dinner, agreeing to meet Mr. Whitmer again at his office at 4:30 p.m.

Agreeable to appointment, we met Mr. Whitmer and his friends at his office, but as the place was too public for private conversation and as it seemed impossible to obtain a private personal interview with David Whitmer, by himself, we invited him and such of his friends as he saw proper to fetch along, to our room in the hotel. Mr. Whitmer apologized for not inviting us to his house, as it was "wash day," and he and his wife were "worn out" with the extra labor, exposure, etc., consequent on rebuilding since the cyclone. He accepted our invitation to our room and brought with him James R. B. Vancleave, a fine-looking, intelligent, young newspaper man of Chicago, who is paying his addresses to Miss Josephine Schweich (granddaughter of David Whitmer), George Schweich (grandson), John C. Whitmer (son of Jacob), W. W. Warner, and another person whose name we did not learn. In the presence of these, the following, in substance, as noticed in Brother Joseph F. Smith's journal, is the account of the interview.

Elder O. [Orson] Pratt to D. [David] Whitmer. Can you tell the date of the bestowal of the apostleship upon Joseph, by Peter, James and John?

D. W. I do not know, Joseph never told me. I can only tell you what I know, for I will not testify to anything I do not know.

J. F. S. [Joseph F. Smith] to D. W. Did Oliver Cowdery die here in Richmond?

D. W. Yes, he lived here, I think, about one year before his death. He died in my father's house, right here, in March, 1850. Phineas Young was here at the time.

Elder O. P. Do you remember what time you saw the plates?

D. W. It was in June, 1829the latter part of the month, and the Eight Witnesses saw them, I think, the next day or the day after (i.e. one or two days after). Joseph showed them the plates himself, but the angel showed us (the Three Witnesses) the plates, as I suppose to fulfill the words of the book itself. Martin Harris was not with us at this time; he obtained a view of them afterwards (the same day). Joseph, Oliver and myself were together when I saw them. We not only saw the plates of the Book of Mormon but also the brass plates, the plates of the Book of Ether, the plates containing the records of the wickedness and secret combinations of the people of the world down to the time of their being engraved, and many other plates. The fact is, it was just as though Joseph, Oliver and I were sitting just here on a log, when we were overshadowed by a light. It was not like the light of the sun nor like that of a fire, but more glorious and beautiful. It extended away round us, I cannot tell how far, but in the midst of this light about as far off as he sits (pointing to John C. Whitmer, sitting a few feet from him), there appeared as it were, a table with many records or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the Sword of Laban, the Directorsi.e., the ball which Lehi hadand the Interpreters. I saw them just as plain as I see this bed (striking the bed beside him with his hand), and I heard the voice of the Lord, as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God.

Elder O. P. Did you see the angel at this time?

D. W. Yes; he stood before us. Our testimony as recorded in the Book of Mormon is strictly and absolutely true, just as it is there written. Before I knew Joseph, I had heard about him and the plates from persons who declared they knew he had them, and swore they would get them from him. When Oliver Cowdery went to Pennsylvania, he promised to write me what he should learn about these matters, which he did. He wrote me that Joseph had told him his (Oliver's) secret thoughts, and all he had meditated about going to see him, which no man on earth knew, as he supposed, but himself, and so he stopped to write for Joseph.

Soon after this, Joseph sent for me (D. W.) to come to Harmony to get him and Oliver and bring them to my father's house. I did not know what to do, I was pressed with my work. I had some 20 acres to plow, so I concluded I would finish plowing and then go. I got up one morning to go to work as usual and, on going to the field, found between five and seven acres of my ground had been plowed during the night.

I don't know who did it; but it was done just as I would have done it myself, and the plow was left standing in the furrow.

This enabled me to start sooner. When I arrived at Harmony, Joseph and Oliver were coming toward me, and met me some distance from the house. Oliver told me that Joseph had informed him when I started from home, where I had stopped the first night, how I read the sign at the tavern, where I stopped the next night, etc., and that I would be there that day before dinner, and this was why they had come out to meet me; all of which was exactly as Joseph had told Oliver, at which I was greatly astonished. When I was returning to Fayette, with Joseph and Oliver, all of us riding in the wagon, Oliver and I on an old-fashioned, wooden, spring seat and Joseph behind us; while traveling along in a clear open place, a very pleasant, nice-looking old man suddenly appeared by the side of our wagon and saluted us with, "Good morning, it is very warm," at the same time wiping his face or forehead with his hand. We returned the salutation, and, by a sign from Joseph, I invited him to ride if he was going our way. But he said very pleasantly, "No, I am going to Cumorah." This name was something new to me, I did not know what Cumorah meant. We all gazed at him and at each other, and as I looked around inquiringly of Joseph, the old man instantly disappeared, so that I did not see him again.

J. F. S. Did you notice his appearance?

D. W. I should think I did. He was, I should think, about 5 feet 8 or 9 inches tall and heavy set, about such a man as James Vancleave there, but heavier; his face was as large, he was dressed in a suit of brown woolen clothes, his hair and beard were white, like Brother Pratt's, but his beard was not so heavy. I also remember that he had on his back a sort of knapsack with something in, shaped like a book. It was the messenger who had the plates, who had taken them from Joseph just prior to our starting from Harmony. Soon after our arrival home, I saw something which led me to the belief that the plates were placed or concealed in my father's barn. I frankly asked Joseph if my supposition was right, he told me it was. Some time after this, my mother was going to milk the cows, when she was met out near the yard by the same old man (judging by her description of him) who said to her: "You have been very faithful and diligent in your labors, but you are tired because of the increase in your toil; it is proper therefore that you should receive a witness that your faith may be strengthened." Thereupon he showed her the plates. My father and mother had a large family of their own; the addition to it, therefore, of Joseph, his wife Emma, and Oliver very greatly increased the toil and anxiety of my mother. And although she had never complained, she had sometimes felt that her labor was too much, or at least she was perhaps beginning to feel so. This circumstance, however, completely removed all such feelings and nerved her up for her increased responsibilities.

Elder O. P. Have you any idea when the other record will be brought forth?

D. W. When we see things in the spirit and by the power of God they seem to be right here; the present signs of the times indicate the near approach of the coming forth of the other plates, but when it will be I cannot tell. The Three Nephites are at work among the lost tribes and elsewhere. John the Revelator is at work, and I believe the time will come suddenly, before we are prepared for it.

Elder O. P. Have you in your possession the original MSS. [manuscripts] of the Book of Mormon?

D. W. I have; they are in O. [Oliver] Cowdery's handwriting. He placed them in my care at his death, and charged me to preserve them as long as I lived; they are safe and well preserved.

J. F. S. What will be done with them at your death?

D. W. I will leave them to my nephew, David Whitmer, son of my brother Jacob, and my namesake.

O. P. Would you not part with them to a purchaser?

D. W. No. Oliver charged me to keep them, and Joseph said my father's house should keep the records. I consider these things sacred, and would not part with nor barter them for money.

J. F. S. We would not offer you money in the light of bartering for the MSS., but we would like to see them preserved in some manner where they would be safe from casualties and from the caprices of men, in some institution that will not die as man does.

D. W. That is all right. While camping around here in a tent, all my effects exposed to the weather, everything in the trunk where the MSS. [manuscripts] were kept became moldy, etc., but they were preserved, not even being discolored (we supposed his camping in a tent, etc., had reference to his circumstances after the cyclone, in June last). As he and others affirm, the room in which the MSS. were kept was the only part of the house which was not demolished, and even the ceiling of that room was but little impaired. "Do you think," said Philander Page, a son of Hiram Page, one of the Eight Witnesses, "that the Almighty cannot take care of his own?"

Next day (Sunday, September 8) Mr. Whitmer invited us to his house, where, in the presence of David Whitmer, Esq. (son of Jacob), Philander Page, J. R. B. Vancleave, David J. Whitmer (son of David the witness), George Schweich (grandson of David), Colonel Childs and others, David Whitmer brought out the MSS. of the Book of Mormon. We examined them closely and those who knew the handwriting pronounced the whole of them, excepting comparatively few pages, to be in the handwriting of Oliver Cowdery. It was thought that these few pages were in the handwritings of Emma Smith and John and Christian Whitmer.

We found that the names of the eleven witnesses were, however, subscribed in the handwriting of Oliver Cowdery. When the question was asked Mr. Whitmer if he and the other witnesses did or did not sign the testimonies themselves, Mr. W. replied, "each signed his own name."

"Then where are the original signatures?"

D. W. I don't know; I suppose Oliver copied them, but this I know is an exact copy.

Someone suggested that he, being the last one left of the eleven witnesses, ought to certify to this copy.

Lawyer D. Whitmer (Jacob's son) suggested that he had better reflect about it first and be very cautious.

J. F. S. suggested that perhaps there were two copies of the manuscripts, but Mr. Whitmer replied that, according to the best of his knowledge, there never was but the one copy. Herein, of course, he is evidently uninformed.

Elder O. Pratt again felt closely after the subject of procuring the MSS., but we found that nothing would move him on this point. The whole Whitmer family are deeply impressed with the sacredness of this relic. And so thoroughly imbued are they with the idea and faith that it is under the immediate protection of the Almighty that, in their estimation, not only are the MSS. themselves safe from all possible contingencies, but that they are a source of protection to the place or house in which they may be kept, and, it may be, to those who have possession of them.

Another reason why they cling to this relic is that David Whitmer has reorganized the "Church of Christ" with six elders and two priests, after the pattern of the first organization, the two priests as we suppose representing Joseph and Oliver as holding the Aaronic priesthood from the hand of John the Baptist. David and John Whitmer were two of these six elders, four others, viz. John C. Whitmer, W. W. Warner, Philander Page, and John Short, having been ordained by David and John. And as the recent death of John has diminished the number to five elders it would be interesting to know if, according to their strict construction the vacancy can be filled.

Their creed is to preach nothing but the Bible and the Book of Mormon. Mr. Whitmer and others called on us again in the evening, at the hotel, and conversed, reiterating many things before stated. Upon inquiry, Mr. Whitmer informed us that Oliver Cowdery had told him all about his visiting the Church at Council Bluffs and of his having been rebaptized. He said, "Oliver died the happiest man I ever saw, after shaking hands with the family and kissing his wife and daughter, he said, 'Now I lay me down for the last time, I am going to my Savior,' and died immediately, with a smile on his face."

In response to some questions, Mr. Whitmer said: "Many things have been revealed which were designed only for the Church, and which the world cannot comprehend, but the Book of Mormon and those testimonies therein given were to go to all the world."

We replied, "Yes, and we have sent that book to the Danes, the Swedes, the Spanish, the Italians, the French, the German, the Welsh, and to the islands of the sea, the book even having been translated into Hindoostanee. So you see the Church has not been idle." To this he made no reply. In parting with him, he said "This may be the last time I shall ever see you in the flesh, so farewell."

This ended our interview with the last remaining witness who saw the plates of the Book of Mormon, yet not the last witness of its truth, for now such witnesses are multiplied into tens of thousands.

Orson Pratt, "Report of Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 40, no. 49 (9 December 1878): 771-74.

Joseph conceals the plates in the Whitmer barn.

[According to David Whitmer,] soon after our [Joseph, Oliver, and David] arrival home [in Fayette], I saw something which led me to the belief that the plates were placed or concealed in my father's barn. I frankly asked Joseph if my supposition was right, and he told me it was. Sometime after this, my mother was going to milk the cows, when she was met out near the yard by the same old man (judging by her description of him) who said to her: "You have been very faithful and diligent in your labors, but you are tired because of the increase of your toil; it is proper therefore that you should receive a witness that your faith may be strengthened." Thereupon he showed her the plates. My father and mother had a large family of their own, the addition to it therefore of Joseph, his wife Emma and Oliver very greatly increased the toil and anxiety of my mother. And although she had never complained she had sometimes felt that her labor was too much, or at least she was perhaps beginning to feel so. This circumstance, however, completely removed all such feelings and nerved her up for her increased responsibilities.

Orson Pratt, "Report of Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 40, no. 49 (9 December 1878):772-73.

Whitmer says that he saw Joseph give Oliver the manuscript from which the Book of Mormon was printed, and that Joseph prophesied a division would unfold in the Church; he also says Orson Pratt sought to buy the manuscript, but Whitmer refused.

[On April 25, 1884, E. C. Briggs and R. Etzenhouser of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints visited with David Whitmer, and report that he said:] "I was present when Joseph gave these manuscripts [i.e., the manuscript from which the Book of Mormon was printed] to Oliver, O, it was such a solemn charge. He (Joseph) said, I feel it in my bones that there will be a division in the church, like it was with the Nephites and Lamanites, and if these manuscripts are not preserved, I fear that the church may be injured, and when you deliver them up to others, be sure they are left in good hands." I now see why they should be preserved. A delegation once waited on me from Utah, Orson Pratt headed it, to secure them. And he said:

"Set your own price on them. There is millions in the treasury and we are authorized to draw any amount for them, so you may not be particular, ask any price."

I replied, "They are not for sale." He said:

"Why not?"

"I answered, I know, and that is enough. There is not enough gold in the world to purchase them." Pratt urged the matter:

"You are not very well off, and it will do your children good."

"I then told him, You have not got money enough in Utah to purchase them."

E. C. Briggs, "Brother Joseph Smith," Saints' Herald 31, no. 25 (21 June 1884): 396.

Tells E. C. Briggs that Joseph and Oliver worked hard on the translation; he then gives his version of how the Urim and Thummim worked.

"The boys, Joseph and Oliver, worked hard, early and late, while translating the plates. It was slow work, and they could write only a few pages a day."

Of Joseph he continued:

"He could not do anything except he was humble, and just right before the Lord."

I said, "Why not?"

He replied:

"The Urim and Thummim would look dark; he could not see a thing in them."

"How did it appear in them?" we asked.

His answer was:

"The letters appeared on them in light, and would not go off until they were written correctly by Oliver. When Joseph could not pronounce the words he spelled them out letter by letter. Ah! Joseph was a good man, but he had a hard task to manage with the people in the early days of the church. They were sectarian (Brigham Young was only a sectarian) and came in with all of their own views, and were hard to manage. In fact, they sought office in the church, and when they were ordained it was only putting new wine into old bottles in many cases.

E. C. Briggs, "Brother Joseph Smith," Saints' Herald 31, no. 25 (21 June 1884): 396-97.

Note: Whitmer is not always as good a witness as he portrays himself. Of his experience with the angel, there is no doubt, but his views on the translation of the Book of Mormon are less reliable. He says, for example, that Joseph and Oliver "worked hard, early and late" yet only produced "a few pages a day," a surprising fact if Joseph simply read the words in English as they appeared written on the Urim and Thummim. We know they worked about 60 translating days, which would mean they averaged a little more than 8 pages a daynot a very sizable accomplishment if just reading, but much more work if Joseph was a "translator" rather than a "reader."

Whitmer says he saw an Angel, the plates, and the Urim and Thummim; he explains why he and Oliver left the Church; he did not know why Joseph and Sydney had disguised names; he says many languages are spoken in tongues; he also tells of the receipt of the Aaronic and Melchisedek Priesthoods; he disputes that the Church needs a president and that the Doctrine and Covenants is needed; he says Joseph's revelations were personal and that the Book of Mormon and the Bible were all that were needed; he also says that Joseph forced William into the Quorum of Twelve, that he used a "Seer Stone" to translate which he did by looking into a hat. Much of the doctrine here is false.

Questions asked of David Whitmer at his home in Ray County, Mo., Jan. 14, 18885, relating to the Book of Mormon, and the history of the Church of Jesus Christ of LDS by Elder Z. H. Gurley.

1Do you know that the plates seen with the Angel (on the table) were real, metal, did you touch them?

AnsWe did not touch nor handle the plates

2Was the table literal wood? or was the whole a vision such as often occurs in dreams &c?

AnsThe table had the appearance of literal wood as shown in the vision, in the glory of God.

3 Q Did you see the Urim and Thummim, what was it?

AnsI saw the "Interpreters" in the holy [there is a piece missing] they looked like whitish stones p [a piece is missing] rim of a bow, looked like spectacles only much larger.

4 QWhy did you stand aloof from the church after 1838?

AnsI was appointed in charge of church affairs in Zion Missouri, but from my teachings disaffection grew, and Joseph and Sydney came out and visited the various branches of the Church pledging them to themselves as against my teachings upon the word of wisdom and other matters, until for the establishment of their views they organized the Danites by which each member was sworn to sustain the Heads of the Church whether right or wrongthe penalty of refusing so to do being death, "the throat cut" [according (?)] I left because I could not accept it being led out by the outstretched arm of Godpromised life and blessing and that my opponents would suffer that which they had tried to bring upon me. Being informed of these designs &c by W W PhelpsJohn Corrill, and Riggs.

5 Q Why did Oliver Cowdery leave the church?

AnsOliver left the church for the same reasons I did, so also did my brother John Whitmer.

6 QWhy did Martin Harris leave the church?

AnsI do not knowhe never was at Far West.

7 Q What caused several of the 1st Quorum of Twelve to leave the Church?

Anscannot state positively

8 Q. Why was Joseph Smith called Barak Ale, and Sydney rigdon, Baneany?

Those names came through the "United order in the church." Why they came I cannot tell. I believe that Order, as also the merchantile and Kirtland Bank business, to have originated either with man or Devil, being no part of the Gospel of Christ, or of his church.

AnsI do not know as no name was given. I have never seen the plates since.

AnsMy understanding was that all kind of languages was spoken.

AnsI know nothing about it.

AnsYes I doas not an order in Christ. It originated in the church because of desire to obtain greater power than what had been given- over anxiety with the leaders, leading to it.

AnsNo I was notneither did I ever hear of such a thing as an angel ordaining them until I got into Ohio about the year 1834or later.

AnsI moved Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to my fathers house in Fayette Seneca County New York from Harmony, Penn. in the year 1829, on our way I conversed freely with them upon this great work they were bringing about, and Oliver stated to me in Josephs presence that they had baptized each other seeking by that to fulfill the commandAnd after our arrival at fathers sometime in June 1829. Joseph ordained Oliver Cowdery to be an Elder, and Oliver ordained Joseph to be an Elder in the Church of Christ and during that year Joseph both baptized and ordained me an elder in the church of Christ. Also, during this year the translation of the Book of Mormon was finished, And we preached, baptized and ordained some as Elders, and upon the Sixth day of April 1830, six Elders together with some fifty or sixty (as near as I recollect) of the members met together to effect an organization.

I never heard that an Angel had ordained Joseph and Oliver to the Aaronic priesthood until the year 1834 5 or 6in Ohio. My information from Joseph and Oliver upon this matter being as I have stated, and that they were commanded so to do by revealment through Joseph. I do not believe that John the Baptist ever ordained Joseph and Oliver as stated and believed by some. I regard that as an error, a misconception.

AnsI regard it as an assumption of power unauthorized by the books in the law of Christ.

AnsThe Book of Doctrine and Covenants was added to satisfy the desire of some of the members and elders. The Bible and Book of Mormon was held to contain Gods law in its completeness, and we understood that they alone should be taught as doctrine, Revelations and visions would assist individuals but were not to be taught as doctrine in any case, such was Josephs teachings upon this point.

AnsThere is no need for such officer, I hold that all difficulties, all difference of opinion as to doctrine should be settled by conferring one with another, united wisdom of many guided by the Law, being the safest rule.

AnsYes they were, and they were not to be published until Christ should come. The Book of Mormon with the Bible being the whole law to the Church.

AnsI do not know.

AnsHe used a stone called a "Seers Stone," the "Interpreters" having been taken away from him because of transgression.

AnsNo.

AnsYes he did, in Clay County, Mo1834. upon condition that he was killed or any mishap befell him. I regard my authority as an elder for Christ given me of God before that time as superior to any honor which Joseph could bestow upon me by any such ordination. This was done on or about the time when Joseph dismissed the "Camp' which he had brought up to deliver Zion a body of some 300 men who was armed and equipped for war.

AnsYes. Cowdery and myself were appointed a committee [a piece is missing] the Twelve but Jose[a piece is missing] insisted that his brother William Smith should be put in as it was the only was by which he could be saved, otherwise we would not have chosen him.

AnsI regard it as an error, one that brought evil upon the church I believe that God will finally gather his people, but not in the sense and way as taught by Joseph, before Gods gathering takes place He will perform a great and mighty work in the earth he will prepare the way, that way is not prepared, hence all attempts at Gathering will prove futile until the Day of the Lord comes.

AnsThe "Interpreters" were taken from Joseph after he allowed Martin Harris to carry away the 116 pages of Ms of the Book of Mormon as a punishment, but he was allowed to go on and translate by the use of a "Seer stone" which he had, and which he placed in a hat into which he buried his face, stating to me and others that the original character appeared upon parchment and under it the translation in english which [piece missing] to read it readily

While Brother Whitmer was too feeble to write much, being unable to write the answers to the foregoing 25 Questions in person yet it was with his consent and in his presence that I wrote them and corrected them as they appear here.

Jan. 211885. Z. H. Gurley

Zenos H. Gurley, "Questions asked of David Whitmer at his Home in Richmond, Ray County, Missouri, Jan. 21, 1885, by Zenos H. Gurley," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
