Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Whitmer, John

(August 27, 1802-July 11, 1878)

Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge go to New York to meet the Prophet; Sidney asks Joseph to inquire of the Lord, which he does (see Doctrine and Covenants 35).

Now it came to pass, after Sidney Rigdon, was received into this Church, that he was ordained an elder, under the hands of Oliver Cowdery. He having much anxiety to see Joseph Smith, Jr., the Seer whom the Lord had raised up in these last days. Therefore he took his journey to the state of New York, where Joseph resided.

There was another man whose name is Edward Partridge who was also desirous, to see the Seer, therefore, he accompanied Sidney, and journeyed with him, to behold this man of God, even Joseph Smith, Jr., he being desirous to know the truth of these things: But not having confidence enough to inquire at the hand of God. Therefore he sought testimony of man, and he obtained it, and received the truth and obeyed the divine requirements and was also ordained an elder unto the Church, to preach repentance and remission of sins, unto this idolatrous generation. Wherefore, after Sidney Rigdon had been at Palmyra a few days he proclaimed the gospel, in those regions round about, at which the people stood trembling and amazed, so powerful were his words, and some obeyed the gospel and came forth out of the water, rejoicing with joy which is unspeakable and full of glory. From thence he journeyed to Fayette, where Joseph lived, and there he also proclaimed the gospel in the regions round about and there were numbers added. Now in those days Sidney Rigdon was desirous to have the Seer inquire of the Lord, to know what the will of the Lord was concerning him. Accordingly Joseph inquired of the Lord, and these are the words that were spoken to him: [see Doctrine and Covenants 35].

John Whitmer, The Book of John Witmer, typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 1-2.
