Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Whitmer, Sylvia

(b. November 15, 1814)

Two letters, one of which contains some of Whitmer's somewhat faulty memories of Joseph Smith: he remembers the martyrdom and the hatred surrounding it; he says Joseph was tall, slender, and "a good looking man;" he remembers the burial of Joseph and Hyrum.

Boseman, Montana

January 3, 1915

Mrs. Sylvia Whitmer

C/O Mrs. Dan Gurule

Dear Madame

On Sunday morning January 3, 1915, there appeared in the Boseman Daily Chronicle the following news item from Clyde Parks.

"Within a few miles of Clyde Park there lives a woman who has but recently celebrated her 100th birthdayMrs. Sylvia Whitmer, who lives with her daughter and son-in-law, Mr. and Mrs. Dan Gurule, on a ranch on Fall Creek, in the foothills of the crazy mountains. According to Mr. Gurule, Mrs. Whitmer was born in Illinois on November 15, 1814, and on the 15th of last month was 100 years old, and is still as spry and hearty as are many women 40 years her junior. She does a share of the work about the house and assists in caring for the nine children of her daughter, and insists that she in not an old woman, as the term in generally understood. Mrs. Whitmer declares she knew Abraham Lincoln personally and well in the early days in the "western" life of that state. She was also a personal friend of the great Mormon prophet, Joseph Smith, and was a spectator in the crowd when the illustrious Mormon and met his tragic death at the hands of a mob at Nauvoo, Ill. She insists that she is still good for many years, altho some six weeks past the century mark."

I am particularly interested in the last part of the above news item, that part which relates to the Prophet Joseph Smith. I have quite a collection of such news items and pamphlets and papers of various kinds and descriptions, and I am greatly interested in the history and doctrines that were promulgated by this great man whom I consider a leader of such renown an intelligence as the world little knows of. The generation in which you were born has almost all departed, and I consider that he who had an honorable part to live and who lived it in that generation and who still lives to tell of it, is greatly blessed and privileged.

Now, Mrs. Whitmer, what I want to know is this: I would like to have you dictate to your daughter, Mrs. Gurule, a history of your life and I would like to have in detail what you know of the Prophet Joseph Smith, to what extent you were acquainted with him, tell me what he said and how he said it of any conversations or incidents when you me him, tell of the mob that so disgracefully assassinated him. Kindly tell me if you know any members of that mob and what were their names, who was their leader, tell me if you heard the report of a cannon shortly after 5:30 o'clock on June 27, 1844, the day that he was killed, tell me how the people around Carthage looked upon the murder and how they acted after it was done, that is, if there was any incident or circumstance out of the ordinary that occurred. Tell me how you were impressed with Mr. Smith. In fact I would be glad to know as much as you can remember of those times in relation to Joseph Smith and Mormonism in general.

This information is for my own benefit in particular and I want it in such shape that it will be of permanent record. You know that in many many instances men and women have died who were acquainted with certain facts which would have benefited mankind if they had made a record of it of permanent form. And in your case you no doubt have a fund of information that will be wasted on the desert air if you do not have it placed in permanent form or have not already done so. To illustrate what I mean: my father and mother were born in Sweden about the year 1843 and 1846. Father kept a diary in the Swedish language. During the past two months I have had his diary translated from the Swedish language into the English language and also a record of his ancestors as far back as he could get them at that time, so that this information is invaluable and cannot be valued in dollars and cents. So you can see that I desire your history in relation to Joseph Smith and Mormonism and that history of course would include any circumstances that would be of interest and in fact all your circumstances connected with it.

After I have received this matter from you I will typewrite it and send a copy to you for your keepsake and for the benefit of your posterity. Tell me what your parents names were, your mother's maiden name and when they were born and when they died. This will help make the record complete so that if anyone should dispute that there ever was a woman by the name of Whitmer the records could easily be looked up. I believe I have explained in sufficient clearness what is desired and the motives that prompt it. If there is anything further that you would like to have any point about kindly let me know.

This information would be so much appreciated and I would be very grateful to your daughter if she would write as you dictate to her. I will furnish the paper and pay you if you want pay for your time and for your daughter's time, providing the matter is such that I can use it for reference later on. If convenient I will try to come over in that part of the country on a special trip sometime next summer if you are still living to go into more detail about it, but I wish you would start immediately as we do not know what the morrow will bring forth.

Kindly let me hear from you in regard to the matter. I am enclosing a stamped envelop for a reply. It might be that one of your daughter's little children would be able to take down what you say and she could make a little pen money, for little tots are always glad to receive a little money once in a while. Please attend to this immediately if you can.

Very truly yours

N. B. Lundwall

C/O U. S. Forest Service

Boseman, Montana

Clyde Park, Montana

January 18, 1915

Mr. N. B. Lundwall

Boseman, Montana

Dear Sir:

We have your letter and was very glad to have it in our possession. In regards of our grandmothers history first I will tell you about my grandmothers parents. My great grandmothers maiden name was Miss Mary Anderson. My mother's great grandmother lived to be [about] 106. She was born in Pennsylvania. She also lived on a place called Beaver Dam. And also two of her brothers was born in the same place. She also tells me of her brother Aggbirt [Egbert?]. He was a doctor and born in Vermont. And also another brother Efrim [Ephraim?] he was born in Vermont. He was a Store keeper in Ox county on the Purere road in Noxville.

My grandmother was born in the year of 1814 the 15th of November. She was married to a man in Princeville, Illinois to Robert Stockton. They lived together four years. Then Mr. Stockton joined the army. Then Mr. Stockton joined the army and got wounded. He went back and then she heard he was killed in the army.

Then after the death of Mr. Stockton my grandfather, Albert Timothy Vale. She also had a girl whose father was killed in the army. Mr. Stockton and her name was Mary Stockton. Now she is Mrs. Mary Phelps. This ladie, Mrs. Mary Phelps we lost track of. She lived in Oregon the last we knew of her.

Now I will tell you about Joseph Smith the Prophet. They gathered up a mob at Warsaw. They was going then to kill Joseph Smith. At the same time she got a letter from the battle field that her husband was killed. At the same time this same mob raised their guns toward the Ellsworth family to shoot them. They thought they were Mormons. And a neighbor of his, Mr. Hosfird told them to stop not to shoot them. He said they are not Mormons. A few of the gentiles went to Mr. Hosfirds house to have the wounds wrapped.

Then after the prophet Joseph Smith the government Mr. Ford sent Mr. Mackentosh to quite the Mormons and gentiles.

Now about Joseph Smith. The paper stated that she was a close friend to Joseph Smith. She was not. She just knew him by sight. She says he was tall and slender and also a good looking man. she knows the jail he was wounded in. Joseph was wounded in the upstairs he jumped from the stair window on to the ground.

The mob dragged him and sit him up against a well curb and shot at him for a target and shot five bullet wholes in his head. His brother, Mr. Hyrum Smith's head was riddled with bullets. She knows well the jail and the town and alos the spot where he was killed. The soldiers wanted Joseph smith's head for they thought he was a smart man and wanted his head. They buried him once then they unburied him and buried him in another place because they was going to unbury him for his head and when they buried him again they put Iron on his grave. Crowds of people followed him to his grave after his death trying to get a good look at him.

The day Joseph Smith was killed the teamsters was coming from Carthage and stopped at grandfather Elworth's house and some of them was laughing about the death of the prophet. But one of the fellows spoke and said if you saw what I saw you would not all laugh so much about it and then he said I saw a light come from the jail where Joseph Smith was shot and went from the jail into the heavens. Although I am not a Mormon a girl, Miss mary Hosfird about 18 years of age saw a building burning to the ground and said I wish the house was full of Mormons and burning this house belinewd to the gentiles but was rented to the Mormons. At this grandmother told her she though she was quit cruel and quite a while after that grandmother saw houses, graineries and farms of all descriptions burning down by the gentiles talking about Joseph Smith the silver plates that he found and also sthe three mummies that he found the two men had dark hair the woman had yellow hair and was very good looking people. They was puseved [sic] in some kind of lickude [sic]. These people lived some ages ago.

The gentiles acknowledged that Joseph Smith was the finder of these dishes and also of the mummies. Doctor Aggbirt Ellsworth saw the three mummies but he never said he was the plates. After the war my grandmother started from Illinois with my grandfather Albert Timothy Vale and come in to Cansese [kansas?] into Fort Carney from there they come into Fort Sideny there is where they joined a big train to come out west at Fort Sigedny [sic] the men but grandfather Vale in for Captain of the train from there they came into Fort Laramie. The train ahead of them was killed and the train behind them there was light women and men and all were killed by the Indians when they got to Laramie grandfather died the next spring.

There grandmother was left with three children without any means of support and she washed for five years had to support her children washing. At the end of this five years she married George Whitmore. She was also going [to] California but after she married him the trip to California was stopped and went to Sandy, Utah. I suppose he is not in existence so grandmother has been living with her son-in-law ever since. She lived with one of her son-in-laws 13 years and has been living with us 20 years. My mother is her baby girl and she has made her home with us 20 years passed.

We have here two of her great grandchildren Albert Brown, and Ada chiles and grandmother thinks there is no better boy than Albert Brown altho she always thought this boy was the best of all.

The paper stated that she saw Abraham Lincoln personally. She did not know him personally she just saw him at his public speeches. When he defect duggles also Joseph Smith.

She saw Joseph Smith two or three times in Nauvoo walking in the streets. We are very sorry, for Grandmother forgets the dates for she is old and feeble and forgetful. In other ways the Clyde Park Herald stated that grandmother was a pretty foot racer 20 years ago. That is true. She could best my mother in a foot race or going after horses or cows she would best my mother to catch a cow or a horse and she kept on pretty lively until the year of 1902 from then on she has been failing fast.

But if any one hates death is my grandmother. She don't like to die. She don't realize she is getting old, and still does a little work at quilts and so on. She thinks she is good for 20 years longer. My grandmother was the mother of four girls. My mother is the mother of thirteen children. She also has seven grandchildren.

Mrs. Phelps is the mother of three children. But we don't know how many grandchildren for we lost track of her. My mothers sister Cirdela Mylindenvale she had seven before we lost track of her so we will write this to see if I could find my grandmothers relatives and also see if we could get information of my mother's sisters or where they are. My mother's name is Phoebe Gurule. Hoping you will make better sense than we do out of this and also word it in the proper way so I never got the chance to go to school but perhaps you can tell what I spelled.

We are home stickers on Fall Creek at the foothills of the Crazy mountains. I was born the 27th of April in the year 1899.

Your truly,

Miss Evalina Gurule

Clyde Park, Montana

"Lundwall, Nels Benjamin, 1884-1969: Correspondence, 1915," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.

Note: It also has a letter from Richard L. Evans, managing editor of The Improvement Era, to Brother Lund, dated March 28, 1939, in which Evans tells of having these two letters and of recommending them to the Church Historian's files.
