Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Whitney, Elizabeth Ann Smith

(December 26, 1800-February 15, 1882)

When Joseph and Newel Whitney first met, Joseph entered Whitney's store and called him by Name; Whitney was surprised, never having previously met the Prophet; Joseph and Emma stayed at the Whitney home; this first meeting fulfilled a vision the Whitneys had previously had.

In December of the same year [1830], Joseph Smith, with his wife, Emma, and a servant girl, came to Kirtland in a sleigh; they drove up in front of my husband's store; Joseph jumped out and went in; he reached his hand across the counter to my husband, and called him by name. My husband, not thinking it was any one in whom he was interested, spoke, saying: "I could not call you by name as you have me." He answered, "I am Joseph the Prophet; you have prayed me here, what do you want of me?" My husband brought them directly to our own house; we were more than glad to welcome them and share with them all the comforts and blessings we enjoyed. I remarked to my husband that this was the fulfillment of the vision we had seen of a cloud as of glory resting upon our house. And during the time they resided with us, and under our roof, were many of the revelations given which are recorded in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants.

Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7, no. 7 (1 September 1878): 51.

Note: According to Joseph Smith, he and his wife arrived in Kirtland and at the Whitney store "about the first of February" 1831 (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 1:145-46).

Elizabeth's husband, Newel Whitney, often traveled with the Prophet, who prophesied the destruction of eastern cities, including New York City; he also prophesied wars, pestilence fires, and earthquakes; once, on returning home, Newel broke his ankle but was healed by a blessing from Joseph.

My husband traveled with Joseph the Prophet through many of the Eastern cities, bearing testimony and collecting means toward building a temple in Kirtland, and also toward purchasing lands in Missouri. During this journey the Prophet Joseph often prophesied of the destruction that ultimately would come upon the cities of the Eastern States, and especially New York, that in that city there would not be left a vestige of its grandeur. He said that wars would soon commence in our own land, which last has since transpired. He said to my husband, "If they reject us they shall have our testimony, for we will write it and leave it upon their doorsteps and window sills." He prophesied of the desolation by fire, by storms, by pestilence and by earthquakes. After their return from the East, they traveled together up to Missouri, and while upon this journey my husband had his ankle broken. Through the power of the administration of the gospel ordinance and faith, he was relieved from all pain; but by Joseph's counsel returned home.

Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7, no. 9 (1 October 1878): 71.

Under the Prophet's guidance, the Whitneys hosted a feast for the poor of Kirtland, which lasted three days and gave the Prophet great joy.

It was about this time my husband was ordained a Bishop by revelation and commandment from God. . . . We had always been in the habit of entertaining our friends and acquaintances generously and hospitably, but after we received the Gospel we did not feel like using our means and time in a way that would only benefit those who had an abundance of this world's means. According to our Savior's pattern and agreeably to the Prophet Joseph's and our own ideas of true charity and disinterested benevolence, we determined to make a Feast for the Poor, such as we knew could not return the same to us; the lame, the halt, the deaf, the blind, the aged and infirm

This feast lasted three days, during which time all in the vicinity of Kirtland who would come were invited, and entertained as courteously and generously as if they had been able to extend hospitality instead of receiving it. The Prophet Joseph and his two counselors were present each day, talking, blessing, and comforting the poor, by words of encouragement and their most welcome presence; some are now living who were present at that Feast, and many have passed behind the veil. The Prophet Joseph often referred to this particular Feast, during his lifetime, and testified of the great blessing he felt in associating with the meek and humble ones whom the Lord has said that "He delights to own and bless." He often said to me that it was preferable and far superior to the elegant and select parties he afterwards attended, and afforded him much more genuine satisfaction; and to me it was a feast of fat things indeed; a season of rejoicing never to be forgotten. . . .

Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7, no. 9 (1 October 1878): 71; and "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7, no. 11 (1 November 1878): 83; see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 2:362 for the Prophet's mention of this feast.

In a patriarchal blessing meeting in the Kirtland Temple Elizabeth sang in Adamic; Parley Pratt recorded her words, and Joseph said she would never lose her gift if she used it wisely; his prophesy came true.

Great manifestations of power were witnessed in the Kirtland Temple. It seemed as though it was illuminated, and many and powerful were the manifestations to those who were humble and participated in the ordinances bestowed upon the faithful Saints in that house. The first patriarchal blessing meeting over which Joseph Smith, Sen., presided was one of the most striking and noticeable features of that particular period of time. In this meeting I received the gift of singing inspirationally, and the first Song of Zion ever given in the pure language was sung by me then, and interpreted by Parley P. Pratt, and written down; of which I have preserved the original copy. It describes the manner in which the ancient patriarchs blessed their families, and gives some account of "Adam ondi Ahman."

In ancient days there lived a man,

Amidst a pleasant garden,

Where lovely flowers immortal bloom'd,

And shed around a rich perfume;

Behold, his name was Adam.

One of the nobles of the Earth,

Had mighty power in blessing:

Received the Priesthood, and went forth

And blessed his seed, and gave the earth

Blessings for their possession.

He sealed them for eternal life,

And all their generations,

Who should obey the Gospel plan,

Down to the latest years of man

A multitude of nations.

Isaac and Jacob, they in turn

Had power to bless their children.

Hence, Jacob by his faith did learn,

And gave directions for his bones

To be conveyed to Canaan.

By this same spirit, Joseph gave

A great and mighty blessing

To Ephraim, and Manasseh too,

Whereby their seed were carried through,

Long travels, though distressing.

By that same faith they built a ship,

And crossed the mighty ocean,

Obtained the choicest land of Earth,

Foretold the great Messiah's birth,

And all the great commotion.

The Holy Priesthood long remain'd

In all its power and glory.

Until the Priests of God were slain,

Their records hid from wicked men

Within the hill Cumorah.

Their remnants sank in sorrow down,

Became a loathsome people.

To misery and sorrow doom'd,

Their pleasant fields o'erspread with gloom,

Ruled by a Gentile nation.

But now the Priesthood is restored,

And we partake its blessings;

Our parents and our children dear

With Joseph's remnants have a share

To latest generations.

As Adam blest his family

In Adam ondi Ahman,

So shall our aged father bless

His seed who dwell in righteousness

Upon the land of Zion.

The Prophet Joseph promised me that I should never lose this gift if I would be wise in using it; and his words have been verified.

Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7, no. 11 (1 November 1878): 83.

Joseph gives the Whitneys accommodations during the early days in Nauvoo, thus fulfilling a prophesy he had made in Kirtland; when the Relief Society was organized, Elizabeth was set apart by the Prophet as a counselor to Emma Smith; Joseph had great faith in the sisters.

Early in the Spring of 1840 we went up to Commerce, as the upper portion of the city of Nauvoo continued to be called. We rented a house belonging to Hiram Kimball, whose widow and children are residents of this city [i.e., Salt Lake City, from whence Elizabeth writes]. Here we were all sick with ague, chills and fever, and were only just barely able to crawl around and wait upon each other. Under these trying circumstances my ninth child was born. Joseph, upon visiting us and seeing our change of circumstances, urged us at once to come and share his accommodations. We felt the climate, the water, and the privations we were enduring could not much longer be borne; therefore we availed ourselves of this proposal and went to live in the Prophet Joseph's yard in a small cottage; we soon recruited in health, and the children became more like themselves. My husband was employed in a store Joseph had built and fitted up with such goods as the people were in actual need of.

One day while coming out of the house into the yard the remembrance of a prophecy Joseph Smith had made to me, while living in our house in Kirtland, flashed through my mind like an electric shock; it was this: that even as we had done by him, in opening our doors to him and his family when he was without a home, even so should we in the future be received by him into his house. We afterwards moved upstairs over the brick store, as it was designated. It was during our residence in the brick store the Relief Society was organized, March 17, 1842, and I was chosen counselor to the President of the society, Mrs. Emma Smith. In this work I took the greatest interest, for I realized in some degree its importance, and the need of such an organization. I was also ordained and set apart under the hand of Joseph Smith the Prophet to administer to the sick and comfort the sorrowful. Several other sisters were also ordained and set apart to administer in these holy ordinances. The Relief Society then was small compared to it numbers now, but the Prophet foretold great things concerning the future of this organization, many of which I have lived to see fulfilled; but there are many things which yet remain to be fulfilled in the future of which he prophesied, that are great and glorious; and I rejoice in the contemplation of these things daily, feeling that the promises are sure to be verified in the future as they have been in the past. I trust the sisters who are now laboring in the interests of Relief Societies in Zion realize the importance attached to the work, and comprehend that upon them a great responsibility rests as mothers in Israel. President Joseph Smith had great faith in the sisters labors, and ever sought to encourage them in the performance of the duties which pertained to these Societies, which he said were not only for benevolent purposes and spiritual improvement; but were actually to save souls.

Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7, no. 12 (15 November 1878): 91.

In privacy, Joseph shared with Newel Whitney the law of plural marriage; Emma, indignant, burned the copy of the revelation; the Whitneys gave their daughter to Joseph as a plural wife.

It was during the time we lived at the Brick Store that Joseph received the revelation pertaining to Celestial Marriage; also concerning the ordinances of the House of the Lord. He had been strictly charged by the angel who committed these precious things into his keeping that he should only reveal them to such persons as were pure, full of integrity to the truth, and worthy to be entrusted with divine messages; that to spread them abroad would only be like casting pearls before swine, and that the most profound secrecy must be maintained, until the Lord saw fit to make it known publicly through His servants. Joseph had the most implicit confidence in my husband's uprightness and integrity of character; he knew him capable of keeping a secret, and was not afraid to confide in him, as he had been a Free Mason for many years. He therefore confided to him, and a few others, the principles set forth in that revelation, and also gave him the privilege to read it and to make a copy of it, knowing it would be perfectly safe with him. It was this veritable copy, which was preserved, in the providence of God that has since been published to the world; for Emma (Joseph's wife) afterwards becoming indignant, burned the original, thinking she had destroyed the only written document upon the subject in existence. My husband revealed these things to me; we had always been united, and had the utmost faith and confidence in each other. We pondered upon them continually, and our prayers were unceasing that the Lord would grant us some special manifestation concerning this new and strange doctrine. The Lord was very merciful to us; He revealed unto us His power and glory. We were seemingly wrapped in a heavenly vision, a halo of light encircled us, and we were convinced in our own minds that God heard and approved our prayers and intercedings before Him. Our hearts were comforted, and our faith made so perfect that we were willing to give our eldest daughter, then only seventeen years of age, to Joseph, in the holy order of plural marriage. She had been raised in the strictest manner as regard propriety, virtue and chastity; she was as pure in thought, in feeling, and in impulse as it was possible for a young girl to be. Yet, laying aside all our traditions and former notions in regard to marriage, we gave her with our mutual consent. She was the first woman ever given in plural marriage by or with the consent of both parents. Of course these things had to be kept an inviolate secret; and as some were false to their vows and pledges, persecution arose, and caused grievous sorrow to those who had obeyed, in all purity and sincerity, the requirements of the celestial order of marriage.

Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7, no. 14 (15 December 1878): 105.

Elizabeth gives her eldest daughter to Joseph as a plural wife; this daughter fulfilled one of Joseph's prophecies.

In January, 1844, my youngest daughter was born. She was the first child born heir to the Holy Priesthood and in the New and Everlasting covenant in this dispensation. I felt she was doubly a child of promise, not only through the priesthood, but through Joseph's promise to me when I gave him my eldest daughter to wife. He prophesied to me that I should have another daughter, who would be a strength and support to me to soothe my declining years; and in this daughter have these words been verified.

Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7, no. 18 (15 February 1879): 191.
