Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Whitney, Helen Mar

(August 25, 1828-November 15, 1896)

Joseph meets and greets incoming Saints at the landing in Nauvoo.

Among the many pleasing incidents within my recollection, was the sight of a large Flatboat loaded with English Saints, who were obliged to leave the steamer at Keokuk, in consequence of low water. They were singing the sweet songs of Zion, as they came up the river at the close of the day, and landed near the Prophet's house, where stood scores of the Saints; also many outsiders had gathered there, and Joseph too, who welcomed them to Zion.

At another time the "Maid of Iowa," I command of Captain Dan Jones, brought a company of two hundred and fifty Saints from New Orleans, who, after unlooked for circumstances, causing a tedious journey of five weeks, arrived safely at Nauvoo, where Joseph and hundreds of the Saints were on the shore waiting to greet them with a warm and hearty welcome.

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 11, no. 12 (15 November 1882): 90.

Masonry taken from the priesthood.

The Prophet Joseph after becoming a Mason said that Masonry had been taken from the priesthood. In Nauvoo I was acquainted with the widow and daughter of [William] Morgan who exposed Masonry. I remember once when but a young girl, of getting a glimpse of the outside of Morgan's book, exposing Masonry, but which my father always kept locked up.

"Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 11, no. 4 (15 July 1882): 26; also in Stanley B. Kimball, "Heber C. Kimball and Family, the Nauvoo Years," BYU Studies 15, no. 4 (summer 1975): 495.

Breaking of young Helen's doll but a foreshadowing of the breaking down of false gods.

Helen also tells that once when Joseph Smith called by their home (to read a letter which Vilate had received from Heber) he accidently broke on of these dolls. According to Helen all the Prophet said by way of excusing himself was, "As that has fallen, so shall the heathen gods fall." Helen thought this a "rather weak apology for breaking my doll's head off."

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 10, no. 5 (1 August 1881): 34; see also Stanley B. Kimball, "Heber C. Kimball and Family, the Nauvoo Years," BYU Studies 15, no. 4 (summer 1975): 453.

Account of Joseph's kindness in helping the impoverished Saints who were suffering and sick because of Missouri persecutions; he said those who died by persecution were martyrs.

[In the Fall of 1839, having recently establishing themselves in Nauvoo, the Saints yet struggled greatly because of the difficulties imposed by the Missouri persecutions. Speaking of a wave of sickness which spread through the city, Helen Mar Whitney remembered:] The Prophet visited and administered words of consolation and often made tea and waited upon them himself and sent members of his own family who were able to go, to nurse and comfort the sick and sorrowful. He was often heard to say that the Saints who died in consequence of the persecutions, were as much martyrs as the ones who were killed in defense of the Saints or murdered at Haun's Mill.

Helen Mar Whitney, "Life Incidents," Woman's Exponent 9, no. 3 (1 July 1880): 18.

When Heber returned from his British Mission and landed in Nauvoo, Joseph met him and insisted he and his family come to Joseph's for dinner; soon Joseph was teaching the doctrine of Celestial Marriage.

On the 1st day of July [1841] my father [Heber C. Kimball] with President Young and Brother John Taylor arrived home from their mission, the families of the latter who were left in Montrose sick, were then living in Nauvoo on the Flat enjoying a more comfortable degree of health. My brother, who was still living at the landing was the first to meet and embrace my father. The Prophet and many more were there ready to greet and welcome them home again. Joseph would have them go home with him to dinner and William hastened home to tell us the same; we thought this almost an unkindness for it seemed so long a time to us who were waiting and watching with impatience to see him but soon we discovered a company of horsemen coming with all speed and when my mother saw them she made a hasty retreat behind the door to hide her confusion, where in a moment after father found her overwhelmed in tears. Joseph it seemed had ordered several horses to be saddled while they were eating and by the time dinner was served, which was a hasty one, the horses were at the door and he with Brother Hyrum sand three or four brethren accompanied my father home. My mother felt the presence of others at such a time almost an intrusion but Brother Joseph seemed unwilling to part with my father; and from that time kept the Twelve in Council early and late, and she sometimes felt nearly jealous of him but never dreamed that he was during those times revealing to them principles of Celestial Marriage and that her trials and sacrifices which she had flattered herself were nearly over, had scarcely begun, and they little realized the meaning of his words when he said "he was rolling off the kingdom from his own shoulders o to the shoulders of the Twelve."

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 10, no. 6 (15 August 1881): 42.

Joseph said practicing plural marriage would try the Saints and those without pure motives would be destroyed; at first Emma accepted the doctrine, but she rebelled and lied to her children about it.

The Prophet said that the practice of this principle [of Celestial Marriage] would be the hardest trial the Saints would ever have to test their faith. It was not his work, but that of the Almighty, and he said it would cause the damnation of all who entered into it with impure motives, and none who acted unrighteously could stand, the trial would be so great; and there would be but few men who would be capable of being saviors upon Mount Zion.

He taught the principle to his wife, Emma, who humbly received it and gave to him three young women to wife, who had been living with her in her family, and had been like adopted daughters. Until she lost the spirit and her heart became hardened, they lived happily together. They respected and loved her as though she had been their mother, and might have remained with her afterwards had they been willing to have severed the ties between themselves and the Prophet; but choosing to remain true [to] their covenants, which they considered binding here and hereafter, they preferred to leave the Mansion.

Emma deceived her children and denied to every one that the Prophet had ever received a revelation on Celestial marriage, or had ever practiced it, although she had heard the revelation and was an eye witness to the marriage of the three wives above mentioned. Besides, he told her of every one that had been sealed to him.

. . . The Prophet Joseph was heard to say that in consequence of wars and disasters, men would become so scarce that when one was seen it would be said of him, "There goes a man."

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 10, no. 11 (1 November 1881): 83.

Tells of a sham battle with the Nauvoo Legion in which Joseph received an inspired prompting that John C. Bennett sought to kill him.

Saturday April 7, 1842, the Nauvoo Legion was on parade, by virtue of an order of the 25th of January, 1842, and was reviewed by Lieutenant-General Joseph Smith, who commanded through the day . . . The weather was very fine. . . . In the afternoon the Legion was divided into cohorts, and fought an animated sham battle. At the close of the parade Gen. Smith delivered a most animating and appropriate address, in which he remarked that his soul was never better satisfied than on this occasion. It will be remembered that on that day Gen. John C. Bennett betrayed his designed upon the life of the Prophet, by requesting him repeatedly to take part in the sham battle, and even urging him to command the first cohort in person, without his staff.

Dr. Bennett's treachery, it seems, was made known to Joseph by the Spirit, for he said: "If General Bennett's true feelings towards me are not made manifest to the world in a very short time, then it may be possible that the gentle breathings of that spirit, which whispered me on parade that there was mischief concealed in that sham battle, were false. A short time will determine the point. Let John C. Bennett answer at the day of judgmentWhy did you request me to command one of the cohorts, and also to take lmly position without my staff, during the sham battle on the 7th of April, 1842, where my life might have been the forfeit, and no man have known who did the deed?"

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 10, no. 12 (15 November 1881): 94.

Helen Mar quotes from a letter from her mother (Vilate M. Kimball) who tells of a Nephite Prophet visiting England, Ireland, and Scotland.

There are no doubt hundreds still living who heard the Prophet relate the circumstance mentioned in my mother's letter of one of the old Nephites visiting England, Ireland and Scotland, and they can bear their testimony to the fulfillment of Joseph's predictions on that day, as well as all the rest up to the present time.

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 10, no. 12 (15 November 1881): 159.

Account of the death of Seymour Brunson and of angels coming to receive him; Joseph preached his funeral sermon.

The following interesting items I copy from my mother's [Vilate M .Kimball] letter to my father [Heber C. Kimball], dated Sept. 6, 1840.

She says: " . . . Seymour Brunson is also dead, everything was done to save him that could be done, but the Lord had need of him. A short time before he died he told Joseph not to hold him any longer 'for' said he, 'I have seen David Patten and he wants me, and the Lord wants me, and I want to go.' They then gave him up; at one time as Joseph entered the room, he told him that there was a light encircled him above the brightness of the sunhe exclaimed, 'The room is full of angels they have come to waft my spirit home.' He then bade his family and friends farewell and sweetly fell asleep in Jesus.

He requested Joseph to preach his funeral sermon, which he did . . ."

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 10, no. 12 (15 November 1881): 159.

Tells of Joseph going to greet visitors and of one who wanted a carriage ride with the "American Mahomet." There is another little incident which I had missed jotting down in the right place. It was near the first of June 1843, just previous to my father's starting East, that the Prophet called and invited him to ride with him and William Clayton, his private clerk, as he was going around to give invitations to his friends, to take a pleasure trip with him down to Quincy, in the little "Nauvoo" boat which, previous to its being purchased, was called "Maid of Iowa." I was also invited to go along. As we drove up the river a Steamer was just landing, and a number of strange gentlemen came ashore, who seemed to have quite a curiosity to see the Prophet. He got out, and in his warm and genial way, gave each of them a cordial shake of the hand. As the carriage was about starting away, one of them came up and, after being introduced by President Smith, requested the privilege of riding. After going a few rods the carriage was stopped for him to get out. He wished to have it said that he rode with Joseph Smith, whom they styled the "American Mahomet."

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 11, no. 8 (15 September 1882): 68.

Tells of Missourians kidnapping Joseph at Dixon, Illinois, and of Joseph's remarks following his release.

I remember the morning that Joseph and family left the city to visit his sister-in-law near Dixon, in Lee County, he called in as he was passing to bid us good bye and the first news that we heard was the unlawful arrest made by Missourians, intending to drag him off into that state, but their brutal conduct roused the indignation of the people at Dixon and by a writ of habeas corpus served by his friends, he was placed under the arm of the law. The news spread so rapidly that a company of horsemen numbering 175, started the same evening under the command of Generals William Law and Charles C. Rich. The officers from Missouri had laid their plans to kidnap Joseph while on the journey but his brethren guarded him too closely and they arrived home in safety June 30th [1843], where they were met on the outskirts by a great multitude of the Saints who, with William Pitts brass band and loud cheers and firing of artillery, escorted him to the mansion.

A meeting had been previously appointed at 5 o'clock the same day in the grove west of the temple, where he delivered a speech which can be duly appreciated at this present time.

"I meet you with a heart full of gratitude to Almighty God and I presume you all feel the same. I hardly know how to express my feelings. I feel as strong as a giant. I pulled sticks with the men coming along, and I pulled up with one hand the strongest man that could be found. Then two men tried, but they could not pull me up. And I continued to pull, mentally, until I pulled Missouri to Nauvoo . . .

It is not so much my object to tell my afflictions and trials and troubles, as to speak of the writ of habeas corpus so that the minds of all may be corrected. It has been asserted by the great and wise men, lawyers and others, that our municipal powers and legal tribunals are not to be sanctioned by the authorities of the state, and accordingly, they want to make it lawful to drag away innocent men from their families and friends and have them put to death by ungodly men for their religion. Relative to our city charter, courts, rights of habeas corpus, etc., I wish you to know and publish that we have all power, and if any man from this time forth says anything to the contrary, cast it into his teeth.

There is a secret in this. If there is not power in our charter and courts, then there is not power in the state of Illinois, nor in the Congress or Constitution of the United States, for the United States gives unto Illinois her constitution or charter and Illinois gave unto Nauvoo her charter, ceding unto us our vested rights, which she has no right nor power to take from us. All the power there was in Illinois she gave to Nauvoo. I want you to hear and learn, O Israel, this day, what is for the happiness and peace of this city and people. If our enemies are determined to oppress us and deprive us of our constitutional rights and privileges as they have done, and if the authorities that are on the earth will not sustain us in our rights, nor give us that protection which the laws and constitution of the United States and of this state guaranteed unto us, then we will claim them from a higher power, from heaven, yea, from God Almighty. Before I will bear this unhallowed persecution any longer, before I will be dragged away again among my enemies for trial, I will spill the last drop of blood in my veins. To bear it any longer would be a sin.

It did my soul good to see your feelings and love manifested towards me. I thank God that I have the honor to lead so virtuous and honest a people, to be your leader and lawyer as was Moses to the children of Israel. Hosannah to Almighty God, who has delivered us thus from out of the seven troubles. I commend you to his grace and may the blessings of heaven rest upon you, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen."

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 11, no. 8 (15 September 1882): 70.

Joseph met with the Indians and told them the Book of Mormon was written by their fathers; he slaughtered cattle to feed them; they later returned the kindness upon the Saints.

Our city was occasionally visited by Lamanites and a deputation of Pottawatamie chiefs were in the city waiting to see Joseph when he returned from Dixon and as soon as consistent after the trial was over he received them.

After being assured that all present were friends to Joseph, their orator arose and said, (it being interpreted): "We as a people have long been distressed and oppressed. We have been driven from our lands many times. We have been wasted away by wars, until there are but few of us left. The white man has hated us and shed our blood, until it has appeared as though there would soon be no Indian left. We have talked with the Great Spirit and the Great Spirit has talked with us. We have asked the Great Spirit to save us and let us live and the Great Spirit has told us that you are the man (pointing to the Prophet). We have now come a great way to see you and hear your words, and to have you tell us what to do. Our horses have become poor traveling and we are hungry. We will now wait and hear your words."

Joseph was considerably affected, so much so that he wept. He said in return: "I have heard your words. They are true! The Great Spirit has told you the truth. I am your friend and brother, and I wish to do you good. Your fathers were once a great people. They worshipped the Great Spirit. The Great Spirit did them good. He was their friend, but they left the Great Spirit and would not hear his words nor keep them. The Great Spirit left them, and they began to kill one another, and they have been poor and afflicted until now.

The Great Spirit has given me a book, and told me that you will soon be blessed again. The Great Spirit will soon begin to talk with you and your children."

Raising the Book of Mormon, he said, "This is the book which your fathers made. I wrote upon it. This tells me what you will have to do. I now want you to begin to pray to the Great Spirit. I want you to make peace with one another, and do not kill white men; it is not good, but ask the Great Spirit for what you want. And it will not be long before the Great Spirit will bless you, and you will cultivate the earth, and build good houses like white men. We will give you something to eat and to take home with you."

The Prophet had an ox killed for them, and some horses were also prepared for them.

They remembered the kindness of Joseph and his people and when driven from our homes they made us welcome upon their land, where we were obliged to make our Winter Quarters.

We have certainly seen the fulfillment of the Prophet's words concerning the red man, cultivating the earth and building houses, as well as other predictions, and are satisfied that all will be fulfilled.

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 11, no. 8 (15 September 1882): 70-71.

Joseph told Governor Thomas Ford of his intent to take the Saints to the Rocky Mountains.

I here produce a copy of the letter received by President Brigham Young from Governor [Thomas] Ford, dated April 8, 1845, containing a proof, indisputable that the Prophet Joseph Smith was the first to propose moving to this western country, instead of Brigham Young, as has been stated by Joseph Smith, editor of the Lamoni Herald and reputed by others, who are equally in the dark in this, as well as in all other matters pertaining to this Latter-day work.

"If you can get off by yourselves you may enjoy peace, but surrounded by such neighbors, I [Thomas Ford] confess that I do not see the time when you will be permitted to enjoy quiet. I was informed by General Joseph Smith last summer that he contemplated a removal west, and from what I learned from him and others at that time, I think if he had lived, he would have began to move in the matter before this time. . . ."

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 11, no. 8 (15 September 1882): 161.

Helen Mar tells that Joseph thrice commanded Heber C. Kimball to take a plural wife; the Lord repeated His command through the Prophet before Heber was able to obey; fearful of offending his wife, Heber labored over the decision to inform her; his wife said the order was in Eternity; she told her husband of her revelation and he rejoiced.

My mother [Vilate Murray Kimball] often told me that she could not doubt that the plural order of marriage was of God, for the Lord had revealed it to her in answer to prayer.

In Nauvoo, shortly after his return from England [July, 1841], my father, among others of his brethren, was taught the plural wife doctrine, and was told by Joseph the Prophet, three times, to go and take a certain woman as his wife; but not till he commanded him in the name of the Lord did he obey. At the same time Joseph told him not to divulge this secret, not even to my mother, for fear that she would not receive it; for his life was in constant jeopardy, not only from outside influences and enemies who were seeking some plea to take him back to Missouri, but from false brethren who had crept like snakes into his bosom and then betrayed him.

My father realized the situation fully, and the love and reverence he bore the Prophet were so great that he would sooner have laid down his life than have betrayed him. This was one of the greatest tests of his faith he had ever experienced. The thought of deceiving the kind and faithful wife of his youth, whom he loved with all his heart, and who with him had borne so patiently their separations, and all the trials and sacrifices they had been called to endure, was more than he felt able to bear.

He realized not only the addition of trouble and perplexity that such a step must bring upon him, but his sorrow and misery were increased by the thought of my mother's hearing of it from some other source, which would no doubt separate them, and he shrank from the thought of such a thing, or of causing her any unhappiness. Finally he was so tried that he went to Joseph and told him how he feltthat he was fearful if he took such a step he could not stand, but would be overcome. The Prophet, full of sympathy for him, went and inquired of the Lord. His answer was, "Tell him to go and do as he has been commanded, and if I see that there is any danger of his apostatizing, I will take him unto myself."

The fact that he had to be commanded three times to do this thing shows that the trial must have been extraordinary, for he was a man who, from the first, had yielded implicit obedience to every requirement of the Prophet.

When first hearing the principle taught, believing that he would be called upon to enter into it, he had thought of two elderly ladies named Pitkin, great friends of my mother's, who, he believed, would caused her little if any unhappiness. But the women he was commanded to take was an English lady named Sarah Noone, nearer my mother's age, who came over with the company of Saints in the same ship in which father and Brother Brigham returned from Europe. She had been married and was the mother of two little girls, but left her husband on account of his drunken and dissolute habits. Father was told to take her as his wife and provide for her and her children, and he did so.

My mother had noticed a change in his manner and appearance, and when she inquired the cause, he tried to evade her questions. At last he promised he would tell her after a while, if she would only wait. This trouble so worked upon his mind that his anxious and haggard looks betrayed him daily and hourly, and finally his misery became so unbearable that it w as impossible to control his feelings. He became sick in body, but his mental wretchedness was too great to allow of his retiring, and he would walk the floor till nearly morning, and sometimes the agony of his mind was so terrible that he would wring his hands and weep like a child, and beseech the Lord to be merciful and reveal to her this principle, for he himself could not break his vow of secrecy.

The anguish of their hearts was indescribable, and when she found it was useless to beseech him longer, she retired to her room and bowed before the Lord and poured out her soul in prayer to Him who hath said: "If any lack wisdom let him ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not." My father's heart was raised at the same time in supplication. While pleading as one would plead for life, the vision of her mind was opened, and as darkness flees before the morning sun, so did her sorrow and the groveling things of earth vanish away.

Before her was illustrated the order of celestial marriage, in all its beauty and glory, together with the great exaltation and honor it would confer upon her in that immortal and celestial sphere, if she would accept it and stand in her place by her husband's side. She also saw the woman he had taken to wife, and contemplated with joy the vast and boundless love and union which this order would bring about, as well as the increase of her husband's kingdoms, and the power and glory extending throughout the eternities, worlds without end.

With a countenance beaming with joy, for she was filled with the Spirit of God, she returned to my father, saying, "Heber, what you kept from me the Lord has shown me." She told me she never saw so happy a man as father and when she described the vision and told him she was satisfied and knew it was from God.

She covenanted to stand by him and honor the principle, which covenant she faithfully kept, and though her trials were often heavy and grievous to bear, she knew that father was also being tried, and her integrity was unflinching to the end. She gave my father many wives, and they always found in my mother a faithful friend.

Orson F. Whitney, The Mormon Prophet's Tragedy (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret News, 1905), 37-41.

Quotes a letter Vilate Kimball wrote to her husband Heber, telling of the martyrdom, of seeing the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum; it also tells of the animus of the apostates, the perfidy of Governor Ford, and the popularity of the Prophet.

The following hastily written lines tell of the awful fate of the Prophet and his brother, Hyrum, and describe the scene in Nauvoo, and the deep sorrow and lamentation that filled the hearts of the people:

"Nauvoo, June 30, 1844.

MY DEAR COMPANION:

"Never before did I take up my pen to address you under so trying circumstances as we are now placed, but as Brother Adams, the bearer of this, can tell you more than I can write, I shall not attempt to describe the scene through which we have passed. I saw the lifeless bodies of our beloved brethren, when they were brought to their almost distracted families. Yea, I witnessed their fears and groans, which were enough to rend the heart of adamant. Every brother and sister who witnessed the scene felt deeply to sympathize with them; yea, every heart is filled with sorrow, and the very streets of Nauvoo seem to mourn. Where it will end the Lord only knows. We are kept awake night after night by the alarm of mobs. These apostates say, "Their damnation is sealed, their die is cast, their doom is fixed," and that they are determined to do all in their power to have revenge. William Law says he wants nine more that were in his quorum, sometimes I am afraid he will get them; I have no doubt but you are one.

"There was a strange circumstance took place when the Legion was first called out to defend the city. There were several drums found with blood upon them. No one could account for it; they examined to see how many there were; they found tend, and when the were examining the eleventh, there came a large drop on that one. William has seen them, and says with all that the drums have been used, the blood is still plain to them.

"I try to submit all things into the hands of God. I have felt opposed to their sending for you to come home at present, and did not know as they would, until Brother Adams called here a few moments ago, and told me he should start in about two hours; if I wanted to write I must send it to the Mansion within that time. I have not time to say much, neither is it necessary, as he can tell you all. My health is better, and the children are all well. I mailed a letter to you last Monday, directed to Baltimore. The letters you sent from Washington all came together last Wednesday; the mail had not been in before for four weeks. When I read your pressing invitation for me to meet you, I again took courage, that the way would yet open for us to go, but alas! All our hopes in that direction are blasted. My constant prayer now is for the Lord to preserve us all to meet again. I have no doubt but your life will be sought, but may the Lord give you wisdom to escape their hands. My time is up, so now fare you well till we meet, which may the Lord soon grant, for His Son's sake. Amen. VILATE KIMBALL."

I well remember the morning that the news came to our city of the murder of Joseph and Hyrum. I had slept that night with Emily Partridge at the house of Winsor P. Lyon. The first sound that broke upon our ears was the voice of Sister Lyon, as she opened the door and told us that they were murdered.

Many scenes in Nauvoo, some of which are described by my mother, are still fresh in my memory. I stood in the door as the procession passed our house, which had increased to several thousand, who followed the wagons bearing the martyrs as they proceeded to the Mansion. I was an eye and ear witness to the insulting speech delivered by Governor Ford upon the very frame of a building which stood west of the Mansion, where a few days previous with thousands I had listened to Joseph's last address to the Ledion, never suspecting treachery nor the awful tragedy that was being enacted at Carthage, where this cowardly Governor had pledged his honor and the faith of the State that they should be protected. We were promised that the laws should be magnified and justice be meted out to their murderers. It was the popularity of Joseph as candidate for the Presidency, and the power and influence that the "Mormon" people were gaining, that created a feeling of fear among the apostates and corrupt politicians, and a deeper hatred took possession of their hearts, similar to that which was felt by the Jews towards Jesus Christ, and like them they were determined to put an end to his earthly career.

It was the morning of June 24 when Joseph and Hyrum, with the City Council, the Marshal and a number of others, started on horseback for Carthage. Joseph halted as they reached the Temple, and looking with admiration upon it and upon the beautiful city, he remarked: "This is the loveliest place and the best people under the heavens; little do they know the trials that await them."

Our history tells a tale of bitter worethe sufferings of the innocent, the robbings and drivings from their homes, the wailings of the widows and the orphans, the fathers and the mothers, brothers and sisters, for their dead any dying, and the surrendering of their arms and submitting to all the cruelties that could be heaped upon them, rather than deny their religionbut does it tell of any redress being made for the wrongs done them by this nation? No, nor do we look for any from them; but our case will be taken to a higher court, whence there is no appeal.

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 11, no. 115 (1 January 1883): 114.
