Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Whitney, Newel Kimball

(February 5, 1795-September 23, 1850)

In 1831 Joseph prophesied in return for the Whitneys kindness to him by helping to provide for their housing and comfort; it was fulfilled in the spring of 1840.

A prophecy of Joseph's in relation to the [Newel K.] Whitney family, uttered in Kirtland, nine years before [i.e., in 1831], was fulfilled soon after they removed from Quincy to Commerce, in the spring of 1840. They at first resided in a very unhealthy neighborhood, and all fell sick with chills and fever. Joseph, on visiting them and witnessing their condition, was touched with compassion. He remembered how kindly they had received him and his family, when they were homeless, and at once urged them to come and occupy a comfortable cottage on his own premises, in a much healthier locality. His generous offer was accepted, and the change soon restored them to wanted health. Joseph had said to Sister Whitney, at Kirtland, that even as she had opened her house to him, he would do a similar act in her behalf in a day when circumstances would require it.

Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:226.

First meeting with the Prophet, who had previously seen Newel and his wife in vision.

When Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland in February, 1831, his sleigh, containing himself, his wife Emma, and one or two other persons, drew up in front of the store of Gilbert and Whitney, and the youthful Prophet, alighting and entering, thus addressed the junior partner: "Newel K. Whitney, thou art the man," at the same time extending his hand as if to an old and familiar acquaintance. "You have the advantage of me," said the one addressed, mechanically taking the proffered hand, a mystified look overspreading his countenance."I could not call you by name as you have me." "I am Joseph the Prophet," said the stranger, smiling."You've prayed me here, now what do you want of me?"referring to a vision in which he had seen the merchant and his wife praying for his coming to Kirtland. This was Newel K. Whitney's introduction to the founder of Mormonism. He cordially welcomed the Prophet and his wife, and of their entertainment at his home Joseph says: "We were kindly received and welcomed into the house of Brother N. K. Whitney. I an my wife lived in the family of Brother Whitney several weeks, and received every kindness and attention that could be expected, and especially from Sister Whitney."

"Newel K. Whitney," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:234.

Joseph provides a house for the Whitneys, fulfilling a prophecy he had uttered nine years previous.

[Bishop Whitney] moved his family to Nauvoo in the spring of 1840. At first they resided in a very unhealthy neighborhood, and fell sick with fever and ague. The Prophet, on visiting them and witnessing the condition, invited them to occupy a comfortable cottage on his own premises, in a much healthier locality. Thus was fulfilled a promise and a prophecy made by him to Mrs. Whitney on his first arrival in Kirtland, when he said that even as she had opened her house to him and his when he was homeless, he would yet do a similar act for her and her family.

"Newel K. Whitney," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:235.
