Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Whitney, Orson F.

(July 1, 1855-May 16, 1931)

Joseph chides Oliver and says the work will go on without him.

I refer to Oliver Cowdery, though I would not say anything of him in an uncharitable spirit, yet his example now comes before me. It is said that he told the Prophet Joseph, "If I leave the Church it will fall and go to pieces." Joseph said, "Oliver, you try it." He did try it, but what was the result? Did the ship go down because one of its officers chose to jump overboard? The answer is here before us in the presence of this mighty congregation, representing the Church and kingdom of God, from which Brother Oliver chose to withdraw. The Work survived, but he went to pieces, or would have done so, utterly, had he not humbled himself and come back and repented at the eleventh hour. Thus it is with all men who think the kingdom cannot get along without them. They seem to forget that One who cannot lie has pledged His word that it shall stand forever.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:82.

Joseph teaches that the earth breathes.

In the days of Nauvoo, a learned lecturer came to that city and lectured on the ebb and flow of the tides. The Prophet Joseph told the lecturer that he could give a better reason for the phenomenon than he had, and when the Professor asked what it was he answered: "Why, the earth breathes." This was an astonishing doctrine, but doubtless a true one. "There are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in our philosophy."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:167.

Earth was created from fragments of other earths.

The Prophet Joseph also declares that this earth is composed of the broken up fragments of other earths; and here again the wisdom of God answers the folly of man. While man stands aghast with all his learning and is tempted to reject the Mosaic account of the creation because the testimony of the rocks as to the age of this planet disagrees or seems to disagree with the inspired record, a single spark of fire dropping from the throne of God kindles up the darkness, dispels the mystery, and sweeps away the sophistries of man. No wonder the material of the earth seems to be older than the Mosaic account would indicate when, according to Joseph, it is older than the earth itself. The broken fragments of other earths thrown back into the mill, ground over and refined and again brought forth. Such, it seems, is our mother earth today.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:167-68.

Tower of Babel was built to reach Zion, not heaven.

It has been taught that it was the object of the people who built the Tower of Babel to reach heaven, to attain to one of the starry planets, one of the heavenly bodies. This sounds, indeed, like a fairy tale; and for one, I cannot conceive nowalthough I once believed ithow a race of people, out of whose midst a Zion had arisen, a generation so intelligent as to have produced such a city, intelligent enough to build a great tower of which the world has not since seen the counterpart, that we are aware of, could cherish the idea that they could actually reach the sun, moon, or one of the stars, simply by piling brick upon brick and stone upon stone. But the Prophet Joseph Smith, whose mission it was to shed light upon the darkness of this generation, is said to have declared that it was not their intention to reach heaven, but to reach Zion, which was then suspended in mid-air, between heaven and earth, or at such a height as to render the project feasible. This certainly is more reasonable.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:359-60.

The exalted earth is a sea of glass.

John, after being told what he should write unto the seven churches, saw a vision of the past and the future. He beheld a sea of glass like unto a crystal, shining before a heavenly throne, upon which sat a glorious being holding in his hand a book sealed with seven seals. Joseph Smith declares that that sea of glass was the earth in its sanctified and immortal state, and that the book with seven seals symbolized the history of the earthits true historythe hidden acts of men and the mysteries of God pertaining to this planet, during the seven thousand years of its temporal existence. The opening of the first seal was the revealing of the acts of the first thousand years, the opening of the second seal the revealing of the acts of the second thousand years, and so on until the seventh.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 4:131-32.
