Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Wight, Lyman

(May 9, 1796-March 31, 1858)

Purposes of Zion's Camp were fulfilled.

With regard to the accomplishments of Zion's Camp, Lyman Wight reported that Joseph Smith "was fully satisfied that he had done the will of God, and that the Lord accepted our sacrifice and offering, even as he had Abraham's when he offered his son Isaac; and in his benediction asked the heavenly Father to bless us with eternal life and salvation."

History of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 8 vols. (Independence, Mo.: Herald Publishing House, 1967), 1:525-26; also cited in Bruce A. Van Orden, "Zion's Camp: A Refiner's Fire," in Larry C. Porter and Susan Easton Black, ed., The Prophet Joseph Smith: Essays on the Life and Mission of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1988), 205.

Moses Wilson seeks to induce Lyman Wight to betray the Prophet; Wight refuses.

In October, 1838, after learning that Far West was surrounded by a mob, he raised fifty-three volunteers in Adam-ondi-Ahman (25 miles distant,) and repaired immediately to Far West to aid in its defense, where, with Joseph and Hyrum Smith and others, he was betrayed into the hands of his enemies, by Colonel George M. Hinkle, on the 31st; and was sentenced by a court martial to be shot the next morning (November 1) [1838] at 8 o'clock. During the evening, General Moses Wilson took him out by himself, and tried to induce him to betray Joseph Smith, and swear falsely against him; at which time the following conversation took place. General Wilson said, "Colonel Wight, we have nothing against you, only that you are associated with Joseph Smith. He is our enemy and a damned rascal, and would take any plan he could to kill us. You are a damned fine fellow; and if you will come out and swear against him, we will spare your life, and give you any office you want; and if you don't do it, you will be shot tomorrow at 8 o'clock." Colonel Wight replied, "General Wilson, you are entirely mistaken in your man, both in regard to myself and Joseph Smith. Joseph Smith is not an enemy to mankind, he is not your enemy; but is as good a friend as you have got. Had it not been for him, you would have been in hell long ago, for I should have sent you there by cutting your throat, and no other man but Joseph Smith could have prevented me and you may thank him for your life. And, now, if you will give me the boys I brought from Adam-ondi-Ahman yesterday, I will whip your whole army." Wilson said, "Wight, you are a strange man; but if you will not accept my proposal, you will be shot tomorrow morning at 8." Colonel Wight replied, "Shoot and be damned."

"Lyman Wight History," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 29 (22 July 1865): 457.

Joseph prophesies that Lyman Wight would be cut off from Church.

One of Joseph's prophesies in jail was, if he was taken away Brigham Young, [Reynolds] Cahoon and, others would cut me off from the church whether they had any accusation against me or not which I have lived to see fulfilled.

"Letter of Lyman Wight to Wilford Woodruff, 24 August 1857," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah; also cited in James B. Allen, "A Dialogue Between Wilford Woodruff and Lyman Wight," BYU Studies 17, no. 1 (autumn 1976): 110-11.
