Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Wight, Orange L.

(November 29, 1823-June 20, 1907)

Tells of Joseph teaching the doctrine of plural marriage.

I now come to that part of my story that you will be most likely interested in, which regards the doctrine taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith in regard to the plural marriage system. At first the doctrine was taught in private, the first I knew about it was in John Higbee's family; he lived close to us and being well acquainted with him and family I discovered he had two wives. The next I noticed when in company with the young folks the girls were calling one another spirituals. Now the reason why the young folks was in advance of me, my work was in the machine shop 22 miles above Nauvoo where I spent nearly all my time. But when at Nauvoo in the winter of 1841 and 1842, I became fully initiated.

"Recollections of Orange L. Wight," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8.

Tells of riding in a carriage with Joseph and one of his plural wives; also tells of a prophecy Joseph made about one of the apostates not returning to Nauvoo.

I was walking along the street with Flora [Woodworth] near the Prophet's residence when he, Joseph, drove, up in his carriage, stopped and spoke to I and Flora and asked us to get in the carriage and ride with him. He opened the door for us and when we were seated opposite to him he told the driver to drive on. We went to the [Nauvoo] temple lot and many other places during the afternoon and then he drove to the Woodworth house and we got out and went in. After we got in the house Sister Woodworth took me in another room and told me that Flora was one of Joseph's wives. I was aware or believed that Eliza R. Snow and the two Partridge girls were his wives but was not informed about Flora. But now Sister Woodworth gave me all the information necessary, so I knew Joseph believed and practiced polygamy.

Now while in the coach with Joseph he asked me a great many questions about my mission and about the other elders in my travels, more particular about the Grants and Apostle John E. Page. Page had charge of the Pennsylvania mission and I was in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania with him part of the winter and with my father who was on a mission in New York State. While in conversation in the carriage I told the Prophet that a man by the name Brank was coming to Nauvoo. He looked troubled for a moment and said he had trouble enough with that man; Brank was an apostate. Then his countenance changed to one of inspiration and he said, "Orange, he will not come" and he never did come. That was a prophecy which seeing him and hearing the words I can never forget. It was proof to me that he was inspired.

"Recollections of Orange L. Wight," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah, 8-9.
