Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Wilcox, Maria Wealthy

(June 17, 1827-January 13, 1909)

Remembers Joseph on his favorite horse, Joe Duncan, in assembly with the Nauvoo Legion.

As I was quite young, my recollections of the Prophet are necessarily rather limited, being more in a general way, through attending meetings on the Sabbath day and listening to his voice. Yet there are some things that transpired just prior to his martyrdom which made a lasting impression on my mind. I distinctly remember the grand parade of the Nauvoo Legion and Masonic Fraternity, in procession together. All were dressed in uniform, with the Prophet Joseph at their head on his favorite black horse, Joe Duncan, his wife Emma riding by his side. This occurred a short time previous to his death. It was truly a grand and beautiful sight, and one that I shall never forget.

Maria Wealthy Wilcox, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 553.

Heard Joseph's last sermon, and remembers the sorrow after the martyrdom and the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

I was also present at the time he preached his last public sermon, while standing on the roof of a shed or small building, with a large congregation gathered around to listen. This was also a very impressive occasion.

When the Prophet Joseph and his brother were taken to Carthage, it was a time of great anxiety for the Saints, consequently no one retired to rest as they knew not what to expect. When morning dawned, the news of the martyrdom of the two brothers reached the city. It can be well imagined, the sorrow and darkness that seemed to pervade the whole place. When the bodies were brought into the city, thousands of the Saints were gathered on the main street, to witness the sad and mournful arrival of our murdered Prophet and Patriarch. The bodies were taken to the Mansion House were they lay in state and were viewed by the multitude.

During this crisis many of the apostles were absent on missions. I well remember the Sunday morning when the sorrowing Saints were gathered together, in the little grove where they were accustomed to meet. Sidney Rigdon presented his claim as successor to the Prophet Joseph, making quite an impression upon the people; but Brigham Young, President of the Apostles, had just returned to Nauvoo, from his mission, in time to attend the afternoon meeting, and in a voice, not unlike the Prophet's, he told the people that although the Prophet Joseph was dead, Joseph had left behind the keys of the kingdom, and had conferred the same power, and authority that he himself possessed, upon the Twelve Apostles, and that the Church would not be left without a leader and a guide. Truly the mantle of Joseph had fallen upon Brigham, and he spoke with power, even to the convincing of the Saints, assuring them that they had nothing to fear, as all would yet be well, if they would hearken to the word of God, and to the counsel of his servants, and keep his commandments.

Maria Wealthy Wilcox, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 553-54.
