Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Williams, Frederick Granger

(October 28, 1787-October 25, 1842)

Loaned Joseph money and the use of his farm in Kirtland; in an unrecorded revelation, the Saints were commanded to be equal and to forgive all their debts against each other; an account of F. G. William's last visit to Nauvoo and of Joseph telling him he was going to die.

I will here enclose, verbatim, his words as copied from his original statements, which are still preserved.

Statement Number 1: "Statement of facts relative to Joseph Smith and myself." From the time I first became acquainted with Joseph Smith, Jr., which was in the month of August, 1831, I frequently assisted him by letting him have money and other things, among which was the use of my farm in Kirtland for two years, for which I never took any not or security. I also furnished him with farming utensils, oxen, chain, sled, wagon and other things not now recollected; for which he gave he his note to the amount of several hundred dollars. But above the time we received the revelation under page 240 in the Doctrine and Covenants, a Revelation was received (but not written) requiring a certain number among us (among which I was one) to balance all accounts, and give up all notes and demands, that they had against each other, and all be equal, which was done. This included all that he was to give me for my farm, and the obligation which I had against him, etc., but he never gave me any obligation for my farm whatever.

Statement Number 2: "From the time I first became acquainted with Joseph Smith, I frequently assisted him, let him have the use of my farm in Kirtland two years, for which I received no compensation, though he frequently promised me, and had given me several notes for oxen, farming utensils, wagon and oxen, etc. For the use of the farm I never took any note, neither received anything for it. Frequently let him have money, of which I made no account. Recollect letting him have $10,000 at one time when making the road up the hill, also thirty-one dollars to redeem Kirtland currency with. About the time we received the Revelation under page 240, if I recollect right, a Revelation was received requiring every one of what was then called 'the firm' to give up all notes and demands, that they had against each other, and all be equal, which was the case that I never got anything for my farm. I commenced writing for Joseph Smith, Jr., July 20, 1832, as may be seen by S. Rigdon's permission dated as above, from which time up to the commencement of the Hebrew School in Kirtland I was constantly in said Smith's employ, and boarded myself, for which he agreed to give me six hundred dollars a year. I also let him have $27.00 when he went to Missouri with the camp. I also bought a patent lever silver watch, for which he agreed to pay $50.00 (N. K. Whitney, John Johnson, Oliver Cowdery of the Revelation concerning giving up the demands.)

"What I have here received of Smith I expect to have copied on this account. (Nothing followed on statement.)

Statement Number 3. "Account on Farm."

Farm,. . . . .. . . . .. . . . .. . . . 2200

1 yoke oxen 80

1two ox wagon 75

130 pound iron 3

Blacksmithy paid and collected 5

1 silver leverwatch agreed upon-50

3 years and 4 months sermon writing, 2200

commencing the first day of August, 1832

and ending in January, 1835, and boarding

myself with the exception of about one month.

The rent of my farm 2 years 300, upon which

was raised 200 bushels of wheat, 17 acres corn, meadow and other products, out of which I had 50 bushels corn and 14 bushels of wheat.

May 10, 18135wheat30

August 17cash16

Statement Number 4: Farm Date

"Deed given to Joseph Smith May 5, 1834"

(This slip of paper was in two pieces and carefully pinned together with a surgeon's fine needle, and is, without doubt, the deed to the Kirtland farm.)

The following statement was taken from Ezra G. Williams' journal, son of F. G. Williams: "According to the will of the Lord by Revelationhe, F. G. Williams, deeded the farm at Kirtland and all its appertainingsone or two yoke of oxen, yoke, chains, plows, harrows, one frame house two rooms down and some upstairs, not finished, where the Prophet and wife slept. A two-roomed log house in which the Prophet's father and mother lived with their family. And a forty-foot barn, in which they held meetings. While most of the leading authorities had building lots on this piece of land, F. G. Williams and family moved about one and one half miles away. (Statement) While there was a proviso put in the deed, that should the property ever cease to be used for Church purposes it should revert back to F. G. Williams or his heirs." After the expulsion of Mormons from Kirtland, Ohio, and the death of said F. G. Williams, able lawyers went to his wife and son, Ezra G. Williams, and offered a large sum of money for the privilege of getting the property for them, but they refused saying they knew said F. G. Williams to be in his right mind and knew what he was doing when he deeded the property to the Church and they would not interfere with it."

On the 7th of September, 1904, and prior to his son's death in Ogden, Utah, Ezra G. Williams warned his children to have nothing to do with it unless counseled to do so and under the direction of Church leaders.

The following is taken from a letter to Dr. Ezra G. Williams of Ogden, Utah, from his cousin, Eunice Williams, and is dated October 5th, 1897. "Chardon, Ohio. . . . There is a matter which perhaps you do not know; when your father deeded to the Mormon Church the land upon which the Mormon temple in Kirtland now stands, he put a condition in the deed, that when it ceased to be used for Church purposes the land could revert to him or his heirs. Signed, affectionately, etc., Eunice Williams." . . .

. . ."NoteThe following Revelation was received by Frederick G. Williams at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple concerning Lehi's travels. The course that Lehi and his company traveled from Jerusalem to the place of their destination; they traveled nearly south, southeast direction, until they came to the 19th degree of south latitude, thence nearly east to the sea of Arabia, then sailed in a southeast direction and landed on the continent of South America in Chile, 30 degrees south latitude."

Mr. Williams claims that at the time of receiving "the Revelation" an angel appeared to him and sat between him and Joseph Smith, Sr. Mr. Williams then transcribed the message on paper from his people; this he kept during his life time and Mrs. Williams keeping it sacred until her demise. Dr. Ezra G. Williams, her son, loaded it to George A. Smith and Mrs. Williams, after the doctor's death has tried several times to secure the manuscript, but was unsuccessful. This Revelation later appeared in print in the Compendium (page 289) and was erroneously accredited to Joseph Smith. (From an interview with Mrs. Ezra G. Williams, at Ogden, Utah, January 24, 1913.) This document is now in the Historian's Office in care of Joseph Fielding Smith and can be viewed by members of the family.

"On the 7th day of May, 1834, Frederick G. Williams was made pay-master of Zion's Camp."

. . . Concerning his rejection from presidency of church and his being disfellowshipped, apostatizing, etc., there are dates and statements at variance with each other. We find in Church Chronology, page 17, Sunday, March 16, 1839. Thomas B. Marsh, F. G. Williams, George M. Hinkle, and others, were excommunicated from the church at Quincy, Illinois. Also at a conference held in Nauvoo, April 6th and 7th, 1840 he was taken back in fellowship. Volume 3 of Church History, page 55: August 5, 1838 the Prophet says: "Sunday 5th: I attended meeting. President Rigdon preached in afternoon, and several were confirmed, among whom was F. G. Williams, who had recently been re-baptized."

Many people, among whom are his descendants, think he was rejected as counselor to the Prophet because of sin. I will quote from Church History, Vol. 2, page 509. Minutes of conference 23rd of September, 1837, in Kirtland. President Smith presented Sidney Rigdon and F. G. Williams as counselors. Voted unanimously in affirmative except for F. G. Williams, which was not carried unanimously. President Smith then introduced O. Cowdery (who had before been sustained as a third counselor.) Joseph Smith, Sr., Hyrum Smith and John Smith for assistant counselors. These last four, with the first three, are to be considered the heads of the church.

Carried unanimously. Soon after the Prophet moved to Missouri and in the minutes of the conference which was held in Farr West, Missouri, 7th of November, 1837, the Prophet nominated Frederick G. Williams to be his second counselor, but he was objected to by Lyman E. Wight in a few remarks referring to a certain letter written to this place by F. G. Williams. Elder Marsh, Elder James Emmett also objected. Bishop Edward Partridge said he seconded President Williams' nomination and should vote for him, and as to the letter, he had heard it and saw nothing criminal in it. President David Whitmer also made remarks in President Williams' favor. Marsh and Greaves objected again and President Rigdon nominated Hyrum Smith to take Williams' place. . . .

. . . Frederick G. Williams died at Quincy, Illinois, October 10, 1842. On his last visit to Nauvoo and as he was about to take his leave for home, the Prophet held him close and said: "Brother Frederick, I hate to see you return home; you are going there to die."

"Notes on the Life of Frederick G. Williams, One Time Counselor to the Prophet Joseph Smith," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2-9.

Joseph and his counselors see the Kirtland Temple in vision before its construction.

Joseph received the word of the Lord for him to take his two counsellors Williams and Rigdon and come before the Lord, and he would show them the plan or model of the House to be built. We went upon our knees, called on the Lord, and the Building appeared within viewing distance: I being the first to discover it. Then all of us viewed it together. After we had taken a good look at the exterior, the building seemed to come right over us, and the Makeup of this Hall seems to coincide with what I there saw to a minutia.

"Journal of Truman O. Angell," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah.
