Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Williams, Rebecca Swain

(August 3, 1798-September 25, 1861)

Met Joseph in 1831; Frederick G. offered the Prophet his land for Church settlements, including land on which the temple was built; Joseph hid from a mob in the Williams home, once escaping dressed as a woman; F. G. and his wife helped scrape tar off Joseph following the Hiram mobbing.

When her husband [Frederick G. Williams] returned from the Indian Mission the next Spring, 1831, he found the branch of the Church prosperous and soon afterward they were pleased to have the Prophet Joseph Smith pay a visit to them. the branch members assembled together in meetings and many talks were made concerning the mobbings that were carried on in the main settlements of the Church. Frederick G. Williams made an offer to the Prophet for the Church to make its headquarters in a Kirtland, proffering his own land for its use. The deeded land comprised one hundred seventeen acres, within which was a lot upon which a Temple was built. So please was the Prophet with the offer that he went back to other officials and they accepted the same. Church members began to gather their possessions for the move. For several years thereafter Kirtland was the church headquarters. . . .

. . . Scarcely had the Saints settled in their new home when trouble arose and mobbings began again. The Prophet was forced to hid from them on several occasions. At one time while residing in Frederick G. Williams' home before his own residence across the street was finished, the mob came and surrounded the Williams' home, cursing and swearing that they would have "Old Joe Smith." Rebecca dressed him in her bonnet and cloak and he walked outside and passed among them and away before they found out he was not in the house. At another time they came, took him outside and tried to poison him, but he spit out the poison so they tarred and feathered him, beat him and left him to die. The brethren found him and brought him back to the doctor, who with his wife and others, removed the tar from his body and administered to his bruises. Another time a sister was milking her cow when a mobocrat with his knife cut a strip from the cow's side, saying it would make a good whip for Old Joe Smith's back. The mob became so persistent that the doctor took the Prophet in his wagon to a place of safety.

Lucy E. Godfrey, "Biographical Sketch of Rebecca Swain Williams, Wife of Dr. Frederick Granger Williams and Mother of Dr. Ezra Granger Williams," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
