Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Williams, Samuel Otho

(birth and death dates unavailable)

Williams, a nonmember and one of the Carthage Greys tells of the martyrdom; he speaks of the Nauvoo Expositor as a nuisance, of the prejudice of the mobbers, and of Ford's conduct; he says at one point Joseph fainted; also says that after he fell from the jail window, Joseph was "shot several times and a bayonet run through him"; the fearful mob dispersed following the murders, leaving Carthage and their homes.

My Dear John:

I have just this moment received your letter of the first inst. and hasten to answer it. I proceed to give you a history of our difficulties with the Saints. About a month ago a paper was started in Nauvoo called the "Nauvoo Expositor" owned by several of the seceding Saints which had for its purpose the exposure of the Smiths and all villany practised by them and in the City under their direction. The first number of the paper was issued and the way it lit out on Jo was a sin. Jo called the City Council together and after much deliberation and talk the new paper was declared a NUISANCE and they pafsed an ordinance requiring the Marshall of the City to destroy the prefs & pie the type and if any resistance was offered to destroy the house. The Mayor of the City (Jo) accordingly issued his writ to the Marshall commanding him to do the work which he did. He with his pofse (the Marshall) threw the prefs into the street and broke it up with a sledge hammer and buried the type. The Mormons also tried to catch the owners of the prefs but they escapedseveral of them came here. Complaint was made here before a Justice of the peace who issued his warrant and sent a Constable to bring them (Jo and all the others concerned about 20 in number) to this place for trialthe Constable arrested them and Jo was discharged by the Municipal Court of the City of Nauvoo and afterwards He discharged the balance on writs of Habeus Corpusthese potent words were entered on the record. "Honorably discharged" as soon as we heard of the prefs being destroyed, a meeting of the old Citizens was called and was in session at the time the officer returned from Nauvoo without the prisoners of coursesuch an excitement I never witnefsed in my life. there were about seven hundred of the old citizens assembled here and I tell you that we all felt that the time had come where either the Mormons or old Citizens had to leave. the meeting determined to call for volunteers to rendezvous at four places in this County and when a sufficient number had assembled the Constable that arrested Smith & the others was to call on us as a pofse Comitatus to help him arrest the accused. Our Brigadier General in the mean time called out the forces under his command. The meeting also appointed two persons to go to the Governor and get him to issue a call for the Militia. They repaired to Springfield and returned with his Excellency; when the Gov. arrived here he found about 300 men armed and drilling four hours each day and standing guard at night. Our Company the Carthage Greys as soon as the meeting came to the conclusion it did, pitched our tents on the public square and went to work. The Gov. soon after his arrival made a speech to the troops and announced his determination to see the laws executed and immediately dispatched a Mefsenger to Nauvoo to Smith telling him the consequences if he did not immediately surrender himself for trial this was on Friday. On Sunday a whole Regiment marched into town from McDonough County and on the next Tuesday a Battalion from Schuyler County which made the forces here amount to about 1400 men. As the different forces marched into town they pledged themselves that no violence should be offered to the prisoners if they did come to Carthage. On Tuesday the Gov. sent Capt. Dunn of the Union Dragoons of this County to Nauvoo with an order for the State Arms with wagons & horses to bring them here on the road between this place and Nauvoo they met Smith and the others accused coming to this place to give themselves up for trial. They returned to Nauvoo with Capt. Dunn and about 2/3 of the State Arms delivered to Capt. Dunn and the two Smiths. Jo & Hiram came out here with Capt. Dunn with the Arms. On Wednesday Morning the McDonough troops requested the Gov. to bring Smith (Jo) along their lines many of whom had never seen him. the two Smiths were after breakfast brought to the Head Quarters of the Brigadier Genl and our Company stationed at the Door as a guard,Your humble Servant had command of the Greys at this time. I brought the company up to the house and formed a square of three sides in front of the house with their muskets set a "charge" and even then had some difficulty in Keeping the crowd back so great was the anxiety to see the Smiths, we stood in this position about ½ an hour when I received orders from the Brig. Genl to form the Greys into a Hollow square and guard the Smiths and the Gov. & the Genl to the right of the 57th Regt. which was formed about 300 yards from the Genls quarters which was accordingly done and when we arrived there I opened the square and let them out and marched the Greys back to their "quarters." I was about to dismifs the Company, when the Smiths in Company with the Brig. Genl. came past our quarters The Company in line at "order arms" when the Greys commenced hifsing, Groaning and making all sorts of Hellish sounds. I tried to stop it, but could not. I was about to dismifs the Company again when several of them requested me to march out and drill awhile. I accordingly march out and started down a street in which the Tavern stands that Jo was stopping at. On the way we pafsed the Brig. Genl and the Greys hifsed him the worst Kind and arrived in a few minutes afterwards in in front of the Tavern where Jo was when the same scene was enactedHissing, groaning and all Kinds of discordant sounds. I all the time tried my utmost to preserve silence but had no more command over them than I would have had over a pack of wild Indians. At this demonstration of feeling on the part of the Greys Jo actually fainted. I will now tell you the reason of all the hifsing &ce. The Greys thought we were ordered to escort Smith and that it was intended as an honor to be conferred on him and the Genl always has been what we call a Jack Mormon. I believe I have told you what that is and therefore wont stop to explain nowa few days before at our Anti Mormon meeting he attempted to make a speech and was hifsed downWell to resume when we arrived at our quarters I was informed that our Company was ordered under "arrest." A Member of the Company immediately mounted a wagon and made a speech to the troops and the remainder loaded their muskets with Ball Cartridges and swore that they would die sooner than give up their Arms. A considerable number of troops say one half, swore that the 'Arms of the Greys should not be taken from them. If you had been here to see the excitement at this time you would have been astonished. I never saw any thing equal it. The Brig. Genl had insulted the McDonough troops by introducing the Smiths in this way, "Gentlemen, officers of the 57th Regt. I introduce to you Joseph & Hiram Smith Generals of the Nauvoo Legion"They at the same [time] prisonersat this stage of the proceedings, the Gov. came on the ground and stated that no honor was intended to be conferred on the Smithsthat it was done at the request of the 57th Regt. that they might see himthat he disapproved of the way of introducing the prisoners and rescinded the order of arrest. At this the shout of the multitude ascended to the heavens. we cheered the Gov. for about 2 minutes and we made "some noisethis settled all things for the presentthe same day an order was issued to all the troops to march on Friday into Nauvoothe whole to rendezvous on Thursday night at Golden point about 5 miles below Nauvoo, on Thursday morning a council of the officers was called and the former order of march was revoked. The Gov. thinking that if we once got into Nauvoo that he could not restrain the troops and that we would burn the placeOn Friday morning all the troops except the Union DragoonsCarthage Greys, and the Carthage Riflemen (the last a Military Company) were disbanded and left for homeJo and Hiram all this time in Jail. I forgot to say that 15 of those concerned in destroying the prefs came forward and gave bail for their appearance at the next term of the Circuit Court without an examination and immediately afterwards Jo & Hiram were arrested on a charge of Treason and the examination was postponed until Saturday the 29th inst. which time they were destined never to see. On Friday about 10 o'clock A.M. the Gov. under the escort of the Union Dragoons started for Nauvoo to addrefs the People thereleaving our Company and the Militia company to protect the prisonersthey being under a pledge to do soAll was quiet at this time a Guard of six men was placed in the Jail with a sergeant to command it which was relieved about every 3 hoursWhen the Gov. had been gone about 2 hours he sent back a Mefsenger to Capt. Smith stating that he was afraid some violence would be offered to the prisoners and that he expected him to do his dutythe same Mefsenger was sent back to the Gov. that we would About 5 o clock P.M. our look out on the Court House Cried out. "There is about 400 Mormons coming down the fence to the Jail." I cannot explain to you the situation of the Jail and our encampment on paper. But when I see you(which I hope will be soon) I will show you. As soon as the alarm was given our Company and the Militia were immediately formed and started for the Jail which was about 700 yards from our quartersAt the time the alarm was given the Mob were in about 200 yards of the JailWe marched double quick time and as we got to the Jail both the Smiths were killed, and the mob running off. When the mob came up in front of the Jail our guard challenged themthe mob demanded the prisonersthey were told that if they did not retire the guard would fire on them the Mob raised a shout and commenced jumping over the low fence in front of the Jail where our guard fired on themthe guard were immediately overpowered and the mob rushed into the Jail and did their workthe Guard were not hurt except some bruisesone of the Guard who was the Sergeant in command lost his sword and another his musket the Guard in return captured a musket and a rifle. The Mob all had their faces blackedwhen we were marching to the Jail about 150 yards from the jail we saw Jo come to the window and turn back and in about a second or two afterwards he came to the window and tumbled out. He was shot several times and a bayonet run through him after he fellFrom all the information I can get the Mob were about 250 strongthe forces left to guard the prisoners about 60 or 65 strongA Mefsenger was immediately dispatched to the Gov. who returned home about 12 o'clock That night and advised us to evacuate the town. After the Smiths were killed all the women and children were removed from town and the men were determined to stay and protect their property but when the Gov. came in and stated that he believed our town would be in ashes before morning we all left and deserted this townstopthere were six men in town at day light Saturday morningI was not one of themI left Carthage about ½ past One and travelled all night through mud & water knee deep in some places. I arrived at Augusta about 7 o clock Saturday morning having travelled 18 miles and considering the roads was tolerably good walking. The Gov. was badly scared and stopped in this place but a few minutes and left for Augustaarrived there about day light and left there directly after breakfast for Quincy where he now is. What will be the result of the death of the Smiths I am entirely unable to saythe Mormons are very badly scared and I dont think they will do anything at presentthe citizens of this place have nearly all returned

Samuel Otho Williams

I think I will be in Edwardsville soonany how as soon as I can leave. Our company is still under orders and I can't leave just yet. My family I sent off to Rushville, 50 miles from here as soon as they could start after the Smiths were killed and I returned here with them yesterday. I suppose your letter has been lying here several days. This will account for its not being answered before. My family are all well, that is, my wife and Boy and Gal. I rather guess you will think I have inherited some of Old Henry T. Lusks principles in writing this letter, but I could not well make it shorter and besides I want to make you repent of taking such an "unwarrantable privilege as to intrude upon the attention of

Your friend, S. Ottis Williams

PS. As the fellow said excuse [rest of sentence illegible]

"Samuel Otho Williams to John, July 10, 1844," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
