Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Williams, Zilpha Baker Cilley

(October 25, 1815-March 21, 1889)

Tells of coming to Nauvoo, of hearing Joseph speak, and of the spirit of love that encompassed him; she also mentions how nice it is living in Nauvoo because there is no crime, drunkenness, etc.

. . . paying our way by cooking for the men we made our way very comfortably to Cincinnati where we took our passage on a steam boat to Nauvoo and arrived here on the 3rd of May 1844 after a passage of 8 weeks the wages of the men on the raft paying our fare on the boat so that they might be saw to have worked their passage all the way. We were here in season to see the prophet before he fell a martyr for his religion for which I am ever thankful that I was permitted to hear from his own lips some of the great things of God which he is doing in these last days and I could truly say they were not the words of him who hath a devil. Could you have seen him as I did standing before the great congregation with a frank open countenance beaming with intelligence while his whole frame seemed animated with it and filled with love to his flock who hung with intense interest upon all he had to say to them. Could you have witnessed the strong attachment of those who were best acquainted with him you would have said "surely he cannot be that wicked man they have represented him to be." So I thought and when he had an opportunity to escape with his brother and save his life yet fearing for the flock he returned and laid down his life for his people . Greater lover than this hath no man that he lay down his life for his friends. But his enemies are disappointed they thought if Joseph were gone the saints would be scattered and the church would go down, but instead of two we have twelve to lead us and the more they destroy the stronger we are and now I wish to say to my friends do not set your faces against this church. Hear what you may remember an enemies report will always be more or less incorrect as their minds are filled with prejudice against us. We have a thriving city of about 14,000 inhabitants yet there is no low business going on, no suing or quarreling, no drunken brawls disturbing the streets, the world is all agitated without while all is peace and quiet in the city of Joseph we are one. Now my dear father I give my testimony with regard to these things when I came into the church I believed that the doctrine they preached was the pure and undefiled gospel of Jesus Christ. I obeyed it and now I know it is for I have both seen in others and felt in my own person the blessing of healing by the power of faith. I have heard the unlearned talk with other tongues. I have seen the power of the spirit of prophecy manifest in giving a knowledge of the past and the future through the power of the priesthood displayed in bestowing patriarchal blessings as in ancient times tracing out the lineage of the person whose head the patriarch lays his hand [on] and bringing to view the blessings attainable to him through faith in the Lord and obedience to his commandments. Now my father I have a request to make of you and I earnestly hope you will not neglect it. This is what I desire to know what are the names of my Grand parents, how many of my uncles, aunts and cousins are dead and what are their names, also the names of my great grand parents together with the names of your and mothers uncles and aunts. It is very necessary I should know this. Also I wish you would take pains if possible to designate the grave where my mother is buried and set up a board or something with her name on it that I might know where she is buried if ever I should come that way. I suppose my father thinks it strange that I ask such questions but if he does not learn in time he may in eternity the great day of God's visitation over the wicked is at hand . . .

"Zilpha Williams to Samuel Cilley, July 16, 1845," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some changes in spelling, punctuation, and grammar have been modernized.
