Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Winters, Mary Ann Stearns

(April 6, 1833-1912)

At 3 years and 3 months of age, she remembers the first time she saw the Prophet.

[Leaving on August 16, 1836 for Kirtland] I well remember that night journey of sixty miles, for I was very tired of the jolting before it was finished. I remember going on the boat, but it was a night boat, and when I awoke in the morning, we were landed at Boston, and there, for the first time we saw the Prophet Joseph Smith who had been preaching in that vicinity. To me he seemed larger and nobler than any other man, and when he was introduced as "the Prophet," his mission seemed as sure to me as that I could see the sun shine in the heavens, or that Abraham was a man of God, as my mother had taught me from the Bible. We stayed in Boston three days, at the home of Aunt Polly Vosi, the Saints constantly receiving instructions from the lips of the Prophet. This, of course, I could not understand, but I watched him closely and realized that what he was saying was good and true.

"An Autobiographical Sketch of the Life of the Late Mary Ann Stearns Winters, Daughter of Mary Ann Stearns Pratt," in "Mary Ann Frost Stearns Pratt," Relief Society Magazine 3, no. 8 (August 1916): 428.

Remembers Father Smith fasting, her mother taking her to the spot in the Kirtland Temple where the Prophet saw the Savior; also remembers seeing the mummies and hearing Joseph explain their meaning.

During this time we were constant attendants at meetings in the temple, and I can especially remember the fast-meetings, and can recall at this day the great power and good spirit that were experienced on those occasionsand it was generally known that Father Joseph Smith, the Patriarch, would not break his fast and partake of food till the sun went down, and I thought he was the most wonderful person willing to go without food for that length of time, and that he must surely be like Abraham, the faithful, that mother had told me so often about. And after the close of one of the meetings, mother took me to the stand and showed me the place on the pulpit where the Savior had stood when He appeared to the Prophet, and where afterwards Moses and Elias came and delivered the keys for the gathering of the Saints (Israel), and the redemption of the dead.

One day mother took me to see the Egyptian mummies that were in the upper corridor of the temple. I was very pleased to go, for there was much talk about them, and I thought it would be so nice to go and see them, but when I saw them they frightened me very muchthey had such an unearthly look to me. There were dark in color, and hard as metal, and the cloth they were wrapped in was petrified like the bodies. Brother Joseph explained much about them that I could not understand, and said they were thousands of years old.

"An Autobiographical Sketch of the Life of the Late Mary Ann Stearns Winters, Daughter of Mary Ann Stearns Pratt," in "Mary Ann Frost Stearns Pratt," Relief Society Magazine 3, no. 8 (August 1916): 431-32.

Joseph appointed Stephen Goddard to conduct the first Sunday School; she tells of the horror of the martyrdom.

One Sunday morning early in June, 1844, I was at a meeting in the grove east on Mulholland street, when Brother Joseph arose and said he wanted all the children that could, to bring their testaments and hymn books and meet there the next Sabbath and have a Sunday School. He said, "I don't know as I will be hereI will if I can, but Brother Stephen Goddard will be here and take charge of you, won't you Brother Goddard?" Brother Goddard assented, and then Brother Joseph called for teachers and a number volunteered. He spoke at some length on the importance of this move, and as far as I know this was the first Sunday School in the history of the Church. I attended the next Sabbath and my teacher was Sister Clara Chase. I cannot remember of meeting but twice in the Sunday School when those awful days came that terminated in the martyrdom of Brother Joseph and Hyrum Smithand oh, the horror and gloom and heartaches and trials of those days. The very atmosphere was so oppressive that it seemed difficult to breathe. Everything seemed to stand still and with such an awful stillness and everyone seemed looking to another for some help, and to know what to do in their awful extremity. Many imagined that Brother Joseph's life could not be taken and the shock to them was doubly greatand all were looking for a message from somewhere, and it came in due time. Our Prophet and Patriarch were goneand the weight of the Church rested on the body of the Churchand right bravely and unflinchingly did they hold it for the time beingfaithfully trusting in the promise that God's Kingdom had come to stay, and would not be broken up, though the headlight was obscured and the darkness profound.

"Mothers in Israel: Autobiography of Mary A. S. Winters," Relief Society Magazine 3, no. 11 (November 1916): 641.

Witnessed, with her friend Julia Felsaw, the transfiguration of Brigham Young; it had the effect of recommitting the Saints.

I was at the great meeting when the mantle of Brother Joseph rested upon Brother Brigham until his whole being seemed changed and his voice was like that of the Prophet. The people around me, rising to their feet to get a better chance to hear and see, I and my little companion of the day, Julia Felsaw, being small of stature, stood upon the benches that we, too, might behold the wonderful transformation, and I know that from that time on the power of that change remained with Brother Brigham Young as long as he lived on the earth. The faithful and honest hearted were quick to discern the right and took up the armor of the Gospel anew, rallied round the faithful Brigham whose rightful leadership had been plainly shown to them, and went to work with renewed zeal to whatever he pointed out to do.

"Mothers in Israel: Autobiography of Mary A. S. Winters," Relief Society Magazine 3, no. 11 (November 1916): 642.

Knew Joseph and Hyrum from her youth and always loved them; she heard Joseph preach many times and remembers his speaking about the mummies from which the Book of Abraham was translated.

The name of the Prophet Joseph Smith is one loved, honored, and revered by all his faithful followers.

I had the privilege of listening to his voice in my early childhood, and even then the Holy Spirit testified to me that he was a Prophet of God. As the years passed on, I had more than an ordinary opportunity of learning of his life work. My stepfather was in constant council with the Prophet, and upon returning home would relate to the family such things as were for the instruction and benefit of the people. I listened with rapt attention and treasured them up in my heart, and can now testify that they have been a blessing to me through life. I rejoice in my acquaintance with the Prophet Joseph, and with his brother Hyrum also, for one is not complete without the otherthey were nearly always together, and inseparably connected in mind,Joseph and Hyrumnames ever dear to the faithful.

I saw Brother Joseph in Kirtland, Far West, Quincy, and Nauvoo. I heard him preach many times in the Kirtland Temple, and heard him explaining about the mummies that were in the upper corridor of the temple, and he said they were thousands of years old.

Mary Ann Winters, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 557.

Joseph met her family at the ship landing in Nauvoo; Parley P. Pratt teased the Prophet about returning; Joseph invited the immigrants to his house.

In Quincy he visited around from house to house among the Saints to see how they were situated, and gave words of strength and encouragement to them. In April, 1843, when we returned from England to Nauvoo, Brother Joseph came down to the landing at the foot of Main Street to meet the company. He came in the cabin, shook hands with our family, took my two little brothers on his knees, and said, "Well, well, Brother Parley, you have come home, bringing your sheaves with you," and the tears rolled down his cheeks.

Brother Pratt answered,

"Why Brother Joseph, if you feel so bad about our coming, I guess we will have to go back again."

Then a smile went all around. Brother Joseph arose and said,

"Come, bring your folks right up to my house."

Mary Ann Winters, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 557.

Joseph met her family at the ship landing in Nauvoo; Parley P. Pratt teased the Prophet about returning; Joseph invited the immigrants to his house.

And oh! the anxiety of the Saints to see the Prophet Joseph Smith! Some thought they would be able to discern him in a multitude, and they all longed to behold him and grasp his hand. Brothers Joseph and Hyrum and a large company of people were at the landing to meet us. Brother Pratt had introduced him to the company, and a general hand-shaking followed with the friends who had come to take them to their various homes and destinations. Then Brother Joseph came on the boat and into the cabin where our family were. After cordial greetings, he took a seat and taking the little boys, Parley and Nathan, upon his knees, seemed much affected, Brother Pratt remarking, "We took away three children and have brought back five." Then Brother Joseph said, "Well, well, Brother Parley, you have returned bringing your sheaves with you," the tears streaming down his face. Brother Pratt, seeing the general emotion this caused, said, in a tender, jesting fashion, "Why, Brother Smith, if you feel so bad about our coming home, I guess we will have to go back again," tears of joy filling his own eyes. This broke the spell-smiles returned, and joy unbounded filled every heart. It was indeed a time of rejoicing, that two boat loads of Saints had arrived in one day. Brother Joseph arose saying, "Come, Brother Parley, bring your folks right up to my house; it is only a little way, and you can be more comfortable after your long journey." My mother was placed in a big chair, and Brother Hodge, with others of Brother Joseph's bodyguard, carried her up to the Mansion, Brother Pratt carrying the babythe rest of us following along, listening to all that Brother Joseph had to say. Some of our friends insisted on having part of our family, so Aunt Olive and we children were taken up to Mother Sessions, where she nursed us up to good health againthe little ones that were not quite over the effects of the measlesand I had chills and fever while on the boat.

"Mothers in Israel: Autobiographical Sketch of Mary Ann Stearns Winters," Relief Society Magazine 3, no. 10 (October 1916): 577.

Joseph speaks prophetically, saying two sisters should forever belong to one man; 4 July 1843 with her parents, Joseph, Hyrum, and others, she went to a dinner with the Mayor of Quincy; though a guest, Joseph "did the entertaining"; later he carried the sleepy child Mary Ann on his lap.

On the fourth of July, 1843, there was an excursion, on the little Maid of Iowa, up to Burlington, Iowa, and my father and mother and Aunt Olive went on the pleasure trip. Mother and Aunt Olive were dressed alike and were standing a little distance off, when Brother Joseph said to Brother Parley, "It is the will of the Lord that those two sisters should never be parted" (meaning that they should both belong to one man). This being the next year after he received the revelation on Celestial Marriage, is an added testimony to the truth of that principle. I heard Brother Pratt tell it on his return home, and my mother also told me about it, and remembered it all her life, and frequently spoke about it.

Later in July there was another excursion on the little boatthis time down the river to Quincy, Illinois. Mother could not go on account of little Natie's leg being broken; Aunt Olive was also detained at home, so I was permitted to go with Pa, Uncle Orson, and Aunt Sarah Pratt.

We took dinner with the Mayor of Quincy, he having invited Brothers Joseph and Hyrum and others of our people whom he had become acquainted with during their sojourn in that city, and entertained them at his house, but I think it would be more proper to say that Brother Joseph did the entertaining, as he talked, and the rest listened with the greatest attention. After a very enjoyable time, as all seemed to testify, we started on our return journey. Our progress was slow, the little boat being too small to stem the rapids successfully, and it was nearly morning before we landed at Nauvoo. Early in the evening, being tired and sleepy, my Pa took me on his lap to rest. He was sitting on the deck opposite Brother Joseph, so near that their knees almost touched. Brother Joseph was preaching, and numbers crowded around, listening. He stopped and gently raised my feet upon his knees, and when I would have drawn them away he said, "No, let me hold them; you will rest better." I was soon sound asleep, and the next I knew, it was morning, and we had landed at Nauvoo.

"Mothers in Israel: Autobiographical Sketch of Mary Ann Stearns Winters," Relief Society Magazine 3, no. 10 (October 1916): 580-81.

At a meeting in the grove, Joseph found the choir seats empty, so he invited those present, including Mary Ann, to form a choir; later, at a civic party, she heard Joseph teach and remembers that he held her feet for her comfort.

Not long after we arrived in Nauvoo, I went to meeting in the grove on the temple block. When Brother Joseph came, he noticed there was no one in the choir seats (there had been some difficulty with the choir leader), and he called for the brethren and sisters who had hymnbooks, and could sing to come forward and take those seats; and after they had done soseeing I had a book he beckoned to me to come, and gave me a seat right in front of the stand, and said, "You can sing, can't you?"

In August, 1843, there was an excursion on the little boat down the river to Quincy, Illinois. The mayor of that city had invited the Prophet, and some of the leading citizens of Nauvoo to be his guests for the day, and he was at the landing to receive his visitors. It was my good fortune to be one of the party that dined at the mayor's, and Brother Joseph was the after-dinner entertainer, for he talked and the others listened with the greatest attention and were loath to have him depart.

As we were going home on the little boat, Brother Joseph sat on the upper deck with the company gathered around him listening to his wonderful words. My father sat opposite him, so near that their knees almost touched. I, a little girl, being tired and sleepy, my Pa took me in his arms to rest. Brother Joseph stopped speaking, stooped and took my feet on his knees and when I would have drawn them away, he said, "No, let me hold them; you will rest better."

Mary Ann Winters, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 558.

Saw Joseph's countenance light up as he preached; also saw him on parade with the Nauvoo Legion; Joseph invited the children to a Sunday meeting; she remembers the martyred bodies of Joseph and Hyrum.

I stood close by the Prophet while he was preaching to the Indians in the grove by the temple. The Holy Spirit lighted up his countenance till it glowed like a halo around him, and his words penetrated the hearts of all who heard him and the Indians looked as solemn as eternity. I saw him on parade at the head of the Nauvoo Legion, looking noble and grand as a leader could do. His commanding presence could be discerned above all others, and all eyes were centered on him, as he rode back and forth giving the commands of his office.

I was at a meeting in the grove on Mulholland Street. At the close Brother Joseph asked that the children bring their Testaments and hymnbooks and meet there the next Sabbath to have Sunday School. He said, "I don't know as I will be here, I will if I can, but Brother Stephen Goddard will be here and take charge of you. Won't you Brother Goddard?"

I attended two Sabbaths, when those awful days of June, 1844, came, and terminated our gathering for that purpose.

I saw the dead bodies of Brothers Joseph and Hyrum as they lay in the Mansion House after they were brought from Carthage, and also saw some of the clothing they had worn, tinged with their life's blood.

I know they were men of God, Prophet and Patriarch, true and faithful. May we be worthy to meet them in the world to come!

Mary Ann Winters, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16, no. 12 (December 1905): 558.
