Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Woodland, John

(March 27, 1776-November 8, 1869)

Tells of a dream in which the Lord promises him a homestead; the Prophet later confirms that dream; he also makes mention of receiving instructions from Joseph to leave Far West.

After joining the Church J. Hunt became dissatisfied and wanted to sell his place and go to Missouri to the Mormons & J. Woodland bought it. That night after buying the place an angel appeared to him & showed him his future home and told him to go search it out. Next morning Bro. Jefferson Hunt came to John Woodland's home. And John Woodland told Bro. J. Hunt that if he would wait a few days that he would accompany him to Missouri. He told Bro. J. Hunt about the dream and that the Angel had shown him his home and that he would know this home by a tree that was about 25 feet higher than the other trees in the grove. And that he (J. Woodland) was to go to that tree place his back against it and step 25 steps West and he would find a spring with white sand boiling up and he would know this was his home. In a few days they saddled their horses placed blankets, and an ax on their saddles and traveled into Missouri. After looking a few days Brother J. Hunt then ask Bro. John Woodland which way he was going to find his home, Brother John Woodland said that the Spirit impressed me to go due north. They started and went North across a prairie about 2 miles, and they saw a grove with a tall tree in it and Brother John Woodland exclaimed "There is the tree I saw in my dream." They rode to the grove. Brother J. Hunt held the horse, while Brother John Woodland went to the tree. Brother John Woodland Placed his back against the tree and stepped 21 steps west and found the spring just as he had seen in the dream. He then called to Brother Hunt to come and have a drink. Brother Hunt laughed because he did not think there was water in existence. But when he came to Brother John Woodland he saw a beautiful spring where they both had a good drink. They then built a house to comply with the law and returned to their families. Brother John Woodland sold his house and moved to the new home which the Lord had shown him. After living and improving his new home for about one year the Prophet Joseph Smith came to visit them. He looked on the place and then said "Oh Brother John, what a pretty place you have here. What would you take for it for a stake of Zion?" Brother John Woodland said, "If it is the will of the Lord take it and give me another place built as good." Brother Joseph stood a minute, dropped his chin on his bosom, turned pail and a bright light shone around himafter standing in this attitude for about 15 minutes he raised and placed his hand on Brother John's shoulders and said "Brother John, I won't have your place, for the Lord showed it unto you, and you had faith enough to seek it out." He then placed his hands upon Brother John's head and sealed the place unto him and his posterity for life and all eternity He told him never to sell the place. After, he was offered a great amount of money for the place but would not sell it, and forbid all his posterity ever to sell it. Brother John Woodland and family remained on the place until they were driven away by the mob. They then went to Adam-ondi-Ahman. . . .

[Later, the following experience is recorded:] . . . We were cut off by the mob from Far West so we went down and settled on the bottom a short distance from the settlement, remaining there until Far West surrendered. While there the Prophet sent word to Brother James Woodland (son of John Woodland) to leave the State, for the mob was after him. As soon as the word was received preparations were made for his departure. As he was leaving his father called the boy's mother to his side and said "Mother, come here and take the last look at your son for it the last time you will see him alive," and it was, for he never returned. All that was ever heard of him was that two new graves were found the next day. It was supposed he was one of them.

"Biographical Sketch of John and Celia Steepleford Woodland," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling and grammar have been modernized.
