Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Woodruff, Phoebe Carter

(March 8, 1807-November 10, 1885)

Joseph taught Saints to honor and uphold the U.S. Constitution.

I have been a member of this church for thirty-six years, and had the privilege of living in the days of the Prophet Joseph, and heard his teaching for many years. He ever counseled us to honor, obey and maintain the principles of our noble constitution, for which our fathers fought, and which many of them sacrificed their lives to establish.

Phoebe Carter Woodruff, "Address to the Ladies of Utah, delivered in January 1870," in Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall, 1877), 399.

Tells of healings at Montrose, where Elijah Fordham was raised from deathbed by the Prophet; she went to Fordham immediately after the miracle, and testified it was of God.

When the [Saints] were settling Nauvoo, the unhealthy labor of breaking new land on the banks of the Mississippi, for the founding of their city, invited pestilence. Nearly every one was attacked with fever and ague. The Prophet had the sick borne into his house and door-yard, until his place was like a hospital. At length, even he succumbed to the deadly contagion, and for several days was as helpless as the rest of our people, who were all nearly exhausted by their extermination from Missouri. But the Spirit of the Lord came upon Joseph commanding him to arise and stay the pestilence. The Prophet arose from his bed and the power of God rested upon him.

He commenced in his own house and dooryard commanding the sick in the name of Jesus Christ to arise and be made whole, and they were healed according to his word. He then continued to travel from house to house, and from tent to tent, upon the bank of the river, healing the sick as he went, until he arrived at the upper stone house where he crossed the river in a boat, accompanied by several of the quorum of the Twelve, whom he had bade to follow him, and landed in Montrose. He walked into the cabin of Brigham Young, who was lying sick, and commanded him in the name of Jesus to arise and be made whole and follow him, which he did. They came to our house, next and Joseph bade Mr. Woodruff also to follow, and they went to the house of brother Elijah Fordham, who was supposed by his family and friends to have been dying two days. The Prophet stepped to his bedside, took him by the hand and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ, to arise from his bed and be made whole.

His voice (Joseph Smith's) was as the voice of God. Brother Fordham instantly leaped from his bed, called for his clothing and dressing himself followed the Apostles into the street. They then went to the house of Joseph B. Noble, who lay very sick and he was healed in like manner.

And when by the power of God granted unto him, Joseph had healed all the sick, he re-crossed the river, and returned to his house. Thousands of witnesses bear testimony of this miracle. It was day never to be forgotten. Hearing of the case of brother Fordham, whom I with the rest, had believed was dying, I thought I would go and see with my own eyes. I found him very happy sitting in his chair. He told me he had been out to work in his garden. This was only a few hours after the miracle. From that day I never doubted that this was the work of God.

Phoebe C. Woodruff, "Autobiographic Sketch of Phebe Woodruff, Salt Lake City, 1880," Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley; see also microfilm of holograph, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
