Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Woodruff, Wilford

(March 1, 1807-September 2, 1898)

Joseph shared parts of the Book of Abraham with the Twelve before it was published.

Joseph the Seer has presented us some of the Book of Abraham which was written by his own hand but hid from the knowledge of man for the last four thousand years but has now come to light through the mercy of God. Joseph has had these records in his possession for several years but has never presented them before the world in the English language until now, but he is about to publish it to the world or parts of it by publishing it in the Times and Seasons, for Joseph the Seer is now the editor of that paper and Elder Taylor assists him in the writing while it has befallen to my lot to take charge of the business parts of the establishment. I have had the privilege this day of assisting in setting the type for printing of the first piece of the Book of Abraham that is to be presented to the inhabitants of the earth in the last days.

"Wilford Woodruff, Daily Journal and History, February 19, 1842," cited in Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, Utah: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1948), 14.

An account of Zion's Camp: Joseph said God caused the storm that frightened and dissembled the mob.

Wilford Woodruff states that "when the five men entered our camp there was not a cloud to be seen in the whole heavens but as the men left the camp there was a small black cloud appeared in the northwest and it began to unroll itself like a scroll and in a few minutes the whole heavens were covered with a pall as black as ink. This indicated a sudden storm which soon broke upon us with wind, rain, thunder, lightning and hail. Our beds were soon afloat and our tents blown down over our heads. We all fled into the Baptist Meeting House. As the prophet Joseph came in shaking the water from his hat and clothing he said, "Boys, there is some meaning in thisGod is in the storm." We sang praises to God and lay all night on the benches under cover while our enemies were in the pelting storm. It was reported that the mob cavalry who fled into the school house tried to hold their horses by the bridles between the logs, but when the heavy hail struck them they all broke away skinning the fingers of those who held them. The horses fled before the storm and were not found for several days. It was reported that the Captain of the company in the school house said that they could do nothing against the dd Mormons but what there must be a dd hail storm or some other dd thing to hinder them from doing anything. But they did not feel disposed to acknowledge that God was fighting our battles. "The storm was tremendouswind and rain, hail and thunder met them in great wrath and soon softened their direful courage and frustrated all their designs to "kill Joe Smith and his army." Instead of continuing firing, which they commenced, they crowded under wagons, into hollow trees, filled one old shanty etc. and when the storm was over their ammunition was soaked; and the party in Clay County were extremely anxious in the morning to return to Jackson County having experienced the pitiless peltings of the storm all night. And as soon as arrangements could be made this "forlorn hope" took the back track for Independence to join the main body of the mob, fully satisfied as were the survivors of the company who were drowned that when Jehovah fights, they would rather be absent. The gratification is too terrible.

"History of the Travels of Zion's Camp, Led by the Prophet Joseph Smith from Kirtland, Ohio, to Clay County, Missouri, in the Spring of 1838, written by Wilford Woodruff, Assistant Historian, who was a member of Zion's Camp," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 62-65.

Joseph knew enemies within the Church sought his blood.

I remember what Joseph said, a short time before he was slain in one of the last sermons I ever heard him preach. Said he, "Men are here to-day who are seeking my blood, and they are those who have held the Priesthood and have received their washings and anointings; men who have received their endowments." I saw the faces of those men at that time, and they had a hand in slaying the Prophet.

Journal of Discourses, 4:149 (December 21, 1856).

Joseph corrected false teachings; Joseph used many methods to teach and test the faith of the early brethren; because he was taught by revelation, his teachings were good.

I have seen men in the days of Joseph bring up principles, and read, and teach, and advocate theories, when the Prophet would say, "It is not right to do so: they are not true." Those men would still argue, maintain their position, and they would write in defense of their theories when the Prophet condemned them, and they would say, "We have no faith in your theory, nor in the system you present." The very moment a man does that, he crosses the path of the servant of God who is set to lead the way to life and salvation. This is one thing that the Elders should carefully avoid. The fact is, there are a great many things taught in the building up of this kingdom which seem strange to us, being contrary to our traditions, and are calculated to try men. Brother Joseph used a great many methods of testing the integrity of men; and he taught a great many things which, in consequence of tradition, required prayer, faith, and a testimony from the Lord, before they could be believed by many of the Saints. His mind was opened by the visions of the Almighty, and the Lord taught him many things by vision and revelation that were never taught publicly in his days; for the people could not bear the flood of intelligence which God poured into his mind.

Journal of Discourses, 5:83 (April 9, 1857).

Wilford's first meeting with Joseph; they tan a wolf-skin; later Joseph prophesied "I am going to have money soon" and it came the following day.

I went with brother Parley through Jefferson County to the North, and then immediately prepared to go to Kirtland. I started to Kirtland on the 11th day of April, 1834, and arrived in Kirtland on the 25th day of the same month. I then for the first time had an interview with the Prophet Joseph. He invited me to his house. I rejoiced to behold his face and to hear his voice. I was fully satisfied that Joseph was a Prophet before I saw him. I had no prejudices on my mind against him, but I expected to see a Prophet.

My first introduction to him was rather singular. I saw him out in the field with his brother Hyrum: he had on a very old hat and was engaged shooting at a mark. I was introduced to him, and he invited me home with him.

I accepted the invitation, and I watched him pretty closely, to see what I could learn. He remarked, while passing to his house, that this was the first hour he had spent in recreation for a long time.

Shortly after we arrived at his house, he went into an adjoining room, and brought out a wolf-skin, and said, "Brother Woodruff, I want you to help me to tan this;" so I pulled off my coat, went to work and helped him, and felt honored in so doing. He was about going up with the brethren to redeem Zion, and he wanted this wolf-skin to put upon his wagon seat, as he had no buffalo robe.

This was my first introduction to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the great Seer of this last dispensation.

I was not there long before I heard him talk about going to Zion, and it did my soul good to hear him speak of many things concerning Zion, the gathering of Israel, and the great Latter-day Work; and I felt truly satisfied with what I saw and heard

I recollect that in the evening after I got there, several of the brethren came in and talked with brother Joseph, and asked what they should do, for they had not means to bear their expenses from there to Missouri. Brother Joseph said, "I am going to have some money soon;" and the next morning he received a letter containing a hundred and fifty dollars, sent to him by sister Voce, of Boston.

Journal of Discourses, 7:101 (January 10, 1858).

Arrives in Kirtland, meets the Prophet and is invited to stay at his house.

[I] arrived in Kirtland on the 25th day of April, 1834.

The Prophet Joseph invited me to make his house my home; I accepted his offer, and stayed with him about one week. I became acquainted with many of the high priests, elders and Saints. I spent one Sabbath in Kirtland, and heard many of the elders speak, and I felt to rejoice before God for the light and knowledge which was manifested to me during that day.

Wilford Woodruff, "History of Wilford Woodruff," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 12 (25 March 1865): 183.

Account of Zion's Camp, and Joseph's promise that if humble and faithful, the brethren would be spared from the cholera.

March 7 [1834]We took up our line of march, pitched our tents by the way, and travelled to Missouri. After we had pitched our tents in Clay County (our numbers being two hundred five) and many of the brethren had taken sick, and some had died, Joseph requested the camp to disperse, except enough to take care of the sick. All who had teams were required to leave the ground and go among the brethren. I went to Brother Lyman Wight's, in company with Heman Hyde and Milton Holmes. Shortly, Joseph called the brethren together at Lyman Wight's, and told them if they would humble themselves before the Lord, and covenant to keep his commandments and obey his counsel, the plague should be stayed from that hour, and there should not be another case of cholera in the camp. The brethren covenanted to do this, and the plague was stayed, and there was not another case in camp.

President Joseph Smith returned to Kirtland with many of the brethren; I remained with Lyman Wight, laboring with my hands till the following winter.

Wilford Woodruff, "History of Wilford Woodruff," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 12 (25 March 1865): 183.

Joseph promised the Saints that if they were faithful they would be delivered from their enemies.

29th [January, 1837]Presidents Joseph Smith [Jr.], and O. [Oliver] Cowdery addressed the Saints in the temple. Joseph blessed the people in the name of the Lord, and said, if we would be faithful, we should arise above our embarrassments, and be delivered from the hands of our enemies.

Wilford Woodruff, "History of Wilford Woodruff," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 17 (29 April 1865): 264.

Spirit of apostasy engulfs Kirtland; Joseph teaches that he was appointed by God, and no man or set of men can remove him.

February 19 [1837] I attended meeting at the temple. President Joseph Smith [Jr.] had been absent on business for the Church, but not half as long as Moses was in the mount away from Israel; yet many of the people in Kirtland, if they did not make a calf to worship, as did the Israelites, [apostasy] turned their hearts away from the Lord, and from his servant Joseph, and had engaged in speculation, and given way to false spirits, until they were darkened in their minds; and many were opposed to Joseph Smith, and some wished to appoint David Whitmer to lead the Church in his stead. In the midst of this cloud of dark spirits, Joseph returned to Kirtland, and this morning arose in the stand. He appeared much depressed; but soon the Spirit of God rested upon him, and he addressed the assembly in great plainness for about three hours, and put his enemies to silence. When he arose he said, "I am still the President, Prophet, Seer, Revelator and Leader of the Church of Jesus Christ. God, and not man, has appointed and placed me in this position, and no man or set of men have power to remove me, or appoint another in my stead; and those who undertake this, if they do not speedily repent, will burn their fingers and go to hell." He reproved the people sharply for their sins, darkness and unbelief. The power of God rested upon him, and bore testimony that his sayings were true.

Wilford Woodruff, "History of Wilford Woodruff," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 17 (29 April 1865): 264.

At a temple meeting, the washing of the feet was administered; Joseph teaches the importance of adhering to his counsels; Joseph prophesied that the kings of the earth would yet come to see Zion in her glory; the brethren hold an all-night temple meeting.

6th [April, 1837] The Presidency of the Church, the Twelve Apostles, and other quorums, met in solemn assembly, and sealed upon our heads our washings, anointings and blessings, with a loud shout of hosannah to God and the Lamb; the Spirit of the Lord rested upon us. After spending three hours in the upper room, the quorums repaired to the lower court; the vails were lowered, and the ordinance of washing of feet was administered. Elder H. [Heber] C. Kimball washed my feet, and pronounced blessings upon me. After this ordinance, the vails of the temple were rolled up, and President Joseph Smith [Jr.,] addressed the elders for three hours, clothed with the Spirit and power of God. He unbosomed his feelings in the house of his friends, and gave much instruction. He urged upon us the absolute necessity of giving strict heed to his teachings and counsel, and the revelations of the Lord to the Church, and be wise in all things, that Zion and her stakes may be redeemed and established, no more to be thrown down. He said, that the kings of the earth would yet come to behold the glory of Zion, and that great and glorious blessings would be bestowed upon the Saints in the last days. . . .

The house was again filled at candlelight. President [Joseph] Smith [Jr.] requested the elders to speak their feelings freely, and sing, exhort and pray, as the Spirit should give utterance. The meeting continued during the whole night; many of the gifts were poured out upon the people; at break of day we were dismissed.

Wilford Woodruff, "History of Wilford Woodruff," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 17 (29 April 1865): 264-65.

Joseph prophesied the wrath of God would fall upon apostates who turned against the work.

April 9 [1837] President [Joseph] Smith [Jr.] spoke in the afternoon, and said in the name of the Lord, that the judgments of God would rest upon those men who had professed to be his friends, and friends of humanity, and in building up Kirtland, a stake of Zion, but had turned traitors to him, and the interests of the kingdom of God, and had given power into the hands of our enemies against us; they had oppressed the poor Saints, and had brought distress upon them, and had become covenant-breakers, for which they will feel the wrath of God.

Wilford Woodruff, "History of Wilford Woodruff," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 17 (29 April 1865): 265.

The healings at Montrose; Joseph sends Wilford in his stead and more healings occur as Joseph had promised.

July 22 [1839] I was with President Joseph Smith [Jr.] and his council and the Twelve; it was a day of God's power with the Prophet. He healed many who were sick nigh unto death, among whom were Elijah Fordham and Joseph B. Nobles [Noble]; even the wicked rabble followed to see the sick healed. As Joseph was about to cross the river, a man came to him and asked him if he would go about three miles and heal two of his small children, who were twins, about three months old, and were sick nigh unto death. He was a man of the world, he had never heard a sermon preached by a Latter-day Saint. Joseph said he could not go, but he would send a man. After hesitating a moment, he turned to me and said, "You go with this man and heal his children," at the same time giving me a red silk handkerchief, and said, "After you lay hands upon them, wipe their faces with it, and they shall be healed; and as long as you will keep that handkerchief, it shall ever remain as a league between you and me." I went and did as I was commanded, and the children were healed.

Wilford Woodruff, "History of Wilford Woodruff," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 21 (27 May 1865): 326.

While sick, Wilford prepares to leave for a mission; Joseph promises he would be healed and blessed.

August 8 [1839] I laid my hands upon my wife and children, blessed them, committed them into the hands of God, and started upon my English mission, leaving my family sick, and with not more than four days' provisions. Brother Brigham Young rowed me across the Mississippi in a boat; I was sick and feeble. When I landed, I laid down upon the bank of the river on a side of sole leather. The Prophet Joseph [Smith, Jr.] came along and looked at me, and said, "You are starting on your mission." I said, "Yes, but I look like a poor instrument for a missionary; I look more fit for a hospital or dissecting room than a mission." He replied, "What do you say that for? Go ahead in the name of the Lord, and you shall be healed and blessed on your mission." I thanked him. A brother came along with a wagon, carried me a few miles on my road. I started without purse or scrip, and passed by Parley P. Pratt, who was hewing logs for a house; he was barefooted, bareheaded, without coat or vest on. He said, "I have no money, but I have an empty purse; I will give you that." I went a few rods, and found Elder H. [Heber] C. Kimball building a log cabin. He said, "I have one dollar, I will give you that to put in your purse." He blessed me, and I went my way, accompanied by Elder John Taylor. I had a shake of the ague every other day, and lay on the bottom of the wagon while I traveled.

Wilford Woodruff, "History of Wilford Woodruff," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 21 (27 May 1865): 326-27.

Sickness brings Wilford near death; he is administered to by Joseph and the Twelve.

July 23, 1842. President Joseph Smith [Jr.], sent me from Nauvoo to St. Louis to procure a stock of paper. I went down upon a steamboat; was six days on the way, during which time I was severely attacked with bilious fever. The day I made my purchase, the fever was so high I was scarcely sensible of what I was doing. As soon as I made my purchase and got my freight on board, I took my berth, and lay there until I arrived at Nauvoo on the 10th of August. I was confined to my bed forty days, and passed through the most severe fit of sickness I ever endured; my life was despaired of by many of my friends. I was administered to by President [Joseph] Smith [Jr.], and the Twelve; my life was preserved by the power of God. I took a relapse twice after I began to recover; once while in council with the Presidency and Twelve, my strength left me, my breath stopped, and I felt as though I was struck with death.

Wilford Woodruff, "History of Wilford Woodruff," Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star 27, no. 24 (17 June 1865): 375-76.

Through faith, the Twelve fulfill Joseph's prophecy about laying the corner stone of the Far West Temple.

The Twelve Apostles were called by revelation to go to Far West, Caldwell county, to lay the foundation of the corner stone of the Temple. When that revelation was given this Church was in peace in Missouri. It is the only revelation that has ever been given since the organization of the Church, that I know anything about, that had day and date given with it. The Lord called the Twelve Apostles, while in this state of prosperity, on the 26th day of April, 1838, to go to Far West to lay the corner stone of the Temple; and from there to take their departure to England to preach the Gospel. Previous to the arrival of that period the whole Church was driven out of the State of Missouri, and it was as much as a man's life was worth to be found in the State if it was known that he was a Latter-day Saint; and especially was this the case with the Twelve. When the time came for the corner stone of the Temple to be laid, as directed in the revelation, the Church was in Illinois, having been expelled from Missouri by an edict from the Governor. Joseph and Hyrum Smith and Parley P. Pratt were in chains in Missouri for the testimony of Jesus. As the time drew nigh for the accomplishment of this work, the question arose, "What is to be done?" Here is a revelation commanding the Twelve to be in Far West on the 26th day of April, to lay the corner stone of the Temple there; it had to be fulfilled. The Missourians had sworn by all the gods of eternity that if every other revelation given through Joseph Smith were fulfilled, that should not be, for the day and date being given they declared that it should fail. The general feeling in the Church, so far as I know, was that, under the circumstances, it was impossible to accomplish the work; and the Lord would accept the will for the deed. This was the feeling of Father Smith, the father of the Prophet. Joseph was not with us, he was in chains in Missouri, for his religion. When President Young asked the question of the Twelve, "Brethren, what will you do about this?" the reply was, "The Lord has spoken and it is for us to obey." We felt that the Lord God had given the commandment and we had faith to go forward and accomplish it, feeling that it was His business whether we lived or died in its accomplishment. We started for Missouri. There were two wagons. I had one and took brother Pratt and President Young in mine; brother Cutler, one of the building committee, had the other. We reached Far West and laid the corner stone according to the revelation that had been given to us. We cut off apostates and those who had sworn away the lives of the brethren. We ordained Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer into the Seventies. Brother George A. Smith and myself were ordained into the quorum of the Twelve on the corner stone of the Temple; we had been called before, but not ordained. We then returned, nobody having molested or made us afraid. We performed that work by faith, and the Lord blessed us in doing it.

Journal of Discourses, 13:160 (December 12, 1869).

Joseph tells the Twelve they have the keys and must "bear up the kingdom."

Said he, during that period, "I now rejoice. I have lived until I have seen this burden, which has rested on my shoulders, rolled on to the shoulders of other men; now the keys of the kingdom are planted on the earth to be taken away no more for ever." But until he had done this, they remained with him; and had he been taken away they would have had to be restored by messengers out of heaven. But he lived until every key, power and principle of the holy Priesthood was sealed on the Twelve and on President Young, as their President. He told us that he was going away to leave us, going away to rest. Said he, "You have to round up your shoulders to bear up the kingdom. No matter what becomes of me. I have desired to see that Temple built, but I shall not live to see it. You will; you are called upon to bear off this kingdom." This language was plain enough, but we did not understand it any more than the disciples of Jesus when he told them he was going away, and that if he went not the Comforter would not come. It was just so with Joseph. He said this time after time to the Twelve and to the Female Relief Societies and in his public discourses; but none of us seemed to understand that he was going to seal his testimony with his blood, but so it was.

Journal of Discourses, 13:164 (December 12, 1869).

Joseph prophesies the Civil War.

Many persons have looked forward to the year 1860 with great interest; and this has been the case with many of the Latter-day Saints. What took place in that year? The dissolution of the American Union; for in that year the South took a stand against the North, and the North against the South, in fulfillment of a certain revelation given by Joseph Smith thirty years before it took place. Joseph Smith predicted that there would be a great rebellion in the United Statesthe South and the North warring against each other, and that this rebellion would commence in South Carolina, and would end in the death and misery of many souls; and that in process of timeafter many days, the slaves would rise against their masters, and that one nation would call for aid upon another, for war would be poured upon the whole earth. I wrote this revelation [ i.e. D&C 87] twenty-five years before the rebellion took place; others also wrote it, and it was published to the world before there was any prospect of the fearful events it predicted coming to pass.

Joseph Smith once said in a speech at Nauvoo, to a company, that whosoever lived to see the two sixes come together in '66 would see the American continent deluged in blood. That was many years before there was any prospect of a rebellion. The history of '60 and of '66 is before the world, and I do not wish to spend time in referring to it.

Journal of Discourses, 14:2 (January 1, 1871); see also Journal of Discourses, 2:147.

Joseph reproves Wilford for complaining and instructs him to go on his mission.

As soon as we got home we prepared ourselves to go on our mission to England, and, as President Young has said, the devil undertook the kill us. I have myself been in Tennessee and Kentucky for two or three years, where, in the Fall, there was not well persons enough to take care of the sick during the ague months, and yet I never had the ague in my life until called to go upon that mission to England. There was not one solitary soul in the Quorum of the Twelve but what the devil undertook to destroy; and, as was said yesterday, when Brother Taylor and myself, the two first of the Quorum ready for the trip, were on hand to start, I was shaking with the ague, and I had it every other day, and on my well day, when I did not have it, my wife had it. I got up and laid my hands upon her and blessed her, and blessed my child, having only one at the time, and I started across the river, and that man who sits behind me to-day, the President of the Church and kingdom of God upon the earth, paddled me across the Missouri river in a canoe, and that is the way I landed in Nauvoo. I lay down on the side of sole leather by the old post office, and I did not know where to go, and I was not able to stand on my feet, and I lay down there. By and by the Prophet came along and said he"Brother Woodruff, you are going on you mission?" "Yes," I said, "but I feel more like a subject for the dissecting room than for a mission." He reproved me for what I said and told me to get up and go. Brother Taylor, the only member of the Quorum of the Twelve who was well, and I traveled together, and on the way he fell to the ground as though he had been knocked on the head with an ax. Old Father Coulton, was carrying us, and Brother Taylor fell twice in that way, taken with the bilious fever, and no man in that Quorum could boast that he went on that mission without feeling the hand of the destroyer, for it was laid upon us all. I had the shaking ague, and lay on my back in a wagon, and was rolled over stumps and stones, until it seemed as if my life would be shaken out of me. I left Brother Taylor behind, by his advice, for said he, "We are both sick, and if you stay you can't do anything here;" so old Father Coulton carried me along in his wagon until I got to Buffalo, N. Y. From there I traveled along to Farmington, Connecticut, my native place, and I stayed there fifteen days at my Father's house, coughing and shaking every day. My father never expected that I should leave my bed, and my step-mother did not expect that I should ever get better. A message came from an uncle of mine, who had just died, and his last words were"I want you to send for Friend Wilford, I want him to come and preach my funeral sermon." My father said"You can't go and preach that sermon, for you can't sit up in your bed." Said I, "Never mind, get up your horse and wagon;" and he did so and I got into it and rode over that morning in a chilly wind, and the hour that my ague was coming on I got before a big blazing fire and preached the funeral sermon of my friend, and the ague left me from that day, and I went back and went on my way rejoicing.

Journal of Discourses, 18:122-24 (October 8, 1875).

Joseph gave keys to the Twelve and charged them to bear off the kingdom.

The Prophet Joseph was moved upon by divine inspiration in the establishment of this Church. And before his death he called the Twelve Apostles together, whom he had called to the ministry by revelation, intimating that he was going to leave them, that he would shortly be called home to rest. And he talked with them and instructed them for weeks and months in the ordinances and laws of the Gospel; and he sealed upon their heads all the Priesthood, keys and powers that had been conferred upon him by the angels of God. And then, in addressing them he said, "Brethren, no matter what becomes of me, or what my fate may be, you have got to round up your shoulders and bear of this kingdom; the God of heaven requires it at your hands. I have desired," said he, "to see the Temple completed, but I shall not be spared to see it, but you will." Although he spoke so plainly to us, intimating that his end drew near, we could no more get it into our hearts that he was going to be martyred, any more than the Apostles could comprehend the meaning of the savior when he told them he was going away, and that if he did not leave them, the comforter could not come.

Journal of Discourses, 19:226 (September 16, 1877).

The Lord told Joseph the proof of his belief lay in his building up the kingdom.

That testament [i.e., the Doctrine and Covenants] contains a volume of the most important revelations God ever gave to man. Fifty years ago, or nearly so, when He gave some of these revelations, the Lord said to Joseph Smith, "If you believe my words you will prune my vineyard while the day lasts; if you believe these revelations I have given you, you will take hold and build up this kingdom."

Conference Report, April 1880, 7.

Joseph blesses the brethren and their wives and families prior to missions.

I remember Brother Joseph Smith visited myself, Brother Taylor, Brother Brigham Young and several other missionaries, when we were about to take our mission to England. We were sick and afflicted many of us. At the same time we felt to go. The Prophet blessed us as also our wives and families; . . .

Journal of Discourses, 21:190 (July 3, 1880).

Neglecting one's duty lays the foundation for apostasy.

[Joseph Smith] then remarked that any man, any elder in this Church and kingdomwho pursued a course whereby he would ignore or in other words refuse to obey any known law or commandment or dutywhenever a man did this, neglected any duty God required at his hand in attending meetings, filling missions or obeying counsel, he laid a foundation to lead him to apostasy and this was the reason those men had fallen. They had misused the priesthood sealed upon their heads. They had neglected to magnify their callings as apostles as elders. They had used that priesthood to attempt to build themselves up and to perform some other work besides the building up of the kingdom of God.

Journal of Discourses, 21:190 (July 3, 1880).

Neglecting one's duty leads to apostasy.

Brother Joseph used to counsel us in this wise: "The moment you permit yourselves to lay aside any duty that God calls you to perform, to gratify your own desires; the moment you permit yourselves to become careless, you lay a foundation for apostasy. Be careful; understand you are called to a work, and when God requires you to do that work do it." Another thing he said: "In all your trials, tribulations and sickness, in all your sufferings, even unto death, be careful you don't betray God, be careful you don't betray the priesthood, be careful you don't apostatize; because if you do, you will be sorry for it." We received a great deal of that kind of counsel, and I have remembered it from that day until the present.

Journal of Discourses, 21:284 (July 4, 1880).

Joseph says to his brethren "you don't know me"; Joseph lamented his inability to "unbosom his feelings."

He remarked on several occasions when conversing with his brethren: "brethren you do not know me, you do not know who I am." As I remarked at our priesthood meeting on Friday evening, I have heard him in my early days while conversing with the brethren, say, (at the same time smiting himself upon the breast) "I would to God that I could unbosom my feelings in the house of my friends." Joseph Smith was ordained before he came here, the same as Jeremiah was.

Journal of Discourses, 21:317 (October 10, 1880).

Joseph, in vision, sees the destruction of the United States.

Joseph went to God, and he opened his mind by vision, in which he saw the destruction of our nation; he saw that famine and pestilence and war would lay waste our land, until it became so terrible that he prayed God to close the vision.

Journal of Discourses, 22:235 (June 26, 1881).

Religious freedom is the right of all.

I have heard Joseph Smith and Brigham Young say that if they had the power over the whole world, over every human being who breathes the breath of life, they would give every inhabitant of the earth the right to worship God according to the dictates of their own conscience.

Journal of Discourses, 22:341 (October 23, 1881).

Religious liberty is the God-given right of all humanity.

I have heard the Prophet Joseph Smith say on several occasions when speaking on the agency of man, and the liberty and rights of men, that if he were emperor of the earth, having control of the whole human family, he would give every man, woman and child the right to worship God according to the dictates of their own conscience, leaving them to be responsible alone to their Creator for their individual acts.

Journal of Discourses, 23:76 (March 26, 1882); see also Journal of Discourses, 22:341; 24:237; Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:221, 341; 3:60-61; 5:369.

Joseph taught the Brethren always to sustain and defend the interests of the Church; Joseph comforts Wilford as he departs for a mission.

When we went upon our first foreign mission, Joseph said to us, "No matter what may come upon you, round up your shoulders and bear it, and always sustain and defend the interests of the Church and Kingdom of God." When we took our departure his demeanor in parting was something that I had never noticed or experienced before. After crossing the Mississippi River I crawled to the side of a house and lay down upon a side of sole leather, while suffering from the chills and fever. While resting there the Prophet Joseph came along and saw me. He gave me some parting advice in answer to some remarks made, and then told me to get up and go on, and all would be well with me. That is the way I parted with him upon that occasion.

Journal of Discourses, 24:53 (January 27, 1883).

Some illustrations of the power of prayer in Joseph's life: Governor Reynolds' suicide, the death by cholera of a persecutor, and his release from jail.

I have heard the Prophet Joseph pray when the power of God rested down upon him, and all who heard him felt it; and I have seen his prayers answered in a marvelous manner almost immediately. Governor Reynolds on one occasion employed men to try and kidnap Joseph, and they almost accomplished their designs, but Joseph had some Gentile friends as well as his brethren, through whom he was rescued, and was taken to Nauvoo and released under a writ of habeas corpus. But the Governor continued to harass him with writs, and was determined to destroy Joseph. Joseph and the Twelve went before God in prayer, offered up prayer, and asked God to deliver him from the power of that man. Among other things he told the Lord that he was innocent before Him, and that his heart was heavy under the persecutions he endured. In about forty-eight hours from that time word reached Joseph that Reynolds had blown his brains out. Before perpetrating the deed he left a note on his desk stating, that as his services were not appreciated by the people of the State, he took that course to end his days.

There is another instance that occurs to my mind. A certain man took a stand against Joseph, and endeavored to bring persecution on him. He went to his God and laid the matter before Him, asking to be delivered out of the hands and power of that wicked man. Joseph was a Prophet, a Seer, a Revelator. He was acquainted with God; he knew the voice of the Spirit when it spoke to him. After offering up his prayer, the whispering of the still small voice came to him saying, "Wait with patience." The next day that man was taken sick with cholera, and died in a few hours. See how quickly the Lord answered his prayer offered up while a prisoner in Liberty Jail. At that time, Presidents Young, Taylor and several of the Twelve were on their way through Clay County to lay the corner stones of the Temple, in fulfillment of the revelation given in the Doctrine and Covenants, section 118. Joseph had no sooner called upon God than he was liberated; and his prayer answered to the very letter.

Journal of Discourses, 24:55 (January 27, 1883).

Right of religious liberty is sacred to all humanity.

I have heard Joseph Smith say that if he were emperor of the whole world, holding the destinies of all men in his hands, he would defend the religious rights of every man, whether his religion was right or wrong.

Journal of Discourses, 24:237 (July 20, 1883).

Predicted judgments and disasters to continue until the work of God is completed.

Joseph Smith said fifty years ago last June, in speaking of the Priesthoodyou can read it in the history of the Church"Men profess to prophesy. I will also prophesy. I say, in the name of the Lord, that the signs of the coming of the Son of Man have already commenced in the earth, and from this time henceforth will the judgments of God be manifest among the nations of the earth. Wars, bloodshed, earthquakes, storms, thunder, lightening, pestilence, famine and the judgments of God will follow in their turn; and when these things go forth upon the earth, they will never be returned or withheld until the work of God is wound up."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:206.

Wilford blessed because of his obedience to Joseph's instructions.

I have had the administration of angels in my day and time, though I never prayed for an angel. I have had, in several instances, the administration of holy messengers. In 1835, at Brother A. O. Smoot's mother's house in Kentucky, I received a letter one day from Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, requesting me to stay in Kentucky and Tennessee and take charge of the Church there. He wanted David Patten and Warren Parrish to go to Kirtland to receive their endowments. Joseph said in that letter: "You shall lose no blessing by pursuing this course." That letter was a great joy, a great comfort and consolation to me. I had traveled with Joseph Smith to Missouri. I had been acquainted with him, and I knew he was a Prophet of God. In the evening of that day I went into a little back room, in which was a small settee. I was alone. I was overwhelmed with joy and consolation at the letter I had received and the encouraging words it contained. I knelt down and prayed. I arose from my knees and sat down. The room was filled with light. A messenger came to me. We had a long conversation. He laid before me as if in a panorama, the signs of the last days, and told me what was coming to pass. I saw the sun turned to darkness, the moon to blood, the stars fall from heaven. I saw the resurrection day. I saw armies of men in the first resurrection, clothed with the robes of the Holy Priesthood. I saw the second resurrection. I saw a great many signs that were presented before me, by this personage; and among the rest, there were seven lions, as of burning brass, set in the heavens. He says, "That is one of the signs that will appear in the heavens before the coming of the Son of Man. It is a sign of the various dispensations."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:217.

Joseph instructed by and protected by angels.

Brother Kimball, Brother George A. Smith and myself had a similar experience in London, at a house where we were stopping. It seemed as if there were legions of spirits there. They sought our destruction; and on one occasion, after Brother Kimball had left, these powers of darkness fell upon us to destroy our lives, and both Brother Smith and myself would have been killed, apparently, had not three holy messengers come into the room and filled the room with light. They were dressed in temple clothing. They laid their hands upon our heads and we were delivered, and that power was broken, so far as we were concerned. Why did the Lord send these men to us? Because we could not have lived without it; and, as a general thing, angels do not administer to anybody on the earth unless it is to preserve the lives of good men, or to bring the Gospel, or perform a work that men cannot do for themselves. That is the reason Moroni and other angels of God visited and taught Joseph Smith. They quoted to him whole chapters in the Biblein Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekieland told him what must come to pass in the last days. It was necessary for these angels to give him the Priesthood. There was no mystery at all with regard to what was taught him. He knew it was of God. These very principles sustained Joseph Smith from the hour the Gospel was delivered to him until he sealed his testimony with his blood.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:218.

Joseph declares religious liberty a principle belonging to all mankind.

Brethren and sisters: I feel to say, God bless you. I am glad to meet with you and to have the privilege of once more bearing my testimony to the Gospel of Jesus Christ and the Kingdom of God. What Brother Cannon has told you with regard to the work of the Lord, is true. I have traveled in my day a great many miles with the Prophet Joseph Smith. I once heard him say that if he were the emperor of the world and had control of the whole human family, he would defend every man, woman and child in the enjoyment of their religion, no matter what their religion was, whether it was true or false. He said they had a right to that privilege, and the exercise of that agency which God had given to the whole human family. Those were his sentiments.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:221.

Wilford Woodruff's account of learning of the martyrdom; also tells of when Joseph gave all the keys to the Twelve.

I was sitting with Brigham Young in the depot in the city of Boston at the time when the two prophets were martyred. Of course we had no telegraphs and no fast reports as we have to-day to give communication over the land. During that period Brother Young was waiting there for a train of cars to go to Peterborough. Whilst sitting there we were overshadowed by a cloud of darkness and gloom as great as I ever witnessed in my life under almost any circumstances in which we were placed. Neither of us knew or understood the cause until after the report of the death of the prophets was manifested to us. Brother Brigham left; I remained in Boston, and next day took passage for Fox Islands, a place I had visited some years before, and baptized numbers of people and organized branches upon both those islands. My father-in-law, Ezra Carter, carried me on a wagon from Scarborough to Portland. I there engaged passage on board of a steamer. I had put my trunk on board and was just bidding my father-in-law farewell, when a man came out from a shopa shoemakerholding a newspaper in his hand. He said, "Father Carter, Joseph and Hyrum Smith have been martyredthey have been murdered in Carthage jail!"

As soon as I looked at the paper, the Spirit said to me that it was true. I had no time for consultation, the steamer's bell was ringing, so I stepped on board and took my trunk back to land. As I drew it off, the plank was drawn in. I told Father Carter to drive me back to Scarborough. I there took the car for Boston, and arrived at that place on Saturday night.

On my arrival there I received a letter which had been sent from Nauvoo, giving us an account of the killing of the prophets. I was the only man in Boston of the quorum of the Twelve.

I had very strange feelings, as, I have no doubt, all the Saints had. I attended a meeting on the following day in Boydston's Hall, where a vast number of the inhabitants of Boston and some three hundred Latter-day Saints had assembled. Hundreds of men came to that meeting to see what the "Mormons" were going to do now that their prophets were dead. I felt braced up; every nerve, bone, and sinew within me seemed as though made of steel. I did not shed a tear. I went into that hall, though I knew not what I was going to say to that vast audience. I opened the Bible promiscuously and opened to the words of St. John where he saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and heard them cry, "How long, O Lord, holy and true, doest thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" The Lord informed them that they must wait a little season, until their brethren were slain as they were. I spoke on those words.

Next day I met Brigham Young in the streets of Boston, he having just returned, opposite to Sister Voce's house. We reached out our hands, but neither of us was able to speak a word. We walked into Sister Voce's house. We each took a seat and veiled our faces. We were overwhelmed with grief and our faces were soon bathed in a flood of tears. I felt then that I could talk, though I could not do so beforethat is, to Brother Brigham. After we had done weeping we began to converse together concerning the death of the prophets. In the course of the conversation, he smote his hand upon his thigh and said, "Thank God, the keys of the kingdom are here." Brother Thatcher referred to this yesterday.

All that President Young or myself or any member of the Quorum need have done in the matter was to have referred to the last instructions at the last meeting we had with the Prophet Joseph before starting on our mission. I have alluded to that meeting many times in my life.

The Prophet Joseph, I am now satisfied, had a thorough presentiment that that was the last meeting we would hold together here in the flesh. We had had our endowments; we had had all the blessings sealed upon our heads that were ever given to the apostles or prophets on the face of the earth. On that occasion the Prophet Joseph rose up and said to us: "Brethren, I have desired to live to see this temple built. I shall never live to see it, but you will. I have sealed upon your heads all the keys of the kingdom of God. I have sealed upon you every key, power, principle that the God of heaven has revealed to me. Now, no matter where I may go or what I may do, the kingdom rests upon you."

Now, don't you wonder why we, as apostles, could not have understood that the prophet of God was going to be taken away from us? But we did not understand it. The apostles in the days of Jesus Christ could not understand what the Savior meant when He told them "I am going away; if I do not go away the Comforter will not come!" Neither did we understand what Joseph meant. "But," he said, after having done this, "ye apostles of the Lamb of God, my brethren, upon your shoulders this kingdom rests; now you have got to round up your shoulders and bear off the kingdom." And he also made this very strange remark, "If you do not do it you will be damned."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:291-92.

Joseph teaches the importance of religious liberty.

I will repeat here what I have often remarked as the words and sentiments of the Prophet Joseph who once declared it in my hearing. Said he, "If I were ruler or emperor of the world, and I had power over the whole human family, I would make every man, woman and child free in the enjoyment of his or her religion, be that religion whatever it may."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:341.

Joseph tells Oliver the Church will go forward without him.

I heard Joseph Smith say that Oliver Cowdery, who was the second Apostle in this Church, said to him, "If I leave this Church it will fall." Said he, "Oliver, you try it." Oliver tried it. He fell; but the Kingdom of God did not.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:45.

Joseph corrects an elder for teaching false doctrine.

There was one of the leading Elders of the Church who went before the people and undertook to preach certain principles. Joseph heard of it and desired him to present the doctrine to him in writing. He wrote it, and when he completed it read it to the Prophet. He asked Joseph what he thought of it. "Why," said Joseph, "it is a beautiful system, I have but one fault to find with it." "What is that, Brother Joseph?" Joseph said, "It is not true." So I say, every little while someone, thinking he is smart, tries to teach something that is not in the Doctrine and Covenants and Church works, and which is not true.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:60; see also 2:85; Journal of Discourses, 4:266.

Joseph shares in counsel with his brethren; he corrects an elder for teaching false doctrine.

The Prophet Joseph, in his day, consulted with the Apostles and sought their views on important matters and principles. He would say, "I want you to tell me your views and feelings about this, that and the other." The agency which God had given us was never taken from us, either by Him or His Prophet. We used to express our feelings to the Prophet, and we did so with all good conscience before God. As a general thing our views were alike; but if there was anything in them different from what Joseph considered was right, when we got through he would tell us thus and so. Then we did not stand against that, but we united upon it. One of the Apostles once brought before the Prophet Joseph a very peculiar kind of a system. Joseph listened to him very patiently, and when this brother got through he says, "Brother Joseph, what do you think of that?" "Why," says he, "Brother ______, it is a beautiful system, and I have only one fault in the world to find about it." "What is it?" "It is not true." Of course, when a man gets up a thing that is not true, he has to lay it aside.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:84-85; see also 2:60; Journal of Discourses, 4:266; Joseph Smith III, "What Do I Remember of Nauvoo?" Journal of History 3, no. 2 (April 1910): 132, 133-136, 138, 139, 142, 143, Lamoni, Iowa: Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Joseph predicts chastisement to befall Zion's Camp; cholera follows.

Those who are here today, Brother Gates, Brother Noble, and perhaps others, who were present on that occasion, will remember the day that Joseph Smith called the camp together. We were all well. There was no disease nor sickness in our camp. But he told us what awaited us. He gave us to understand that there was to be a chastisement visit our camp. He told us the reason. He had given counsel to the brethren with regard to many things, and a number of them had disobeyed that counsel. They did not understand and appreciate fully his position and standing as a Prophet of God. "Yes," says he, "you think of me as a boy, like the rest of you, but you will understand soon that I occupy a position where God governs and controls me." Those who were present know the feelings that we had. There was not a dry eye in camp. He stood upon a wagon and told us the judgments of God would visit our camp and we would be chastised. These things came to pass. The day that we landed the destroying angel visited our camp, and, of course, there was sorrow. I do not know the number that went to the grave, but somewhere about fourteen, I think. Then we understood that we had a Prophet in our midst. We knew very well that what he said would come to pass. Well, everything that was done in that camp, going and returning, a record of it, in a measure, has been kept. During that thousand miles journey the word of the Lord was given unto us, and we fully understood we were being led by a Prophet of God. We realized that all the way through that mission.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:207.

First meeting with the Prophet; they tan a wolf skin together.

Before I saw Joseph I said I did not care how old he was, or how young he was; I did not care how he lookedwhether his hair was long or short; the man that advanced that revelation was a prophet of God. I knew it for myself. I first met Joseph Smith in the streets of Kirtland. He had on an old hat, and a pistol in his hand. Said he, "Brother Woodruff, I've been out shooting at a mark, and I wanted to see if I could hit anything;" and says he, "Have you any objection to it?" "Not at all," says I; "there is no law against a man shooting at a mark, that I know of." He invited me to his house. He had a wolf skin, which he wanted me to help him to tan; he wanted it to sit on while driving his wagon team. Now, many might have said, "You are a pretty prophet; shooting a pistol and tanning a wolf skin." Well we tanned it, and used it while making a journey of a thousand miles. This was my first acquaintance with the Prophet Joseph.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:263-64; see also Journal of Discourses, 7:107.

The spirit of revelation swells in the hearts of the faithful.

What is revelation? It is the inspiration of the Holy Ghost to man. Joseph Smith said to Brother John Taylor in his day: "Brother Taylor, you watch the impression of the Spirit of God; you watch the whisperings of that spirit to you; you carry them out in your life, and it will become a principle of revelation in you, and you will know and understand this spirit and power." This is the key, the foundation stone of all revelation.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:266.

Brigham Young was transfigured; he appears and speaks like Joseph.

He (Brigham) then asked if they wanted the Twelve Apostles to step forth and magnify their calling and build up the Church and establish the kingdom of God in all the earth, "All who do, raise your right hand," and almost every soul in that congregation voted; and when Brigham Young arose and commenced speaking, as has been said, if my eyes had not been so I could see, if I had not seen him with my own eyes, there is no one that could have convinced me that it was not Joseph Smith speaking. It was as the voice and face of Joseph Smith; and any one can testify to this who was acquainted with these two men.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:383-84.

Joseph urges religious liberty.

I traveled with Joseph Smith thousands of miles; have been associated with him and with the Apostles of our Church almost since its organization. I have heard Joseph Smith say in public and in private that if he were the emperor of the world, and had control of every human being on the face of the earth, he would give every man, woman and child the fullest liberty to enjoy their religion, and sustain them in it, let that religion be what it might.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 3:60.

Wilford's first meetings with the Prophet, who prophesied the growth of the kingdom, removal to Rocky Mountains, and conversion of Lamanites.

The first time I ever saw Joseph Smith was in April, 1834. I met him in the streets of Kirtland. He invited me to his house. I stopped with him while preparing to go up to Zion in Zion's camp. On Sunday he called a Priesthood meeting. They all gathered in a little cabin. There I first heard Joseph Smith speak publicly, also Hyrum Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley and Orson Pratt, and William E. McLellin. The Prophet called upon the Elders to bear testimony of the Gospel of Christ, and they arose one after another and bore a short testimony. Then Brother Joseph arose and said: "Brethren, I am very much edified and interested in listening to your testimony. But I want to tell you that you know no more concerning the result of this work and what lies before you as the Elders of Israel and before this people, than a parcel of little children." I expect they were all a little startled by it. He told them this work would fill the whole earth, and that all nations would have to hear the proclamation of the Gospel. He further said: "This work will fill the Rocky Mountains with tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints, and there will be joined with them the Lamanites who dwell in those mountains, who will receive the Gospel of Christ at the mouth of Elders of Israel, and they will be united with the Church and Kingdom of God, and bring forth much good." I little thought, when I listened to those words, that I should ever live to see the fulfillment of these words of the Prophet. I little thought that I should ever visit the Rocky Mountains, or ever see the Lamanites of whom he then was speaking. These men before me today bring to my mind sayings of the Prophet. His mind expanded on that occasion and he had a good deal to say with regard to the progress of this work, what the Elders of Israel would have to pass through, and the work that God would require at their hands in the redemption of the Lamanites and the honest and meek throughout the world, and in the building up of the Zion of God on the earth. But I have lived to see these days. I have lived to see the Lamanites in these mountains. I have visited a great many of themthe Zunis, Lagunas, Moquis, Navajoes, Apaches, and a great many of these Indian tribes. I have preached the Gospel to them, in connection with my brethren, through interpreters. I have spent many interesting days with these Lamanites in the mountains of Israel. I spent three days in the wilderness in Arizona with Petone, the great war chief of the nation. I preached the Gospel to him. He called his tribe together, stood upon his feet some two hours or more, and told his tribe all that we had said to him. This tribe was looked upon as a very dangerous one in the midst of the nation, and this Petone had engaged in a great deal of warfare.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 3:85; see also Conference Report, 6 April 1898, 57.

Joseph had the gift of healing; he healed Elijah Fordham and Joseph B. Noble, for example.

I have seen Joseph Smith in one day go forth among the sick and command those that were dying to arise and be made whole, and they have leaped from their beds, been clothed, and walked out in the street and followed the Prophet of God in his travels through the midst of the Saints of God. Can I doubt this work? Can you doubt it? I think not. No man that has had any experience in this work can doubt it. You remember Brother Fordham. He was breathing his last breath of life when the Prophet took him by the hand and commanded him in the name of Jesus of Nazareth to arise and be made whole. He leaped from his bed, was clothed, and walked out and into the house of Brother Joseph Bates Noble, who is still living in these mountains. He was also lying at the point of death and was instantly healed by the power of God, through the voice of the Prophet of God. I name these things because I have had experience in them and have a right to mention them. The power of God was with the Prophet, from the time he was ordained to the Priesthood until he was murdered.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 3:156.

Joseph conferred all the keys on the Twelve.

The Elders of Israel have got to go forth and warn the inhabitants of the earth, as Joseph Smith told the Twelve Apostles the last time I saw him before his martyrdom, when he laid before us the work he was required to do. The Prophet said: "God has given to me every key, every power and principle of salvation belonging to this great last dispensation; and I have sealed upon your heads every key, principle and power which God has sealed upon me. Now, you Apostles, round up your shoulders and bear off this kingdom, or you will be damned, saith the Lord." I do not forget these things, and they are true.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 3:157.

Prophet received inspiration to organize the Relief Society.

Now I want to say a few words concerning our Relief Societies. They were organized by the Prophet Joseph Smith, in Nauvoo, at an early day; and he took great interest in the organization of that society. And he knew by the spirit of inspiration, what result that organization would have in the Church, and he saw by the spirit of inspiration the necessity of that society. And now they are all through these mountains, in every ward.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 3:425.

All ordinances, including the endowment, were revealed through Joseph.

Where has the power of God been since the death of Joseph? With this people. They say, these apostates, that Brigham Young organized the endowments and originated the principle of plural marriage. They're liars, every one of them, and the truth is not in them; in so far as this matter is concerned. There's Sister Bathsheba Smith, she and I both had our endowments under the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I had my second anointings and sealings under his hands. There is not a single principle in this Church that he did not lay the foundation for; he called the Twelve together the last time he spoke to us, and his face shone like amber. And upon our shoulders he rolled the burden of the Kingdom, and he gave us all the keys and powers and gifts to carry on this great and mighty work. He told us that he had received every key, every power and every gift for the salvation of the living and the dead, and he said: "Upon the Twelve I seal these gifts and powers and keys from henceforth and forever. No matter what may come to me. And I lay this work upon your shoulders. Take it and bear it off, and if you don't, you'll be damned."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 4:111.

Good comes from God; evil comes from the devil.

The angel Moroni said to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "Whatsoever enticeth and leadeth to good and to do good is of God, and whatsoever doth not is of that wicked one."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 4:142.

Note: Compare Moroni 7:5-13.

Detecting a false and hypocritical spirit in two visiting preachers, Joseph made a mark on the ground and challenged them to jump from it; they left offended, thinking Joseph was irreverent.

President Woodruff relates an occurrence . . . which happened on his first visit to Kirtland after his baptism. He was in company with the Prophet and his brother, Hyrum, and a number of other leading Elders when two preachers called to see President Joseph Smith. After some conversation, the Prophet made a mark on the ground, and standing with his toes against it, jumped, and, making another mark where he alighted, said to the brethren, "Boys, I don't think any of you can beat that." This happened to be on Sunday, and the two preachers broke out in condemnation of his conduct, because he, professing to be a Prophet of God, should be guilty of such conduct on the Sabbath day. After they had given vent to their feelings, he said to them, "I knew what was in your hearts and that you had come to seek for iniquity."

George Q. Cannon, "Topics of Our Times," Juvenile Instructor 29, no. 23 (1 December 1894): 746.

Wilford endowed by Joseph, who laid the foundation for all gospel principles in this dispensation; he then gave the keys to the Twelve to bear off the kingdom or be damned.

Where has the power of God been since the death of Joseph? With this people! These apostates say that Brigham Young organized the endowments and originated the principle of plural marriage. They are liars every one of them and the truth is not in them, so far as this matter is concerned. There is Sister Bathsheba Smith. She and I both had our endowments under the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I had my second anointings and sealings under his hands. There is not a single principle in the Church that he did (not) lay the foundation of. He called the Twelve together for the last time he spoke to us and his face shone like amber, and upon our shoulders he rolled the burden of the Kingdom, and gave us all the keys and powers and gifts to carry on this great and mighty work. He told us he had received every key, every power and every gift for the salvation of the living and the dead. He said "take this work and bear it off." If we did not, we would be damned. He said no matter what might come to him the work was on us."

"Remarks of President Wilford Woodruff, June 24, 1894 at the Temple Workers Excursion, Brigham City, Utah," cited in "Family Record of Eliza Smith Somerville," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 115.

Account of Kirtland apostasy: apostles apostatize; one even rebels in a temple meeting.

I have remarked that there was a time when there were but two of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles then in the town of Kirtland who stood by Joseph Smith and upheld him as a Prophet, Seer, and Revelator. I was not a member of that quorum at that time; I was a Seventy. Several of these men called upon me in the time of this apostasy and asked me to join them against the Prophet; the Prophet was fallen, they said. Now, I had seen enough myself of the Prophet of God, and I had read enough of the revelations of God through him, to know that he was a Prophet of God and not a fallen prophet. I saw that these men were yielding to the devil, and I told them so. Said I: "You will all go to hell unless you repent. Joseph has been raised up by the power of God; he has organized this Church, he has been true and faithful to God and to the Church and kingdom of God here on the earth, and you will fall and go to perdition unless you repent of your sins and turn from the position you are in to-day." A good many of them did fall. I will here name one instance. I saw one of these Apostles in the Kirtland Temple, while the Sacrament was being passed, stand in the aisle and curse the Prophet of God to his face while he was in the stand, and when the bread was passed he reached out his hand for a piece of bread and flung it into his mouth like a mad dog. He turned as black in the face almost as an African with rage and with the power of the devil. What did he do? He ate and drank damnation to himself. He did not go and hang himself; but he did go and drown himself, and the river went over his body while his spirit was cast into the pit, where he ceased to have the power to curse either God or His Prophet in time or in eternity. I may say that David Patten was not in Kirtland at this time; he was in Missouri. He never apostatized, but died a martyr.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 4:289-90.

In his last meeting with the Twelve, Joseph testifies they have the keys of the kingdom.

The last time the Apostles ever met with the Prophet Joseph Smith, there were eleven of us present,nine Apostles, himself and his brother Hyrum. He likewise was transfigured before us, as far as mortal man can be. The room which he was in was filled as with consuming fire by the power of God. His face was clear as amber, he was clothed with the power of God. We did not know he was going to leave us any more than the Apostles knew the Savior was going to leave them in that day. But he told us what our duties were. He laid before us what God required at his hands and the ordinances unto which he had been ordained by the power of God. He said the Lord had sealed upon his head every ordinance, every key and every power belonging to this dispensation of the fullness of times; and, he added, "I have sealed these things upon your heads; now you must go forth and bear off this kingdom or you will be damned." That was a very strong remark to us. I have never forgotten it from that day to this.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 4:291.

Last meeting of the Prophet with the Twelve; Joseph's face shone like amber; he also said the Twelve had the Keys.

I remember very well the last charge that Joseph gave to the Apostles. We had as little idea that he was going from us as the Apostles of the Savior did that He was going to be taken from them. Joseph talked with us as plainly as did the Savior to His Apostles, but we did not understand that he was about to depart from us any more than the Apostles understood the Savior. Now, I have heard of other parties rising up and pretending that the Prophet Joseph Smith gave unto them a charge to lead and direct the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I want to say that it is false; there is not a word of truth in it. When he delivered that charge to the Apostles he was filled with the power of God. His face was clear as amber, and the room was filled with the Spirit of God, like the holy fire. In his address he told us that he had received at the hands of the Almighty God all the keys, and powers, and priesthood, and ordinances and gifts belonging to the dispensation in which we lived. "Now," says he, "I have sealed all these blessings upon your heads, upon you Apostles of the Lamb of God, who have been chosen to bear off this Church and kingdom on the earth;" and after making this solemn proclamation to us, he said, "Now, you have got to round up your shoulders and bear off this kingdom, or you will be damned." I never shall forget that.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:188-89.

Wilford obeys Joseph's counsel and is blessed; he sees a vision of the last days.

After laboring in that part for a length of time, I received a letter from Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, in which they requested me to stay in that country and take charge of the churches that we had built up there. The Prophet promised me many things, and said I should lose no blessings by tarrying in that country and doing as he wished me, and letting the other brethren go and get their endowments. I was then at the house of Brother Abraham O. Smoot's mother. I received this about sundown. I went into a little room where there was a sofa, to pray alone. I felt full of joy and rejoicings at the promises God had made to me through the Prophet. While I was upon my knees praying, my room was filled with light. I looked and a messenger stood by my side. I arose, and this personage told me he had come to instruct me. He presented before me a panorama. He told me he wanted me to see with my eyes and understand with my mind what was coming to pass in the earth before the coming of the Son of Man. He commenced with what the revelations say about the sun being turned to darkness, the moon to blood, and the stars falling from heaven. Those things were all presented to me one after another, as they will be, I suppose, when they are manifest before the coming of the Son of Man. Then he showed me the resurrection of the deadwhat is termed the first and second resurrection. In the first resurrection I saw no graves nor anyone raised from the grave. I saw legions of celestial beings, men and women who had received the Gospel all clothed in white robes. In the form they were presented to me, they had already been raised from the grave. After this he showed me what is termed the second resurrection. Vast fields of graves were before me, and the Spirit of God rested upon the earth like a shower of gentle rain, and when that fell upon the graves they were opened, and an immense host of human beings came forth. They were just as diversified in their dress as we are here, or as they were laid down. This personage taught me with regard to these things. Among other things he showed me, there were seven lions like burning brass placed in the heavens. I asked the messenger what they were for. He said they were representative of the different dispensations of the Gospel of Christ to men, and they would all be seen in the heavens among the signs that would be shown. After this passed by me, he disappeared. Now, if I had been a painter I could have drawn everything that I saw. It made an impression upon me that has never left me from that day to this. The next day we had a meeting in the academy. Brother Smoot and some others went with me; but I was a lost man. I hardly knew where I was, so enveloped was I in that which I had seen.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:235-36.

In a dream, Joseph counsels Brigham and Wilford to get in tune with the Spirit of the Lord.

One morning, while we were at Winter Quarters, Brother Brigham Young said to me and the brethren that he had had a visitation the night previous from Joseph Smith. I asked him what he said to him. He replied that Joseph had told him to tell the people to labor to obtain the Spirit of God; that they needed that to sustain them and to give them power to go through their work in the earth.

Now I will give you a little of my experience in this line. Joseph Smith visited me a great deal after his death, and taught me many important principles. The last time he visited me was while I was in a storm at sea. I was going on my last mission to preside in England. My companions were Brother Leonard W. Hardy, Brother Milton Holmes, Brother Dan Jones, and another brother, and my wife and two other women. We had been traveling three days and nights in a heavy gale, and were being driven backwards. Finally I asked my companions to come into the cabin with me, and I told them to pray that the Lord would change the wind. I had no fears of being lost; but I did not like the idea of being driven back to New York, as I wanted to go on my journey. We all offered the same prayer, both men and women; and when we got through we stepped on to the deck and in less than a minute it was as though a man had taken a sword and cut that gale through, and you might have thrown a muslin handkerchief out and it would not have moved it. The night following this Joseph and Hyrum visited me, and the Prophet laid before me a great many things. Among other things, he told me to get the Spirit of God; that all of us needed it. He also told me what the Twelve Apostles would be called to go through on the earth before the coming of the Son of Man, and what the reward of their labors would be; but all that was taken from me, for some reason. Nevertheless I know it was most glorious, although much would be required at our hands.

Joseph Smith continued visiting myself and others up to a certain time, and then it stopped. The last time I saw him was in heaven. In the night vision I saw him at the door of the temple in heaven. He came and spoke to me. He said he could not stop to talk with me because he was in a hurry. The next man I met was Father Smith; he could not talk with me because he was in a hurry. I met half a dozen brethren who had held high positions on earth, and none of them could stop to talk with me because they were in a hurry. I was much astonished. By and by I saw the Prophet again, and I got the privilege to ask him a question. "Now," said I, "I want to know why you are in a hurry. I have been in a hurry all through my life; but I expected my hurry would be over when I got into the kingdom of heaven, if I ever did." Joseph said: "I will tell you, Brother Woodruff. Every dispensation that has had the Priesthood on the earth and has gone into the celestial kingdom, has had a certain amount of work to do to prepare to go to the earth with the Savior when He goes to reign on the earth. Each dispensation has had ample time to do this work. We have not. We are the last dispensation, and so much work has to be done, and we need to be in a hurry in order to accomplish it." Of course, that was satisfactory to me, but it was new doctrine to me.

Brigham Young also visited me after his death. On one occasion he and Brother Heber C. Kimball came in a splendid chariot, with fine white horses, and accompanied me to a conference that I was going to attend. When I got there I asked Brother Brigham if he would take charge of the conference. "No," said he, "I have done my work here. I have come to see what you are doing and what you are teaching the people." And he told me what Joseph Smith had taught him in Winter Quarters, to teach the people to get the Spirit of God. He said, "I want you to teach the people to get the Spirit of God. You cannot build up the Kingdom of God without that."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:237-38.

Joseph told John Taylor to get in tune with the Spirit.

Joseph Smith told Brother John Taylor on one occasion to labor to get the Spirit of God, and to follow its dictation, and it would become a principle of revelation within him. God has blessed me with that, and everything I have done since I have been in this Church has been done upon that principle. The Spirit of God has told me what to do, and I have had to follow that.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:238.

The Holy Ghost is the author of revelation.

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught the Twelve Apostles in my day and time with regard to the principle of revelation. The Prophet said the Elders of Israel would have their minds moved upon by the Spirit of God concerning various things which they might not always understand, but if they would follow out that principle and practice upon it it would very soon become a principle of revelation to them. This is a true principle and by observing it I have been blessed all my life.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:316.

Last meeting of Joseph with the Twelve; he testifies they have the keys of the kingdom and must bear it off.

I am the only man living in the flesh that received endowments under the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I am the only man in the flesh that was with the Twelve Apostles when he turned over the kingdom of God to them and laid upon them the commandment to bear off this kingdom. He stood for some three hours in a room delivering to us his last lecture. The room was filled as with consuming fire. His face was as clear as amber; his words were like vivid lightning to us. They penetrated every part of our bodies from the crown of our head to the soles of our feet. He said, "Brethren, the Lord Almighty has sealed upon my head every Priesthood, every key, every power, every principle that belongs to the last dispensation of the fullness of times, and to the building up of the kingdom of God. I have sealed upon your heads all those principles, Priesthood, apostleship, and keys of the kingdom of God, and now you have got to round up your shoulders and bear off this kingdom or you will be damned." I do not forget those wordsI never shall while I live. That was the last speech he ever made in the flesh. Soon afterward he was martyred and called home to glory.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:317-18.

Correcting another, Brigham teaches that the written revelations are as nothing when compared to the living oracles and Joseph concurs, saying Brigham taught "the word of the Lord."

I will refer here to a certain meeting I attended in the town of Kirtland in my early days. At that meeting some remarks were made that have been made here today, with regard to the living oracles and with regard to the written word of God. The same principle was presented, although not as extensively as it has been here, when a leading man in the church got up and talked upon the subject, and said: 'You have got the word of God before you here in the bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants; you have the written word of God, and you who give revelations should give revelations according to those books, as what is written in those books is the word of God. We should confine ourselves to them.'

When he concluded, Brother Joseph turned to Brother Brigham Young and said, 'Brother Brigham I want you to take the stand and tell us your views with regard to the living oracles and the written word of God.' Brother Brigham took the stand, and he took the Bible, and laid it down; he took the Book of Mormon, and laid it down; and he took the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and laid it down before him, and he said: "There is the written word of God to us, concerning the work of God from the beginning of the world, almost, to our day. And now,' said he, 'when compared with the living oracles those books are nothing to me; those books do not convey the word of God direct to us now, as do the words of a Prophet or a man bearing the Holy Priesthood in our day and generation. I would rather have the living oracles than all the writing in the books.' That was the course he pursued. When he was through, Brother Joseph said to the congregation, "Brother Brigham has told you the word of the Lord, and he has told you the truth.'"

Conference Report, October 1897, 18-19.

Note: See also Brigham Young, Conference Report, 8 October 1866, for a very similar story which Brigham places in Nauvoo. It seems that Brigham's account is the more accurate.

In a letter, Joseph tells Wilford he is to fill one of the vacancies in the Twelve and to gather the Fox Island Saints and bring them to Zionwhich he did.

While in the ministry there [i.e., Fox Islands] I received a letter from Joseph Smith, the Prophet of God, in which he told me that the Lord had given him a revelation, and named to me the persons that were called to fill the places of those who had fallen. My name was among them. He said that he wanted me to gather up the Saints I had baptized and bring them to Zion. What were the circumstances? I was on an island of the sea. There was not a horse or an ox on the island. There was not a man or a woman that knew how to harness a horse. I told one of the brethren, who had some money, that we must furnish a train of horses, wagons, harness, etc., and he proposed to advance the money for that purpose. He went with me and we bought about fifty horses; and then I had to match these horses, and get harness to fit them. I went to a wagon-maker and engaged twenty or twenty-five wagons. I did this in order to prepare the people to go with me, according to the words of the Prophet. I arranged everything, agreed with this brother to furnish the money, and left in advance with the understanding that they were to leave the first day of September. The letter to me was dated the first of August. I went to Maine, as my wife was there with her first child. I waited for this company to come to me, but they did not come till the first of October. We had them to travel from Maine to Missouri through snow, rain, and mud. However, we passed through it all, and got up there, according to the commandment of the Lord to me.

Conference Report, October 1897, 46.

Joseph proclaimed religious liberty for all.

I had a very pleasant interview with Dr. Reiner at our office, and I related to him a certain principle which was presented by Joseph Smith at a conference in Illinois, before some fifteen thousand people. In speaking upon religious liberty, he said: "If I were the emperor of the world, and I had control of all the human family, I would sustain every man, woman and child on the face of the whole earth in the enjoyment of their religion, let that religion be what it may." I have told the doctor that those were my sentiments. They are my sentiments today.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:369.

First meeting with the Prophet; Wilford was invited to a Sunday night service, at which Joseph prophesied growth and development of the kingdom, saying it would "fill the world" and that the Savior would come when the Saints were "in the Rocky Mountains."

[In 1834] I arrived in Kirtland on Saturday and there met with Joseph and Hyrum Smith in the street. I was introduced to Joseph Smith. It was the first time that I had ever seen him in my life. He invited me home to spend the Sabbath with him, and I did so. They had meeting on Sunday.

On Sunday night the Prophet called us all who held the Priesthood to gather into the little log school house they had there. It was a small house, perhaps 14 feet square. But it held the whole of the Priesthood of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who were then in the town of Kirtland, and who had gathered together to go off in Zion's Camp. That was the first time I ever saw Oliver Cowdery, or heard him speak; the first time I ever saw Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, and the two Pratts, and Orson Hyde and many others. There were no Apostles in the Church then except Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. When we got together the Prophet called upon the Elders of Israel with him to bear testimony of this work. Those that I have named spoke, and a good many that I have not named, bore their testimonies. When they got through the Prophet said, "Brethren I have been very much edified and instructed in your testimonies here tonight, but I want to say to you before the Lord, that you know no more concerning the destinies of this Church and kingdom than a babe upon its mother's lap. You don't comprehend it." I was rather surprised. He said "It is only a little handful of Priesthood you see here tonight, but this Church will fill North and South Americait will fill the world." Among other things he said, "it will fill the Rocky Mountains. There will be tens of thousands of Latter-days Saints who will be gathered in the Rocky Mountains, and there they will open the door for the establishing of the Gospel among the Lamanites, who will receive the Gospel and their endowments and the blessings of God. This people will go into the Rocky Mountains; they will there build temples to the Most High. They will raise up a posterity there, and the Latter-day Saints who dwell in these mountains will stand in the flesh until the coming of the Son of Man. The Son of Man will come to them while in the Rocky Mountains."

Conference Report, 6 April 1898, 57; see also Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 3:85.
