Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Woolley, Edwin Dilworth

(June 28, 1807-October 14, 1881)

Moves to Commerce upon the advice of Joseph; later, Joseph tested him by asking for all his mercantile goods, which, when offered, Joseph returned to him, grateful for his faith.

In 1839 he removed with his family to Quincy, Ill., where he first met the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Patriarch Hyrum, and began an acquaintance which ripened into the closest friendship and love, continuing until the death of the martyred Prophet and Patriarch. In the spring of 1840, by the advice of the Prophet, he removed to Commerce, afterwards named Nauvoo . . .

. . . he engaged in the mercantile business. While thus engaged the Prophet called upon him one day and said, "Brother Woolley, we want all your goods for the building up of the Kingdom of God;" or words to that effect. Elder Woolley went to work at once and packed up ready for removal all the goods in his store, with the exception of some which were held on commission from different mercantile firms; he then went to Joseph and said, "Brother Joseph, I wish to know, if you also want the goods I hold on commission, and will pay the houses in St. Louis and other places from where I obtained them; and also whether you will send teams to take the goods away, or wish me to deliver them." The Prophet answered by asking, "And you have packed all your goods except those you hold on commission and are ready to deliver them, or haul them over?" "Yes," was the answer. "Then," said the Prophet, with deep feeling, at the same time putting his hand affectionately on Brother Woolley's shoulder, "Take your goods, replace them on your shelves and go on with your business." The Prophet had probably only been testing him and found that he was willing to make any sacrifice necessary for the cause he had espoused, and that the property was doing as well in his hands as it would in some other way, and that anything needed could be had at any time it might be called for.

"Woolley, Edwin D.," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:631-32; also in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:283.

Loans the Prophet $500 to pay for an attorney seeking his release from the Missouri mobbers.

[Brother Woolley] furnished the Prophet money frequently, as loans or otherwise, and on one occasion (as it is remembered by his youngest brother), he gave the Prophet $500 to pay a lawyer for securing his release from Joseph H. Reynolds, a Missouri sheriff, who had kidnapped Joseph at Dixon, Ill., for the purpose of taking him to Missouri, where his enemies were waiting to injure, if not to kill him. Joseph had tried to get the money needed from several of his friends, but had failed, until he applied to Edwin D. Woolley.

"Woolley, Edwin D.," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:632.

Joseph stopped at Woolley's home on the way to Carthage; when he left he said, "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter."

[Brother Woolley] participated in the joys and also in the troubles of the Church while in Nauvoo, and was at home when the Prophet and Patriarch rendered themselves up to the officers to be taken to Carthage in June, 1844. Just as they martyrs were leaving Nauvoo, they called at the home of Edwin D. Woolley, and on leaving the Prophet uttered those memorable words which will be remembered while time lasts: "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter; but have a conscience void of offense towards God and towards all men. I shall die innocent, and it shall be said of me, 'he was murdered in cold blood.'"

"Woolley, Edwin D.," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:632.

Note: When Orson F. Whitney tells this story, he says "it was on leaving (Woolley's) it is claimed, that the Prophet uttered those memorable words: 'I am going like a lamb to the slaughter'" (see "Edwin Dilworth Woolley," in Orson F. Whitney, History Of Utah, 4 vols. [Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904], 4:283.)
