Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Woolley, Samuel Amos

(September 11, 1825-March 23, 1900)

In the fall of 1839, Woolley stays in Quincy upon the advice of Joseph; he served as a member of the Nauvoo "whittling and whistling gang" and was present when Brigham Young was transfigured.

Together with my brothers Edwin D. and John M., I started for the gathering place of the Saints in the fall of 1839, but on reaching Quincy, Ill., we met the Prophet and the Patriarch and were advised to stop at that place for the winter, which we did, and I worked at chopping and hauling wood.

. . . During a Conference meeting held in Nauvoo in the spring of 1843 an officer came to arrest Joseph the Prophet; but in order to prevent him from doing so a number of boys, including myself, commenced whittling sticks and whistling, and every time the officer neared the house where the Prophet was, we would stand in front of him and whittle and whistle. The result of this was that he did not arrest Joseph Smith that day. During the troublous times of 1844 I served as a city guard in Nauvoo. After the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith I was present at the important meeting where President Brigham Young first spoke to the Saints of Joseph's death, and I received a testimony that the mantle of Joseph had fallen upon Brigham Young's shoulder, for when he spoke it seemed as if Joseph himself were speaking, his voice and gestures being exactly like those of the martyred prophet.

"Woolley, Samuel A.," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:781.

Tells of a Nauvoo youth who whistled and whittled to monitor a stranger's behavior; he was present at the transfiguration of Brigham Young; he also saw the mummies from which Abraham's papyrus was taken.

The family sold out and went to Quincy, Illinois in the fall o f1839. There they met Joseph Smith who was on his way from Nauvoo to Washington, D. C. to see the President of the United States to try and get redress for the wrongs of the Saints. The Prohet advised the family to remain in Quincy for the winter, and in the spring they went to Commerce, (later called Nauvoo.) There on the 7th day of April, 1840 he was baptized in the Mississippi River by Almon W. Babbitt, and confirmed the same day.

In 1841 he worked in the quarry cutting stone for the Nauvoo Temple, being one of the first on that work. From 1842 to 1846 he worked in his brother's store as Edwin D. was busy with Church affairs and left him in charge.

In the forepart of 1844 the mobs were so bad, Joseph Smith put the city under Marshall law. The Woolley boys were closely associated with Joseph and Hyrum, Edwin B. being a bodyguard of the Prophet. Samuel was one of the city guards. I now quote from his journal, "During a meeting held in Nauvoo in the spring of 1843 an officer came to arrest Joseph Smith, and in order to keep him from doing so, a number of the boys, including myself, began whittling sticks and whistling, and every time the officer came near the house we would stand in front of him and whistle and whittle The result was that he did not arrest Joseph smith that day."

After the martyrdom of the Prophet he was at the meeting called where Brigham Young first spoke to the Saints, and received a testimony that the mantle of Joseph rested on Brigham Young.

. . . Before I close this history, I would like to add the following: As before stated, my father and his brothers were closely associated with the Prophet Joseph Smith. At the time the mobs were so bad in Ohio they were called upon to protect the Prophet many times. At one time Edwin D. brought home the mummies that held the papyrus from which we get the Book of Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price. My father records the following concerning this incident: He is speaking of his brother,

"Before he was baptized he went to Kirtland to see Joseph Smith the Prophet, but as he had gone to Missouri he did not see him. On his return he found father Smiththe Prophet's father, at the town of Portage as the mob had driven him and some others from Kirtland. So he brought him home with him and hired a wagon to bring the mummies and the record of the Book of Abraham, etc.

"The mummies were Egyptian, embalmed and preserved, brought from the catacombs of Egypt. Three were men and one a young women with red hair. One of the men had his arms over his breast and the records which were on papyrus were held in them, etc."

"History of Samuel Amos Woolley, Written by His Daughter, Florence Woolley Russell," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
