Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Young, Brigham

(June 1, 1801-August 29, 1877)

First meeting of Brigham and Joseph; Joseph invites Brigham to pray after a meeting and he prays in Adamic; Joseph prophesies Brigham will yet preside over the Church.

We proceeded to Kirtland and stopped at John P. Greene's, who had just arrived there with his family. We rested a few minutes, took some refreshment, and started to see the Prophet. We went to his father's house and learned that he was in the woods, chopping. We immediately repaired to the woods, where we found the Prophet, and two or three of his brothers chopping and hauling wood. Here my joy was full at the privilege of shaking the hand of the Prophet of God, and received the sure testimony, by the spirit of prophecy, that he was all that any man could believe him to be, as a true Prophet. He was happy to see us, and bid us welcome. We soon returned to his house, he accompanying us.

In the evening a few of the brethren came in, and we conversed together upon the things of the kingdom. He called upon me to pray; in my prayer I spoke in tongues. As soon as we arose from our knees the brethren flocked around him, and asked his opinion concerning the gift of tongues that was upon me. He told them it was the pure Adamic language. Some said to him they expected he would condemn the gift Brother Brigham had, but he said, "No, it is of God, and the time will come when Brother Brigham Young will preside over this Church." The latter part of this conversation was in my absence.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 4-5.

Note: This quote from the Journal of Brigham Young refers to events which transpired November 8, 1832.

Note: The Prophet refers to this experience in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:295-97, observing that it was the first time that he had heard the gift of tongues spoken among the brethren. Joseph also spoke in tongues on this occasion.

Joseph prophesies that if Brigham and Joseph Young will go on Zion's Camp, they will not be hurt but will go and return in safety.

[During the Winter and Spring of 1834] While the Prophet Joseph was gathering up the elders of Israel [Zion's Camp] to go up to Missouri and assist the brethren that had been driven from Jackson County, I was preaching and laboring for the support of my family. My brother, Joseph Young, arrived, and I requested him to go with me to Missouri. He hesitated; but while walking together a few days afterwards we met the Prophet, who said to him, "Brother Joseph, I want you to go with us up to Missouri." I informed the Prophet that my brother was doubtful as to his duty about going, to which the Prophet replied, "Brother Brigham and Brother Joseph, if you will go with me in the camp to Missouri and keep my counsel, I promise you, in the name of the Almighty, that I will lead you there and back again, and not a hair of your heads shall be harmed," at which my Brother Joseph presented his hand to the Prophet, as well as myself, to confirm the covenant. The brethren continued to come in from various parts of the country to Kirtland, and on the 5th of May we started for New Portage, the place appointed for organization.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 8-9.

Tells of cholera on Zion's Camp; Joseph prophesied that if the men were humble and obedient the cholera would pass.

May 7 [1834], Brother Joseph Smith and the remainder of the brethren having arrived, we began to organize [Zion's Camp], and on the 8th, the organization being completed, we started on our journey. We arrived at Brother Burgett's, Rush Creek, Clay County Missouri, on the 3rd of June, and passed through the scenes of cholera and death, as related in the history of Joseph Smith. We remained one week attending to the sick and burying the dead. About seventy of the brethren were attacked with the cholera, and eighteen died.

President Joseph Smith called the members of the camp of Zion together, and told them if they would humble themselves before the Lord, and covenant that they would from that time forth obey his counsel, that the plague should be stopped from that very hour, and there would not be another case in camp, whereupon the brethren with uplifted hands covenanted that they would from that very hour hearken to his counsel and obey his word, and the plague was stayed according to the words of the Lord through his servant.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 8-9.

Brigham returns from Zion's Camp when he walked 2000 miles with the Prophet.

July 4th, my brother Joseph and myself, in company with several of the brethren, started for home, and walked all the way, arriving in Kirtland in August, having performed a journey of about 2000 miles on foot, in a little over three months, averaging forty miles per day while traveling.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 9.

Brigham called to testify in a suit against Joseph following Zion's Camp.

In the fall of 1834, Denis [Dennis?] Lake instituted a lawsuit before Justices Dowen and Hanson, against Brother Joseph Smith, charging him $30 a month for going up in Zion's camp to Missouri, alleging that Joseph had promised him a lot of land. I was called up by the attorney for the prosecution, General Paine, and questioned. I was asked if I went up to Missouri with the said camp? I answered I did. I was asked what tools I took with me. I replied, a good gun and bayonet, plenty of ammunition, a dirk, an ax, a saw, a chisel, spade, hoe, and other necessary tools. I was asked what I meant to do with my gun and ammunition. I replied, I meant to defend my property, myself and my brethren from thieves and robbers. I was asked how much I understood a lot of land to mean. I told them, in the burying yard it generally meant six feet. Joseph's attorney, Mr. Bissell, hearing me answer these and similar questions so readily and definitely, punched the prosecuting attorney on the shoulder and asked him if he had anymore questions to ask that witness. He said no.

Mr. Collins being examined, testified that Joseph had promised all who would go up in camp should return, and that many had gone up, and when they returned some were dead and some were alive. Joseph's attorney, taking advantage of the witness' words, remarked that the witness had testified that they all returned, and that was all Mr. Collins said Joseph had promised.

Thirty witnesses were summoned to attend this trial (three of whom were sectarian priests), for the purpose of impeaching the testimony of Joseph Smith, at which they made a signal failure. I mention such cases, wherein I took a part, in my history, realizing that there are but few of the vexatious proceedings of the world and the apostates, against Joseph noticed in his history.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 9-10.

Joseph appoints Brigham to superintend the painting of the Kirtland Temple; great spiritual manifestations happened at the Kirtland temple dedication; Joseph washes Brigham's feet.

I remained at home during the fall and winter, occasionally going out and preaching to the neighboring branches. In the course of the winter there was a Hebrew school started, which I attended until February 22, 1836, when I was called upon by the Prophet to superintend the painting and finishing of the [Kirtland] temple, upon which I labored until March 27, when the temple was so far finished as to be dedicated to the Lord by the Prophet, with the assembled quorums of the Church and as many members as could possibly be accommodated. On this occasion the power of God was displayed, as recorded in the history of Joseph Smith.

I attended the solemn assembly, and, with my brethren of the Twelve, received my washings and anointings, and was privileged to listen to the teachings and administrations of the Prophet of God. We also attended to the washing of feet, which ordinance was administered to me by the Prophet Joseph.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 12-13.

While on a mission in Salem, Massachusetts, Brigham joins the Prophet Joseph, who receives the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 111.

In the spring of 1836, in company with my brother Joseph, I started for the Eastern States, visited our relatives, and preached the gospel to them, many of whom believed our testimony and were baptized. We traveled through New York, Vermont and Massachusetts. I left my brother Joseph in Boston, and with Brother Lyman E. Johnson went to Salem, where we met the Prophet Joseph and the brethren who were with him. August 6, Joseph received a revelation concerning that city [see D&C 111].

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 14.

With the spirit of apostasy, several of the Twelve meet to consider deposing Joseph; Brigham opposes them; disunited, they agree on no plan.

On a certain occasion several of the Twelve, the witnesses to the Book of Mormon, and others of the Authorities of the Church, held a council in the upper room of the [Kirtland] Temple. The question before them was to ascertain how the Prophet Joseph could be deposed, and David Whitmer appointed President of the Church. Father John Smith, Brother Heber C. Kimball and others were present, who were opposed to such measures. I rose up, and in a plain and forcible manner told them that Joseph was a Prophet, and I knew it, and that they might rail and slander him as much as they pleased, they could not destroy the appointment of the Prophet of God, they could only destroy their own authority, cut the thread that bound them to the Prophet and to God and sink themselves to hell. Many were highly enraged at my decided opposition to their measures, and Jacob Bump (an old pugilist) was so exasperated that he could not be still. Some of the brethren near him put their hands on him, and requested him to be quiet; but he writhed and twisted his arms and body saying, "How can I keep my hands off that man?" I told him if he thought it would give him any relief he might lay them on. This meeting was broken up without the apostates being able to unite on any decided measures of opposition. This was a crisis when earth and hell seemed leagued to overthrow the Prophet and Church of God. The knees of many of the strongest men in the Church faltered.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 14-15.

Brigham rides to meet Joseph, and thus saves his life.

Ascertaining that a plot was laid to waylay Joseph for the purpose of taking his life, on his return from Monroe, Michigan, to Kirtland, I procured a horse and buggy, and took Brother William Smith along to meet Joseph. We met him returning in the stagecoach. Joseph requested William to take his seat in the stage, and he rode with me in the buggy. We arrived in Kirtland in safety.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 17.

A man named Hawley comes to Kirtland to accuse Joseph of being a false prophet; at midnight in the streets of Kirtland he disturbs public peace until Brigham confronts and stops him.

A man named Hawley, while plowing his field in the state of New York, had an impression rest down on his mind, with great weight, that he must go to Kirtland and tell Joseph Smith that the Lord had rejected him as a Prophet. He accordingly started right off, with his bare feet, and, on arriving in Kirtland, told Joseph that the Lord had rejected him for allowing John Noah, a Prophet of God, to be cut off from the Church, and for allowing the women to wear caps and the men to wear cushions on their coat sleeves. He was called up before the bishop's court and disfellowshipped.

He went through the streets of Kirtland one morning, after midnight, and cried, "Woe! woe! unto the inhabitants of this place." I put my pants and shoes on, took my cowhide, went out, and laying hold of him, jerked him round, and assured him that if he did not stop his noise and let the people enjoy their sleep without interruption, I would cowhide him on the spot, for we had the Lord's Prophet right here, and we did not want the devil's prophet yelling round the streets. The nuisance was forthwith abated.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 17-18.

Joseph is falsely arrested five times; each time he is released; he then goes on a mission to Canada.

I started from Kirtland on a mission to the east, accompanying the Prophet Joseph, his brother Hyrum, David W. Patten, Sidney Rigdon and Thomas B. Marsh, on their way to Canada. When we arrived at Painesville, the Prophet was arrested by an officer for some pretended debt. Joseph immediately entered into trial before the court, which found no cause of action. After his release he was again arrested and brought before the court, when he was again dismissed. He was arrested the third time, and on examination was held over to trial. Brother Anson Call, who had lately joined the Church, stepped forward and proffered to become his bail.

The sheriff, who was personally acquainted with Brother Call, took him to one side and advised him strongly against being bail for the Prophet, asserting the Prophet would be sure to abscond, and he would lose his farm; but Brother Call willingly became his bail. On being released he was arrested a fourth time, for a debt of a few dollars, which was paid forthwith, and the fifth time he was arrested, which cause was soon disposed of, and he concluded to return to Kirtland for the night. As he got into his buggy, an officer also jumped in, and catching the lines with one hand, put his other hand on Joseph's shoulder and said, "Mr. Smith, you are my prisoner."

Joseph inquired what was the cause of action. The officer informed him that a gentleman, a few months previous, had left a stove with him, for the price of which he was sued. Brother Joseph replied, "I never wished to purchase the stove, but the gentleman insisted on putting it up in my house, saying it would bring him custom." Joseph left his watch and other property in security, and we returned home to Kirtland.

Next day we started again, and traveled by land as far as Ashtabula, shunning Painesville and other places where we suspected our enemies were laying in wait to annoy Joseph. We tarried in Ashtabula through the day, wandering over the bluffs, through the woods and on the beach of the lake, bathing ourselves in her beautiful waters, until evening, when a steamboat arrived from the west. We went on board and took passage for Buffalo. I gave the Prophet my valise for a pillow, and I took his boots for mine, and we all laid down on the deck of the vessel for the night.

We arrived in Buffalo early the next morning. Joseph and the brethren proceeded to Canada.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 21-22.

Apostates seek to overthrow Joseph; conference is held, and Joseph is sustained by the vote of the conference.

September 3 [1837] This day was appointed for the Saints to meet in conference to reorganize the Church. Owing to the disaffection existing in the hearts of many, I went to the brethren whose votes could be relied on, early in the morning, and had them occupy the stand and prominent seats. At 9, a.m., the services commenced; Joseph and his first counselor were received, his second counselor: F. [Frederick] G. Williams, was laid over, not being present. The members of the Quorum of the Twelve in good standing, and the authorities, generally, were sustained. We were also enabled to disfellowship those of the Twelve and others seeking to bring disunion and destruction upon the Church. The apostates and disaffected, not being united, were compelled to endure the chagrin of witnessing the accomplishment of the will of God and his Prophet.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 23.

Impoverished, Joseph comes to Brigham for counsel, which he receives and obeys; consequently he has money to meet his needs.

On reaching Dublin, Indiana, I found my brother Lorenzo and Isaac Decker, and a number of other families who had stopped for the winter. Meanwhile the Prophet Joseph, Brothers Sidney Rigdon and George W. Robinson came along. They had fled from Kirtland because of the mobocratic spirit prevailing in the bosoms of the apostates.

Here the Prophet made inquiry concerning a job at cutting cordwood and sawing logs, after which he came to me and said, "Brother Brigham, I am destitute of means to pursue my journey and as you are one of the Twelve Apostles who hold the keys of the kingdom in all the world, I believe I shall throw myself upon you, and look to you for counsel in this case." At first I could hardly believe Joseph was in earnest, but on his assuring me he was, I said, "If you will take my counsel, it will be that you rest yourself and be assured, Brother Joseph, you shall have plenty of money to pursue your journey."

There was a brother named Tomlinson living in the place, who had previously asked my counsel about selling his tavern-stand. I told him if he would do right and obey counsel, he should have opportunity to sell soon, and the first offer he would get would be the best. A few days afterwards Brother Tomlinson informed me he had an offer for his place. I asked him what offer he had; he replied he was offered $500 in money, a team, and $250 in store goods. I told him that was the hand of the Lord to deliver President Joseph Smith from his present necessity.

My promise to Joseph was soon verified. Brother Tomlinson sold his property and gave the Prophet three hundred dollars, which enabled him comfortably to proceed on his journey.

The day Joseph and company started, Isaac Seeley and wife arrived. The house was pretty well littered up. I sat writing to my wife, but I welcomed them to the use of the house and what was left in it. Brother Samuel H. Smith came along, who tarried with me until my Brother Lorenzo returned from Cincinnati, and Brother Decker from Michigan, whose families had gone forward with Joseph. We prepared to follow, and started on, overtaking the Prophet four miles west of Jacksonville, Illinois, where there was a branch of the Church.

After stopping a few days and resting, we proceeded to Quincy, where we found the river frozen over, though it had been broken up. Joseph and I went down to the river and examined the ice. We soon learned that by going through the flatboat which lay the end to the shore, and placing a few planks from the outer end on the ice, we could reach the heavy ice which had floated down the river a few days previous, sufficient to bear up our teams. We hauled our wagons through the boat and on to the ice by hand, then led our horses on to the solid ice, and drove across the river by attaching a rope to the wagon and to the team, so that they would be some distance apart. The last horse which was led on to the ice was Joseph's favorite, Charlie, He broke the ice at every step for several rods.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 24-26; see also Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 3:2.

The axle frame on Brother Barnard's carriage was bent and dysfunctional; Joseph said he would straighten it; Barnard objects, saying it is impossible; Joseph then straightens it and they continue on their journey.

One day while crossing a large prairie, six or eight miles from any house, we crossed a small stream. The ground was frozen deep on each side, and we sprung one of the axletrees of Brother Barnard's carriage. Brother Barnard said we could not travel with it any farther. Brother Joseph looked at it and said, "I can spring that iron axletree back, so that we can go on our journey." Brother Barnard replied, "I am a blacksmith, and used to work in all kinds of iron, and that axletree is bent so far round that to undertake to straighten it would only break it." Brother Joseph answered, "I'll try it." He got a pry, and we sprung it back to its place, and it did not trouble us anymore till we arrived at Far West, March 14, 1838. Brother Barnard, seeing this done, concluded that he would never say again that a thing could not be done when a prophet said it could.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 27.

Describes troubles at Far West; Brigham saw Joseph apprehended by General Lucas.

Many Saints were wounded and murdered by the army, and several women were ravished to death. I saw Brothers Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight and George W. Robinson, delivered up by Colonel Hinkle to General Lucas, but expected they would have returned to the city that evening, or the next morning, according to agreement, and the pledge of the sacred honor of the officers that they should be allowed to do so, but they did not return at all.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 29.

In fulfillment of the prophet's prophesy, the Twelve meet on 26 April 1839 at the temple lot in Far West, lay the cornerstone, and depart for their missions.

Early on the morning of the 26th of April [1839], we held our conference, cut off 31 persons from the Church and proceeded to the building spot of the Lord's house [in Far West, Mo.,] where Elder Cutler, the master workman of the house, then recommenced laying the foundation agreeable to revelation, by rolling up a large stone near the southeast corner.

The following of the Twelve were present:Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page and John Taylor, who proceeded to ordain Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith to the office of the Twelve, to fill the places of those who had fallen. Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer, (who had just been liberated from Richmond Prison, and arrived the evening previous,) were then ordained to the office of the seventies.

The Twelve then offered up vocal prayer in the following order:Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith; after which we sung "Adam-ondi-Ahman," and then we took our leave of the following Saints, agreeably to the revelation, viz.:Alpheus Cutler, Elias Smith, Norman Shearer, William Burton, Stephen Markham, Shadrach Roundy, William O. Clark, John W. Clark, Hezekiah Peck, Darwin Chase, Richard Howard, Mary Ann Peck, Artimesia Grainger, Martha Peck, Sarah Grainger, Theodore Turley, Hyrum Clark and Daniel Shearer.

As the Saints were passing away from the meeting, Brother Turley said to Page and Woodruff, "Stop a bit, while I bid Isaac Russell good-bye;" and knocking at his door, called Brother Russell. His wife answered, "Come init is Brother Turley. Russell replied, "It is not; he left here two weeks ago," and appeared quite alarmed; but on finding it was Turley, asked him to sit down; but he replied, "I cannot; I shall lose my company." "Who is your company?" inquired Russell. "The Twelve." "The Twelve?" "Yes; don't you know that this is the twenty-sixth, and the day the Twelve were to take leave of their friends on the foundation of the Lord's House, to go to the islands of the sea? The revelation is now fulfilled, and I am going with them. Russell was speechless, and Turley bid him farewell.

Thus was this revelation [D&C 115:11] fulfilled, concerning which our enemies said, if all other revelations of Joseph Smith were fulfilled that one should not, as it had day and date to it.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 37-39; see also Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 3:23-25, 336-40, where the Prophet gives the context for these events. These passages from Brigham's history are there quoted.

Meets Joseph after his escape from prison; a joyful reunion.

May 3 [1839] In company with my brethren of the Twelve. I rode out to Mr. Cleveland's to visit Brothers Joseph and Hyrum Smith, it being the first time we had seen them since their release from prison, where they had been confined about six months, and were under sentence of death. They had escaped from prison, and were en route for Quincy, while we were going up to Far West.

It was one of the most joyful scenes of my life to once more strike hands with the Prophets and behold them free from the hands of their enemies; Joseph conversed with us like a man who had just escaped from a thousand oppressions and was now free in the midst of his children.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 39-40.

Joseph says bishops, not seventies, are responsible for the care of the poor.

June 1 [1839] A conference was held in Quincy; President Joseph Smith presided. He informed the seventies it was not the will of God that they should appoint, or have committees to take care of their poor, but that bishops were the authorities that God had specially appointed for that purpose; which counsel was immediately responded to.

25, 26, and 27 [June, 1839] I spent in council with the Presidency and Twelve, receiving much valuable instruction from the Prophet.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 42.

Joseph searches out a site for a city to be called Zarahemla; the brethren dine and counsel in the evening.

July 2 [1839]Brothers Joseph, Hyrum and others came over the river to Montrose, and went out on the prairie and looked out the sight for a city for the Saints, which was called Zarahemla. We dined at Brother Woodruff's; after dinner the Presidency, Twelve, and a few others met at my house; President Hyrum Smith opened the meeting by prayer. Elders W. [Wilford] Woodruff, G. [George] A. Smith and T. Turley were blessed. Brother Hyrum Smith gave the Twelve some good advice; Brother Joseph taught many important and glorious principles calculated to benefit and bless them on their mission, unfolding keys of knowledge whereby to detect Satan and preserve us in the favor of God.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 42-43.

Tells of the healings at Montrose.

President Joseph Smith had taken the sick into his house and dooryard until his house was like an hospital and he had attended upon them until he was taken sick himself and confined to his bed several days.

July 22, 1839, Joseph arose from his bed of sickness, and the power of God rested upon him. He commenced in his own house and door yard, commanding the sick, in the name of Jesus Christ, to arise and be made whole, and they were healed according to his word. He then continued to travel from house to house and from tent to tent upon the bank of the river, healing the sick as he went, until he arrived at the upper stonehouse, where he crossed the river in a boat, accompanied by several of the Quorum of the Twelve, and landed in Montrose.

He walked into the cabin where I was lying sick, and commanded me, in the name of Jesus Christ, to arise and be made whole. I arose and was healed, and followed him and the brethren of the Twelve into the house of Elijah Fordham, who was supposed to be dying, by his family and friends. Joseph stepped to his bedside, took him by the hand and commanded him, in the name of Jesus Christ, to arise and be made whole. His voice was as the voice of God. Brother Fordham instantly leaped from his bed, called for his clothing and followed us into the street.

We then went into the house of Joseph B. Nobles [Noble], who also lay very sick, and he was healed in the same manner, and when, by the power of God granted unto him, Joseph had healed all the sick, he recrossed the river and returned to his home. This was a day never to be forgotten.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 49-50.

Brigham returns from his British mission; he is met by Joseph, who also receives a revelation (Doctrine and Covenants 126) about Brigham.

July 1[1841] We arrived in Nauvoo, and were cordially welcomed by the Prophet Joseph, our families and the Saints.

9th [July, 1841] President Smith called on me at my house, when he received the following revelation:

"Dear and well-beloved Brother Brigham Young, verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Brigham, it is no more required at your hand to leave your family as in times past, for your offering is acceptable to me; I have seen your labor and toil in journeyings for my name. I therefore command you to send my word abroad, and take special care of your family from this time, henceforth, and for ever. Amen."

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 105.

Joseph teaches the Saints about temperance, virtue, charity, and truth.

7th [Nov., 1841] Brother Joseph and several of the Twelve called on me. We went to meeting, when Joseph spoke on temperance, virtue, charity and truth. After the meeting I met with the Twelve and high priests quorum. The word of wisdom was brought up; I expressed my views upon the subject, and said I considered it wisdom to use all things put into our hands according to the best judgment God would give us: wisdom was justified of her children.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 111.

Note: The Prophet gives a summary of some of his remarks in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 4:445-46.

The Prophet presides at the dedication of the baptismal font in the Nauvoo Temple.

8th [Nov., 1841] I attended the dedication of the baptismal font in the Lord's House; President Smith called upon me to offer the dedicatory prayer. This is the first font erected and dedicated for the baptism for the dead in this dispensation.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 111.

Joseph meets in council with the Twelve.

28th [Nov., 1841] Brother Joseph and the Twelve spent the day in council at my house

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 112.

Note: In his notes of this Council meeting, the Prophet wrote: "I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding its precepts, than by any other book" (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 4:461).

Joseph tells the Twelve how he used the Urim and Thummim; he also spoke of the seerstones.

27th [Dec., 1841] I met with the Twelve at Brother Joseph's. He conversed with us in a familiar manner on a variety of subjects, and explained to us the Urim and Thummim which he found with the plates, called in the Book of Mormon the Interpreters. He said that every man who lived on the earth was entitled to a seerstone, and should have one, but they are kept from them in consequence of their wickedness, and most of those who do find one make an evil use of it; he showed us his seerstone.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 112.

Note: In Joseph's summary of this meeting, he says nothing of the Urim and Thummim or of seerstones (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 4:486).

Joseph is elected Mayor of Nauvoo.

19th [June, 1842] I attended city council, Joseph Smith was elected mayor, John C. Bennett having resigned.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 117.

Joseph often had to hide from his enemies.

In the month of July [1842] I attended councils, waited upon the immigrants; and as President Joseph Smith kept concealed from his enemies, I had continual calls from the brethren for counsel, which occupied much of my time.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 120.

Orson Pratt wavers and the Prophet instructs that he be cut off from the Church; Amasa Lyman is ordained in his stead.

Assisted by Elders H. [Heber] C. Kimball and Geo. [George] A. Smith, I spent several days laboring with Elder Orson Pratt, whose mind became so darkened by the influence and statements of his wife, that he came out in rebellion against Joseph, refusing to believe his testimony or obey his counsel. He said he would believe his wife in preference to the Prophet. Joseph told him if he did believe his wife and follow her suggestions, he would go to hell.

We reported to the Prophet that we had labored with Brother Orson [Pratt] diligently in a spirit of meekness, forbearance and long-suffering. He requested us to ordain Brother Amasa Lyman in Brother Orson's stead. After receiving these instructions, we met Brother Orson near my house, and continued to labor with him. He said to us, There is Brother Amasa Lyman in your house, Brother Young; he has been long in the ministry, go in and ordain him in my stead.

20th [Aug., 1842] Brother Orson Pratt was cut off from the Church, and, according to the Prophet's direction, Brothers H. [Heber] C. Kimball, Geo. [George] A. Smith and I ordained Brother Amasa Lyman in his stead.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 121.

Note: While the Prophet mentions the ordination of Amasa Lyman to the Council of the Twelve, he makes no mention of Orson Pratt's excommunication (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 5:120).

Prophet takes measures to counteract the evil influences of John C. Bennett; 380 men respond to mission calls after a conference in which Joseph speaks.

The Prophet also directed us to call a special conference on Monday next, and nominate the elders to go on this important mission, and give them their instructions; and that we should also get the affidavits against Dr. Bennett published, so that the elders might have authentic and strong testimony to lay before the public in relation to those matters.

27th [Aug., 1842] Engaged with Brother Joseph and others, preparing affidavits for the press.

29th [Aug., 1842] Conference convened. Presidents Joseph and Hyrum Smith addressed the Saints; 380 elders volunteered to go immediately on the contemplated mission.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 121-22.

Brigham becomes violently ill; Joseph prophesied he should live and recover.

26th [Nov., 1842] I was suddenly attacked with a slight fit of apoplexy. Next morning I felt quite comfortable; but in the evening, at the same hour that I had the fit the day before, I was attacked with the most violent fever I ever experienced. The Prophet Joseph and Elder Willard Richards visited and administered unto me; the Prophet prophesied that I should live and recover from my sickness. He sat by me for six hours, and directed my attendants what to do for me. In about thirty hours from the time of my being attacked by the fever, the skin began to peel from my body, and I was skinned all over. I desired to be baptized in the river, but it was not until the 14th day that Brother Joseph would give his consent for me to be showered with cold water, when my fever began to break, and it left me on the 18th day. I laid upon my back, and was not turned upon my side for eighteen days.

I laid in a log house, which was rather open; it was so very cold during my sickness, that Brother Isaac Decker, my attendant, froze his fingers and toes while fanning me, with boots, greatcoat and mittens on, and with a fire in the house from which I was shielded by a blanket.

When the fever left me on the 18th day, I was bolstered up in my chair, but was so near gone that I could not close my eyes, which were set in my headmy chin dropped down and my breath stopped. My wife, seeing my situation, threw some cold water in my face; that having no effect, she dashed a handful of strong camphor into my face and eyes, which I did not feel in the least, neither did I move a muscle. She then held my nostrils between her thumb and finger, and placing her mouth directly over mine, blew into my lungs until she filled them with air. This set my lungs in motion, and I again began to breathe. While this was going on I was perfectly conscious of all that was passing around me; my spirit was as vivid as it ever was in my life, but I had no feeling in my body.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 124-25.

Joseph presides at the rebaptism of Elder Orson Pratt.

20th [Jan., 1843] I attended council with the Prophet and the Twelve at my house, in regard to Orson Pratt, who had confessed his sins and manifested deep repentance, which resulted in his baptism and reordination, by the Prophet, to his former standing in the Quorum of the Twelve. Brother Joseph Smith said that he would find another place for Brother Amasa Lyman.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 126.

Note: Amasa Lyman was called as a Counselor to the Prophet Joseph Smith (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 5:255).

Joseph speaks of the importance of building the Nauvoo House.

18 and 19th [April, 1843] Met in council with the Quorum of the Twelve at Joseph's office, when Joseph gave us much instruction pertaining to our labors the ensuing summer, and also gave us directions to wake up the people in relation to the importance of building the Nauvoo House, as there was a prejudice against it, in favor of the temple.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 128.

Joseph administers the endowment to Brigham and gives him instructions on the priesthood.

26th [May, 1843] Met with the Prophet Joseph [Smith], the Patriarch Hyrum [Smith], Brothers Kimball and Richards, Judge James Adams, and Bishop N. [Newel] K. Whitney, receiving our endowments and instructions in the priesthood. The Prophet Joseph administered to us the first ordinances of endowment, and gave us instructions on the priesthood and the new and everlasting covenant.

28 (Sunday)I met with Brothers Joseph, Hyrum, Heber, Willard, Bishop Whitney and Judge Adams when we administered to Brother Joseph the same ordinances of endowment, and of the holy priesthood which he administered unto us.

29Met at 9 a.m., with the same brethren, when Joseph instructed us further in principles pertaining to the holy priesthood.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 129.

Joseph is kidnapped and taken to Dixon, Illinois; the brethren organize to rescue him; Joseph returns to Nauvoo amid great celebration.

13th [June, 1843] In company with my brothers Phinehas H. and Lorenzo D., I went to Brother Decker's. 25th [June] Two p.m., Brother William Clayton having brought news of President Joseph Smith's arrest at Dixon, Brother Hyrum Smith went to the stand and requested the brethren to meet him in half an hour at the Masonic Hall, when three hundred volunteered to go in pursuit of President Joseph Smith and prevent his being taken to Missouri, out of which number several companies were selected to go. The companies agreed to meet in the evening at William Law's, which they did, when Hyrum reported he could not raise means. Wilson Law said, if means were not raised he would not go. I told the brethren to get in readiness and the money would be forthcoming, although at the time I knew not from whence, but in two hours I succeeded in borrowing $700 to defray the expenses of the expedition.

30th [June] Brother Joseph returned to Nauvoo with the brethren who were sent after him. On his entrance into the city, multitudes of the brethren and sisters turned out to meet and greet him, and on this occasion the officers who arrested him, who were still with him, witnessed the devotion and good feeling in the hearts of the Saints towards their Prophet.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 131-32.

During a conversation with a southern Professor, Brigham acknowledges that Joseph had more than one wife; then Brigham provides a rationale for plural marriage.

9th [July, 1843] Left St. Louis at half-past 9 a.m., for Cincinnati, on the steamer Lancet, and had conversation with various gentlemen who were inquiring after "Mormonism," one of whom, a professor in a Southern university, said, "I have heard and read much of your people, and of Joseph Smith, but I have no confidence in newspaper stories, and, if it would be agreeable, I would like to ask a few questions." I told him I would answer any questions he might propose, so far as I was able.

He then asked me if Joseph Smith had more wives than one. I told him I would admit he had. In order to explain the principle, I asked the gentleman if he believed the Bible, and was a believer in the resurrection. He said he was a believer in the Old and New Testament and in the resurrection.

I then asked him if he believed parents and children, husbands and wives would recognize each other in the resurrection. He said he did.

Also, if parents and children would have the same filial feeling towards each other which they have here; and he said he believed they would, and that their affections would be more acute than they were in this life.

I then said, "We see in this life, that amongst Christians, ministers and all classes of men, a man will marry a wife, and have children by her; she dies, and he marries another, and then another, until men have had as many as six wives, and each of them bear children. This is considered all right by the Christian world, inasmuch as a man has but one at a time. Now, in the resurrection this man and all his wives and children are raised from the dead; what will be done with those women and children, and who will they belong to? and if the man is to have but one, which one in the lot shall he have?"

The professor replied, he never thought of the question in this light before, and said he did not believe those women and children would belong to any but those they belonged to in this life.

"Very well," said I, "you consider that to be a pure, holy place in the presence of God, angels, and celestial beings; would the Lord permit a thing to exist in his presence in heaven which is evil? And if it is right for a man to have several wives and children in heaven at the same time, is it not an inconsistent doctrine that a man should have several wives, and children by those wives at the same time, here in this life, as was the case with Abraham and many of the old Prophets? Or is it any more sinful to have several wives at a time than at different times?"

He answered, "I cannot see that it would be any more inconsistent to have more wives in this life than in the next, or to have five wives at one time than at five different times. I feel to acknowledge it is a correct principle and a Bible doctrine, and I cannot see anything inconsistent in it."

After conversing with him upon the organization of the Church, the gospel, and order of the priesthood, he remarked that such an organization possessed within itself all the elements of permanent success and prosperity, and the system of such a government could not be overthrown.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 135-36.

Joseph instructs Brigham and others in the law of Celestial Marriage.

October 23 [1843] With Elders H. [Heber] C. Kimball and Geo. [George] A. Smith I visited the Prophet Joseph, who was glad to see us. We paid him every cent of the means we had collected for the temple and Nauvoo House. He taught us many principles illustrating the doctrine of celestial marriage concerning which God had given him a revelation, July 12th [1843] [D&C 132].

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 154.

Note: The revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 132 was received in 1831, though not recorded until 1843.

Brigham was with Joseph at a prayer meeting and the anointing of Newel Whitney and his wife.

27th [Nov., 1843] I attended prayer meeting in the evening at President Joseph Smith's. Bishop N. [Newel] K. Whitney and wife were anointed.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 154.

Joseph teaches the importance of integrity; he says a lack of integrity leads to apostasy.

30 [Dec., 1843] I attended a meeting with the Quorum in the Assembly Room. President Joseph Smith preached on the principles of integrity, and showed that the lack of sustaining this principle led men to apostasy.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 157.

Joseph advises against certain political involvements which might incite the jealousy of their enemies.

6th [Feb., 1844] Partook of supper at Brother John Taylor's with Joseph, Hyrum, Sidney and the Twelve and their wives. The Twelve discussed the propriety of establishing a moot congress for the purpose of investigating and informing ourselves on the rules of national intercourse, domestic policy and political economy. Joseph advised us not to do it, lest we might excite the jealousy of our enemies.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 160.

Joseph directs that an expedition be formed to explore the Rocky Mountains as a location for the Saints.

21st [Feb., 1844] I met in council. Brother Joseph directed the Twelve to select an exploring company to go to California to select a location for the settlement of the Saints: Jonathan Dunham, David Fulmer, Phinehas H. Young and David D. Yearsley volunteered to go, and Alphonzo Young, James Emmett, George D. Watt and Daniel Spencer were selected to go.

23rd I met with the [First] Presidency and Twelve in relation to the Rocky Mountain expedition, eight more volunteers gave in their names. Brother Joseph gave instructions in relation to the fit out needed. It was agreed that the company should number twenty-five.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 160.

Joseph organizes a Council of Fifty to seek redress for wrongs committed against the Saints.

11th [March, 1844] Joseph commenced the organization of a council for the purpose of taking into consideration the necessary steps to obtain redress for the wrongs which had been inflicted upon us by our persecutors, and also the best manner to settle our people in some distant and unoccupied territory; where we could enjoy our civil and religious rights, without being subject to constant oppression and mobocracy, under the protection of our laws, subject to the constitution.

The council was composed of about fifty members, several of whom were not members of the Church.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 164.

April Conference of 1844: Joseph declares all of North and South America are Zion.

6, 7, 8 and 9 [of April, 1844] I attended a special conference in Nauvoo, the stand was occupied by the [First] Presidency, the Twelve and others, among whom were eleven Lamanite chiefs and braves, it was estimated there were about 20,000 persons present, the conference was addressed by Presidents Joseph, Hyrum and Sidney, myself and Elders H. [Heber] C. Kimball, John Taylor and A. [Amasa] Lyman. The Prophet declared that all North and South America was the land of Zion. At the close of the conference 344 elders volunteered to go on missions.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 165.

Felt a depressing spirit on the day of Joseph's martyrdom but did not know why.

27th [June, 1844] Spent the day in Boston with Brother Woodruff, who accompanied me to the railway station as I was about to take cars to Salem. In the evening, while sitting in the depot waiting, I felt a heavy depression of spirit, and so melancholy I could not converse with any degree of pleasure. Not knowing anything concerning the tragedy enacting at this time in Carthage Jail, I could not assign my reasons for my peculiar feeling.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 169.

Hears the first rumors of the martyrdom.

9th [July, 1844] I heard today, for the first time, the rumors concerning the death of Joseph and Hyrum [Smith].

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 170.

Hears particulars of the martyrdom; remembers immediately the Twelve hold the keys.

16th [July, 1844] While at Brother Bement's house in Peterboro,' I heard a letter read which Brother Livingston had received from Mr. Joseph Powers, of Nauvoo, giving particulars of the murder of Joseph and Hyrum. The first thing which I thought of was, whether Joseph had taken the keys of the kingdom with him from the earth; Brother Orson Pratt sat on my left; we were both leaning back on our chairs. Bringing my hand down on my knee, I said the keys of the kingdom are right here with the Church.

Received a letter from Brother Woodruff confirming the news of the death of the Prophets. I started for Boston; stayed at Lowell all night.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 170-71.

Brigham's letter to his daughter Vilate; he tells of his return to Nauvoo following martyrdom; of learning of the death of Samuel Smith from bilious fever; he says the Saints were like children without a father; also says "the spirit of Joseph is here"; the Church sustained the Twelve, who will organize the Church; the mob seem satisfied now that Joseph and Hyrum are dead; the day Joseph was brought from Carthage "5 barrels of tears shed."

My Dear Daughter Vilate

[See file for full letter, and account of return from Boston]

. . . [While returning] There was a brother came to us in Galena and told us that Brother Samuel Smith was dead; he died with bilious fever. We found many of the friends came down the river they were very glad to see us. We came with perfect safety, [and] arrived home on Tuesday evening, just at dusk. Our families and the Brethren were overjoyed to see us come home, for they were like children without a father, . . . the Brethren prayed with all faith for us to return. I cannot say much about the families of Brothers Joseph and Hyrum Smith for I have not had time to call on them yet. I have been in Council all most all the time since I arrived here, but this much I can say: the Spirit of Joseph is here though we cannot enjoy their persons. Through the great anxiety of the Church there was a conference held last Thursday. The power of the Priesthood was explained and the order thereof, on which the whole Church lifted up there voices and hands for the twelve to move forward and organize the church and lead it as Joseph lead it, which is our indispensable duty to do. We shall organize the church as soon as possible. The Brethren feel well to think the Lord is still merciful to us as a people.

. . . I think the mob are satisfied now they have killed Joseph and Hyrum. . . . It has been a time of mourning. The day that Joseph and Hyrum were brought from Carthage to Nauvoo it was judged by many both in and out of the church that there was more then 5 barrels of tears shed. I cannot dare to think any thing about it. The Twelve will govern all the church affairs; we have appointed the two oldest Bishops in the Church for Trustees who will take the charge of all temporal affair while we attend to the spiritual affairs. We shall organize all the churches through[out all] of the world as soon as possible . . .

"Brigham Young to Vilate Young, Aug. 11, 1844," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling and punctuation have been modernized.

Saints to gather where the keys are.

[3 May 1864] Joseph said that where the keys of the Kingdom were, there would be the place to gather.

Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Elden J. Watson, Publisher, 1968), 149.

Joseph's meaning in saying the people did not know him had to do with his blood and family relations.

When we come to the [family] connections we discover that we all sprung back to the settlement of New England about 200 years ago. It is but a little more than that time when Father Smith, the Goddards, Richards, Youngs and Kimballs were all in one familyas it were. We are all relations. It is only three generations back that Brother Joseph Smith's family were related to this family. There are only three children of Grand father and Grand mother Howethat is, only three families who have embraced the Gospel, but the others must, because the decree has gone forth. I have preached to them myself, I have done my duty and now I have handed them over to other powers for a time. There is a great deal might be explained here this day. I will first set in order before these relations the true order of the Kingdom of God and how the families hereafter will be organized; you have heard Joseph say that the people did not know him; he had his eyes on the relation to blood-relations. Some have supposed that he meant spirit, but it was the blood-relations. This is that he referred to. His descent from Joseph that was sold into Egypt was direct, and the blood was pure in him.

"Minutes of a Meeting of the Richards and Young Families Held in Nauvoo, Ill., Jan. 8, 1845," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 11 (July 1920): 107.

Newspaper made mention of an angel coming to Joseph Smith; the night he received the plates great lights shone in the heavens, which Brigham saw.

I suppose it was the first time that Joseph Smith gave to his Father the account of the finding of the records, when there was printed in the newspaper a short paragraph; it was only about a square inch, but it stated that a young man had seen an angel who had told him where to find an Indian Bible, and it went on to inquire what would happen if it should come forth; should we then know about the origin of the Indians? The night the plates were found, there was a great light in the East and it went to the West and it was very bright although there was no moon at the time. I gazed at it in company with my wife. The light was perfectly clear and remained several hours. It formed into men as if there were great armies in the West; and I then saw in the northwest armies of men come up. They would march to the South West and, then go out of sight. It was a very remarkable occurrence. It passed on, and continued perhaps about two hours. Soon after this the Book of Mormon was printed and came into our section of the country.

"Minutes of a Meeting of the Richards and Young Families Held in Nauvoo, Ill., Jan. 8, 1845," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 11 (July 1920): 109-10.

Early brethren were instructed to preach to their friends.

The Prophet Joseph told us to go and preach to our friends. We did so.

"Minutes of a Meeting of the Richards and Young Families Held in Nauvoo, Ill., Jan. 8, 1845," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 11 (July 1920): 111.

Joseph taught the doctrine of plurality of wives; he also taught that there are certain bounds set, and if one is true to those, the Lord will take him out of the world before he falls.

Moses was a god to his generation, and Joseph was to his. No man could have the Spirit without loving Joseph. In Joseph entered the Spirit of revelation, and it went right to him, and told him the spiritual wife doctrine. It also came upon me when abroad, in such a manner as I have never forgotten. There is one blood which particular things belong to, after all, we are of one blood and one flesh-all the nations of the earth. Joseph said to me, "I command you to go and get another wife." I felt as if the grave was better for me than anything. But I was so filled with the Holy Ghost that my wife and Brother Kimball's wife would upbraid me for lightness in those days. I could jump up and hollow. My blood seemed clear as India Rum, my flesh was that clear also. I said to Joseph, "Suppose I should apostatize. Would my family not be worse off?" Joseph said, "There are certain bounds set to men and if a man is faithful and pure to those bounds, God will take him out of the world if he sees that man falter. He will take him to himself. And you have passed these bounds, Brigham, and have this consolation."

But I never had any fears of not being saved. . . .

"Brigham Young Remarks, 16 Feb. 1849," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The Law of Tithing was revealed through Joseph; an explanation of how tithes should be paid.

Afterwards President Young gave some instructions on the law of tithing. The Lord himself instituted the principle through Joseph the Prophet, and that is for all the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to pay one tenth of all they have to begin with, and afterwards, one tenth of their increase; after some further observations he said we want to build a large house and farm to put the poor on, as soon as they arrive here, we want only your tenth. I ask not that of my brethren but what I am willing to give myself, and what I do as your leader or president, you should be willing to do the same.

"Brigham Young Remarks, 8 April 1850," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 17.

The Prophet's vision laid out enough work for twenty years; Joseph also said he had not apostatized.

Joseph laid out as much work as we can do for twenty years. I have no disposition to seek more till I see those we have obeyed.

. . . When we have the Spirit of the Lord we work together in oneness and we shall accomplish the designs sooner or later, Joseph used to say, "don't be scared. I have not apostatized yet!" And he did not! I say brethren, I have not apostatized, and there are a good many who have not.

"Brigham Young Remarks, 7 October 1850," typescript copy, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 14.

Emma burned the original copy of Doctrine and Covenants 132, but Bishop Whitney had a copy; a U.S. Senator knew Joseph had plural wives; Joseph wrote many other revelations also.

You heard brother Pratt state, this morning, that a revelation would be read this afternoon, which was given previous to Joseph's death. It contains a doctrine a small portion of the world is opposed to; but I can deliver a prophecy upon it. Though that doctrine has not been practiced by the Elders, this people have believed in it for years.

The original copy of this revelation was burnt up. William Clayton was the man who wrote it from the mouth of the Prophet. In the meantime, it was in Bishop Whitney's possession. He wished the privilege to copy it, which brother Joseph granted. Sister Emma burnt the original. The reason I mention this is because that the people who did know of the revelation suppose it is not now in existence.

The revelations will be read to you. The principle spoken upon by brother Pratt, this morning, we believe in. and I tell youfor I know itit will sail over and ride triumphantly above all the prejudice and priestcraft of the day: it will be fostered and believed in by the more intelligent portion of the world as one of the best doctrines ever proclaimed to any people. Your hearts need not bear; you need not think that a mob is coming here to tread upon the sacred liberty which the Constitution of our country guarantees unto us, for it will not be. The world have known, long ago, even in brother Joseph's days, that he had more wives than one. One of the Senators in Congress knew it very well. Did he oppose it? No: but he has been our friend all the day long, especially upon that subject. He said pointedly to his friends, "If the United States do not adopt that very methodlet them continue as they now arepursue the precise course they are now pursuing, and it will come to thisthat their generations will not live until they are 30 years old. They are going to destruction; disease is spreading so fast among the inhabitants of the United States, that they are born rotten with it, and in a few years they are gone." Said he, "Joseph has introduced the best plan for restoring and establishing strength and long life among men, of any man on earth; and the Mormons are a very good and virtuous people."

Many others are of the same mind: they are not ignorant of what we are doing in our social capacity. They have cried, "Proclaim it." But it would not do, a few years ago: everything must come in its time, as there is a time to all things. I am now ready to proclaim it.

This revelation has been in my possession many years; and who has known it? None but those who should know it. I keep a patent lock on my desk, and there does not anything leak out that should not.

It pleases me a little to think how anxious this people are for new revelation. I wish to ask you a question: Do this people know whether they have received any revelation since the death of Joseph, as a people? I can tell you that you receive them continually. I would be willing the Elders of Israel should understand one principle; and this I have taught often. This is also taught in the old and new Scriptures, or, in other words, in the former and latter Scriptures, The principle is set forth simply, which is thisWhen a man is called, as Joseph was, to be a Prophet, he writes his revelations. Joseph wrote a great many. He would, for instance, give a revelation to a man to go to Sanpete to labor; he would give revelations touching both temporal and spiritual things, in the building up of houses and cities, or in the proclamation of the Gospel in the worldall of which are necessary for the salvation and exaltation of the people of the Lord.

Journal of Discourses, 6:281-82 (August 29, 1852).

Now is the time for Zion to flourish and be favored.

I feel to say to Jew and to Gentile, Let this people alone in these valleys of the mountains, or you will find that which you are not looking for. We are on the Lord's side, and we have the tools to work with. But shall this people sink? No. The time has come that Israel shall be redeemed, and they never shall lie trampled under foot again. Now is the time; Joseph told us, before he was killed, the set time to favor Zion had come.

Journal of Discourses, 1:84 (March 27, 1853).

Apostleship embraces all the keys.

It was William E. McLellin who told Joseph, that I and Heber were not ordained High Priests, and wanted to know if it should not be done. Said Joseph, "Will you insult the Priesthood? Is that all the knowledge you have of the office of an Apostle? Do you not know that the man who receive the Apostleship, receives all the keys that ever were, or that can be, conferred upon mortal man? What are you talking about? I am astonished!" Nothing more was said about it.

Journal of Discourses, 1:137 (April 6, 1853).

The Lamanites must repent or perish.

We may yet have to fight [the Lamanites], though they are of the house of Israel to whom the message of salvation is sent; for their wickedness is so great, that the Lord Almighty cannot get at the hearts of the older ones to teach them saving principles. Joseph Smith said we should have to fight them. He said, "When this people mingle among the Lamanites, if they do not bow down in obedience to the Gospel, they will hunt them until there is but a small remnant of them left upon this continent." They have either got to bow down to the Gospel or be slain. Shall we slay them simply because they will not obey the Gospel? No. But they will come to us and try to kill us, and we shall be under the necessity of killing them to save our own lives.

Journal of Discourses, 1:171 (July 31, 1853).

Joseph received his wisdom from God.

Joseph Smith said to this people, that all the wisdom he had was received from the hand of the Lord. All the knowledge, wisdom, economy, and every business transaction pertaining to human life in connection with the spiritual kingdom of God on the earth, is given unto us as individuals, or as a community, from the liberal hand of God.

Journal of Discourses, 1:78 (September 11, 1853).

Joseph prophesied he would not live to be forty.

Who delivered Joseph Smith from the hands of his enemies to the day of his death? It was God; though he was brought to the brink of death time and time again, and, to all human appearance, could not be delivered, and there was no probability of his being saved. When he was in jail in Missouri, and no person expected that he would ever escape from their hands, I had the faith of Abraham, and told the brethren, "As the Lord God liveth, he shall come out of their hands." Though he had prophesied that he would not live to be forty years of age, yet we all cherished hopes that that would be a false prophecy, and we should keep him for ever with us; we thought our faith would outreach it, but we were mistakenhe at last fell a martyr to his religion. I said, "It is all right; now the testimony is in full force; he has sealed it with his blood, and that makes it valid."

Journal of Discourses, 1:364 (August 1, 1852).

Joseph's compassionate nature made it difficult for him to maintain a store.

Now, for instance, a great many inquire, saying, "Why does not our Church keep a store here?" Many can answer that question, who have lived here for some years past; and you who make such an inquiry, would have known the reason, had you also lived here. You that have lived in Nauvoo, in Missouri, in Kirtland, Ohio, can you assign a reason why Joseph could not keep a store, and be a merchant? Let me just give you a few reasons, and there are men here who know how matters went in those days. Joseph goes to New York and buys 20,000 dollars' worth of goods, comes into Kirtland and commences to trade. In comes one of the brethren, "Brother Joseph, let me have a frock pattern for my wife." What if Joseph says, "No, I cannot without the money." The consequence would be, "He is no prophet," says James. Pretty soon Thomas walks in. "Brother Joseph, will you trust me for a pair of boots?" "No, I cannot let them go without the money." "Well," says Thomas, "Brother Joseph is no prophet; I have found that out, and I am glad of it." After awhile, in comes Bill and Sister Susan. Says Bill, "Brother Joseph, I want a shawl, I have not got the money, but I wish you to trust me a week or a fortnight." Well, Brother Joseph thinks the others have gone and apostatized, and he don't know but these goods will make the whole Church do the same, so he lets Bill have a shawl. Bill walks off with it and meets a brother. "Well," says he, "what do you think of Brother Joseph?" "O he is a first- rate man, and I fully believe he is a prophet. See here, he has trusted me this shawl." Richard says, "I think I will go down and see if he won't trust me some." In walks Richard. "Brother Joseph, I want to trade about 20 dollars." "Well," says Joseph, "these goods will make the people apostatize; so over they go, they are of less value than the people." Richard gets his goods. Another comes in the same way to make a trade of 25 dollars, and so it goes. Joseph was a first- rate fellow with them all the time, provided he never would ask them to pay him. In this way it is easy for us to trade away a first-rate store of goods, and be in debt for them.

Journal of Discourses, 1:215 (October 9, 1852).

Joseph not "the Stone of Israel"; a belief in false Messiahs is destructive.

When Martin [Harris] was with Joseph Smith, he was continually trying to make the people believe that he (Joseph) was the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel. I have heard Joseph chastise him severely for it, and he told me that such a course, if persisted in, would destroy the kingdom of God. Who else ever said that Joseph Smith was anything but an unlearned son of a backwoodsman; who had all his lifetime, ever since he would handle an ax, helped his father to support his little family by cutting wood?

Journal of Discourses, 2:127 (April 17, 1853).

On temple building and unnecessary revelations.

Concerning revelations pertaining to building temples, I will give you the words of our beloved Prophet while he was yet living upon the earth. Many of us that are here to-day, were with him from the commencement of the church. He was frequently speaking upon the building of temples in Kirtland, Missouri, and Illinois. When the people refused in Kirtland to build a temple, unless by a special revelation, it grieved his heart that they should be so penurious in their feelings as to require the Lord to command them to build a house to His name. It was not only grievous to him, but to the Holy Spirit also. He frequently said, that if it were not for the covetousness of the people, the Lord would not give revelations concerning the building of temples, for we already knew all about them; the revelations giving us the order of the Priesthood make known to us what is wanting in that respect at our hands. If you should go to work to build a dwelling house, you know you would want a kitchen, a buttery, sitting rooms, bedrooms, halls, passages, and alleys. He said, you might as well ask the Lord to give revelation upon the dimensions and construction of the various apartments of your dwelling houses, as upon the erection of temples, for we know before hand what is necessary.

Journal of Discourses, 1:277-78 (February 14, 1853).

Parley Pratt to build a temple in Scotland.

I will venture to say, that brother Parley P. Pratt has got a job on hand infinitely more extensive than the walling in of the whole territory of Utah. His work was given to him sixteen years ago, by the Prophet Joseph Smith, in the Kirtland Temple. Parley P. Pratt has yet to build temples in old Scotland.

Journal of Discourses, 1:77 (September 11, 1853).

All things temporal belong to God.

The doctrine of brother Joseph is, that not one dollar you possess is your own; and if the Lord wants it to use, let it go, and it is none of your business what He does with it.

Journal of Discourses, 1:340 (December 5, 1853).

Constitution is to hang by a thread and the elders are to step forward and save it.

Will the Constitution be destroyed? No: it will be held inviolate by this people; and, as Joseph Smith said, "The time will come when the destiny of the nation will hang upon a single thread. At that critical juncture, this people will step forth and save it from the threatened destruction." It will be so.

Journal of Discourses, 7:15 (July 4, 1854).

Joseph prophesies that Brigham and his family will live while Brigham is away on a mission.

When I left my family to start for England, I was not able to walk one mile, I was not able to lift a small trunk, which I took with me, into the wagon. I left my wife and my six children without a second suit to their backs, for we had left all our property in possession of the mob. Every one of my family were sick, and my then youngest child, who has spoken before you to-day, was but ten days old at the time I left for England. Joseph said, "If you will go, I promise you, that your family shall live, and you shall live, and you shall know that the hand of God is in calling you to go and preach the Gospel of life and salvation to a perishing world." He said all he could say to comfort and encourage the brethren. This was our situation, and I say, with regard to the remainder of the Twelve, they had all been driven like myself, and we were a band of brethren about equal. My family lived.

Journal of Discourses, 2:19 (July 24, 1854).

Joseph always exercising faith: "I have not apostatized."

I recollect many times when brother Joseph, reflecting upon how many would come into the Kingdom of God and go out again, would say, "Brethren, I have not apostatized yet, and don't feel like doing so." Many of you, no doubt, can call to mind his words. Joseph had to pray all the time, exercise faith, live his religion, and magnify his calling, to obtain the manifestations of the Lord, and to keep him steadfast in the faith.

Journal of Discourses, 2:257 (April 6, 1855).

Joseph's metaphor illustrating the need for obedience to the Lord's order.

You used to hear brother Joseph tell about this people being crowded into the little end of the horn, and if they kept straight ahead they were sure to come out at the big end. It is so with some Elders who go on missions; while many who go into the big end of the horn, and are so full of fancied intelligence, preaching, counsel, knowledge, and power, when they go out into the world, either have to turn around and come back, or be crowded out at the little end of the horn.

Journal of Discourses, 2:268 (April 8, 1855); see also Journal of Discourses, 3:23.

Effects of the Holy Ghost on gentile blood.

Again, if a pure Gentile firmly believes the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and yields obedience to it, in such a case I will give you the words of the Prophet Joseph"When the Lord pours out the Holy Ghost upon that individual he will have spasms, and you would think that he was going into fits."

Joseph said that the Gentile blood was actually cleansed out of their veins, and the blood of Jacob made to circulate in them; and the revolution and change in the system were so great that it caused the beholder to think they were going into fits.

Journal of Discourses, 2:269 (April 8, 1855).

During the millennium, men will live to the "age of a tree."

It is for us to stop the tide of physical degeneracyto lay the foundation for a return to the position from which the human family has fallen. We have that privilege, by keeping ourselves pure. If we take the right course, our children will live longer than we shall, and their children will surpass their fathers, and have longer life, and so on, till they obtain to the age of those who lived in the early period of the world. The Prophet, speaking of the Saints in the last days, said, "For as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands."

Journal of Discourses, 2:270 (April 8, 1855); see also Doctrine and Covenants 101:30.

Joseph said the people were not able to bear all the revelations he had received.

Joseph said, twenty-two years ago, "Brother Brigham, if I were to tell this people all the revelations I have, every man would leave me." I do not want to know things faster than I can obey. Everything that is received must be lived up to by the people, and when this people are ready to receive further light, I promise you in the name of Israel's God it will be given every son and daughter . . ."

"Deseret Theological Institute, Minutes of (2 May) 1855," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar and spelling have been modernized.

Joseph insisted on obedience to the laws of the nation.

If a person belonging to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was guilty of stealing while living in the States, or if any of that Church were found guilty of murder, or any other transgression of the civil law, they ought to have been tried by the law, and have received the punishment affixed to the crime. Did any of the Latter-day Saints object to that! No, not one. Joseph the Prophet never objected to it, but on the contrary he urged it, prayed for it, and wished the Church to be delivered from all transgressors

Journal of Discourses, 2:311 (July 8, 1855).

Joseph prophesied the exodus to Rocky Mountains.

The Prophet Joseph has been referred to, and his prophecy that this people would leave Nauvoo and be planted in the midst of the Rocky Mountains. We see it fulfilled. This prophecy is not a new thing, it has not been hid in the dark, nor locked up in a drawer, but it was declared to the people long before we left Nauvoo. We see the invisible hand of Providence in all this; we realize that His hand has wrought out our salvation.

Journal of Discourses, 3:257-58 (March 16, 1856).

Men are commanded to repent.

The Lord said to the people through Joseph, "You must keep the law here, and be careful to repent of your sins." Occasionally a man's name would be mentioned, and he might be pointed out as a pattern for the rest.

Journal of Discourses, 3:335 (June 15, 1856).

Jospeh prophesied the Saints would flee to the Rocky Mountains.

Previous to the death of Joseph, he said that the time would come when the Saints would be glad to take a bundle, if they could get one, under their arms and start to the mountains, and that they would flee there, and that if they could pick up a change of linen they would be glad to start with that, and to go into the wilderness with anything, in order to escape from the destruction that is coming on the inhabitants of the earth. This we believed, or at least I did; though it seemed to be pretty hard that people should be obliged to leave their houses, farms, friends, and comforts that they had gathered around them, and run from them all.

Journal of Discourses, 4:203 (February 1, 1857).

Joseph tells Orson Hyde that boundless space is not filled with the Holy Spirit.

Brother Hyde was upon this same theory once, and in conversation with brother Joseph Smith advanced the idea that eternity or boundless space was filled with the Spirit of God, or the Holy Ghost. After portraying his views upon that theory very carefully and minutely, he asked brother Joseph what he thought of it? He replied that it appeared very beautiful, and that he did not know of but one serious objection to it. Says brother Hyde, "What is that?" Joseph replied, "it is not true."

Journal of Discourses, 4:266 (March 8, 1857); see also Wilford Woodruff, Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 2:60, 85.

Spirits innocent and pure at birth.

You will see people possessed of different spirits; but I will say to you what I have heretofore frequently said, and what brother Joseph Smith has said, and what the Scripture teaches, your spirits when they came to take tabernacles were pure and holy, and prepared to receive knowledge, wisdom, and instruction, and to be taught while in the flesh; so that every son and daughter of Adam, if they would apply their minds to wisdom, and magnify their callings and improve upon every grace and means given them. . . . There is no spirit but what was pure and holy when it came here from the celestial world. There is no spirit among the human family that was begotten in hell; none that were begotten by angels, or by any inferior being. They were not produced by any being less than our Father in heaven. He is the Father of our spirits.

Journal of Discourses, 4:268 (March 8, 1857).

Joseph's life to be preserved until his mission completed.

Jesus had a work to do on the earth. He performed his mission, and then was slain for his testimony. So it has been with every man who has been fore-ordained to perform certain important missions. Joseph truly said, "No power can take away my life, until my work is done." All the powers of earth and hell could not take his life, until he had completed the work the Father gave him to do; until that was done, he had to live. When he died he had a mission in the spirit world, as much so as Jesus had.

Journal of Discourses, 4:285 (March 15, 1857).

Saints should have confidence in their leaders.

To say nothing of names, creeds, or titles, brother Joseph taught, and it is taught to the people now continually, to have implicit confidence in our leaders to be sure that we live so that Christ is within us a living fountain, that we may have the Holy Ghost within us to actuate, dictate, and direct us every hour and moment of our lives.

Journal of Discourses, 4:298 (March 29, 1857).

Joseph had faith that he would rise above all evil.

Joseph said, years ago, that he had all hell on his back, and all the world. All the evil influences that knew anything about him were combined to crush him; but, said he, "I will rise above them all, and bear off the kingdom;" and so he did, until he was slain.

Journal of Discourses, 4:352 (June 7, 1857).

Joseph prophesied Zion's Camp would be cursed because of evil.

While brother Heber was talking about our travels in 1834, I remember that brother Joseph said the camp should be cursed. We had some wicked men in the company, and Joseph discerned the spirits of those men, and said that the camp should be cursed and that they should feel the heavy hand of the Lord.

Journal of Discourses, 5:257 (September 20, 1857).

Joseph to Brigham: "You have just begun to work."

I am thankful that I do not hear, of late, since the Spirit has been generally diffused among the people, "O Lord, give revelation through brother Brigham." I wish to fulfill what we have received before I ask for more. I said to brother Joseph, the spring before he was killed, "you are laying out work for twenty years." He replied, "You have as yet scarcely began to work; but I will set you enough to last you during your lives, for I am going to rest."

Journal of Discourses, 5:331 (October 7, 1857).

We must act on the revelations we have in order to grow.

Many years ago, the Prophet Joseph observed that if the people would have received the revelations he had in his possession, and wisely acted upon them, as the Lord would dictate, they might, in their power to do and understand, have been many years ahead of what they then were. Experience has taught us that it requires time to acquire certain branches of mechanism, also all principles and ideas that we wish to become masters of. The closer people apply their minds to any correct purpose the faster they can grow and increase in the knowledge of the truth.

Journal of Discourses, 6:94 (November 29, 1857).

Angels to fight the battles of the righteous.

Are the Latter-day Saints ready to receive Zion from above? Have they wisdom and knowledge to receive and conduct themselves properly in the society of angels? I think not. While I was in Far West, and the mob began to gather there, determined to kill Joseph, he preached to the people and said, "If you had faith and would live your religion, you would prove the revelation to be true where the Lord says, 'I will fight your battles, and, if necessary, send down angels to save you from the wicked grasp of your enemies.'" There was an armed mob of some 3,500 arrayed against some 300 of us. They sent in a deputation, saying they wanted about three persons out of the town, for they were calculating to destroy the people and the place. Some of those self-glorious stars of "Mormonism"stars that fell in that crisis, looked round for the angels. They did not see them, and straightway turned their backs upon their God and their religion, and joined the enemy.

Journal of Discourses, 7:143 (May 22, 1859).

God watched over Joseph's family and lineage from the beginning.

I told you that the doctrine of election and reprobation is a true doctrine. It was decreed in the counsels of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that he should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth the word of God to the people, and receive the fullness of the keys and power of the priesthood of the Son of God. The Lord had his eye upon him, and upon his father, and upon his father's father, and upon their progenitors clear back to Abraham, and from Abraham to the flood, from the flood to Enoch, and from Enoch to Adam. He has watched that family and that blood as it has circulated from its fountain to the birth of that man. He was foreordained in eternity to preside over this last dispensation, as much so as Pharaoh was fore-ordained to be a wicked man, or as was Jesus to be the Savior of the world because he was the oldest son in the family.

Journal of Discourses, 7:289-90 (October 9, 1859).

Note: This is not Joseph, but Brigham speaking.

Bones of Missouri mobbers to bleach the plains.

It was prophesied by Joseph the Prophet that the bones of those who drove the Church from Missouri, and killed men, women, and children, should bleach upon the Plains. This has been fulfilled. Did they suffer more than the people of God whom they drove from their homesfrom their firesides in winterfrom their fathers and mothers and friends, and the land of their nativity? Yes, there is scarcely a comparison. Their sufferings in crossing the Plains to the gold regions of California have been greater by far than ever the sufferings of the Saints have been in crossing the Plains to Utah. These are facts that are present with us. The bones of those who drove the Saints from Independence, from Jackson County, then from Clay and Davis Counties, and last of all from Caldwell County, from whence they fled into Illinois, have been scattered over the Plainsgnawed and broken by wild beasts, and are there bleaching to this day, while the Saints who have died on the Plains have, without an exception, had a decent burial where they have died,have had friends to condole with and comfort them in their dying moments, and to mourn for a season with their bereaved relatives.

Journal of Discourses, 9:101-2 (January 5, 1860).

Elders and Twelve to be tempted by females.

When the Quorum of the Twelve was first organized, Joseph said that the Elders of Israel, and particularly the Twelve Apostles, would receive more temptations, be more buffeted, and have greater difficulty to escape the evil thrown in their way by females than by any other means. This is one of Satan's most powerful auxiliaries with which to weaken the influence of the ministers of Christ, and bring them down from their high position and calling into darkness, shame, and disgrace.

Journal of Discourses, 8:55 (April 25, 1860).

Elders are to build up Zion, not the world.

In Kirtland, in 1833, the Prophet Joseph told the Elders that if they would do rightwould promote the kingdom of God upon the earth, as they professed they desired to do, they would take his counsel to never put forth their hands to do another days work to build up a Gentile city. From that day to this, I do not know that I have done one hours work contrary to that counsel . . .

Journal of Discourses, 8:277 (June 3, 1860).

The wicked will destroy the wicked.

If I have faith enough to cause the devils to eat up the devils, like the Kilkenny cats, I shall certainly exercise it. Joseph Smith said that they would eat each other up, as did those cats. They will do so here, and throughout the world. The nations will consume each other, and the Lord will suffer them to bring it about.

Journal of Discourses, 8:143 (August 12, 1860).

Misunderstanding a prophet's role, the people expected undue holiness.

I remember Joseph Smith's saying, "If I were as pure and holy as you wish me to be, I could not stay with you; I should not be here to guide and direct you, for the Lord would take me from you." He did take him; the people were not worthy of him.

Journal of Discourses, 8:189 (September 30, 1860).

Nations to break to shivers.

The scripture concerning the five wise and five foolish virgins will be fulfilled, as will also the revelation that was given to Joseph about the nations breaking to shivers. . . .

Journal of Discourses, 8:196 (October 7, 1860).

Joseph would have saved the nation if he would have been permitted.

When Joseph Smith rose in the majesty of his calling before God, he saw what we are now hearing of through dispatches received from week to week. The nation is ruined, and will crumble to pieces. They will destroy themselves. Joseph rose up and said"I will save them, if they will let me." He stepped forth like a man and proffered his services to save the nation that is now breaking; and he would have saved it, if they had permitted him. What did they bestow upon him in return? They made a martyr of him; . . .

Journal of Discourses, 8:320 (February 10, 1861).

Sorrow and misery will besiege the American nation (a reference to the American Civil War).

I have heard Joseph say, "You will see the sorrows and misery that will be upon this land, until you will turn away and pray that your eyes may not be obliged to look upon it." Said he, "There are men in this Council that will live to see the affliction that will come upon this nation, until their hearts sink within them." He did not live here to see it, though he will see it. Can you endure the sight of it? No. Boast not over the misery of your fellow-men. God will fulfill his purposes.

Journal of Discourses, 8:325 (February 10, 1861); see also Jedediah M. Grant, Journal of Discourses 2:1147.

Saints to be blessed an hundred fold.

We shall send and bring up the poor, and shall build, and continue to increase in our ability. Every time we put forth our ability. Every time we put forth our ability to do good and build up the kingdom of God, according to the means the Lord bestows upon us, our means and ability will be doubled and trebled. Yes, we shall receive tenfold, and, as Joseph said, an hundred fold. Have we witnesses of this? Yes, plenty of witnesses.

Journal of Discourses, 8:337 (February 17, 1861).

Joseph counsels to start small: "go in at little end of the horn."

I recollect one remark that brother Joseph used to make frequently, when talking to the Elders. No matter what he set them to do, whether he wanted them to go to a foreign land on a mission, or to go into business, he would say, "When you commence, go in at the little end of the horn; for if you do not, but enter at the big end, you will either have to turn round and come out at the end you went in at, or go out at the small end and be squeezed nigh unto death." Let an Elder hire the best halls in large cities to begin with, and go to lecturing, and it will take him a long time to raise a Branch of this Church. But let him begin among the poor of the earththose who live in the cellars, and garrets, and back streets; "for," says the Almighty, "I am going to take the weak things of the earth, and with them confound the wisdom of the wise."

Journal of Discourses, 8:354 (March 3, 1861).

Joseph prophesies the fate of the Missouri and Illinois Mobocrats.

I will tell you another prophecy of Joseph's, of which both Jews and Gentiles are my witnesses. Joseph said that the bones of hundreds of the Missouri and Illinois mobocrats, who drove the Saints from those States, should bleach on the plains, and their flesh should be meat for wolves. Are you witnesses to that, in coming over the Plains? Yes, hundreds and hundreds of those characters that started to go to the gold mines, their flesh was meat for the wolves, and their bones are there bleaching to-day, so far as they have not been buried, or entirely rotted away. That is another prophecy of Joseph's.

Journal of Discourses, 8:357 (March 3, 1861).

Mobocrats to be filled with mobbings.

I heard Joseph Smith say, nearly thirty years ago, "They shall have mobbing to their heart's content, if they do not redress the wrongs of the Latter-day Saints." Mobs will not decrease, but will increase until the whole Government becomes a mob, and eventually it will be State against State, city against city, neighborhood against neighborhood, Methodists against Methodists, and so on.

Journal of Discourses, 9:5 (April 6, 1861).

Joseph calls the Twelve and the Seventy; his demeanor changed when he was receiving revelation.

After we returned from Missouri, my brother Joseph Young and myself had been singing after preaching in a meeting; and when the meeting was dismissed, brother Joseph Smith said, "Come, go down to my house with me." We went and sung to him a long time, and talked with him. He then opened the subject of the Twelve and Seventies for the first time I ever thought of it. He said, "Brethren, I am going to call out Twelve Apostles. I think we will get together, by-and-by, and select Twelve Apostles, and select a Quorum of Seventies from those who have been up to Zion, out of the camp boys." In 1835, the last of January or in February, or about that time, we held our meetings from day today, and brother Joseph called out Twelve Apostles at that time. He had a revelation when we were singing to him. Those who were acquainted with him knew when the Spirit of revelation was upon him, for his countenance wore an expression peculiar to himself while under that influence. He preached by the Spirit of revelation, and taught in his council by it, and those who were acquainted with him could discover it at once, for at such times there was a peculiar clearness and transparency in his face. He followed up that revelation until he organized the Church, and so along until the baptism of the dead was revealed.

Journal of Discourses, 9:89 (May 7, 1861).

Joseph could not worship a God who had no Father.

Brother Kimball quoted a saying of Joseph the Prophet, that he would not worship a God who had not a Father; and I do not know that he would if he had not a mother; the one would be as absurd as the other. If he had a Father, he was made in his likeness. And if he is our Father we are made after his image and likeness. He once possessed a body, as we now do; and our bodies are as much to us, as his body to him.

Journal of Discourses, 9:286 (February 23, 1862).

Revelations come to the spirit, not the tabernacle of man.

We have received these bodies for an exaltation, to be crowned with those who have been crowned with crowns of glory and eternal life. Yes, Joseph Smith said, the Lord whispers to the spirit in the tabernacle the same as though it were out of it. That is correct and true.

Journal of Discourses, 9:287 (February 23, 1862).

Saints were unready to receive all that Joseph knew.

Joseph said to me in Kirtland, "Brother Brigham, if I was to reveal to this people what the Lord has revealed to me, there is not a man or a woman would stay with me." In the day of prosperity now the people are slow to follow the Lord. If he were now to bless this people with gold and silver, houses and lands, with everything to make them wealthy and comfortable here in Deseret or Utah, a great many would turn away from him to worship their idols.

Journal of Discourses, 9:294 (May 25, 1862).

On the Bible as treason.

Joseph Smith was arraigned before Judge Austin A. King, on a charge of treason. The Judge inquired of Mr. Smith, "Do you believe and teach the doctrine that in the course of time the Saints will possess the earth?" Joseph replied that he did. "Do you believe that the Lord will raise up a kingdom that will fill the whole earth and rule over all other kingdoms, as the Prophet Daniel has said?" "Yes, sir, I believe that Jesus Christ will reign king of nations as he does king of Saints." "Write that down, clerk; we want to fasten upon him the charge of treason, for if he believes this, he must believe that the State of Missouri will crumble and fall to rise no more." Lawyer Doniphan said to the Judge, "damn it, Judge, you had better make the Bible treason and have done with it."

Journal of Discourses, 9:331 (August 3, 1862); see also Journal of Discourses, 10:320; 19:61.

Joseph testified of Christ.

Joseph told us that Jesus was the Christ, the Mediator between God and man, and the Savior of the world. He told us that there was no other name in the heavens nor under the heavens, neither could there be, by which mankind could be saved in the presence of the Father, but by and through the name and ministry of Jesus Christ, and the atonement he made on Mount Calvary. Joseph also told us that the Savior requires strict obedience to all the commandments, ordinances and laws pertaining to his kingdom, and that if we would do this we should be made partakers of all the blessings promised in his Gospel.

Journal of Discourses, 9:365 (August 31, 1862).

Joseph said he could save the nation.

Joseph Smith knew what was coming upon the nation of the United States, and said, "If they will let me, I will save the nation." They would not let him, but treated him as a traitor. They arrested him in Missouri for treason, when he had not said a word with regard to political affairs, but preached the Gospel to his brethren.

Journal of Discourses, 9:368 (August 31, 1862).

Disobedience damns.

When a great blessing is bestowed up a people, and that blessing is not strictly honored and lived to, in proportion to the greatness of that blessing, over and above what has been previously enjoyed, it will be a curse to them. I recollect that Joseph once said to me, when he was taking upon the principle of the Lord's raising up seed to himself upon the eartha royal Priesthood, a holy nation that can offer sacrifices acceptable to God"Brother Brigham, it will damn many of the Elders of Israel." There are but few men in this kingdom that are now worthy of that blessing, yet all who are in full fellowship must enjoy it.

Journal of Discourses, 10:22 (October 6, 1862).

Joseph said he would save the nation if permitted.

[In the context of speaking of the Civil War, and the turmoils that lead to it, Brigham said:] Joseph Smith knew what was coming upon the nation of the United States, and said, "If they will let me, I will save the nation."

"Remarks on August 31, 1862," Deseret News, 22 October 1862.

Joseph predicted the Civil War would "sicken the heart."

The waste of life in the ruinous [Civil War] now raging is truly lamentable. Joseph the Prophet said that the report of it would sicken the heart; and what is all this for? It is a visitation from heaven, because they have killed the Prophet of God, Joseph Smith, jun, Has not the nation consented to his death, and to the utter destruction of the Latter-day Saints, if it could be accomplished? But they found that they could not accomplish that.

. . . Joseph said that if they succeeded in taking his life, which they did, war and confusion would come upon the nation, and they would destroy each other, and there would be mob upon mob from one end of the country to the other.

Journal of Discourses, 10:255 (October 6, 1863); see also Jedediah M. Grant, Journal of Discourses, 2:147.

War predicted, State's rights to be trampled, and the people to feel great sadness.

The war now raging in our nation is in the providence of God, and was told us years and years ago by the Prophet Joseph; and what we are now coming to was foreseen by him, and no power can hinder.

. . . When we appealed to the government of our nation for justice, the answer was: "Your cause is just, but we have no power." Did not Joseph Smith tell them in Washington and Philadelphia, that the time would come when their State rights would be trampled upon?

Joseph said, many and many a time, to us,"Never be anxious for the Lord to pour out his judgments upon the nation; many of you will see the distress and evils poured out upon this nation till you will weep like children." Many of us have felt to do so already, and it seems to be coming upon us more and more; . . .

Journal of Discourses, 10:294-95 (May 15, 1864); see also Jedediah M. Grant, Journal of Discourses, 2:147-48.

Brigham's name to be held for good and evil.

My name is had for good and evil upon the whole earth, as promised me. Thirty years ago brother Joseph, in a lecture to the Twelve, said to me, "your name shall be known for good and evil throughout the world," and it is so. The good love me, weak and humble as I am, and the wicked hate me; . . .

Journal of Discourses, 10:297 (May 15, 1864).

Nations doomed unless they cease rebelling against God.

Joseph Smith told the nations of the earth what would be their doom, unless they stopped rebelling against the kingdom of God, and forsook their own systems, or, in other words, the cisterns they had hewn out for themselves, which hold no water, and began to trust in the Lord.

Journal of Discourses, 10:304 (June 4, 1864).

The world will seek refuge among the Saints.

It has been said here, time and time again, and been prophesied for years and yearsJoseph said it when alivethat the time would come when men would be glad to take a bundle under their arms and flee to the mountains, when they will seek unto this people for succor. Already is this coming to pass. People are coming by thousands and scores of thousands into these mountains.

Journal of Discourses, 10:330 (June 22-29, 1864).

Saints were unprepared to receive all that Joseph knew.

I do not know that it would not be as Joseph once remarked. Said he, "If I were to tell the people what I knew of the kingdom of God, there is not a man nor woman that would stay with me." Said I, "Do not reveal anything to me then, I do not wish to apostatize."

Journal of Discourses, 10:351 (October 30, 1864).

Brigham corrects a historical error made by George A. Smith: he tells that Joseph never denied any doctrine he taught, especially polygamy. Brigham also told of how he helped Hyrum learn and accept the doctrine; he speaks of Hyrum's integrity; Brigham tells of meeting in Joseph's house where Brigham corrected Hyrum, by teaching that the living oracles are more important than written scripture; Joseph had many wives; Brigham erroneously says his father was the first patriarch, George A. thanks Brigham for correcting him.

(The President arose to make some historical corrections, for which purpose Elder George A. Smith who was speaking vacated the stand.)

I am an older man than brother George A. Smith, and my memory of things which took place in his boyhood should be better than his; but whether it is better or not I will not pretend to say. He is our historian, and he has a remarkable memory. There is one fact which I desire to refresh the memory of Brother George A. Smith and others. Brother George A. was a boy when he came into the Church, and when the Twelve went to England, and when they came back he was not married. I do not think that Joseph, the Prophet, had any doubt with regard to the ability and integrity of his cousin; but there were other men with whom he associated more frequently, and talked more freely. I would not be willing to say that Joseph even denied any doctrine he published; he never did it to my knowledge; he never made the letter "a" mean anything but "a." It is nothing else but "a" in the gospel, as it is in the Deseret Alphabet. It does not represent any double meaning.

Brother George A. spoke about Hyrum Smith. Now Hyrum was as good a man as ever lived, and he was no better than his brother Joseph. His integrity was of the highest order; but his ability was not equal to Joseph's. Hyrum was a positive man; Joseph was a comparative man, regarding everything according to the circumstances of the case, and every person according to their intrinsic worth. Hyrum did not know enough to do this. I used to think and think now that an Angel dwelling in the presence of the Father and the son possessed no more integrity in their hearts than did Hyrum Smith. While he lived he was Joseph's fast friend; notwithstanding this, I have heard Joseph tell him that if the Church was left to his leadership he would lead it directly to hell. He never appointed his brother Hyrum to be his successor; he never even thought such a thing; and if my word is good for anything, I can say of a truth that Joseph told me not three months before he was killed, and I did not seek the information he gave mewe were talking upon counseling, governing and controllingthat "if I am moved out of the way, you are the only man living on this earth who can counsel and direct the affairs of the Kingdom of god on the earth." When he said this to me, we were walking up by the old burying ground, where brother Wilford Woodruff was building a little brick house, and turning to the north around the corner where Willard Richards lived. He often said to [us?] when speaking upon polygamy, "I shall die for it, and I would as lief die for it as not; it is the work of God, and He has revealed this principle, and it is not my business to control or dictate it, to say it shall or shall not be." I know that brother George A. Smith does not recollect these things as well as others doas well as men who are older than him, and who were with Joseph more frequently.

Right north of the Masonic Hall in Nauvoo the ground was not fenced, this was in the year 1842. There were some rails laid along to fence up some lo[unintelligible]. Hyrum came to me and said, "Brother Brigham, I want to talk to you. In the first place I say unto you, that I do know that you and the Twelve know some things that I do not know. I can understand this by the motions, and talk, and doings of Joseph, and I know there is something or other, which I do not understand, that is revealed to the Twelve. Is this so?" I replied, "I do not know anything about what you know, but I know what I know." Then he said, "I have mistrusted for a long time that Joseph has received a revelation that a man should have more than one wife, and he has hinted as much to me, but I would not bear it."

We had heard him say things. I recollect in one council where Joseph undertook to teach the brethren and sisters, William Law was there, and William and Hyrum were against Joseph. William Law made this expression, "If an angel from heaven was to reveal to me that a man should have more than one wife, if it were in my power I would kill him." That was pretty hard, but Joseph had to submit to it. The brethren were not prepared to receive the doctrine. Brother Kimball and others were in that Council. Joseph had a meeting in his house time after time, and month after month, every Sunday evening. Joseph was worn out with it, but as to his denying any such thing, I never knew that he denied the doctrine of polygamy. Some have said that he did, but I do not believe he ever did.

I recollect one Sunday evening Joseph came to my house at dusk, and said, "I want you to go to my house and preach." I told him that I loved to go to meeting, but did not want to go to his house. I knew what was going on. I knew that Hyrum and William Marks, and William Law would be there to operate against the Prophet Joseph, and therefore I told Joseph I would rather not go to his house. Finally, he said to me, "Brother Brigham, if you do not go with me, I will not go home to my house tonight." I concluded I would go with him, so I did up my evening chores, and we started for the Prophet's house. By the time we got there, the meeting had commenced. Hyrum had opened the meeting, and was preaching, when we went in. We went into the old log house. Hyrum had the stand by the fire place without any fire in it. We came up and sat on a board close to the stand. Joseph sat with his hands over his face all the time Hyrum was talking, and he preached and preached and preached, like a person trying to pour water out of a dry well. I will refer to his character as a preacher, and you that knew him and heard him will understand it. When we had held a two hour meeting, then Hyrum would get up on the stand to speak on the Word of Wisdom. He was a positive man; and I have know him to talk an hour and a half and two hours on the Word of Wisdom, when I did not see any particular utility in it. At this meeting in Joseph's house Hyrum worked hard. He took the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and said he, "That is the law which God has given us by which to build up His Church and Kingdom in the last day and anything more than these is of man, and is not of God." When he sat down, Brother Joseph, with his hands still over his face, and nudging me with his elbow, said, "Brother Brigham, now come, get up." I got up, and previous to getting up I had become pretty well charged with plenty of powder and began. My lungs were not so weak as they are now. I could talk then so as to be heard a mile. I felt like a thousand lions. I took the books and laid them down one by one beginning with the Bible, and said, "there lies the Bible, there the Book of Mormon, and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, the revelations God has given through Joseph for the salvation of the people in the 19th Century, yet I would not give the ashes of a rye straw for these three books so far as they are efficacious for the salvation of any man, that lives without the living oracles of God." That was my text, and I think that before we got through the congregation was perfectly satisfied. I showed them that if we did not have the living oracles we were no better than the sectarian churches of the world. After I got through, Hyrum arose and made a handsome apology, and confessed his wrong which he had committed in his excess of zeal, and asked pardon. This refers to the time that Brother George A. spoke about [Elder Heber C. Kimball: "I was there."] Yes, and a good many others were there, and heard the lion roar.

I will now go back to where I met Hyrum. He said to me, "I am convinced that there is something that has not been told me." I said to him, "Brother Hyrum, Joseph would tell you every thing the Lord reveals to him, if he could." I must confess I felt a little sarcastic towards Hyrum, although he was just as honest as an Angel, and as full of integrity as the Godsbut he had not that ability which Joseph possessed to see and understand men as they were. I took advantage of this, and I said to him, "Brother Hyrum, I will tell you about this thing which you do not know if you will swear with an uplifted hand, before God, that you will never say another word against Joseph and his doings, and the doctrines he is preaching to the people." He replied, "I will do it with all my heart," and he stood upon his feet, saying, "I want to know the truth and be saved." And he made a covenant there, never again to bring forward one argument or use any influence against Joseph's doings. Joseph had many wives sealed to him. I told him the whole story, and he bowed to it and wept like a child, and said "God be praised." He went to Joseph and told him what he had learned, and renewed his covenant with Joseph, and they went heart and hand together while they lived, and they were together when they died, and they are together now defending Israel.

It is a mistake with regard to Joseph every saying that Hyrum would be his successor. He ordained him a prophet and Seer. There may be millions of prophets and seers and revelators, and none can hold the keys of presidency over the Church and Kingdom of God in all the world without the apostleship. They must hold the keys of the apostleship to do this.

I could not do otherwise than to make these corrections. It is important that history should go down to our children divested of all mistakes as far as possible. My memory with regard to a great many things, especially with regard to things which pertain to the Kingdom of God upon the earth, is very retentive, vivid and quick. On the things of God, on the building of His Kingdom, on the doctrines Joseph taught, or on anything that pertains to the priesthood I will not lay my memory aside to prefer any man's living. I know how I received the knowledge that I have got. I have seen the time when I first saw Joseph, that I had but one prayer, and I offered that all the time, and that was that I might be permitted to hear Joseph speak on doctrine, and see his mind reach out untramelled to grasp the deep things of God. But, in consequence of the wickedness of the children of men and the consequent inability they possess to receive heavenly things, he could not impart what was made know to him of the Lord. I was with him several years before I pretended to open my mouth to speak at all; but I would constantly watch him, and if possible learn doctrine and principle beyond that which he expressed. Myself, Brother Kimball and others were with him when he received revelation; and when the first Council was organized. My father was the first patriarch in the Church. My brother Joseph mooted the question of my father gathering his children together for the purpose of giving them a patriarchal blessing, and Joseph ordained him to be a patriarch, and Joseph afterwards received revelation on the subject of ordaining patriarchs. An angel never watched him closer than I did, and that is what has given me the knowledge I have today. I treasure it up, and ask the Father in the name of Jesus, to help my memory when information is wanted; and I have never been at a loss to know what to do concerning the Kingdom of God. I knew of the doctrine of polygamy by revelation to myself, while I was in England, before it was revealed to me by Joseph.

After President Young ended his remarks George A. Smith arose and said: "I am thankful to be corrected. President Young has the best memory of any man on the earth, I give way to him on this. I do not profess to remember very much, but such things as I speak of, I speak of in many instances as I have received them from others. I know that Joseph placed the spirit and authority and priesthood upon the heads of the Twelve to bear off the Kingdom of God to the nations of the earth; not only did he do this, but bore testimony of it on numerous occasions in the presence of the congregated saintsin the presence of thousands. I bear testimony that the work that has been carried out by President Young and his brethren has been in accordance with the plans, designs, and Spirit, and instructions of Joseph Smith, as the Lord lives, unto the present time."

"Remarks by President Brigham Young at the Semi Annual Conference, Great Salt Lake City, Oct. 8, 1866," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Spelling, punctuation, and grammar have been modernized.

Note: See Wilford Woodruff Conference Report, October 1897, 18-19 for a very similar account, which Wilford says occurred in Kirtland, but which is so similar to the above it may be that President Woodruff has simply confused the place where the events took place.

Note: Brigham taught on multiple occasions that his father was the first patriarch ordained in this dispensation, even though our records show that Joseph Smith, Sr., was ordained 18 December 1833, some six months before the events he here recalls. For a similar account by Brigham calling his father the first ordained patriarch, see "Discourse by President Brigham Young, June 21, 1874," Deseret News, 1 July 1874, 340.

Saints to build Zion, not the works of the world.

If our mechanics would work upon the principle of establishing the Kingdom of God upon the earth, and building up Zion, they would, as the prophet Joseph said, in the year 1833, never do another day's work but with that end in view. In that year a number of Elders came up to Kirtland; I think there were some twenty or thirty Elders. Brother Joseph Smith gave us the word of the Lord; it was simply this: "Never do another day's work to build up a Gentile city; never lay out another dollar while you live, to advance the world in its present state; it is full of wickedness and violence; no regard is paid to the prophets, nor the prophesyings of the prophets, nor to Jesus nor his sayings, nor the word of the Lord that was given anciently, nor to that given in our day. They have gone astray, and they are building up themselves, and they are promoting sin and iniquity upon the earth; and," said he, "it is the word and commandment of the Lord to his servants that they shall never do another day's work, nor spend another dollar to build up a Gentile city or nation."

Journal of Discourses, 11:294-95 (February 3, 1867).

If united, the Saints can do all things.

If we were united, we would get rich ten times faster than we do now. How are you going to bring a people to that point when they will all be united in the things of this life? By no other means than prevailing upon them to live their religion that they all may possess the Holy Ghost, the spirit of revelation, the light of Christ, which will enable them to see eye to eye. Then their acts and all their dealings would be so connected that they would pull together, as Joseph used to say: "A long pull, a strong pull, and a pull all together." This point gained, we could bear off the Kingdom victoriously, and we could do what we pleased; but there is no doctrine in existence, short of the gospel of the Son of God, by which a people can be brought to a oneness in their temporal matters.

Journal of Discourses, 11:349 (April 6, 1867); see also Journal of Discourses, 11:372.

Build Zion, not Gentile cities.

I will quote you a little Scripture if you wish, the words of an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ to me. You may think that I saw him in vision, and it was a vision given right in broad daylight. Said he"Never spend another day to build up a Gentile city, but spend your days, dollars, and dimes for the upbuilding of the Zion of God upon the earth, to promote peace and righteousness, and to prepare for the coming of the Son of Man, and he who does not abide this law will suffer loss."

That is a saying of one of the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ. He said it to me. Do you want to know his name? It is not recorded in the New Testament among the apostles, but it was an apostle whom the Lord called and ordained in this my day, and in the day of a good portion of the congregation, and his name was Joseph Smith, junior. These words were delivered to me in July, 1833, in the town of Kirtland, Geauga County, State of Ohio. The word to the elders who were there was: "Never, from this time henceforth, do you spend one day or one hour to sustain the kingdoms of this world or the kingdoms of the devil, but sustain the Kingdom of God to your uttermost."

Journal of Discourses, 12:59 (June 16, 1867).

The Lord to take Brigham before he would apostatize.

Before Joseph's death he had a revelation concerning myself and others, which signified that we had passed the ordeal, and that we should never apostatize from the faith of the holy gospel; "and," said Joseph, "if there is any danger of your doing this, the Lord will take you to Himself forthwith, for you cannot stray from the truth." When men and women have traveled to a certain point in their labors in this life, God sets a seal upon them that they never can forsake their God or His kingdom; for, rather than they should do this, He will at once take them to Himself. Probably this is so with many of the elders who are taken from us, and over whom many ignorantly mourn.

Journal of Discourses, 12:103 (November 17, 1867).

Note: Another who received the same promise was Heber C. Kimball, who, during the great personal test regarding the introduction of plural marriage, went to the Prophet Joseph Smith, telling him he was fearful he could not endure. "The Prophet, full of sympathy for him, went and inquired of the Lord. His answer was, 'Tell him to go and do as he has been commanded, and if I see that there is any danger of his apostatizing, I will take him to myself'" (Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball [Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1945], 325-26.)

If the Constitution is to be saved, it would be by the elders.

How long will it be before the words of the prophet Joseph will be fulfilled? He said if the Constitution of the United States were saved at all it must be done by this people. It will not be many years before these words come to pass.

Journal of Discourses, 12:204 (April 8, 1868).

Joseph instructs Brigham regarding plural marriage.

This doctrine [of plural marriage] so hateful and annoying to the feelings of many, was revealed from heaven to Joseph Smith, and obedience is required to it by the Latter-day Saints. . . . If the prophet had said to me, "Brother Brigham, you can never have but one wife at a time." I should have said, "glory, hallelujah, that is just what I like." But he said, "You will have to take more than one wife, and this order has to spread and increase until the inhabitants of the earth repent of their evils and men will do what is right towards the females."

Journal of Discourses, 12:261-62 (August 9, 1868).

On how Joseph governed the saints.

The question was asked a great many times of Joseph Smith, by gentlemen who came to see him and his people, "How is it that you can control your people so easily? It appears that they do nothing but what you say; how is it that you can govern them so easily?" Said he, "I do not govern them at all. The Lord has revealed certain principles from the heavens by which we are to live in these latter days. The time is drawing near when the Lord is going to gather out His people from the wicked, and He is going to cut short His work in righteousness, and the principles which He has revealed I have taught to the people and they are trying to live according to them, and they control themselves."

Gentlemen, this is the great secret now in controlling this people. It is thought that I control them, but it is not so. It is as much as I can do to control myself and to keep myself straight and teach the people the principles by which they should live.

Journal of Discourses, 13:176-77 (May 29, 1870).

Saints must obey the gospel to be saved.

The inquiry arises with a great many, "What are you going to do with all the rest of the human family, are you going to send them to hell?" I will answer the question as Joseph once did when a person asked him, "Will everybody be damned except the Latter-day Saints?" "Yes," said Joseph, "and many of them, unless they take a different course from what they are now taking."

Journal of Discourses, 14:133 (May 21, 1871); see also Journal of Discourses, 1:339.

Joseph Smith a brother to Jesus.

Not that Joseph was the Savior, but he was a prophet. As he said once, when some one asked him, "Are you the Savior?" "No, but I can tell you what I amI am his brother."

Journal of Discourses, 14:202 (August 13, 1871).

Unity is central to the success of the Saints.

We do not wish to co-operate in mercantile affairs only, but we wish to bring the minds of the people to consider the benefit of uniting and laboring together, to make this long and strong pull all together, of which brother Taylor spoke. This is an expression that Brother Joseph Smith frequently used concerning the oneness of the people.

Journal of Discourses, 16:65 (June 28, 1873).

Mortal feelings will change in the Celestial world.

I recollect a sister conversing with Joseph Smith on this subject. She told him: "Now, don't talk to me; when I get into the celestial kingdom, if I ever do get there, I shall request the privilege of being a ministering angel; that is the labor that I wish to perform. I don't want any companion in that world; and if the Lord will make me a ministering angel, it is all I want." Joseph said, "Sister, you talk very foolishly, you do not know what you will want." He then said to me: "Here, brother Brigham, you seal this lady to me." I sealed her to him. This was my own sister according to the flesh. Now, sisters, do not say, "I do not want a husband when I get up in the resurrection." You do not know what you will want.

Journal of Discourses, 16:166-67 (August 31, 1873).

Saints must obey the gospel to be saved; all are damned but faithful Latter-day Saints.

I expect one thing will be true that Joseph said when living. A gentleman came to see him and asked him a great many questions, and among the rest he said"I suppose you calculate that you are just right, and that you "Mormons" are all going to be saved and everybody else will be damned." Said Joseph, "Sir, I will tell you this one thing, all the rest of the world will be damned, and I expect that most of the "Mormons" will be unless they do better then they have done." The man did not stop for an explanation. What Joseph meant by being damned was that people will go into the spirit world without the Priesthood, and consequently they are under the power of Satan, and will have to be redeemed, or else they will be forever under his power. That is all there is about that.

Journal of Discourses, 17:159 (August 8, 1874).

Note: Brigham Young says that Joseph's expression here quoted took place in a conversation with a questioner. In addition, we have Joseph's own written statement that he said the same thing in answer to questions frequently asked of him (see Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Joseph Fielding Smith, compiler [Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1976], 119, and Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 1:339).

Saints must obey revelations to be saved; an illustration from the revelation on plural marriage.

Brother George A. Smith has been reading a little out of the revelation concerning celestial marriage, and I want to say to my sisters that if you lift you heels against this revelation, and say that you would obliterate it, and put it out of existence if you had the power to nullify and destroy it, I say that if you imbibe that spirit and feeling, you will go to hell, just as sure as you are living women. Emma took that revelation, supposing she had all there was; but Joseph had wisdom enough to take care of it, and he had handed the revelation to Bishop Whitney, and he wrote it all off. After Joseph had been to Bishop Whitney's he went home, and Emma began teasing for the revelation. Said she"Joseph, you promised me that revelation, and if you are a man of your word you will give it to me." Joseph took it from his pocket and said"Take it." She went to the fire-place and put it in, and put the candle under it and burnt it, and she thought that was the end of it, and she will be damned as sure as she is a living woman. Joseph used to say that he would have her hereafter, if he had to go to hell for her, and he will have to go to hell for her as sure as he ever gets her.

Journal of Discourses, 17:159 (August 9, 1874).

Joseph authorized the call of Brigham's father to be a patriarch.

At the time that Zion's Camp, as it is called, went up to Missouri, in 1834, so far as I am aware, Joseph had never received any intimation as to there being a patriarch in the Church. On our return home from Missouri, my brother Joseph Young, while conversing with me, asked if it would be right for our father to give us a blessing. Said he"I feel just as though I want my father to give me a patriarchal blessing." When we reached Kirtland we talked with Joseph on the subject, and he said, "Certainly," and finally we appointed a day, and brother Joseph, the Prophet, came to where we met and ordained my father a Patriarch, and he was the first man ordained to the office of Patriarch in the Church, and he blessed his children; and soon after this Joseph ordained his father a patriarch and his father called his children together and blessed them. Then Joseph had another revelation, that a record would be kept, and when this was revealed to him, he then had his father call his house together again, and blessed them over and a record was kept of it. This is to show you, and especially those who have no experience in the Church, how the Lord has led this people along . . .

Journal of Discourses, 18:240-41 (June 23, 1874).

Note: While there is no reason to doubt the general sense of what Brigham Young here saysthat following Zion's Camp the Prophet ordained his father a patriarch, who in turn gave blessings to Brigham and John Youngour records show that the Prophet's Father, Joseph Smith, Sr., was ordained a Patriarch on December 18, 1833, and as such was the first Patriarch ordained in this dispensation (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 4:190).

Joseph said the people were not prepared to receive the revelations the Lord had for them; the law of consecration; Brigham went to pay Joseph's debts, the Elders found he had none.

I will now say to my brethren and sisters, the Lord, in the first place, commenced to bring the people together upon the ground of union and oneness; but they could not bear this. You can read, on page 161, of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants [i.e., D&C 54], a revelation given to the Colesville Branch. Lemon Copley had a tract of land that was to be given to the Saints, and they were to build up a stake of Zion until there was another place prepared for the center stake; but he apostatized and the people went away. Before this the Lord revealed to Joseph, that the people would gather out from Babylon, and establish the kingdom of God upon the principles of heaven. They went up to Jackson County, Mo., with this in their faith, and with the express understanding that when they go there, everything was to be laid at the feet of the Bishop, not at the feet of the Apostles, as they did anciently. Then, you know, they sold all they had, and brought their substance and laid it at the feet of the Apostles. The revelation given through Joseph was to lay all at the feet of the Bishop, who was to distribute it among the people, according to the revelation given for that purpose, for their benefit. But they could not bear this, consequently they were driven from Jackson County, and assembled again, some in Caldwell, and some in Davies County, and finally they were driven from the State. This was in the fall of 1838. I recollect, in Far West, Joseph, talking upon these matters, said"The people cannot bear the revelations that the Lord has for them. There were a great many revelations if the people could bear them." I think it was the eighth day of July, 1831, Joseph had a revelation that the people should consecrate their surplus property for the building of the Temple there in Far West, for the support of the Priesthood, for the paying of the debts of the Presidency, etc., which I could give an account of, for I was present when it came. Joseph was doing business in Kirtland, and it seemed as though all creation was upon him, to hamper him in every way, and they drove him from his business, and it left him so that some of his debts had to be settled afterward; and I am thankful to say that they were settled up; still further, we have sent East to New York, to Ohio, and to every place where I had any idea that Joseph had ever done business, and inquired if there was a man left to whom Joseph Smith, Jun., the Prophet, owed a dollar, or a sixpence. If there was we would pay it. But I have not been able to find one. I have advertised this through every neighborhood and place where he formerly lived, consequently I have a right to conclude that all his debts were settled.

Journal of Discourses, 18:242 (June 23, 1874).

The Lord told Brigham about plural marriage while he was on a mission in England; he did not understand the revelation until returning and speaking with Joseph; Joseph also received a revelation on baptism for the dead; Joseph presided in things spiritual as well as temporal; Joseph said people could not bear all the revelations he had received; after Joseph's death, Brigham and others went to pay his debts, but Joseph had none.

We were driven from Missouri after Joseph went up there, and we came to Nauvoo, and the Twelve went to England. While we were in England, I think, the Lord manifested to me by visions and his Spirit things that I did not then understand. I never opened my mouth to any person concerning them until I returned to Nauvoo. Joseph had never mentioned this, there had never been a thought of it in the church that I knew anything about at that time. But I had this for myself, and I kept it to myself, and when I returned home and Joseph revealed these things to me, I then understood the reflections that were upon my mind while in England. But this was not until after I had told him what I understood. I saw that he was after something by his conversation, leading my mind along, and others, to see how we could bear this. This was in 1841; the revelation was given in 1843, but the doctrine was revealed before this; and when I told Joseph what I understood, which was right in front of my house in the street, as he was shaking hands and leaving me, he turned round and looked me in the eye, and says he"Brother Brigham, are you speaking what you understand, are you in earnest." Says I"I speak just as the Spirit manifests to me." Says he"God bless you, the Lord has opened your mind," and he turned and went off.

About this time came a revelation concerning baptism for the dead. I know that in my traveling and preaching, many a time, I have stopped by beautiful streams of clear, pure water, and have said to myself"How delightful it would be to me to go into this to be baptized for the remission of my sins." When I got home Joseph told me it was my privilege. At this time came a revelation that the Saints could be baptized and rebaptized when they chose, and then that we could be baptized for our dead friends, but at first it was not revealed that a record should be kept of those who were baptized; but when he received an additional revelation to that effect, then a record was kept. Hundreds of thousands, I suppose, were baptized before any record was kept at all, and they were baptized over, and a record kept of the baptisms and the names of the administrator, those who acted for the dead, and of the dead, and of the witnesses. You can read in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants the letter that Joseph wrote when he was away from home in regard to having witnesses at these baptisms. I relate this to show you that the Lord did not reveal everything at once; but I need not dwell on this any longer.

I will now say to my brethren and sisters, the Lord, in the first place, commenced to bring the people together upon the ground of union and oneness. You can read, on page 161, of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants [i.e., D&C 54], a revelation given to the Colesville Branch. Lemon Copley had a tract of land that was to be given to the Saints, and they were to build up a stake of Zion until there was another place prepared for the center stake; but he apostatized and the people went away. Before this the Lord revealed to Joseph that the people would gather out from Babylon, and establish the kingdom of God upon the principles of heaven. They went up to Jackson County, Mo., with this in their faith, and with the express understanding that when they got there everything was to be laid at the feet of the Bishop, not at the feet of the Apostles, as they did anciently. Then, you know, they sold all they had and brought their substance and laid it at the feet of the Apostles. The revelation given through Joseph was to lay all at the feet of the Bishop, who was to distribute it among the people, according to the revelation given for that purpose, for their benefit. But they could not bear this, consequently they were driven from Jackson County, and assembled again, some in Caldwell and some in Daviess County, and finally they were driven from the State. This was in the fall of 1838. I recollect, in Far West, Joseph talking upon these matters, said"The people cannot bear the revelations that the Lord has for them. There were a great many revelations if the people could bear them." I think it was the eighth day of July, 1831, Joseph had a revelation that the people should consecrate their surplus property for the building of the temple there in Far West, for the support of the priesthood, for the paying of the debts of the Presidency, &c, which I could give an account of, for I was present when it came. Joseph was doing business in Kirtland, and it seemed as though all creation was upon him, to hamper him in every way, and they drove him from his business, and it left him so that some of his debts had to be settled afterwards; and I am thankful to say that they were settled up; still further, we have sent East to New York, to Ohio and to every place where I had any idea that Joseph had ever done business, and inquired if there was a man left to whom Joseph Smith, Jr., the Prophet, owed a dollar, or a sixpence. If there was we would pay it. But I have not been able to find one. I have advertised this through every neighborhood and place where he formerly lived, consequently I have a right to conclude that all his debts were settled.

. . . In all ages of the world that we have any knowledge of, when there was a people on the earth whom God acknowledged as his people, he has invariably dictated them in spiritual and in temporal things. This question was agitated year after year in the days of Joseph. The first two Bishops in the ChurchEdward Partridge was the first, I was well acquainted with him, and Newel K. Whitney was the secondquestioned the propriety of Joseph having anything to do with temporal things. Joseph would argue the case with them a little, and tell them how things were, and bring up scripture to show them that it could not be otherwise, that it was, that it was impossible for the Lord to dictate to the people unless he dictated them in temporal affairs. . . .

"Discourse by President Brigham Young, June 21, 1874," Deseret News, 1 July 1874, 340-41.

In a dream, Brigham sees Joseph herding strange and inferior sheep. Joseph says "they are all good in their place."

Now I am going to tell a dream that I had, which I think is as applicable, to the people to-daythe 21st day of June, 1874, as when I had it. There were so many going to California, and going this way and that way, and they did not know what they wanted, and said I"Stay here, we can raise our food here, I know it is a good stock country, a good sheep country, and as good a country for raising silk as there is in the world, and we shall raise some of the best of wheat. There stands a manBurr Frost, and there is Truman O. Angell, who were present at the time." Said I, "We can raise all we want here, do not go away, do not be discouraged." That was when the pioneers came; the next year, it was California, California, California, California. "No," said I, "stay here." After much thought and reflection, and a good deal of praying and anxiety as to whether the people would be saved after all our trouble in being driven into the wilderness, I had a dream one night, the second year after we came in here. Captain Brown had gone up to the Weber, and bought a little place belonging to Miles Goodyear. Miles Goodyear had a few goats, and I had a few sheep that I had driven into the Valley, and I wanted to get a few goats to put along with the sheep. I had seen Captain Brown and spoken to him about the goats, and he said I could have them. Just at that time I had this dream, which I will now relate, I thought I had started and gone past the Hot Springs, which is about four miles north of this city. I was going after my goats. When I had gone round the point of the mountain by the Hot Springs, and had got about half a mile on the rise of ground beyond the Spring, whom should I meet but brother Joseph Smith. He had a wagon with no bed on, with bottom boards, and tents and camp equipage piled on. Somebody sat on the wagon driving the team. Behind the team I saw a great flock of sheep. I heard their bleating, and saw some goats among them. I looked at them and thought-"This is curious, brother Joseph has been up to Captain Brown's and got my goats." There were men driving the sheep, and some of the sheep I should think were three and a half feet high, with large, fine beautiful white fleeces, and they looked so lovely and pure; others were of moderate size, and pure and white; and in fact there were sheep of all sizes, with fleeces clean, pure and white. Then I saw some that were dark and spotted, of all colors and sizes and kinds, and their fleeces were dirty, and they looked inferior; some of these were a pretty good size, but not as large as some of the large fine clean sheep, and altogether there was a multitude of them of all sizes and kinds, and goats of all colors, sizes and kinds mixed among them. Joseph stopped the wagon, and the sheep kept rushing up until there was an immense herd. I looked in Joseph's eye, and laughed, just as I had many a time when he was alive, about some trifling thing or other, and said I"Joseph, you have got the darndest flock of sheep I ever saw in my life; what are you going to do with them, what on earth are they for?" Joseph looked cunningly out of his eyes, just as he used to at times, and said he"They are all good in their places." When I awoke in the morning I did not find any fault with those who wanted to go to California; I said, "If they want to go let them go, and we will do all we can to save them; I have no more fault to find, the sheep and the goats will run together," but Joseph says, "They are all good in their places."

"Discourse by President Brigham Young, June 21, 1874," Deseret News, 1 July 1874, 341.

Tells of Joseph ordaining Brigham's father as a patriarch, calling him the first so ordained; also tells of receiving a revelation while in England which he did not understand and therefore kept to himself; later, in a conversation with the Prophet, he came to understand its meaning.

In 1834, so far as I am aware Joseph had never received any intimation as to there being a patriarch in the Church. On our return home from Missouri, my brother Joseph Young, while conversing with me, asked if it would be right for our father to give us a blessing. Said he"I feel just as though I want my father to give me a patriarchal blessing." When we reached Kirtland we talked with Joseph on this subject, and he said, "Certainly," and finally we appointed a day, and Brother Joseph, the Prophet, came to where we met and ordained my father a patriarch, and he was the first man ordained to the office of patriarch in the Church, and he blessed his children; and soon after this Joseph ordained his father a patriarch and his father called his children together and blessed them. Then Joseph had another revelation, that a record should be kept, and when this was revealed to him, he then had his father call his house together again, and blessed them over and a record was kept of it. This is to show you, and especially those who have no experience in the Church, how the Lord has led this people along, led them along, led them along.

We were driven from Missouri after Joseph went up there, and we came to Nauvoo, and the Twelve went to England. While we were in England, I think, the Lord manifested to me by visions and his Spirit things that I did not then understand. I never opened my mouth to any person concerning them until I returned to Nauvoo. Joseph had never mentioned this, there had never been a thought of it at that time in the Church that I knew anything about. But I this for myself, and when I returned home and Joseph revealed these things to me, I then understood the reflections that were upon my mind while in England.

"Discourse by President Brigham Young, June 21, 1874," Deseret News, 1 July 1874, 340.

Note: While the lesson Brigham teaches is a good one, his memory was not accurate with regard to the ordination of the first Patriarch in this dispensation. The Prophet's father, Joseph Smith, Sr., was ordained a Patriarch on December 18, 1833 in Kirtland, Ohio (see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 4:190) and yet the brethren did not return from Zion's Camp until the early summer of 1834, as Brigham rightly recalls. The revelation Brigham refers to as having received in England dealt with the doctrine of plural marriage.

Joseph prophesies he will not live to be forty.

I heard Joseph say many a time, "I shall not live until I am forty years of age."

Journal of Discourses, 18:361 (May 6, 1877); see also Journal of Discourses, 1:364.

Cumorah was a room full of plates with the sword of Laban hanging on the wall; the Smiths were a seeric family.

I lived right in the country where the plates were found from which the Book of Mormon was translated, and I know a great many things pertaining to that country. I believe I will take the liberty to tell you of another circumstance that will be as marvelous as anything can be. This is an incident in the life of Oliver Cowdery, but he did not take the liberty of telling such things in meeting as I take. I tell these things to you, and I have a motive for doing so. I want to carry them to the ears of my brethren and sisters, and to the children also, that they may grow to an understanding of some things that seem to be entirely hidden from the human family. Oliver Cowdery went with the Prophet Joseph when he deposited these plates. Joseph did not translate all of the plates; there was a portion of them sealed, which you can learn from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. When Joseph got the plates, the angel instructed him to carry them back to the hill Cumorah, which he did. Oliver says that when Joseph and Oliver went there, the hill opened, and they walked into a cave, in which there was a large and spacious room. He says he did not think, at the time, whether they had the light of the sun or artificial light; but that it was just as light as day. They laid the plates on a table; it was a large table that stood in the room. Under this table there was a pile of plates as much as two feet high, and there were altogether in this room more plates than probably many wagon loads; they were piled up in the corners and along the walls. The first time they went there the sword of Laban hung upon the wall; but when they went again it had been taken down and laid upon the table across the gold plates; it was unsheathed, and on it was written these words: "This sword will never be sheathed again until the kingdoms of this world become the kingdom of our God and his Christ." I tell you this as coming not only from Oliver Cowdery, but others who were familiar with it, and who understood it just as well as we understand coming to this meeting, enjoying the day, and by and by we separate and go away, forgetting most of what is said, but remembering some things. So is it with other circumstances in life. I relate this to you, and I want you to understand it. I take this liberty of referring to those things so that they will not be forgotten and lost. Carlos Smith was a young man of as much veracity as any young man we had, and he was a witness to these things. Samuel Smith saw some things, Hyrum saw a good many things, but Joseph was the leader.

Journal of Discourses, 19:38 (June 17, 1877).

Recounts death of Brigham, and his last words: "Joseph! Joseph! Joseph!"

I can't remember all who were there, except that Uncle Joseph Young, and several of his wives, and many of his children were there. When he was placed upon the bed in front of the window he seemed to partially revive, and opening his eyes, he gazed upward, exclaiming: "Joseph! Joseph! Joseph!" and the divine look in his face seemed to indicate that he was communicating with his beloved friend, Joseph Smith, the Prophet. This name was the last word he uttered.

Susa Young Gates, The Life Story of Brigham Young (New York: The MacMillan Company, 1930), 362.
