Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Young, Emily Dow Partridge Smith

(February 24, 1824-December 9, 1899)

Knew Joseph well; often weighed down by the weight of his burdens, which he kept to himself.

My soul is harrowed up when I let my mind revert back to those days of sorrow and persecution that followed the Prophet Joseph all his life. His troubles at home were more sad and harder to bear than all the troubles that could be heaped upon him by outside.

I was intimately acquainted with him for several years. More acquainted with his home life than with his publicor rather, his private life outside of his home. I have known him to come in with his head bowed. He would walk the floor back and forth, with his hands clasped behind him (a way he had of placing his hands when his mind was deeply troubled), his countenance showing that he was weighed down with some terrible burden. Many times my heart has ached for him. He did not often speak to his family of his outside troubles.

Joseph was a prophet of God, and a friend of man. His was a noble character. All who knew him can testify to that assertion. He was all that the word gentleman would implypure in heart, always striving for right, upholding innocence, and battling for the good of all.

Emily Partridge Young, "Statement Written June 27, 1897," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Tells of the doctrine of plural marriage and of her marriage to the Prophet Joseph, which occurred with Emma's consent in Emma's presence; Emma also gave Joseph other wives.

The first intimation I had from Brother Joseph that there was a pure and holy order of plural marriage, was in the spring of 1842, but I was not married until 1843. I was married to him on the 11th of May, 1843, by Elder James Adams. Emma was present. She gave her free and full consent. She had always up to this time, been very kind to me and my sister Eliza, who was also married to the Prophet Joseph Smith with Emma's consent; but ever after she was our enemy. She used every means in her power to injure us in the eyes of her husband, and before strangers, and in consequence of her abuse we were obliged to leave the city to gratify her, but things were overruled otherwise, and we remained in Nauvoo. My sister Eliza found a home with the family of Brother Joseph Coolidge, and I went to live with Sister Sylvia Lyons. She was a good woman, and one of the lord's chosen few. Emma, about this time, gave her husband two other wivesMaria and Sarah Lawrence.

Emily Young, "Autobiography of Emily D. P. Young," Woman's Exponent 14, no. 5 (1 August 1885): 38.
