Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Young, John Ray

(April 30, 1837-September 5, 1931)

As a young boy, he met the Prophet, who predicted he would aid in taking the gospel to the nations of the earth; he also remembers the sorrow caused by the martyrdom.

One day my father [Lorenzo Dow Young, Brigham's brother] took me for a walk, to give me air and sunshine. We met Joseph and Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon. Father shook hands warmly with Joseph and Hyrum, but he merely bowed to Brother Rigdon. Joseph asked if I was the child father had requested the elders to pray for. Being answered in the affirmative, the prophet removed my hat, ran his fingers through my curly locks, and said, "Brother Lorenzo, this boy will live to aid in carrying the Gospel to the nations of the earth."

His words thrilled me like fire; and from that hour I looked forward to the day when I should be a missionary.

Not long after that, Joseph was martyred at Carthage. I remember how my mother wept, and how shocked and prostrated everybody was, when the bloodstained bodies of the Prophet and his brother were brought home. Father was away doing missionary work when that fearful tragedy took place.

John R. Young, Memoirs of John R. Young, Utah Pioneer 1847 (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Deseret News , 1920), 9-10.

Note: John R. Young lived to serve two separate missions to the Sandwich Islands and a third mission to England.

Young sees Joseph and Hyrum in a vision; Joseph promises Hyrum will bless Young, which he does; Young is inspired and bears his testimony.

[Not yet 18 years of age, and while serving as a missionary in the Sandwich Islands, Young had a vision, of which he says:] I saw Joseph and Hyrum Smith coming from the north. When they came to the gate that opened into the yard of our house, Joseph said: "Let us call in here." Instantly the house was filled with light, and they were standing in the room. I sprang to my feet and reached out my hand to shake hands with Joseph; but he moved his hand away. I thought he was displeased; but he smiled and said: "Hyrum will bless you." I saw Hyrum hold his hands above my head, and rays of light came from the palms of his hands and rested on my head: "Be of good cheer; you shall be healed, and you shall speedily learn the language and do a good work. Now do not worry any more."

They then passed out of the west door and moved southward; and when I came to myself, I was standing out of doors, on the west side of the house, weeping with joy. My eyes were healed, and when I the Saints came home, I went capering like a freed cold, from house to house bearing testimony, as best I could, to the truth of Mormonism.

John R. Young, Memoirs of John R. Young, Utah Pioneer 1847 (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Deseret News , 1920), 76-77.

Tells of a conflict on board a ship with a man named McCarty, who boasted of having helped kill the Prophet; while in a fit of anger, McCarty dies.

[En route to a mission to the Sandwich Islands, John R. Young traveled on a bark as a companion to Elder Benjamin Cluff. Then:] On Tuesday, May 24, 1864, we sailed second cabin on the bark Onward, Hempstead, captain. Brother Cluff and I occupied one room with a Missourian named McCarty, said to be suffering with consumption. He was a large, raw-boned man, of a quarrelsome disposition.

One day Captain Hempstead invited us three to have seats on the upper deck with the first-cabin passengers. The reason for this courtesy was soon apparent. Among the cabin passengers were several ministers; and they wanted a little diversion at the expense of the Mormon Elders.

A warm discussion ensued. It was asserted that the Mormons were driven from Missouri and Illinois on account of their thieving and lawless acts. In my defense I challenged the proof of a single dishonest deed, and testified that Joseph and Hyrum were innocent, and that they were murdered in cold blood.

Mr. McCarty became angry, and boasted that he helped kill Joseph and Hyrum Smith. I told him then that by his own confession he was a murderer, and that the curse of God was upon him. He would have struck me, but the captain interfered, and made him behave.

About midnight of the 30th of May, I was awakened by McCarty. He was sitting on a stool, in front of his bunk; the full moon shining through the window giving him a white, ghastly appearance. He told me to get up and get him a drink. I replied that the guard passed the door every five minutes and would wait upon him.

He seized a butcher knife, sprang to his feet, and swore he would cut the heart out of me. I was lying in the middle bunk, and had but little room in which to move, and nothing with which to defend myself; but I felt I would rather die than do his bidding. I therefore silently asked God to deliver me from his power.

"He took one step forward, threw up both hands, and fell backwards. I sprang from the bunk, and raised his head, but the man was dead. Brother Cluff called the guard, who soon brought the captain and the doctor. The latter said he died of heart failure.

In the morning they sewed him up in a canvas, a cannon ball at his feet. I stood by the taff rail, and saw the body slide off the plank; and as I watched it sink into the depths of the ocean, I rejoiced that I had borne a faithful testimony of God's martyred prophets, and was truly grateful that I had been delivered from the hands of a wicked man.

John R. Young, Memoirs of John R. Young, Utah Pioneer 1847 (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Deseret News , 1920), 129-30.

Joseph helps John Horner hoe in the garden; later, in confirming Horner, promises that he shall become a skilled gardener.

Mr. Horner told me that when he was a boy Joseph the Prophet, and Oliver Cowdery had called on the Horner family. John M. wanted to visit with the young prophet; but his father insisted that he finish hoeing a piece of corn given him as a stint. Joseph, on learning of it, took off his coat, asked for a hoe, and helped finish the task. The sequel: John M. Horner was baptized by Oliver Cowdery, and confirmed and blessed by Joseph Smith, who predicted that the earth should yield abundantly at Brother Horner's behest. In California, Brother Horner at one time paid a tithe of twenty thousand dollars, the fruit of agriculture.

John R. Young, Memoirs of John R. Young, Utah Pioneer 1847 (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Deseret News , 1920), 142.
