Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Young, Joseph

(April 7, 1797-July 16, 1881)

Joseph prophesied the first missionary success of Joseph Young and his companions would be to their families; he also prophesied that Albert P. Rockwood would come into the Church.

As Uncle Haven expressed it, we visited the Eastern States, and the Prophet Joseph prophesied before we went, that we should see the fruit of our labors in converting them to the Gospel. Brother Phineas Young went with us to the Richards family, and after we had spent a short time with them, we went on to the East and saw my uncles and aunts, and preached to them. They looked on us as strange beings and our doctrine was strange to them. We preached to Uncle and Aunt Haven; we stayed but a little while with them and then went on to Albert P. Rockwood's for this was according to the promise of the Prophet.

"Minutes of a Meeting of the Richards and Young Families Held In Nauvoo, Ill., Jan. 8, 1845," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 11 (July 1920): 108.

Tells of the Prophet's vision, which guided him in the organization of the Twelve and the Seventy; also tells of his prophecy that Brigham would be an Apostle and Joseph president of the Seventies and of the fulfillment of those predictions; also tells of Joseph saying that Zion's Camp was to prepare leaders and that they "sacrificed as did Abraham" and that those who did not so sacrifice would "make them hereafter."

Under the heading, "A Scrap of History" President Joseph Young writes as follows in relation to the organization of the Seventies: "On the 8th day of February, in the year of our Lord, 1835, the Prophet Joseph Smith called Elders Brigham Young and Joseph Young to the chamber of his residence in Kirtland, Ohio; it being the Sabbath day. After they were seated and he had made some preliminaries, he proceeded to relate a vision he had seen, in regard to the state and condition of those Elders who died in Zion's Camp in Missouri. He said: 'Brethren, I have seen those men who died of the cholera in our camp; and the Lord knows, if I get a mansion as bright as theirs, I ask no more.' At this relation he wept, and for some time could not speak because of his tender feelings in memory of his brethren. When he had somewhat relieved himself, he resumed the conversation, and addressing himself to Brother Brigham Young he said: 'I wish you to notify all the brethren living in branches within a reasonable distance from this place, to meet at a general conference on Saturday next. I shall then and there appoint twelve special witnesses to open the door of the Gospel to foreign nations, and you (speaking to Brother Brigham) will be one of them.'" The prophet, according to the narrator, then explained the duties of the Twelve Apostles, after which he turned to Joseph Young and said with much earnestness: "Brother Joseph, the Lord has made you President of the Seventies."

Upon the 28th of the month the first quorum of Seventy were chosen and ordained, under the hands of the Prophet and other Church leaders. Joseph Young was the second name upon the list, and he was one of the original Seven Presidents of that body. Soon afterwards he succeeded to the first or senior place, which he retained to the end of his life, thus realizing the Prophet's forecast concerning him. Not long after the organization of this quorum the Prophet said in the course of an address to them: "Brethren, some of you are angry with me because you did not fight in Missouri; but let me tell you, God did not want you to fight. He could not organize his Kingdom, with twelve men to open the Gospel door to the nations of the earth, and with seventy men under their direction to follow in their tracks, unless he took them from a body of men who had offered their lives, and who had made as great a sacrifice as did Abraham. Now the Lord has got his Twelve and his Seventy, and there will be other quorums of Seventies called, who will make the sacrifice, and those who will not make their sacrifices and their offerings now will make them hereafter."

"Joseph Young," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., Publishers, 1904), 4:443-44; see also Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 2:181.

Joseph prophesied that Joseph Young would preach the gospel in the British Isles and it was so.

He [Joseph Young] traveled and preached extensively in the Territory, and in fulfillment of a prediction by the Prophet Joseph he visited the British Isles in 1870, and thus preached in the old world.

Joseph E. Cardon and Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, by its Leaders (Independence, Mo.: Zion's Press, 1930), 204-5.

Joseph prophesied Joseph Young would fulfill a mission to Great Britain, which he did in 1879.

In 1870 [Seymour B. Young] was called by President Brigham Young to take a second mission to Great Britain, this time to accompany his father, the late Pres. Joseph Young, to that field of labor, in conformity with a prediction made to him by the Prophet Joseph Smith at the time that Elders Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball were called to their first mission to England, that at some time in the future Brother Joseph Young should take a mission to Great Britain.

"Joseph Young," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:202.

In 1832 he traveled with Brigham and Heber to meet Joseph, whom they met as he was chopping wood. The Prophet later recognized Joseph Young when they met five months later. Joseph predicted one of his opposers would fail; he hinted he wanted Joseph Young to go to Missouri and later prophesies that if he and Brigham would go to Missouri, they would return safely. Faith in that promised preserved Jospeh Young from cholera. According to the Prophet's promise, Oliver and Sidney were ordained special witnesses and Joseph Young was ordained as one of the presidents of the Seventy. Kirtland Bank troubles caused some to lose faith; the Prophet envisioned Kirtland as one of the principal stakes of Zion.

When I look back about fifty years ago, or a little more, perhaps say fifty two years, that I heard something of a Golden Bibleit was a strange thing in those days of scarcity for great events. More so than perhaps it would be nowadays when so many marvelous things are transpiring, and, notwithstanding the violent position that was arrayed against it, there was a secret influence that came with a still small voice on the wings of the winds, in the Storms and the Tempests, in the clouds, in the Sunshine, and [in the] silent night in dreams and visions of those things which since have transpired which I have not the least [inclin]ation to doubt.

. . . I followed along in the old way (or Methodist order) for two long yearsafter which when I had witnessed many of those visions which I referred to. I left the province of Upper Canada with Brother Brigham and traveled 100 miles and arrived at our father's House in Mendon, Monroe County, State of New York, and tarried a few days and from thence 100 miles more to the State of Pennsylvania where I was baptized on the 6th of April 1832six months after this three of us, Bro. Brigham and H. C. Kimball and myself visited Kirtland, Ohio to witness the sight of a Prophet of the Lordhaving read of such men or characters. To see one and hear him talk was worth traveling two-hundred miles to have such a Blessing.

Well, how did I expect to find him? A short or a tall man, or a lank and slender Man? What was the physical status I had formed in my own mind of finding when I met a man sent from heaven with a message of love to poor fallen man? I had formed no particular idea in these respects. But the moral and spiritual condition, I must confess I had pictured out something, perhaps in my own mind which, when I saw him, did not fill my programI expected at least I should find him in his Sanctum dispensing spiritual blessings and giving directions on how to build the Zion of God on the earth. But the temporal part I seemed to overlook. Well, we inquired for Kirtland and found the house of the Prophet and inquired for him, and were informed that he was chopping firewood half a mile from his home . . . We repaired to the woods and found the young man Joseph the Prophet with a number of his brothers. We introduced our selves as visitors, [who had come] to see and converse with him, as we had come a long way for that purpose.

To these remarks he made the following short reply. "Brethren, I am glad to see you." At this he threw down his ax and said "Boys, take care of my ax," and we went with him to his house. He introduced us to his wife, Emma, who was in bed with the infant Joseph, her firstborn. This was in November, 1832. We tarried seven days, and then took leave of the man that could reveal the hidden things and mysteries of the Kingdom as no other man ever did before.

About 5 months subsequent to this period, the Prophet Joseph came to the State of New York. I met him in the town of Lima, Livingston County. He recognized and hailed me, before we had met. He exclaimed "There's Brother Joseph Young." We shook hands and [he] said, "Brother Joseph, I want to talk with you." Said he "let us go up to that barn," and we accordingly went. We went into it and climbed up into the loft and sat down on the hay. He said to me "Br. Joseph Young Sr.___________ will go down to hell until the day of redemption." I said to him, "Brother Joseph, you astonish me." "Well," he said, "it is true, for he has always put himself in my way, and wishes to supplant me and take this work out of my hands; but the Lord won't suffer him to do it." He then expatiated somewhat on the object of his then present mission; which was to gather up the strength of the Lord's house, to go up redeem Zion, or replace the Saints in Jackson County. He hinted to me a wish that I should go in that company. He did not however urge me.

For Brigham had moved to Kirtland the year before. This was the second time I had seen the Prophet. My convictions of the truth of his mission had not diminished in the least, but at every subsequent interview, I was strengthened in my faith in him as a prophet. I resolved if an opportunity was presented to go up to Kirtland, Ohio, where this company was rallying to go to Missouri, [I would join them.] It was not long before I had this [opportunity] presented; and I improved it. One of the brethren came along with his team and carriage and offered me a seat. I took leave of my newly married wife and we went on our way rejoicing to the land of Kirtland, where we arrived in safety and met and greeted our friends in that place, and saw the Prophet, for the third time. He then invited me again to go in the camp to Zion more pressingly and had Brigham's influence with him. He finally said to me, "Brother Joseph, if you will go with Brother Brigham and me up to Missouri, and will keep my counsel, both you and Brigham, I promise you in the name of the Lord, that I will lead you there and back again, and there shall not a hair of your heads fall." We both shook hands with him upon that covenant and we performed our vow; we kept his counsel. We arrived in Missouri March 12, 1838 [1834?]. But when we arrived in Liberty the cholera broke in upon us. Some scores of the Brethren were taken with it. It was light on some, and on others heavy, and about twenty cases were fatal. All felt its symptoms, I think, without exception. It attacked me a number of times, but not so radical as to prostrate me, for Joseph's promise would occur to me and my faith was so strong in it, that all the symptoms would leave me.

. . . I have referred to the ordination and organization of the Seventies, by the Prophet Joseph, in my Pamphlet, after our return from Missouri. I will add a little to what I have said in the Pamphlet. The Prophet remarked to Sidney Rigdon and Oliver Cowdery, who were then his acting Councilors; said he, "I promised these Brethren that went to Missouri, in Zion's Camp, that when they returned, and it was found that they had been faithful, that I would ordain them to all the Priesthood that the Lord had conferred upon us." He did not say, what that Priesthood was, but he meant no doubt the Apostleship.

I name this as a matter of history, and let it pass for what it is worth. The hands of those three men, I recollect distinctly, were placed upon my head. Sidney Rigdon was the mouth. I will repeat his words, as near as I can recollect. Calling me by name, he said, "We lay our hand on your head, and ordain you one of the Seventies or special witnesses, and confer upon you all the authority that the Lord has placed upon us; and we not only ordain you a Seventy, but we also ordain you a President of the Seventies."

I will now refer to the Temple. It was at this time, up to the square, Feb. 1835, and the roof was being put on. The work of completion was continued for about eight or nine months, till the next November, when it was ready to receive windows, which were prepared and placed in the building by the hands of Brigham and Joseph Young. The following April it was dedicated. The Prophet Joseph declared that Kirtland would be one of the principle Stakes of Zion. The Saints were very poor. Many of the elders had been absent on missionshad spent their time and their families in their absence had consumed their substance and money was very scarce. The prophet had conceived a plan of instituting a Bank, with a view of relieving their financial embarrassments, which all the Saints believed met with the approval and favor of the Lord. This was a stumbling block as it turned out; but it ranked pretty well with the failure of redeeming Zion, as neither of them was successful as people generally construed it, and even the Saints themselves, many of them looked upon it with disfavor; and their remarks on the subject showed that they could not, or did not understand, that the Lord had a hand in these things; but they had not eyes to see his providence. Some few of the Saints accused Joseph the Prophet in these matters and their murmurings brought chastisement upon them and left them in the dark and hence they stayed away and lost their faith.

. . . I will refer once more to the statement of the Prophet Joseph in regard to the Stake at Kirtland. I will repeat that he said, it would be one of the principle ones of Zion and that the faithful saints who then occupied it, should be among the principle ones, and their posterity of the inhabitants that should compose that City. I have heard Br. Brigham make similar statements.

Hence the many efforts that that man have made to obtain by legal process, possession of that Temple; but as far as I can learn the title of that property seems to be somewhat mixed. I am confirmed in these statements, from what transpired when we lived in Kirtland, after the Bank was established.

When the Bank first began to issue its currency, Brother Joseph, the Prophet, proposed to Brother Brigham and Brother Hyrum, that they should commence buying farms. The first one that was purchased, was from a Mr. Stannard, a farmer who lived on the edge of the town of Chester. This purchase was made by Joseph and Brigham. The Prophet paid over to this Mr. Stannard $2000.00 from the Bank, and they gave a mortgage and their notes for semi-annual payments, until all the purchase money was paid over. They took possession of the premises and all the personal property thereon, such as horses and colts; cows and calves; work oxen and farming utinsels; hay and grain that was in the barn. This shows that the Prophet Joseph was in earnest. His labors were constant and indefatigable. His motives were unquestionably pure and unyielding to any adverse pressure; and thus far he was successful.

This precedent was followed by many of his brethren and friends who made purchases of property round about Kirtland and the adjoining towns. Brigham and Hyrum made a number of purchases after this took place; as also the Prophet's brother Samuel purchased a farm in Mentor. He also paid $2000.00 for it from the Bank; and this was followed up by a good many purchases by the brethren who lived in Kirtland. I have neither time nor space to follow out this little thread of history at present. . . .

"Joseph Young Sr. to Lewis Harvey, 16 November 1880," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar, spelling, and punctuation have been modernized.
