Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Young, Lorenzo Dow

(October 19, 1807-November 21, 1895)

Saints are instructed to make their own clothing.

I well recollect hearing the Prophet Joseph instruct the people, about twenty years ago, to make their own clothing, and to let the decoration of their bodies be the workmanship of their own hands. That revelation has not been much thought of by many. I referred to it in the old Bowery, and there was such a rebutting feeling in the spirit of the people, that it was with the greatest difficulty I could say anything.

Journal of Discourses, 6:212 (December 13, 1857).

Note: See Doctrine and Covenants 42:40, the text from which the Prophet appears to have been preaching.

Lorenzo takes Joseph, Hyrum, and Brigham to examine a quarry and returned with the first load for the Kirtland Temple.

In March, 1833, Lorenzo Young followed his father and his brother Phineas to Kirtland, Ohio. The Kirtland Temple Committee was appointed June 6th, of that year. About that time with his team Lorenzo took Hyrum and Joseph Smith, his brother Brigham and Elder Cahoon to examine a stone quarry to see if the rook was suitable for the walls of the temple. It was decided that it would do, and a part of a load was put on the wagon. All returned to town and the rock was unloaded on the temple ground. The Prophet remarked, "We have hauled the first load of rock for the temple." From that time Lorenzo labored on the temple, as occasion required, until its completion.

James A. Little, "Biography of Lorenzo Dow Young," Utah Historical Quarterly 14, no. 1 (January 1946): 43-44.

Joseph calls Lorenzo to serve on the first high council, but Lorenzo refuses the call; Joseph honors Lorenzo's agency, and Lorenzo learns the sad lesson of disobedience.

On the 17th of February, 1834, those holding the Priesthood were called together for the purpose of organizing a High Council and Lorenzo Young was one of that number. Of this circumstance he says:

On that occasion I committed a grave error, and desire to leave a record of it for a lesson to others. The Prophet requested me to take a seat with the brethren who had been selected for this Council. Instead of doing so I arose and plead my inability to fill so responsible a position, manifesting I think, considerable earnestness in the matter. He then said he really desired I should take the place; but as I still excused myself he appointed another to fill it. I think that was the reason he never again called me to fill any important position in the Priesthood. I have since learned to go where I am called, and not set up my judgment against that of those who are called to guide in this kingdom.

James A. Little, "Biography of Lorenzo Dow Young," Utah Historical Quarterly 14, no. 1 (January 1946): 44.

Commissioned by Joseph, Lorenzo finds Artemus Millet, a mason, to finish the outside walls of the Kirtland Temple.

The 8th of March, 1835, Lorenzo Young was set apart in Kirtland as a missionary to the Lamanites.

When the temple was enclosed, in a meeting of the brethren called to consult about its completion, the Prophet Joseph Smith desired that a hard finish be put on its outside walls. None of the masons who had worked on the building knew how to do it. Looking around on those present his eyes rested on Lorenzo and he said, "Brother Lorenzo, I want you to take hold and put this hard finish on the walls. Will you do it?" Lorenzo replied, "Yes, I will try."

The following day with horse and buggy he went to Cleveland, twenty-two miles, determined if possible to find a man who understood the business. He had been there but a short time inquiring after such a man, when he met a young man, Artemus Millet, who said he understood the business, had just completed a job and wanted another. Lorenzo at once engaged him, put him and his tools into the buggy and returned to Kirtland.

The materials and fixtures were soon on hand to make the mortar, and work was commenced on the 2nd of November, 1835 . . .

James A. Little, "Biography of Lorenzo Dow Young," Utah Historical Quarterly 14, no. 1 (January 1946): 44.

The Prophet advises that 12 or 15 men join in administering to the dying Lorenzo, each in turn until they obtain a testimony that he will be healed. Hyrum Smith prophecies he will regain his health and go with the Saints and gain prosperity in the Rocky Mountainsthis being one of the earlier statements of the westward move of the Saints. It is also a case where obeying the ordinances brings the Spirit into the lives of those participating.

The task [of finishing the outside walls of the Kirtland Temple] was completed on the 8th of January, 1836, but Lorenzo was sick the last two days. He had caught a bad cold accompanied with a very severe cough, and in a few days was confined to his bed. His disease was pronounced "quick consumption," and he sank rapidly. When for two weeks he had been unable to walk, Dr. Williams, one of the brethren, came to see him. Considering his case a bad one he returned the next day and brought with him Dr. Seeley, an old practicing physician, and another doctor whose name is forgotten.

They examined the patient and Dr. Seeley asserted that he had not as much lungs as would fill a tea saucer. He appeared a somewhat rough, irreligious man. With what he probably considered a good natured fling at the belief of the Saints in miracles, he said to Father Young, "Unless the Lord makes your son a pair of lungs there is no hope for him." Again we will let the subject of our narrative tell his experience, when his life seemed to hang only on a thread:

I was so low and nervous that I could scarcely bear any noise in the room. The next morning after the visit of the doctors, my father came to the door of the room to see how I was, and I recall his gazing earnestly at me with tears in his eyes. As I afterwards learned he went from there to the Prophet Joseph and said to him: "My son, Lorenzo, is dying: can there not be something done for him?" The Prophet studied a few moments and replied, "Yes' of necessity I must go away to fill an appointment which I cannot put off. But you go and get my brother Hyrum, and with him get together twelve or fifteen good faithful brethren; go to the house of Brother Lorenzo and all join in prayer; one by mouth and the others repeat after him in unison. After prayer divide into quorums of three. Let the first quorum who administer anoint Brother Young with oil, then lay hands on him, one being mouth, and the other two repeating in unison with him. When all the quorums have, in succession, laid their hands on Brother Young and prayed for him, begin again with the first quorum by anointing, continuing the administration in this way until you receive a testimony that he will be restored.

My father came with fifteen of the brethren and these instructions were strictly followed. The administrations were continued until it came the turn of the first quorum the third time. Brother Hyrum Smith led. The spirit rested mightily upon him and he was full of blessing and prophecy. He said that I should regain my health, live to go with the Saints into the bosom of the Rocky Mountains to build up a place there, and that my cellar should overflow with wine and fatness.

At that time I had not heard about the Saints going to the Rocky Mountains; possibly Brother Smith had. After he was through the administration he seemed surprised at some things he had said, and wondered at the manifestations of the spirit. I coughed no more and rapidly recovered. I had been pronounced by the best physicians in the country past all human aid. I am now a living witness of the powers of God through the administration of the Elders.

James A. Little, "Biography of Lorenzo Dow Young," Utah Historical Quarterly 14, no. 1 (January 1946): 45-46.

Joseph calls Young on missions to Ohio, New York, and Pennsylvania.

[Lorenzo] continued to live in Kirtland to labor for the support of his family and to go on missions. After receiving his blessings in the House of the Lord in the spring of 1836, he was sent by the Prophet Joseph to the western part of Ohio. He preached in a number of towns and baptized several persons.

This was a short mission, and soon after his return to Kirtland the Prophet called Lorenzo to go on a mission to the states of New York and Pennsylvania.

James A. Little, "Biography of Lorenzo Dow Young," Utah Historical Quarterly 14, no. 1 (January 1946): 48.

In reporting his mission to the First Presidency, Young displeases Rigdon, but Joseph insists he be open and complete in detail; he speaks of his distrust for Sampson Avard, who was then organizing his Danites. Lorenzo has courage to confront Avard.

I returned to Kirtland, and in a short time was requested to attend a council of the First Presidency, which consisted of the Prophet, S. Rigdon, and F. G. Williams. I was requested by Joseph Smith to make a report of my mission, and particularly that part of it connected with Dr. Avard, and the branch of the Church over which he presided. The impressions I had received of him were not flattering to his character for honesty and integrity. Without bringing any accusation against him, in a moderate way I expressed my views to the council. Elder Rigdon manifested his displeasure by animadverting rather sharply on my remarks. After he was through expressing his views the Prophet Joseph said, "Brother Young, I wish you to express your views of Dr. Avard without fear or favor." I expressed a wish not to do so, to which he replied that he really desired that I should. I then more fully gave my opinion that Dr. Avard was a dishonest, hypocritical man. I said to Elder Rigdon, "Give Dr. Avard time and he will prove my estimate of his character to be correct."

James A. Little, "Biography of Lorenzo Dow Young," Utah Historical Quarterly 14, no. 1 (January1946): 51-52.

Note: Young then tells of later being invited by Avard to a meeting of his secret society, called Danites, whose mission it was to take revenge on nonmembers, pursuing them even to their homes and bedrooms. On one occasion Young spoke to the society, giving his reasons for not wanting to join, and Avard interrupted him and threatened to have him killed. Lorenzo went and told Brigham, who told Joseph, who was already suspicious of some evil on Avard's part.
