Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Young, Margaret Pierce Whiteside

(April 18, 1823-June 16, 1907)

Joseph visited her home; her mother prepared "a splendid supper" and Joseph preached until 2 a.m.; the next day her mother was baptized; Joseph confirmed her; Hyrum also visited their home; also tells of Joseph and Emma meeting them at the landing when they moved to Nauvoo and taking them to their home and entertaining them.

In January, 1840, word came that the Prophet Joseph Smith was to visit our Branch on his way from Philadelphia. It was announced in the papers, and Father said, "Let us get our carriage and go to meet him." So James Downing, Levi Riter, Jacob Weiler and Father, Robert Pierce, brought him to our house.

My Mother served a splendid supper, and then the neighbors gathered to hear the Prophet discourse. I wish that I might describe my feelings at that meeting. Though they are fresh in my memory today, I cannot fall short of expressing myself. So animated with loving kindness, so mild and gentle, yet big and powerful and majestic was the Prophet, that to me he seemed more than a man; I thought almost, that he was an Angel. We were all investigating, none of my people had yet entered the waters of baptism. However, it was a great joy to us to entertain the Prophet Joseph Smith, and hear his wonderful words of wisdom. It was 2 o'clock in the morning before we permitted him to retire. We wanted to listen to him all night.

After he had gone from the room, my Mother said, "I don't see how anyone can doubt that he is a Prophet of God. They can see it in his countenance, which is so full of intelligence." "Yes, truly!" my Father replied. "He is a Prophet of God." The very next day my Mother was ready for baptism. The ice was six (6) inches deep, but was cut, and the way was prepared and Mother entered the waters of baptism. She was baptized by Elder Lorenzo Barnes, and was confirmed a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

My sister, Mary, followed, but Mother made me wait until the weather was milder, so it was not until April that I became a member of the Church. My father was baptized the following day.

We kept "open house" for the Missionaries. Among those who visited us were Brother and Sister Erastus Snow, who had with them their first baby. They were indeed sweet singers, and we enjoyed their society very much. Brother Snow, afterwards, became one of the powerful leaders in Utah. Hyrum Smith, the Patriarch, also came to our home. His object was to borrow money for the Church. Father had sold his property with the fixed purpose of gathering with the Saints, so he freely loaned what was asked of him.

The Patriarch was like his brother Joseph, a very great gentleman, handsome, splendid, serious and yet extremely polite and full of blessings.

One lovely day in harvest time, September 22, 1843, accompanied by William Smith, the brother of the Prophet, we bade farewell to our land of Quaker parentage, and traveling by rail and steam-boat we soon landed in the beautiful city of Nauvoo, Illinois. At the landing, who should we meet but the Prophet and his wife who took us to their home and entertained us most hospitably. Their family was always very friendly to us, seeming never to forget my father's hospitality in Pennsylvania, as well as his generosity in lending money that was needed.

"Margaret Pierce Young (1823-1907) Journal Excerpts," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1-3.
