Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Young, Zina Diantha Huntington

(January 31, 1821-August 28, 1901)

Learned the principle of eternal marriage and polygamy from Joseph, to whom she was sealed; she also tells of the martyrdom, claiming Joseph uttered the Masonic distress code when leaping from the Cathage jail window.

Joseph Smith taught her the principle of marriage for eternity, and she accepted it as a divine revelation, and was sealed to the Prophet, after the order of the new and everlasting covenant, Oct. 27, 1841, her brother Dimick officiating. . . .

[At a mass meeting of Utah women held on November 16, 1878, Zina arose extemporaneously and said:] I am the widow of a master mason, who, when leaping from the window of Carthage jail pierced with bullets, made the masonic sign of distress; but, gentlemen (addressing the representatives of the press that were present) those signs were not headed except by the God of heaven. That man, the Prophet of the Almighty, was massacred without mercy! Sisters, this is the first time in my life that I have dared to give utterance to this fact, but I thought I could trust my souls to say it on this occasion; and I say it now in the fear of Israel's God, and I say it in the presence of these gentlemen, and I wish my voice could be heard by the whole brotherhood of masons throughout our proud land.

"Zina Diantha Huntington Young," in Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Western Epics, 1971), 1:697-99.

Even the elements lamented the martyrdom; Learns of the martyrdom when she sees Dimick weeping; she was present, with Thousands, when Brigham Young was transfigured to appear as Joseph.

It was the 27th of June, 1844, and it was rumored that Joseph was expected in from Carthage. I did not know to the contrary until I saw the Governor and his guards descending the hill by the temple, a short distance from my house. Their swords glistened in the sun, and their appearance startled me, though I knew not what it foreboded. I exclaimed to a neighbor who was with me, "What is the trouble! It seems to me that the trees and the grass are in mourning!" A fearful silence pervaded the city, and after the shades of night gathered around us it was thick darkness. The lightnings flashed, the cattle bellowed, the dogs barked, and the elements wailed. What a terrible night that was to the saints, yet we knew nothing of the dark tragedy which had been enacted by the assassins at Carthage.

The mourning dawned; the sad news came; but as yet I had not heard of the terrible event. I started to go to Mother Smith's, on an errand. As I approached I saw men gathered around the door of the mansion. A few rods from the house I met Jesse P. Harmon. "Have you heard the news?" he asked. "What news?" I inquired. "Joseph and Hyrum are dead!" Had I believed it, I could not have walked any further. I hastened to my brother, Dimick. He was sitting in his house, mourning and weeping aloud as only strong men can weep. All was confirmed in a moment. My pen cannot utter my grief nor describe my sorrow. But after awhile a change came, as though the released spirits of the departed sought to comfort us in that hour of dreadful bereavement.

"The healer was there, pouring balm on my heart,

And wiping the tears from my eyes;

He was binding the chain that was broken in twain,

And fastening it firm in the skies."

Never can it be told in words what the saints suffered in those days of trial; but the sweet spiritthe comforterdid not forsake them; and when the twelve returned, the mantle of Joseph fell upon Brigham.

When I approached the stand (on the occasion when Sidney Rigdon was striving for the guardianship of the Church), President Young was speaking. It was the voice of Joseph Smithnot that of Brigham Young. His very person was changed. The mantle was truly given to another. There was no doubting this in the minds of that vast assembly. All witnessed the transfiguration, and even to-day thousands bear testimony thereof. I closed my eyes. I could have exclaimed, I know that is Joseph Smith's voice! Yet I knew he had gone. But the same spirit was with the people; the comforter remained.

Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall, 1877), 326-27.

Recounts events leading up to, surrounding, and following the martyrdom.

21st [June, 1844] Had a letter from the Governor [Thomas Ford], to Joseph. He is at Carthage, that is the Governor.

[27th June, 1844] O the ever to be remembered awful day of the 27th of June 1844. The men of Carthage drove off some of the brethren at the point of the bayonet and swore they would kill Joseph. The Governor knew of it yet he left them in the jail with a light guard, took a number of men, came out here. About the time they arrived here in Nauvoo the awful scene took place. About 100 men with painted faces burst open the jail door. Shot in. (No man entered the room). Joseph discharged three of the barrels of a six-shooter. Hyrum was short first in the head or under the left eye. [They] shot Joseph through. He leaped from the upper window of a 2 story building. Brother Willard Richards started to follow him but seeing that he must fall upon the enemies bayonet, desisted. Brother John Taylor is wounded. By the miraculous hand of God Brother Richards was not hurt, for the bullets flew like hail in a violent storm. There were both shot twice. Thus in one day about 3 or 4 o'clock fell the Prophet and Patriarch of the Church of the Latter day Saints, the kind husbands, the affectionate father, the venerable statesman, the friends of mankind, by the hand of a ruthless mob mixed with dissenters. O God how long before thou wilt avenge the innocent blood that had been shed? How long must widows mourn and orphans cry before thou wilt avenge the faith and cause wickedness to cease? Wilt thou hasten the day, O Lord, in thine own way? Wilt thou prepare me to stand all things and come off conqueror through him who hath loved us, and give me a seat in thy Celestial Kingdom with the sanctified. I ask these favors for thy Son Jesus' sake, amen.

July 1st, 1844. I washed Joseph and Hyrum's clothes.

In Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed. "'All things Move in Order in the City': The Nauvoo Diary of Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs," BYU Studies 19, no. 3 (spring 1979): 291-93.

Those who died because of persecution also called martyrs.

Thus died my martyred mother! The prophet Joseph often said that the saints who died in the persecutions were as much martyrs of the Church as was the apostle David Patten, who was killed in the defense of the Saints, or those who were massacred at Haun's Mill.

In Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall, 1877), 214.

Recalls the blessing given to her son by Joseph Smith, who promised he would become a "Patriarch, Priest, and King."

Jan. 2nd, 1889. Today is the birthday of my firstborn son Zebulon Jacobs who [was born] Sunday, Jan. 2, 1842 about sunrise [illegible] in Nauvoo, Hancock Co., Illinois. Joseph Smith came with Brother Dimick B. Huntington and blessed me after I was taken sick [and] said all would be well. The next day he came in and blessed the boy, [and] said he should be a Patriarch, Priest and King, just give him time to grow up. This gave me comfort and strength to exercise faith.

"Zina D. H. Young, Diary 1889," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Grammar, spelling, and punctuation have been modernized.

Memories of the Prophet: the transfiguration of Brigham Young; Joseph told her brother that an angel with a drawn sword commanded plural marriage; those true to Joseph Smith to be admitted to Celestial glory.

I received a testimony for myself from the Lord of this work, and that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God before I ever saw him, while I resided in the state of New York, given in answer to prayer. I knew him in his lifetime and know him to have been a great, true man, and a servant of God.

The speaker also related in detail her experience and impressions on the occasion when President Brigham Young seemed to the whole congregation to be the Prophet Joseph. . . . Continuing, she said: "I wish to bear my testimony to the principle of celestial marriage, that it is true. When I think of the man [Joseph Smith] that took his life in his hands and went from place to place where God told him to go, and in the midst of persecutions, trials and vexations of every kind, made covenant with the women of God that have stood true to himmost of themwhen I think of his integrity, and of his obedience, I think what a lesson it should be to us, that we know he did not do this of his own accord. He sent word to me by my brother, saying, 'Tell Zina I put it off and put it off till an angel with a drawn sword stood by me and told me if I did not establish that principle upon the earth, I would lose my position and my life.' President Young told us in several placessaid he, 'Brethren, if you want wives take them, for the time will come when you can't.' But, thanks to our Heavenly Father, there are many left upon the earth who were born under the celestial covenant, although they do not at present appreciate their position. The day will come when they will feel the Spirit of God resting upon them, and they will feel that it is an honor to be born in that covenant. I feel to bear my testimony to the truth of this work. I know it is the work of God, and that Joseph Smith was His Prophet, and that Brigham Young was his successor, and those by whom I am surrounded are holy men, living to the best of their understanding, according to His will. Joseph Smith said: 'All you who will not find fault with the words of life and salvation that God reveals through me for the salvation of the human family, I will stand like an officer of the gate, and I will see you safe through into the celestial kingdom.' I became his wife at this time in Nauvoo, and I never in my life had a rebellious thought against that principle, for which I thank the Lord."

President Joseph F. Smith [then said:] "I want to announce that this lady is a wife of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was sealed to him in his lifetime, and lived with him as his wife in Nauvoo."

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:31-32.

Note: Zina Diantha was sealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith; she was also married to Henry Bailey Jacobes.

Joseph told William Huntington that a messenger who visited the Huntington family to prepare them to receive the gospel was one of the Three Nephites.

When Zina Diantha was eleven, the Huntington family received an unusual visitor. They treated it as a significant occurrence, but the experience assumed heightened importance when the family joined the Mormons and heard the mysterious story of the Three Nephites, ancient Americans promised by a resurrected Jesus they would live until the Second Coming. As told by Zina Diantha's daughter, Zina Young Card, the visit occurred on a cold November evening in 1832. The family had gathered for their customary scripture study followed by a musical evening with Zina Diantha playing the cello. After they had finished a piece of music, they heard a knock at the door and opened it to a man of medium height, dressed in old-fashioned clothing, and carrying a bundle under his arm. He stepped into the room and inquired, "I usually bend my steps to some sequestered vale. May I find lodging here tonight?" They pulled up a chair for him, served him some supper, and read with him a section from the New Testament. Zina Baker commented wistfully that they would like to "hear the Gospel in its fullness as explained by the Saviour. The stranger immediately took up the subject and began explaining the scriptures and quoting the sayings of the Saviour. It seemed to them that his words held a new light and were clearer than they had ever thought of before. The stranger filled them with awe and reverence, such as they had never before felt." He left the next morning.

A few years later, when Joseph Smith spoke to a group of Latter-day Saints about the Three Nephites, William recounted this visit. Joseph laid his hand on William's shoulder and said, "My dear brother, that man was one of the Three Nephites who was sent by the Lord to prepare your family to receive the restored gospel of Jesus Christ."

Martha Sonntag Bradley and Mary Brown Firmage Woodward, Four Zinas (Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books, 2000), 41-42.

Tells of kindness of Joseph in caring for Huntington family during sickness.

On 24 June [1839] Zina first fell sick with what they thought was a "congestive chill" but was actually malaria. Oliver [Huntington] and Zina Diantha also suffered from "chills and fever," Oliver remembered. "Father took care of us and John done the house work by the direction of Zina Diantha, for Mother was too low to talk. In a day or two more and Father was flat on his back, when we had to get a hired girl." Zina Diantha's account is a chronicle of progressive suffering:

"I was taken sick in the morning of the 25th [of June]. My Father on the 27th, my Brother Oliver on the 1st of July. John was the only one that could give us a drink of water. . . . Pres Joseph Smith . . . and his family ware very kind. . . . He saw to our being taken care of as well as circumstances would possibly permit as there ware hundreds in tents and wagons that needed care.

"He once came in, found us all needing refreshment [so] he went and made us warm drink [and] brought it to all of us. My mother's weight was 236 lbs so that when she needed lifting he sent Brethren to assist."

Joseph daily visited all families suffering with illness, blessing the sickest.

Martha Sonntag Bradley and Mary Brown Firmage Woodward, Four Zinas (Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books, 2000), 103-4.

Account of Joseph and Emma kindly tending to the sick.

Joseph Smith manifested the tenderest solicitude for this struggling family. In a story that paralleled that of others bonded to him during this difficult time, he had sixteen-year-old Oliver taken to Hiram Clark's while Zina Diantha and John came to his own house where Emma devotedly nursed them back to health. Zina and John stayed for three months during the winter of 1839-40. In her autobiography, Zina praised the Smith's generosity: "My Fathers life was dispared of. . . . Some times 30 or 40 would come from there tents and wagons to shake with the ague or have chills on President Smiths floor just to be in the shade. Sister Emma was like a mother, and [I] Fancy I can see the pales of Gruel and quarts of Composition that was retailed to the sick in those shadowy times.

Martha Sonntag Bradley and Mary Brown Firmage Woodward, Four Zinas (Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books, 2000), 106.

Joseph tells Zina she will be reunited with her Mother after death, and that we have a Mother in Heaven.

Still mourning the loss of her mother, Zina Diantha asked the prophet's help in understanding the meaning of her experience. She wondered if she would know her mother in the hereafter. He replied promptly, "Certainly you will. More than that you will meet and become acquainted with your eternal Mother, the wife of your Father in Heaven." Never having previously considered the novel idea of a heavenly mother, Zina asked: "And have I then a Mother in Heaven?" "You assuredly have," Joseph answered. "How could a Father claim His title unless there were also a Mother to share that parenthood."

Martha Sonntag Bradley and Mary Brown Firmage Woodward, Four Zinas (Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books, 2000), 107.
