Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Bullock, Lucy Clayton

(March 26, 1820-April 16, 1879)

Joseph, disguised in a woman's bedclothes, escapes mob by hiding in Clayton's home.

As a young girl Lucy was acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother, Hyrum. At one time the Prophet was being hunted by a mob. In order to escape he sought refuge at the Clayton home where he quickly dressed, at the request of Mrs. Clayton, in a woman's nightdress and cap and went to bed in Lucy's bed with his face toward the wall. When the mobsters came with their clothes wrong side out and their faces all blackened, they rushed into the house, searching it from top to bottom. As they entered the bedroom, Lucy's mother told them the women in the bed was very sick. They immediately left the house, and the Prophet once again escaped uninjured.

"Lucy Clayton Bullock," in Kate B. Carter, comp. Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1958-77), 8:287-88.

Tells of her mother dressing Joseph in a woman's nightgown and cap and hiding him in a bed while a mob searched the house; also claims to have seen the Urim and Thummim.

She became very well acquainted with the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum Smith and worked for their families a great deal of the time. At one time the Prophet was visiting in the home where she was staying and while they were eating dinner, they heard a large commotion just down the street. Looking out they saw an angry mob of men with their faces blacked and their coats turned to the bedroom, dressed in her large flannel night gown and night cap, which were worn in those days and put him in bed with his face to the wall. The mob came storming to the door and declared that someone had seen the Prophet come to this house earlier in the day and that the place had been carefully watched all day. They said that they knew he was in the house. Grandmother told them that she had a very sick woman in the bedroom and begged them to be more quiet, but that they were welcome to come in and search the place. The leader stormed into the bedroom, pulled all of the clothes in a large fashioned wardrobe on the floor, looked in all the corners, under the bed and then stood glaring at the woman in the bed. He then stormed out, telling his men that there was no one in there but the sick old "hag" she had mentioned. Grandmother kept him in bed until darkness had settled down and then succeeded in helping him get to a place of safety. She related this story to her family many years after and said that the Lord had heard her prayers, that day and delivered the beloved Prophet out of the hands of his enemies. She was a girl of very great faith and many many times her faith and prayers were rewarded.

While the Book of Mormon was being translated, she was very well acquainted with the men who did the translating, cooked meals for them and helped in any way she could. She was allowed to see the Urim and Thummim but never the plates. At the time of the death of the Prophet, and his brother Hyrum she was employed in the home of the jailor. After the trouble was over and the bodies taken to their homes, she was ordered to clean up the plaster etc. which had been shot from the walls of the cell. She was unable to scrub the blood stains from the rough board floor of the jail. She went to the Smith home that night, and was one of the six people who were present when the bodies were buried in the basement of an unfinished building.

Flora Reynolds, "My Grandmother's History, Read in Daughters of the Utah Pioneers Camp, Jan. 14, 1942," typescript copy, Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, Salt Lake City, Utah.
