Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Bunnell, Stephen Ithamar

(February 1, 1834-July 23, 1925)

Heard Joseph's last speech; appears to have been present for transfiguration of Brigham Young.

I went with my mother to Nauvoo. My mother and I heard the Prophet preach his last sermon. He told the people what to do to avoid apostasy. He stood in the pulpit and then said "Attend to your prayers, pay an honest tithing, obey the authorities and follow the records of this Church and you will never apostatize."

. . . I saw the Prophet Joseph Smith and heard him preach his last sermon, with the exception of the one he preached to the mob at Carthage Jail, Ill. I also saw him and his brother Hyrum. After they were murdered and their bodies brought to Nauvoo, and after the burial the Church was without a leader. Sidney Rigdon one of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon claimed the right to lead the Church. The church held a meeting and had him (Sidney Rigdon) up to be sustained by vote of the people. But he received very few votes. They put Brigham Young up and he got about 40 [illegible]. When Brigham Young stood up before the congregation the people all declared that he had the look of the Prophet Joseph, then he was declared the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

"Stephen Ithamar Bunnell," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

In a dream sees and talks with Joseph, who says in the spirit world they are very busy; saw the quarreling of the damned; Joseph promised Bunnell could join Hyrum and him if he was faithful.

I started on a journey on the 2nd of January 1916 not knowing where I was going until I came to two very large gates. Just as I approached the gates they opened and two men were there, who seemed to be gate keepers. One of the men said to me, "Your name is Bunnell isn't it?" I answered "Yes, sir" then the interested man said, that the Prophet Joseph Smith was down here a few minutes ago and asked if I had been there, and the man said I had not. He then turned around and said "there he comes now he will soon be here." I started toward him and he toward me, when we met he said "Well brother Bunnell I am glad you are here we have been looking for you." He then took me by the right hand and told me to hold tight to his hand and he would to mine. He said, "Now I want you to go with me and I will show you the beauties of Mount Zion." When we had gone almost to the top I saw a great many people I had known on earth. He said, "Now we haven't time to talk long, I think my brother Hyrum is up here today." Then he said, "No he isn't here today, I had forgotten he is off on some business." He then said, "As you only had five hours to spend, that isn't much time, and we will have to hurry." Then we started and came to a dark deep gulch, I heard a noise and asked him what it was, he told me it was the spirits of the damned fighting among themselves. These are the ones who have murdered the Prophets, Saints, and children of God ever since this world was created," he said. Then we came to the gates and they opened the same as when I came in. He then said "Go back Brother Bunnell and do all you can, and when you can not do any more, you shall come and dwell with my brother Hyrum and myself and all other Saints who have done their duty, through all eternity for you have done a great work for your kindred dead, and for others.

"A DreamFrom the Life of Stephen I. Bunnell," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
