Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Burbank, Daniel Mark

(December 3, 1814-1894)

Tells of experiences in Nauvoo; recalls efforts of mob to kidnap Joseph and of events associated with kidnapping at Dixon, Illinois; recalls martyrdom, the persecutions which surrounded it, and the Saints leaving for the West.

Whilst Living in Nauvoo Times was vary Hard for the saints to live whilst Bilding The Temple our Labor was Grate for we had to Labor days and gard Night thare was menny Atemps made to Burn the Temple some times By falst Brethern seeking to kill the Proffet Joseph Smith Kidnap him and run (?) him into Misoury and thare Hang Burn or other Wise distroy him so menny times We had to turn out and take him a way and fetch him home again. At one time Whilst at Poplar (?) Grove on Hook River and mutch Mal treated him. When Bro. Hiram Smith set out Colnel Charles Mitah (?) Colnel Steven Markum And other each with a party of horsemen one to be Towdry (?) the Massacippy and the other East to head to Ward the Illinois River Whilest sum thirty others Went by Watter on Bord of the steam Boat Maid of Iowa this Boat was commanded by Sma Jones. Whilst the Possey was commanded by General John C. Cumum (?) John Taylor Chapten John Pinlinsen (?) Shargan (?) & [illegible] Burbank Pilot and first sargent George Langley second sargent Thomas Briligstears (?) [illegible]. We started down the massacippy then turned up the Illinois River we soon found that thare was A Boat that had ben landed (?) out at St. Louis to Receive Joseph and the Mob at Otaway whitch is on the West side of the River at the Mouth of Fox River and run him into St. Louis then Back into the Country and thare distroy him at thare own pleasure this Boat Had a Armed posse (?) and two scivels (?) on Bord hur name was Chickeaugo BillA bury large and strang Bilt Boat with sum hundred men Well Armed when we got this New we boarded all stream for the Bill was som 40 miles away. At the Town of Eary West Bank we had to stop and bye some Bricks and wound (?) up our Back wall of our furnis But this Was soon dun And we Gaze (?) under Way crouding our Little Beat day & Night tell one Morning about three O.C. [o'clock] we have in sight of the Town of Peakin East Bank. When in about one and a half miles of this plase We saw a Boat Leaving the Warf Running out at Cross the River West for a small Island shute (?) Whitch was the mane pasage and Channel in hear [illegible] in to the Right in to this Channel she Caut fast on a sand Bar and thare she was fast and caut. the Bill We stoped and haled her wiWith a speaking trumpt from the Pilot stand if she wanted Not set us pass she wanted What Boat we was we told hur she than answered that she wanted not Let us by she then swung aRound With hur sturn in the Willers and thare Made it fast. We then asked if they wanted not East of hur Line and let us pass they swore that they Wanted Not at this time hur decks was black with [illegible] When the spirit of God Whispered to the Pilot Burbank whitch was at the Wheal to go A Round hur through the Brush on Island When at this moment the Pilot Rang the Bell sung out through the Long Speaking trumpet to the Ingmeare (?) to put on the steam on we Went through the Woods tell we reached the main River about the Bell so on we went and twilight in the morning we was at the House of [illegible] heard we got [illegible] from our Brotheren that went by Land so on we Went to Peru Twon on the West side at the Mouth of the Canall here We got word again that our Brotheren by Land Had retaken Joseph and they ware on thare march for Nauvoo for us to Return to Quincy and Wate thare tell further Orders so back we went. [illegible] the Bell again at Simon (?) Island on a plase Nome as the Buckhorn wood yard Was lying to a Wooding on to Quincy we went and from this plase on up to Nauvoo Joseph was there undergoing his tryel he cald to us to Wate he wanted to see us and in a little While him and Bro. Hiram camein to our midst then they Blest us in the Name of the Lord and we again Went to our Homes then for a while we lived in pease tell a Bout the time that Joseph gave him self up to go to Carthage. Being Charged With treson aganst Government this was only a sham for he was alway true and [illegible] they only wanted to distroy him and this was the desire of the hole & Entire Government and then after the Governor ford promised him proticksion [illegible] thare one men and whilst in prison they shot him & Bro. Hiram then Not long they Commenst Burning our houses killing our stock all through the Country so that the people at Nauvoo had to turn out and help Geather in the poor saints Amenny of them had only the close on thare Bachs all had ben Burn and distroyed And sum lost thare lives I Rode for sum time (illegible) Colnel S. Markum on Bar River Grean Planes and also at Carthage and to Warsaw in our scourging the Country we saw mutch distruction of houses animals & Grane in this We got no redress from the Governor or the President of the united states in 1846 We had to leave the states and find a home Whare Best we could, so we started into the Wilderness West leaving our farms houses orcherds and Temple and Got Nothing for all our Labors meny vary Pour and destitute for the comforts of life yet We must go or Be Killed [illegible] uterly distroyed as the thrusting in God we draged along till we got in to the valley of the Grate Salt Lake.

"Autobiography of Daniel Mark Burbank, 1814-1894," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
