Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Burbank, Sarah

(b. 1836)

First saw Joseph when she was eight; remembers seeing his parents and Emma; her parents saw the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum; her husband administered medicine to and cured Emma once.

I was eight years old when I saw the Prophet Joseph Smith first. I have been in his store and bought things for my parents. We lived not far from his house on Mulholland Street. I have heard him preach, also his brother Hyrum. I have shaken hands with him in Sunday School. His wife, Eliza Snow Smith, his second wife, was my teacher. In a grove by the Prophet Joseph Smith's house I have seen his first wife, Emma Hale Smith, and his mother, Lucy Mack Smith. The Prophet's father's name was Joseph. He was the first patriarch in the Church of the Latter-Day Saints.

I have seen Joseph in his regiment unit on his black horse, named charley, drilling his soldiers, sword in hand as they marched with drum and fifes. I with many people, sat on the ground watching him, his big feather flying on his hat. He looked grand.

. . . After the Prophet's death the Lord made known to Brigham Young that he was to be our leader. When Brigham was speaking to the Saints his voice sounded like Joseph and he looked like him, then the Saints knew he was our Prophet, Seer and Revelator. I bear my testimony that he was a Prophet of God raised up to lead the people in these last days.

When Joseph and Hyrum were brought in from Carthage dead my parents went and saw them lying in their bloody clothes in Joseph's house. People went there to see by the thousands. My parents went to their funeral. It was a mock funeral to fool the mob, [tombs?] filled with sand because of threats that their bodies would be dug up. The city was in great mourning and many cried saying, "What will we do for our great Prophet, he is gone." The Lord raised up another in the person of Brigham Young.

My husband D. M. Burbank, used to guard his house and took him out in the country and hid him away from the mob. He dressed himself in his mother's old dress and bonnet and took her cane and basket, bent over and walked past the mob and got away. My husband guarded the Prophet just before he was taken to Carthage where he was put in jail. Hyrum was holding the door when the mob fired the bullet through it striking him. He fell to the floor exclaiming, "I am a dead man." Joseph was shot as he was about to leap from the window. They took him and set him up by a wall.

John Taylor was shot in his hip and hand. A bullet truck his watch that hung over his heart and that saved his life. The doctors took the bullet out of his wounds. Willard Richards crawled under the bed and saved his life.

When Emma the Prophet's wife was given up to die by the doctor he called D. M. Burbank to come and see her. Brother Burbank said, "I think I can cure her," she said he went in the store, got some medicine and stayed two nights and days and cured her. Then the Prophet told Brother Burbank to gather all his books and tend all the ladies in confinement. The knowledge that Brother Burbank had was received in a hospital in St. Louis. The Prophet said that was his mission on earth and his blessing said the same. I went along with my husband and learned how to take care of women from him. My blessing also said I came on this earth to attend to the sick.

"Account of the Life of Sarah Burbank, Written at Richfield, Utah, March 13, 1924," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some spelling and punctuation have been modernized.
