Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Burgess, Harrison

(September 3, 1814-February 10, 1883)

On Zion's Camp the Lord told Joseph their offering of faith was accepted; also that a scourge would comethe cholera followed.

I started in March, 1834, in company with Joseph Smith and others. We had a long and tedious journey, and arrived in Missouri on the last of June. While the camp tarried there, Brother Joseph received the word of the Lord by revelation, relative to the camp, informing us that we were not to fight at that time, that Zion could not be redeemed then, and that He had required us to come thus far, as a trial of our faith, that He had accepted of our offering. Some individuals of the camp fell to murmur at this decree and wanted to fight the enemies of God. Brother Joseph said the Lord would send in a scourge upon us in consequence of this unrighteous feeling. The cholera was upon in a few hours after this prediction, and some eighteen of our brethren fell victims to its grasp. Among the number that I attended upon, and helped to bury, was my Brother John S. Carter. My feelings on this occasion can never be described. At length I was violently seized with it myself, but through faith in God and the kind assistance of Brother Zerah Cole, I was rescued from the grasp of death.

Harrison Burgess, "Sketch of a Well-Spent Life," in "Labors in the Vineyard," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 66-67. See also "Harrison Burgess, Autobiography," in Kenneth Glyn Hales, ed. and comp., Windows: A Mormon Family (Tucson, Ariz.: Skyline Printing, 1985), 101-2.

Manifestations in the Kirtland Temple in spring 1835; Joseph sees the Savior; others see angels.

I will here relate a vision which was shown me. It was near the close of the endowmentsI was in a meeting for instruction in the upper part of the temple, with about a hundred of the high priests, seventies, and elders. The Saints felt to shout, "Hosanna," and the spirit of God rested upon me in mighty power and I beheld the room lighted up, with a peculiar light such as I had never seen before; [soft and clear and] the room looked to me as though it had neither roof nor floor to the building and I beheld Joseph [Smith the Prophet] and Hyrum Smith [the Prophet's brother], and Roger Orton enveloped in the light. Joseph exclaimed aloud, "I behold the Savior, the Son of God." Hyrum exclaimed "I behold the angels of heaven." Brother Orton exclaimed, "I behold the chariots of Israel." All who were in the room felt the power of God to that degree that many prophesied, and the power of God was made manifest, [to all these in the assembly] the remembrance of which I shall never forget while I live upon the earth.

Harrison Burgess, "Sketch of a Well-Spent Life," in "Labors in the Vineyard," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 67. See also "Harrison Burgess, Autobiography," in Kenneth Glyn Hales, ed. and comp. Windows: A Mormon Family. (Tucson, Ariz.: Skyline Printing, 1985), 103.

Attended School of the Prophets with Joseph; ordained a seventy by him.

During the Winter of [1832-1833], I attended a high school together with Brothers Joseph and Hyrum Smith and most of the leading men of the Church; it was a fine opportunity for obtaining knowledge. The evenings were mostly spent in meetings for instructions on the principles of our faith and religion. It was then and there that the lectures in the first part of the Doctrine and Covenants were given. During this Winter and Spring the members of Zion's Camp were called together to receive an especial blessing, according to a promise which had been made in the before-mentioned revelation. Out of this number most of the Twelve were selected, and also the first Seventy, of which latter I was one. We had a meeting every Saturday to bless and ordain such as had been called. I was blessed and ordained under the hands of Joseph Smith, Jun., Joseph Smith, Sen., and Sidney Rigdon.

Harrison Burgess, "Sketch of a Well-Spent Life," in "Labors in the Vineyard," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 67-68.

Note: From 1835 to 1921 the Lectures on Faith were published as part of the Doctrine and Covenants. While they contain some of the best exposition in print on faith, the nature and character of God, and other subjects, they were removed from the D&C as they had not been accepted by the Church as a part of the canon of scripture.

Joseph gives Burgess a plot of land in Far West as a reward for his assistance.

We [i.e., Burgess and his family] arrived at Far West the 27th of May, 1837. The next day I went to Daviess County with Joseph and Hyrum Smith and some others to look out a new location. I remained there nine days and helped survey the site for a city. As a reward for rendering this assistance at this time Brother Joseph selected me a very fine city lot.

Harrison Burgess, "Sketch of a Well-Spent Life," in "Labors in the Vineyard," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 68.

One of the bodyguards at the burial of Joseph and Hyrum.

In June, 1844, the storm of persecution arose against the leaders of the Church, which terminated in the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. During the scene I had the command of one of the companies of the Nauvoo Legion, and was on duty about three weeks. I saw Joseph's and Hyrum's dead bodies and was called upon to act as one of the guards at the burial.

Harrison Burgess, "Sketch of a Well-Spent Life," in "Labors in the Vineyard," in Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1969), 69.
