Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Burgess, Margarette [Margaret] Jane McIntire

(May 22, 1837-1919)

As a child, Joseph blessed her and healed a sore throat; also remembers Joseph rescuing her and her brother from mud puddle and cleaning her face with his handkerchief; also remembers Joseph recognizing the fraud when the twins Emma had been watching were switched on him.

My father, William P. McIntire, lived in Nauvoo, on the corner of Main and Parley Streets. He was a near neighbor to the Prophet, and a true and loving watch-guard for him in times of trouble.

The Prophet Joseph was often at my father's house. Some incidents which I recollect of him made deep impressions on my child-mind. One morning when he called at our house, I had a very sore throat. It was much swollen and gave me great pain. He took me up in his lap, and gently anointed my throat with consecrated oil and administered to me, and I was healed. I had no more pain nor soreness.

Another time my older brother and I were going to school, near to the building which was known as Joseph's brick store. It had been raining the previous day, causing the ground to be very muddy, especially along that street. My brother Wallace and I both got fast in the mud, and could not get out, and of course, childlike, we began to cry, for we thought we would have to stay there. But looking up, I beheld the loving friend of children, the Prophet Joseph, coming to us. He soon had us on higher and drier ground. Then he stooped down and cleaned the mud from our little, heavy-laden shoes, took his handkerchief from his pocket and wiped our tear-stained faces. He spoke kind and cheering words to us, and sent us on our way to school rejoicing. Was it any wonder that I loved that great, good and noble man of God? As I grew older I felt to honor and love him, for his mission to earth in restoring the gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

I will relate another incident which occurred. Joseph's wife, Sister Emma, had lost a young babe. My mother having twin baby girls, the Prophet came to see if she would let him have one of them. Of course it was rather against her feelings, but she finally consented for him to take one of them, providing he would bring it home each night. This he did punctually himself, and also came after it each morning. One evening he did not come with it at the usual time, and Mother went down to the mansion to see what was the matter, and there sat the Prophet with the baby wrapped up in a little silk quilt. He was trotting it on his knee, and singing to it to get it quiet before starting out, as it had been fretting. The child soon became quiet when my mother took it, and the Prophet came up home with her. Next morning when he came after the baby, Mother handed him Sarah, the other baby. They looked so much alike that strangers could not tell them apart; but as Mother passed him the other baby he shook his head and said, "This is not my little Mary." Then she took Mary from the cradle and gave her to him, and he smilingly carried her home with him. The baby Mary had a very mild disposition, while Sarah was quite cross and fretful, and by this my mother could distinguish them one from the other, though generally people could not tell them apart. But our Prophet soon knew which was the borrowed baby. After his wife became better in health he did not take our baby anymore, but often came in to caress her and play with her. Both children died in their infancy, before the Prophet was martyred.

I cannot describe my feelings as I beheld his lifeless remains when my parents took me to look at him and his noble brother, Hyrum. But they may be more easily imagined than described.

Margarette Burgess, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27, no. 2 (15 January 1892): 66-67.

Note: The twins, Mary and Sarah Ann, were born October 10, 1841; Sarah died in September 1842 and Mary in December 1843. Thus the events described herein must have occurred some time before September 1842.

As a child, she was healed when anointed and blessed by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

I must now tell you something of my childish personal incidents at Nauvoo, our place being two blocks above the Nauvoo Mansion. We were close neighbors to the Prophet's family, and very intimate, too. The Prophet was often in our home for short visits. One morning he came in and noticed I had a piece of flannel around my throat. He inquired if my throat was sore. Mother told him it was, and she was afraid it was the mumps. He called me to him, took me upon his lap, took the flannel off and asked mother for the oil. He anointed my throat with the oil and then he administered to me. I knew I was well, as I got down from his lap after which I felt no more sore throatanother proof of his tender, loving heart.

"Mothers in Israel: Margaret McIntire Burgess," Relief Society Magazine 5, no. 1 (January 1918): 14.

As children, she and her brother get muddied on way to school; Joseph cleans their shoes with his handkerchief.

One morning as we were on our way to school, my brother and I were forced to walk in some very muddy places as it had rained the previous night. The school was down near the river we got stuck fast, and I began to cry, as did my little brother. I thought I would surely never get out, but on looking up, we saw the Prophet coming right for us. The crying soon ceased. He carried me out first and then my brother. He took his handkerchief out of his pocket, wiped the tears from our eyes and cleaned the mud off our shoes, all the time speaking comforting words to us, sending us on our way rejoicing, at the same time pointing our a safer way to get to the school house. Oh, our beloved Prophet, how deep were his sympathies and how his kind heart yearned to do good.

"Mothers in Israel: Margaret McIntire Burgess," Relief Society Magazine 5, no. 1 (January 1918): 14.

Joseph borrowed McIntire baby to comfort Emma when she was sick; he could always tell the identical twins apart.

My mother had twin baby girls, and Aunt Emma, as we called her, (the Prophet's wife) had been confined, and her babe had died; soon after the birth the Prophet came in one morning and said, "Sister McIntire, I have come to borrow one of your babies," and mother exclaimed, "Why, Brother Joseph, what do you want with one of my babies?" "Well," he replied, "I want one of them for my wife to comfort her only for a time." He talked with mother a while and she finally told him he could have one baby through the day time if he would bring it back nights, so the bargain was made and the Prophet smiled with gratitude. The twins were so much alike they could scarcely be told apart, but, of course, mother knew and their dispositions were not alikeone was a quick little thing and the other one was mild. My mother would set them in the double cradle, made high at each end and low in the middle, and give each some playthings, and the quick one would take all the things away from the mild one. They were dressed exactly alike. One morning when the Prophet came for the baby, mother reach him the other baby. He took it and looked at it, kissed it and handed it back and said, "Not my little Mary," so mother reached him little Mary. He had always taken the little mild oneher name was Mary and the other one was Sarah. The Prophet would always bring the baby up himself at night. One night he did not come as usual and mother went down and found the baby was crying. Brother Joseph was sitting by the fire trotting it. He had it wrapped up in a little silk quilt, preparatory to starting out with it. When mother went in it was still. When mother started back the Prophet took the baby from her and walked up home with her. When Aunt Emma's health returned, our baby came home to stay. When she was able to walk she came often to see baby Mary, as our home was only two blocks from the Mansion.

"Mothers in Israel: Margaret McIntire Burgess," Relief Society Magazine 5, no. 1 (January 1918): 14-15.
