Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Burnett, Peter H.

(November 15, 1807-May 17, 1895)

Description of the Prophet; tells of Joseph's wrestling prowess.

Joseph Smith, Jr., was at least six feet high, well-formed, and weighed about one hundred and eighty pounds. His appearance was not prepossessing, and his conversational powers were but ordinary. You could see at a glance that his education was very limited. He was an awkward but vehement speaker. In conversation he was slow, and used too many words to express his ideas, and would not generally go directly to a point. He possessed the most indomitable perseverance, and was a good judge of men, and deemed himself born to command, and he did command. His views were so strange and striking, and his manner was so earnest, and apparently so candid, that you could not but be interested. There was a kind, familiar look about him, that pleased you. He was very courteous in discussion, readily admitting what he did not intend to controvert, and would not oppose you abruptly, but had due deference to your feelings. He had the capacity for discussing a subject in many different aspects, and for proposing many original views, even of ordinary matters. His illustrations were his own. He had great influence over others. As an evidence of this I will state on Thursday, just before I left to return to Liberty, I saw him out among the crowd, conversing freely with every one, and seeming to be perfectly at ease. In the short space of five days he had managed so to mollify his enemies that he could go unprotected among them without the slightest danger. Among the Mormons he had much greater influence than Sidney Rigdon. The latter was a man of superior education, an eloquent speaker, of fine appearance and dignified manners; but he did not possess the native intellect of Smith, and lacked his determined will. Lyman Wight was the military man among them. There are several others of the prisoners whose names I have forgotten.

I remember to have heard of a circumstance which was said to have occurred while the prisoners were under guard in Davis, but I cannot vouch for its truth from my own knowledge. Joseph Smith, Jr., was a very stout, athletic man, and was a skillful wrestler. This was known to the men of Davis County, and some of them proposed to Smith that he should wrestle with one of their own men. He at first courteously objected, alleging substantially that, though he was once in the habit of wrestling, he was now a minister of the gospel, and did not wish to do anything contrary to his duty as such, and that he hoped they would excuse him on that ground. They kindly replied that they did not desire him to do anything contrary to his calling; that they would not bet anything; that it was nothing but a friendly trial of skill and manhood, for the satisfaction of others, and to pass away the time pleasantly; and that they hoped he would, under all circumstances, comply with their request. He consented; they selected the best wrestler among them, and Smith threw him several times in succession, to the great amusement of the spectators. Though I did not witness this incident, I heard it stated as a matter of fact at the time, and I have no doubt of its truth.

Peter H. Burnett, An Old California Pioneer (Oakland, Calif.: Biobooks, 1946), 40-41.

Note: Peter Burnett was not a member of the Church. In his early career building years he lived in Missouri at the same time that the Saints sought to establish themselves there. It was in this time period that he first saw the Prophet Joseph and heard him preach. He later moved to California, becoming the first Governor of the State of California.
