Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Burton, Robert Taylor

(October 21, 1821-November 11, 1907)

Personal memories of Joseph; served guard duty the night of the martyrdom; saw transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Bishop Robert T. Burton was the next speaker. He said he knew the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was ordained to the priesthood and set apart to his first mission under the hands of Hyrum Smith, brother of the Prophet and father of President Joseph F. Smith. He was on guard in the city of Nauvoo at the time the martyrdom of the Prophets occurred, and well remembered the conditions, and scenes of those times. The speaker thought prior to that time, and as far as he knew, the Latter-day Saints thought it was not possible to take the life of Joseph, the Prophet of God. He had many, many times been arrested, held in custody, and tried, but always acquitted of any charge brought against him. His life was often in imminent peril, but invariably something intervened to preserve his life until the people began to think the wicked could not destroy the life of that great man; and when the awful news came, nobody can tell or feel as those felt who had their lives wound up in that man, the degree of gloom and sadness that pervaded every person in the city of Nauvoo. A large number of the people were in the militia over whom Joseph Smith had been the superior officer. They felt as if they must go right to Carthage, and from there follow the fiends that had destroyed the life of the Prophet. But this was overcome. In time it became the question who was going to lead the people. One said, "follow me," and another, "follow me," until some of the people became confused. Most of the Apostles and leading Elders were absent on missions. I was well acquainted with the Prophet. I was imperfectly acquainted with Brigham Young. When Brigham Young returned, and arose in the congregation and began to speak, I arose from my seat, as did hundreds of others, to look at Joseph. His voice, his language, every expression seemed to come from Joseph himself. It was a testimony to many hundreds of the Latter-day Saints that from that time to the present has never left their memories for a moment. By it God communicated to His people who the successor of Joseph was. It has been a great comfort to me. I speak it here in all soberness and thoughtfulness that I rose to my feet to look upon Joseph Smith because I thought I heard his voice, and felt his spirit and the influence that he had.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 5:31.

Witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Statement by Bishop Robert T. Burton, in response to some things said by Reorganized Church members, in which he testifies that he was present on August 8, 1844 and saw Brigham Young transfigured. The likeness was so striking that he could not believe that Joseph had not returned to life; he rose to his feet, as did hundreds of others. He has heard othersdozenstestify to the same experience.

"Statement of Robert T. Burton," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Testifies of the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

This morning, at the Presiding Bishop's Office, after reading what purported to be an appeal to the Latter-day Saints by Frederick J. Smith in regard to the successor of the Prophet Joseph Smith Jr., I had occasion, in conversation with Bishop O. P. Miller to refer to my experience in Nauvoo, Illinois some time after the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and upon his request, I made the following statement:

This to my mind was one of the most critical periods in the history of the Church. A number of persons claimed the legal succession, and to have this authority, among them Sidney Rigdon, James J. Strange, Aaron and Moses Smith and others. The occasion that I now refer to was a general meeting of the Latter-day Saints, soon after the return to Nauvoo of President Brigham Young and other members of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, from their missions. The meeting had been called to order, and after the usual opening exercises President Brigham Young arose to address the assembly.

At that time I was not acquainted with President Young, but his voice, manner, expression, and in fact, his personal appearance was so strikingly that of the martyred Prophet, that I rose from my seat, as did hundreds of others, to look at the Prophet Joseph Smith Jr. The likeness was so marked that I could hardly make myself believe that the Prophet had not himself returned; not that there was a resemblance between the two men. I am not going to say why this was other than I received it, as an evidence to the people that God had chosen Brigham Young as successor to the Prophet Joseph Smith Jr. There were dozens, even hundreds of others, who were impressed just the same as I was at that time, and I have heard many, many who are now gone make similar statements or expressions to that I am here making.

Robert Taylor Burton, "Statement Concerning the Transfiguration," 28 July 1905, typescript copy, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
