Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Butler, John Lowe

(April 8, 1808-April 10, 1860)

Obeys Joseph's counsel to move his family and they are saved from being killed by the mob.

I concluded to ride over to Far West some fourteen miles from where we lived and I saw Brother Joseph Smith. He resided there. He asked me if I had removed my family. I told him no, I had not. "Then," said he, "go and move them directly and do not sleep another night there." "But," said I, "I don't like to be a coward." "Go and do as I tell you," said he. So I started back again and got home about two hours after dark. I then said to my wife, "We must pack up our things and leave here directly, for Brother Joseph has told me to." My wife was very glad for she had been wanting to move for a long time. So we loaded up one wagon load and took it down to Brother Taylor's about one mile and a half and my wife and Malinda Porter, a young woman that was boarding with us, who was keeping school. They packed up another wagon load by the time I got back and we all started off just about the break of day.

Now about sunrise, or a little while after, Brother Gee saw in the distance a large body of men. He said that he thought there was about thirty-odd. He watched them come toward the house and surround it. He then ran down to Taylor to tell them that we were all killed, I suppose, and when he saw us, he said, "Oh, I am so glad that you are here for there are about thirty men around your house to kill you all." I then saw the hand of the Lord guiding Brother Joseph Smith to direct me to move my family away. If he had not, why in all probability we should all have been murdered, and I felt to thank God with all my heart and soul.

John Lowe Butler, "John Lowe Butler Autobiography, Long Version," in William G. Hartley, My Best for the Kingdom (Salt Lake City, Utah: Aspen Books, 1993), 392; see also "Autobiography of John Lowe Butler," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah.

The Prophet invites Butler to stay at his home; Joseph promises that with hard work, the Lord would bless the saints to transform swampy Commerce into a haven.

While I was on this mission, Brother Joseph and Hyrum were released from prison. They came over to Quincy and the governor told them that they might go and build a settlement in Commerce, that was up the river from Quincy, but it was the most sickly place in the state, so Brother Joseph concluded to move in the forepart of the year [eighteen] forty four. My wife bore me a daughter on December 29, 1839. We named her Caroline Elizabeth. About March, Joseph and Hyrum moved up to Commerce, and I went up just after them to look at the place and see how I should like it. Brother Joseph asked me if I was coming to live there. I told him that I wanted to live where he did. "Well," said he, "you have not got your family here yet, have you?" I told him no, I had not moved them up yet, but that I had come up just to look at the place. Brother Joseph then said, "You will come over to my house and stay while you are here, and until you move your family up." I thanked him for his kind offer, and when I got over to the house, I found a whole lot of folks sick. It was a very sickly place indeed. I asked Brother Joseph what kind of a place it was. He said it was a low, marshy, wet, damp and nasty place, but that if we went to work and improved it, it would become more healthy and the Lord would bless it for our sakes.

John Lowe Butler, "John Lowe Butler Autobiography, Long Version," in William G. Hartley, My Best for the Kingdom (Salt Lake City, Utah: Aspen Books, 1993), 399; see also "Autobiography of John Lowe Butler," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah.

Helps Joseph fix his fence and garden.

I went to work after I had been there [i.e., Commerce] some three weeks to pay for my board and helped Brother Joseph to fix up his fence and to plow his lot and do up his garden for him; then my family was moved up and I built a house and fenced my lot upon the hill.

John Lowe Butler, "John Lowe Butler Autobiography, Long Version," in William G. Hartley, My Best for the Kingdom (Salt Lake City, Utah: Aspen Books, 1993), 399; see also "Autobiography of John Lowe Butler," typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah.

Joseph captured by Missourians and taken to house of an old man who berates them for mistreating the Prophet; Butler part of the rescue party of some 300 men, which escorts Joseph back to Nauvoo. Joseph's captors become his prisoners, and he frees them to return to their homes.

There is one circumstance that I have missed putting down. In the summer before I went to Kentucky, Brother Joseph started with his wife, Emma, to visit her friends, and I expect some of the dissenters told some of the Missourians and a mob came over and put themselves up as officers of the peace to take him to Missouri and make away with him. They were going to Stone River to see her friends and on the way they waylaid him and took him prisoner, and Emma did not know what to do, so she started back again to Nauvoo. Now these Missourians took him to a house belonging to an old man and asked him if he would let them have a room to put their prisoner. Now while they were going and after they had gotten there, there was a fellow with a revolver pointing it to Joseph's ribs, and once in a while he would give him a poke with it, until he had taken the skin off in more than one or two places. Well, the old man heard by some of his folks that they had ill-treated their prisoner so he thought that he would go and see the prisoner, so he went to the door and it was fastened so that he could not get in. They were counseling together what they would do with him. I expect the old man demanded admittance, but they would not let him in, so he told them that he was coming in, or would set fire to the place and burn them up, but what would go in, so they let him in.

"A pretty thing," said he, "to keep a man out of his own house when he had kindly let you have a room to secure your prisoner in." So he asked Joseph whether he had been ill-treated. Joseph opened his shirt bosom and showed him his side which was then bleeding, and said, "If you call that ill treatment, why I have been ill treated." The old man looked and said, "Who did it?" and Joseph said his captors. The old man said, "Gentlemen, you have abused this man shamefully and I tell you, you can't do such things in my house, and I tell you how we serve folks that don't go by the laws of the Constitution of the United States. We just take them by lynch law, and I can tell you that you must not abuse a prisoner in this part of the state or you will be very apt to know of it." He then asked Joseph whether he had had anything to eat. He said that he had not. "Why," said the old man, "these other men have had something to eat, why did you not get some?" "Because," said Joseph, "they would not give me any." "Never mind, you shall have some." "Oh," said they, "he is only a damned Mormon." "Well," said the old man, "Mormon or no Mormon, he is a man and a citizen of the United States and he has got to have justice and he is going to have it so long as he stays with me." They then growled about something, but the old man went off to get something to eat for Joseph. He gave him something good to eat and told him that he should have a bed to sleep upon, but that those other fellers would have to find their own for they should not sleep with him.

Joseph told him about Emma's going back to Nauvoo and that he expected someone would be along to help him out of the difficulty. The old man then told Joseph that he would keep him there until some of his friends should come to his assistance. His treatment to Joseph was very kind. If it had not been for him, I don't know how Brother Joseph would have fared, but the Lord was his guardian angel and he would just let things go so far and no further. He softened the old man's heart so that he should have justice done him, and to bring about his purposes.

Well, at this time Emma had gone back to Nauvoo and told the brethren that Brother Joseph had been taken by a mob. I, at that time, had been ordained one of Joseph's lifeguards, so some thirty of the brethren with myself started to go to Brother Joseph and rescue him from the bloodthirsty wretches if we could. It took us some time for we did not get on the right track for awhile. Well, we met them coming back. The old man had gone and gotten some of his friends and taken Brother Joseph and started to Nauvoo with him. The mob was taken also and brought with him, except two or three, those who abused Brother Joseph so mean; they went home the next day fearing, I expect that the old man would bring his threats into realities, so they put for home.

Now we met Brother Joseph and his escort and we had not been with him more than half an hour when about three hundred of the brethren came up all mounted and ready for anything that might transpire. The old man gave up Joseph after his thanking him for his hospitality and kindness to him. The brethren took the mob prisoners and the old man and his friends wished us good day and started for home. And we started for home, too. Sister Emma sent Joseph out some clean clothes, but Joseph [saw] . . . his brethren were as dirty as he and he was not going in clean and his brethren dirty, the dust upon the road then was four or five inches deep. The folks all heard of our arrival home and they all came out and lined the street on both sides. Brother Joseph was first and then Brother Hodge and myself, his lifeguards and then came the officers that took him prisoner, and then the rest of the brethren. The folks, both men and women and children, were glad to see their leader again, and out of the hands of murderers; they took off their hats and bonnets and ushered him all the way up the street. Brother Joseph took off his hat and looked around upon the people and shouted, "Hosanna to God." The officers said that the people thought a good deal of him. "Yes," said Brother Joseph, "they are the best people in the world."

. . . I went home with Brother Joseph to the mansion house and saw the prisoners safely under guard. They did not know what to think; they thought that they were about done for; they thought that they would be killed; they took their trial, but Brother Joseph did not want to hurt them at all, so he let them go home and told them in the future to do unto others as they would that others should do unto them. They looked very sheepish; they went home and left us once more to ourselves, but there were lots of apostates there so that Brother Joseph could hardly not make a move without its going abroad to the mobs.

John Lowe Butler, "John Lowe Butler Autobiography, Long Version," in William G. Hartley, My Best for the Kingdom (Salt Lake City, Utah: Aspen Books, 1993), 402-4; see also "Autobiography of John Lowe Butler" typescript copy, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Provo, Utah.
