Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Butterfield, Jacob Kemp

(1813-1889)

Testifies of Joseph; adds that he is "a good looking man" who "sets good examples in his family and in the streets."

[Jacob Butterfield, wrote to his mother, Persis Butterfield, on May 10, 1837. Midway through the letter he says he knows that] " . . . God has set his hand the second time to recover the remnant of his people Israel and that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God. I am not afraid to declare it unto the ends of the earth and invite all to embrace it with all their hearts that they may receive the blessings of the gospel and be saved in the celestial kingdom of God. Joseph is a good looking man, a man that sets good examples in his family and in the streets and labors diligently to have the church deal justly, walk humbly and to have mercy."

"Jacob Kemp Butterfield to Persis Butterfield, May 10, 1837," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Writes about Kirtland Temple in a letter to his widowed mother; gives short description of Joseph Smith.

The people in Kirtland are generally very industrious, possessing good habits with some exceptions. The land is generally very good but broken. There is a small river or stream which runs through the northern part of the place through a low but rich tract of land. The land rises from the river towards south. At the distance of a half a mile and on the location stands the house of the Lord which is a large splendid stone building covered or washed with a kind of cement which looks very beautiful. I cannot now describe the inside of the house, but let me say it is the most beautifully constructed of any that I ever saw. But I have not seen any part of it but what is of great worth either for worship of schooling there is the best order observed in it. I have been into Joseph Smith Jrs. Frequently and have conversed some with him. He is a large, well proportioned man. In short he looks like other men. I cannot write particulars now but will endeavour as soon as I can.

"Jacob K. Butterfield to Widow Persis Butterfield, Nov. 11,1836," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
