Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Cahoon, William Farrington

(November 7, 1813-1897)

Joins Zion's Camp; Joseph promises their safety; the Lord inspires Joseph to dig and water is supplied for the camp; the Lord says not to take sword against Missouri mobocrats.

The last part of August I returned home and labored with my hands until May 5, 1834. I then enlisted to go to the land of Zion in Jackson County and started with the Volunteer Company under the Prophet Joseph Smith for the delivery of the brethren who had been driven from their homes by a ruthless band of mobocrats.

On May 5, 1834 the [Zion's] camp left [for] Missouri. It was truly a solemn morning, we left our wives, children and friends, not knowing whether we would see them again as we were threatened by enemies that would destroy and exterminate us from the land. We were facing the "lion in his den."

Joseph Smith had made this pledge to us, "If you will go with me to Missouri and keep my counsel, I pledge that I will lead you there and back and not a hair of your head shall be hurt."

This [Zion's] camp marched through a population of tens of thousands of people like lambs among wolves, but no man among them opened his mouth to say, "Why do you do so?" On we marched singing our favorite song, "Hark listen to the Trumpeters."

[As told by William F. and Father Cole]. While traveling across the vast prairie, treeless and waterless, they camped at night after a long and wearisome day's march. They had been without water since early morning, and men and animals suffered greatly from thirst, for it had been one of the hottest days of June. Joseph sat at his tent looking out upon the scene. All at once he called for a spade. When it was brought, he looked about him and selected a spot, the most convenient in the camp for men and teams to get water. Then he dug a shallow well, and immediately the water came bubbling up into it and filled it, so that the horses and mules could stand and drink from it. While the camp stayed there, the well remained full, despite the fact that about two hundred men and scores of horses and mules were supplied from it.

[This incident was related to Elder O. B. Huntington by William F. Cahoon. It was also told to Elder Huntington by Father Zera Cole while Elder Huntington and Father Cole were working for the dead in the Logan Temple. Zera Cole was with the camp of Zion and when it went to Missouri in 1834, William F.'s brother-in-law, Harvey Stanley, also went with them. The autobiography continues:]

We journeyed, pitching our tents by the way, and arrived in Missouri in the latter part of June. We then numbered two hundred and five. A council was held to determine what steps to take when the word of the Lord came to the Prophet Joseph saying the time had not come to "take the sword in hand to redeem Zion."

"William Cahoon Autobiography," in Stella Shurtleff and Brent Farrington Cahoon, eds., Reynolds Cahoon and His Stalwart Sons (Salt Lake City, Utah: Paragon Press, 1960), 81-82.

Gives account of visiting and teaching the Prophet and his family; blessed by the Prophet for his devotion.

I wish to mention one circumstance which I shall never forget. I was called and ordained to act as a ward teacher to visit the families of the Saints. I got along very well until I was obliged to pay a visit to the Prophet. Being young, only 17 years of age, I felt my weakness in the capacity of a teacher. I almost felt like shrinking from my duty.

Finally, I went to the door and knocked and in a minute the Prophet came to the door. I stood there trembling and said to him; "Brother Joseph, I have come to visit you in the capacity of a ward teacher, if it is convenient for you." He said, "Brother William, come right in. I am glad to see you. Sit down in that chair there and I will go and call my family in." They soon came in and took seats. The Prophet said, "Brother William, I submit myself and family into your hands," and took his seat. "Now, Brother William," said he, "Ask all the questions you feel like."

By this time my fears and trembling had ceased and I said, "Brother Joseph, are you trying to live your religion?" He answered, "Yes." I then said, "Do you pray in your family?" He answered, "Yes." "Do you teach your family the principles of the gospel?" He replied, "Yes, I am trying to do it." "Do you ask a blessing on your food?" He said he did. "Are you trying to live in peace and harmony with all your family?" He said that he was.

I turned to Sister Emma, his wife, and said, "Sister Emma, are you trying to live your religion? Do you teach your children to obey their parents? Do you try to teach them to pray?" To all these questions she answered, "Yes, I am trying to do so." I then turned to Joseph and said, "I am now through with my questions as a teacher and now if you have any instructions to give, I shall be happy to receive them." He said, "God bless you Brother William, and if you are humble and faithful you shall have power to settle all difficulties that may come before you in the capacity of a teacher." I then left my parting blessing upon him and his family, as a teacher, and departed.

"William Cahoon Autobiography," in Stella Shurtleff and Brent Farrington Cahoon, eds., Reynolds Cahoon and His Stalwart Sons (Salt Lake City, Utah: Paragon Press, 1960), 80; see also William Cahoon, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 29, no. 16 (15 August 1892): 492-93.

Tells of the healings at Montrose.

I have seen the sick healed under [Joseph'] administration in many instances. I have seen cripples healed immediately, and leap for joy after being administered to. I was present, and well remember a case of healing at Montrose, Iowa. One day about two o'clock in the afternoon, I was down at Brother Fordham's to see if he was still alive, (he being very low,) and as I was going home I saw Brother Joseph, the Prophet, coming up from the river. He went immediately to the house of Fordham, opened the door and went in. I then, with two or three of the brethren, went back to Fordham's immediately. The Prophet went to Brother Fordham's bedside and said, "are you very sick, Brother Fordham?" But he could not speak; he made a little motion with his head. The Prophet then laid his hands upon the sick man's head, and said, "Brother Fordham, in the name of the Sons of God, and the Holy Priesthood which I hold, be thou made well from this very moment."

In a few minutes the Prophet said, "Brother Fordham, get up, put on your clothes, and go with me to visit some more sick people. And all saw the Prophet and Brother Fordham going off to another house together. I am willing to testify to this before God, and angels, and all men at any time.

William Cahoon, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 29, no. 16 (15 August 1892): 492; for a similar recollection, see Wilford Woodruff, Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 3:156; and Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of His Life and Labors (Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1964), 104-5.

Sealed to a plural wife by Joseph Smith.

At the age of 23 I married a wife by the name of Nancy Miranda Gibbs on the 17th day of January 1836, Joseph Smith the Prophet performing the ceremony in a public meeting, there were two other couples married at the same time.

William Farrington Cahoon, "Autobiography and Family Record," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
