Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Call, Anson

(May 13, 1810-August 31, 1890)

While living at the three forks of the Grand River, Call and others are counseled by Joseph to move to Far West or Adam-ondi-Ahman.

In the month of September [1838], I received a visit from Joseph, Hyrum and Sidney Rigdon. Joseph stated that he had come to visit us on a special errand. It was on the Sabbath; the day of his arrival the brethren were congregated at my house for the purpose of meeting in connection with a number of Missourians. After meeting was out he told me he wished to see the brethren together, on which he availed himself of the opportunity of slipping off into the cornfield with about 12 of the brethren. He then stated to us we must leave for there were going to be difficulties. We inquired of him from what source. He said it was not for him to say; the message he had received was for us to leave and go to Far West or Adam-ondi-Ahman. We unanimously agreed to do so. We then inquired whether it was necessary for us to go forthwith or whether we could stay and save our crops and sell our farms. He said you need not sell your farms and he presumed we should have time to get away, but how much time he knew not. They then immediately left us after the dinner.

Anson Call, "The Life and Record of Anson Call, Commenced in 1839," typescript copy, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 6-7.

Meets Joseph after his escape from Missouri; Joseph says he was delivered because of the prayers of the Saints; he later visits Call in his home and recounts events of his escape.

About the middle of May [1839], I was one day traveling to Warsaw when to my great surprise I met Brothers Joseph and Hyrum. I asked him when and how he had made his escape from Missouri. He said, "I am in a great hurry, for my enemies are pursuing me. I will say in short to you, the prayers of the brethren brought me here." He then inquired of me where I lived. He said, "In about a week I will be at your house; then I will relate the whole matter to you." He passed on in great haste. I was filled with great joy to see our Prophet after more than six months, suffering by chains and dungeons, once more in the enjoyment of liberty.

He came to my house about the appointed time, had his dinner and spent the principal part of the afternoon in conversation. Hyrum, Sidney Rigdon, and Vincent [Vinson] Knight were with him. He related to us some of the circumstances of his escape from Missouri. He also stated that he had purchased a tract of land in Commerce, a place for the Saints to gather to, now called Nauvoo.

Anson Call, "The Life and Record of Anson Call, Commenced in 1839," typescript copy, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 6-7.

Failed to ease growing mob tensions in Nauvoo; heard Joseph's last farewell to the Legion; heard Porter Rockwell announce the martyrdom; traveled to Carthage, saw martyrs blood and testified to some of the mob.

In June, 1844, Anson Call, with David Evans, was appointed to visit the leaders of the mob forces then gathering against Nauvoo, and endeavor to effect a peaceable settlement of the pending troubles. They were unsuccessful and barely escaped mob violence. They also visited Judge Thomas of the circuit court, then sitting at Knoxville, eighty miles from Nauvoo, and tried to get a change of venue by which the Prophetaccused of treason and riotmight be brought before that tribunal instead of being taken to Carthage, which town was swarming with enemies who had sworn to kill him. Judge Thomas declined to interfere, remarking that it was better one or two men should be killed than that a whole people should perish. Messrs. Call and Evans delivered this answer to Emma Smith, who promised to send it to her husband, then on the west side of the Mississippi. Willard Richards told Anson Call that this was never done.

June 24, 1844, was the last day that he saw the Prophet alive. Joseph bade farewell to the Legion near the Masonic Hall saying: "Boys, I have come to bid you good bye; I am going to leave you for a while." He turned in the saddle, raised his hand and added, "You are my boys, and I bless you in the name of Israel's God. Be faithful and true, and you shall have your rewardfarewell." He then set out for Carthage. "Sunday Morning, June 28"says Mr. Call"O. P. Rockwell rode into Nauvoo at full speed, with the sweet dripping from his horse, shouting 'Joseph is killedJoseph is killed; they have killed himthey have killed him.!'"

A few days after the murder he visited Carthage and was shown through the jail. He saw Hyrum Smith's blood on the floor of the fatal room, and the Prophet's blood on the well curb outside the prison. He met a number of the murderers, among them Captain Robert Smith of the Carthage Greys. Says he: "I suppose I was the first man who ever testified to him that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. He never could look me in the face afterwards."

"Anson Call," in Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City, Utah: G. Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1904), 4:143-44.

Joseph bids farewell to the Nauvoo Legion before leaving for Carthage.

[On the 24th of June, 1844] Joseph rode up to the legion who were gathered near the Masonic Hall and said "Boys, I have come to bid you good bye. I am going to leave you for a while." He turned himself upon the saddle and said, "you are my boys and I bless you in the name of Israel's God. Be faithful and true and you shall have your reward. Farewell!" He then started for Carthage. I little thought it was the last time I should see him alive, being acquainted with his many deliverances from the hands from the hands of his enemies. I thought he would be again.

Anson Call, "The Life and Record of Anson Call, Commenced in 1839," typescript copy, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 27.

Call's inspired dream, in which he sees Joseph, who tells him he still holds the keys, and will still govern and control the kingdom.

[Shortly after the Prophet's martyrdom] . . . I had a dream or a vision which I will relate.

I was traveling by myself in a lonely place till I came to a new field about 3 acres in size. I went to the door of the house. I discovered Joseph in the house standing in the middle of the floor. I sprang and clinched him by the hand. I threw my arm around him and kissed him and said, "Joseph, I thought you was dead." He said, "I am." I said "this is certainly Joseph." He said, "yes it is Joseph. Take your seat and I will tell you all about it." I seated myself and then discovered I was in a congregation of saints whom I was acquainted with. Joseph then said, "brethren, I have been killed in Carthage jail and it will not make any difference with you, if you do as you are told. I shall continue to govern and control this kingdom as I have hitherto done. The keys of this kingdom were committed to me. I hold them and I shall continue to hold them worlds without end. I am dead and I am out of the power of my enemies. I am now where I can do you good. Be no longer troubled, be faithful, be diligent, do as you are told and you shall see the salvation of God." I then discovered myself sitting in the bed. I spoke to my wife and told her what I had seen and heard and let her heart be comforted for we should yet see good days and prevail over our enemies. I then commenced comforting my intimate brethren and told them what I had seen and heard.

Anson Call, "The Life and Record of Anson Call, Commenced in 1839," typescript copy, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, 28.

Note: See D&C 90:2-3 where the Lord told the Prophet the keys of the kingdom would not be taken from him, "while thou art in this world, neither in the world to come." See also D&C 112:15.

Heard Joseph and other brethren reading from the Book of Abraham.

While at Far West I happened in John Corls [Corrill] or the Church store and my attention was called by Vincent Knights [i.e., Vinson Knight] who was opening some boxes of goods. Says he, "Joseph will be much pleased with these. He has been very uneasy about the translation of the Bible and the Egyptian Records. Here they are." Placing them on the table, he said to me, "If you will take one of these, I will the other and we will carry them over to Joseph's office." There we found Joseph and six or seven other brethren. Joseph was much pleased with the arrival of the books, and said to us, "Sit down and we will read to you from the translation of the Book of Abraham." Oliver Cowdery then read until he was tired when Thomas Marsh read making altogether about two hours. I was most interested in the work.

"Anson Call, Manuscript Journal, Summer 1838," 9. Cited in Robert J. Matthews, A Plainer Translation (Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1975), 98.

Note: Oliver Cowdery was excommunicated from the Church in April 1838; it is therefore unlike that he would have been present at this conversation, held in September 1838. Call likely confused him with another.

Tells of Saints willing to stand in rain to hear Joseph preach, and of anti-Mormons organizing in Nauvoo and vicinity.

On Sunday, June 14, 1844, when the Saints were assembled at the usual place of meeting, in a grove east of the Temple, Judge Thomas, the Circuit Judge of the district, drove up to the stand and asked for an opportunity of speaking with Joseph Smith. The Prophet went out and talked with him for about fifteen minutes, during which time the Judge explained to him and advised him what to do. Joseph returned to the stand and began to speak. Just then a shower occurred and he asked he assembly whether they would like to dismiss to go home or remain and hear his discourse. The responsibility seemed to be unanimous, "We will tarry," they said, this was the discourse delivered by the Prophet on the Sabbath Day.

During the meeting the Prophet, acting upon the suggestion of Judge Thomas, appointed delegates to visit precincts of the country to try to effect a settlement against the Saints. Anson Call and David Evans were appointed to a committee to visit the precinct where Colonel Williams lived, who was an influential leader of the mob. After meeting they started upon this mission and that night lodged with Father Call, five miles from Warsaw. They called at Colonel Williams's house the following morning and learned that he had gone to Adams County to raise recruits to proceed against the Mormons. They learned from Elder Knox, a Campbellite preacher, that an anti-Mormon committee had been organized in every precinct, that the members of the Committee in that precinct were Colonel Williams, Elder Knox, and a Mr. Henderson. In response to a desire expressed to go and bring Mr . Henderson to them.

While waiting for his return they were confronted with a mob of about fifty men who came swarming into the house. Among them was a lawyer from Warsaw by the name of Stevenson. Addressing Messrs. Evans and Call, he said, "Gentlemen, you are delegates from Nauvoo, I suppose." Being told that we were, he said the people of Warsaw were also expecting delegates and had decided to throw them into the Mississippi River and make fish bait of them when they arrived. They added by way of advice to the local residents, "You can dispose of yours as you think proper." Being informed of the instructions to Judge Thomas to Joseph Smith, he discredited it by saying he had talked with the Judge before he went to Nauvoo, and intimated that he did not believe he had so advised but if he had thought the Judge ought also to be consigned to the Mississippi River. The mob became threatening but the Campbellite preacher insisted that they must not disturb the Mormons while they were doing business with him. For further protection a guard was stationed around the house. After an hour's discussion, the assembly refused to act upon the proposition of the delegates in the absence of Colonel Williams. His fellow committeemen guaranteed the safety of the delegates until they could mount their horses, but no longer. They were soon in their saddles and spurring their horses, and reached a safe distance while the mob were preparing to pursue them. They arrived in Nauvoo late in the evening of the 15th of June, and at 8 o'clock the following morning they repaired to the Mansion House to report to the Prophet. Reynolds Cahoon, the doorkeeper, however, refused to grant them an interview with him, saying that he was busy and did not wish to see anyone. Anson, after a few minutes stay, succeeded in learning what room the Prophet had and boldly opened the door and walked in. He was greeted in the most cordial manner by the Prophet, who hastened to inquire when he had returned and where brother Evans was, then he insisted that Brother Evans be admitted and the two made their report, of it before Ebenezer Robinson, Justice of the Peace. They were then requested to be sworn in to a statement to Judge Thomas, who court was in session in Knoxville, eighty miles distant. Two of the best horse to be had were ordered for them to ride, and before sunset they were on their way. The Prophet told them to make all possible haste and to get an interview with the Judge if they had to follow him into Court by holding on to his coat-tail.

"'Sketch of the Life of Anson Call,' Taken from the original diary of Anson Call, recopied by Lorna B. Schlote, great-granddaughter, Feb. 1962," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Some spelling has been modernized.

Witnessed the transfiguration of Brigham Young.

That week, Brigham Young and others of the 12 came to the city. On the Sunday following, Brigham and a portion of the Twelve presented themselves in our congregation. He said he had not come to electioneer, nor set up any particular claim, but to do his duty, and it was for the people to judge between truth and error. Before he [Brigham] had spoken many sentences, I discovered that it was the voice of Joseph, and had I have been where my eyes could not have beheld him, I should have believed that Joseph had been speaking. It was Joseph's voice and Joseph's gestures through the entire discourse, I became perfectly satisfied that it was the voice for me to follow in connection with the majority of the brethren.

Anson Call, "The Life and Record of Anson Call: Commenced in 1839," holograph 30, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
