Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Cannon, Angus M.

(May 17, 1834-June 7, 1915)

Memories of the Prophet's return after the Dixon kidnapping; heard Joseph teach that only one man authorized to receive revelations which were binding upon the Church; also heard Joseph testify that he received Melchizedek Priesthood from Peter, James, and John; remembers Joseph at the head of the Nauvoo Legion.

The first time it was my privilege to look upon the Prophet Joseph Smith was in a meeting held on the first floor of the Nauvoo Temple, early in the spring of 1843. I accompanied my father to the meeting and he pointed the Prophet out to me. After that I heard him speak on numerous occasions in the grove, west of the temple. But the time that I was most impressed by his expressions was when he mounted the well-curb, at the east side of his old residence, the home that he occupied before moving to the Mansion House. It was on the occasion of his return from Dixon when two men from Missouri had endeavored to kidnap him. He mounted the well-curb, holding on by the uprights with one hand, while he swung his hat with the other and proclaimed aloud with a voice that thrilled my entire being. As he called to the multitude congregated to bid him welcome, "I am thankful to the God of Israel who has delivered me out of the hands of the Missourians once more," his words so affected many of the people that they wept tears of joy.

He was one of the grandest samples of manhood that I ever saw walk or ride at the head of a legion of men. In listening to him as he has addressed the Saints his words have so affected me that I would rise upon my feet in the agitation that would take hold of my mind.

On one occasion especially do I remember Brother Joseph as he addressed an assembly of the Saints, in the spring of 1844. It was under some large oak trees, in a hollow south of the temple, near to Parley Street. He was discoursing upon the fact that God, in establishing His Church, had provided that only one man was authorized, of God, to receive revelations that should be binding upon the Church. At the time his counselor, [William]Law, was exercising a baneful influence upon the minds of the Saints and assuming to have light and possess knowledge, that the Prophet Joseph was not justified in giving certain revelations which Law claimed were not inspired of the Lord. It was on this same occasion that I heard the Prophet declare he had received the Melchizedek Priesthood, under the administration of Peter, James and John.

The impression created upon my young mind in the inspired utterances of Joseph Smith have accompanied me throughout my subsequent life; and when darkness would otherwise have beclouded my mind, his testimony has come up vividly before me, giving me evidence that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has been established and governed by the manifest power and authority of God. It has been as a beacon light, that shone forth, amidst the greatest darkness, my mind ever experienced, accompanied by a power and heavenly influence, indescribable.

Aside from seeing him at the head of the Legion, when he has lifted his hat in saluting his associates in arms, I never heard him speak in public, except as before mentioned. Neither was I ever permitted to approach sufficiently close to touch his person. But with the greatest veneration I viewed him.

That Joseph Smith lived and died a Prophet of God and that he with his brother Hyrum were pure and chaste and worthy of the people's love is beyond doubt in my mind, as a humble disciple of Jesus.

Angus M. Cannon, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 546-47.
