Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Cannon, George Q.

(January 11, 1827-April 12, 1901)

Recognized Joseph the first time he saw him.

The first time I saw him I was but a boy. He was in the midst of hundreds, but I knew him to be the Prophet Joseph. The Lord gave me a knowledge that he was His servant. I have rejoiced in that knowledge ever since. I have been glad continually that I have lived in such a day and among such a people as the Latter-day Saints; that I have lived to see the Prophet, to hear his voice, to listen to his teachings, and to have the testimony that he was indeed the chosen servant of God.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 4:199-200.

Knew the Prophet instantly on sight and would amid a crowd of 10,000"there was that about him."

It was the author's privilege thus to meet the Prophet for the first time. The occasion was the arrival of a large company of Latter-day Saints at the upper landing at Nauvoo. The general conference of the Church was in session and large numbers crowded to the landing place to welcome the emigrants. Nearly every prominent man in the community was there. Familiar with the names of all and the persons of many of the prominent elders, the author sought with a boy's curiosity and eagerness to discover those whom he knew, and especially to get sight of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum, neither of whom he had ever met. When his eyes fell upon the Prophet, without a word from anyone to point him out, or any reason to separate him from others who stood around, he knew him instantly. He would have known him among ten thousand. There was that about him, which, to the author's eyes, distinguished him from all the men he had ever seen."

George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1964), 20-21.

Joseph prophesies that men will seek his blood.

I recollect upon one occasion, previous to the death of the Prophet Joseph, hearing him make a remark from the stand which made a deep impression upon my mind at the time. He said that if he were to reveal unto the people the principles and the doctrines which God had revealed unto him, there were men upon the stand that would go around the streets of the city seeking to shed his blood. I do not give his exact words; but the idea. I was young at the time, and I immediately began investigating my own feelings to know what doctrines brother Joseph could possibly teach that would have that effect upon my mind. Although I did not fully comprehend his remark, I believed it; for I believed every thing he said. Yet not many months elapsed before I comprehended his words; for, soon afterwards one of the men who sat on the stand and heard that declaration, and whose name he mentioned, went about the city plotting to shed his blood.

Journal of Discourses, 10:343 (October 23, 1864).

Saints to be tried by abundance; warned against pride.

Our Prophets have predicted, that when the time should arrive for this people to be tried with prosperity, then they would be in great danger. I have heard this prediction uttered hundreds of times, until it has almost become like an old story with us. I heard the Prophet Joseph say, when he was living, that the time would come that this people would be tried with abundance; but he warned them to be careful of these things. The Lord has told us, through the revelations which he gave to Joseph, that it must needs be that the riches of the earth were his to give to his people; "but," he said, "beware of pride, lest ye become as the Nephites of old." This was the warning God gave to us years ago, and it has been repeated in our ears from that time until the present, and still there is a great necessity that we should treasure it up in our hearts, and often reflect upon it.

Journal of Discourses, 10:346 (October 23, 1864). See also Orson Hyde, Journal of Discourses, 17:5.

Spirits of the dead often dwell near mortal habitation; such spirits sometimes influence mortal feelings.

I have no doubt that many of my brethren and sisters have sensibly felt in various places and at various times evil influences around them. Brother Joseph Smith gave an explanation of this. There are places in the Mississippi Valley where the influence or the presence of invisible spirits are very perceptibly felt. He said that numbers had been slain there in war, and that there were evil influences or spirits which affect the spirits of those who have tabernacles on the earth. I myself have felt those influences in other places besides the continent of America; I have felt them on the old battle grounds on the Sandwich Islands.

Journal of Discourses, 11:30 (November 13, 1864).

A strong delusion and lying spirit to come among the Latter-day Saints.

[Joseph Smith] said the time would come when there would be strong delusion and lying spirits permitted to come forth among the people. He declared that God had restored the priesthood to the earth, and the ordinances of the Gospel, and had established His Church in its purity; and that those who did not believe the testimony of the servants of God and obey it, would be given over to hardness of heart and become subject to evil influences that were known nothing of previous to the establishing of the Church and the restoration of the priesthood.

Years elapsed before this prediction was fulfilled, but it was eventually verified. I recollect very well the first time I got any intimation of it. I was on the Sandwich Islands on a mission; I had stepped into the house of a man who afterwards became a member of the Church. I happened to pick up a book, upon examining which, I found a good many things that struck me as being very strange. I thought, at first that it must be a work written by the Latter-day Saints; but I soon found that it was not. The argument of the writer was in favor of communication with the spirit world, through the ministering of angels, being as possible in these days as at former times. He used precisely similar arguments to those used by the Elders of this Church; and quoted largely from the Bible to prove that it had been quite common for men in ancient days to have such communications and to possess the gift of prophecy and the spirit of revelation, and he argued in favor of these modes of communication in these days. I was very much surprised at seeing such principles advocated by this book; but immediately the recollection of Joseph's predictions flashed across my mind. I was but young at the time he made the remark, but I recollected it.

Journal of Discourses, 12:368-69 (January 31, 1869).

Joseph urged Saints to finish temple and obtain endowments.

Previous to his death, the Prophet Joseph manifested great anxiety to see the temple completed, as most of you who were with the Church during his day, well know. "Hurry up the work, brethren," he used to say, "let us finish the temple; the Lord has a great endowment in store for you, and I am anxious that the brethren should have their endowments and receive the fullness of the Priesthood." He urged the Saints forward continually, preaching unto them the importance of completing that building, so that therein the ordinances of life and salvation might be administered to the whole people, but especially to the quorums of the holy Priesthood; "then," said he, "the Kingdom will be established, and I do not care what shall become of me."

These were his expressions oft repeated in the congregations of the Saints, telling the brethren and sisters of the Church, and the world that he rolled the Kingdom on to the Twelve, and they would have to round up their shoulders and bear it off, as he was going to rest for awhile, and many other expressions of a like nature, the full meaning of which the Saints did not realize at the time.

Journal of Discourses, 13:49 (December 5, 1869).

On indolence; three kinds of poor.

I was reminded very much, in hearing the statement of the brethren, of what the Prophet Joseph said when alive about the indolence, carelessness and indifference to work manifested by some men. He said there were three kinds of poorthe Lord's poor, the devil's poor, and the poor devils.

Journal of Discourses, 17:239 (October 8, 1874).

Oliver and Joseph both surprised by the large number of scriptures speaking of the latter-day restoration; both Joseph and Brigham taught by the power of the Holy Ghost.

I remember hearing related brother Parley P. Pratt's first interview with the Saints at Fayette, Seneca County, where the Church was organized. Those of you who remember brother Parley know his familiarity with the Scriptures, especially with the prophecies. On that occasion he was called upon to speak; the Prophet Joseph was not present at the time. He brought forth from the prophecies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and other prophets, abundant proofs concerning the work which the Lord had established through his servant Joseph, a great many of the Latter-day Saints were surprised that there were so many evidences existing in the Bible concerning this work. The Church had then been organized some five months, but the members had never heard from any of the Elders these proofs and evidences which existed in the Bible. And, if I remember correctly, he told me that Oliver Cowdery and the Prophet Joseph himself were surprised at the great amount of evidence there was in the Bible concerning these things. The Prophet Joseph was inspired of God to teach the doctrines of life and salvation, and he did so without reference to what the ancient prophets had said. I have heard President Young make the same remarks. He said that he never consulted the Book of Covenants, he never consulted the Bible or Book of Mormon to see whether the doctrines and counsels which he was inspired to give, corresponded with these books or not. It was a matter that gave him no particular concern, from the fact that he endeavored always to be led by the Spirit of the Lord, to speak in accordance therewith; hence these men have had very little care resting upon their minds as to whether their doctrines and counsels were in harmony with the doctrines and counsels of those who preceded them. It was for them to seek to know the mind and will of the Lord and comprehend his Spirit as it rested upon them, to speak in accordance therewith; and the doctrine that has been taught under the inspiration of that spirit will be found to be in perfect harmony with the doctrines which have been taught by men inspired of God in ancient days.

Journal of Discourses, 19:105 (September 16, 1877).

Peace to be taken from the earth; great calamities to unfold; Civil War predicted.

The last time the Prophet addressed the people he predicted that peace should be taken from the earth, and that terrible calamities would come upon its inhabitants, and particularly upon our own nation. He predicted what the results would be of the spirit of mobocracy which then raged, and which had caused our expulsion from our homes, if allowed to prevail. Already, the prediction had been recorded by him, twelve years previous to his death, that there would be a rebellion break out in South Carolina, and a fratricidal war commence between the South and the North. The revelation upon this subject had been written [See D&C 87]; it had been published. It was well known to the great bulk of the Latter-day Saints years previous to this. I, when quite a child heard it, and looked for its fulfillment until it came to pass. And this was the case with the body of the people who were familiar with the predictions which had been uttered by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Journal of Discourses, 22:135 (July 3, 1881). For a similar statement, see Jedediah M. Grant, Journal of Discourses, 2:147.

Without plural marriage, the progress of the Saints would cease.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said, and so taught, when he first communicated this principle, [of plural marriage] that there had come a time in the history of God's people, when if they did not obey that law, all progress would cease, that the kingdom could go no further. And he commanded the servants of God, his associates, the Apostles, to obey it, under penalty of their ceasing to progress in the work of our God.

Journal of Discourses, 23:279 (October 8, 1882).

Joseph gave all priesthood keys to the Twelve; taught them all the ordinances of salvation; placed the responsibility for the kingdom on the Twelve.

While he was in possession of all his faculties, and likely to live for many years to lead the Churchin fact the people believed that he would live to redeem Zionwhen he was thus situated, impressed by the Spirit and power of God, he called together our leading men, and he bestowed upon the Twelve Apostles all the keys and authority and power that he himself possessed and that he had received from the Lord. He gave unto them every endowment, every washing, every anointing, and administered unto them the sealing ordinances and taught them the character of those ordinances, and revealed unto them the doctrine of celestial marriage, and impressed upon them the importance of their obedience to the same, and made it obligatory upon them that they should obey it and carry it out in their lives, and teach it to others. He taught these brethren that unless they did this the kingdom would stop, it could not make further progress. And filled with the power of God, he blessed them and placed those keys and this authority upon them, and told them that he had thus ordained them to bear off the kingdom. There was no key that he held, there was no authority that he exercised that he did not bestow upon the Twelve Apostles at that time. Of course, in doing this he did not divest himself of the keys; but he bestowed upon them these keys and this authority and power, so that they held them in their fullness as he did, differing only in this respect, that they exercised them subordinate to him as the head of the dispensation. He ordained them to all this authority, without withholding a single power or key or ordinance that he himself had received.

Thus you see these men whom God chose to hold the Apostleship received all this authority from Him. Hence he told the people before he was taken, "I roll this kingdom off on to the shoulders of the Twelve." Probably there are some in this room who heard him talk in this manner. I was but a boy at the time, but I remember it very distinctly.

Journal of Discourses, 23:362-63 (October 29, 1882). See also Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, 1:206.

Matter is eternal and indestructible; days of creation not twenty-four hours.

Joseph Smith taught the eternal duration of matter. He taught the doctrine that matter was indestructible; that it never had a beginning; that it never could have an end; that it might undergo chemical changes, but that it was indestructible, and that the elements of which the earth is composed were eternalnever had a beginning and never would have an end. The whole religious world were shocked at such an idea, and so in regard to the time occupied in the creation of the earth. But Joseph taught the true principle connected with this. He said the days mentioned as occupied in the creation were not our days of twenty-four hours' length, but were periods of time. Now, that is a commonly received doctrine, although it was sneered at and rejected by religious men at the time it was taught by the Elders of this Church.

Journal of Discourses, 24:257 (August 19, 1883).

Elders to build up Zion.

Joseph said in the beginning that it was the duty of the Elders of this Church to labor constantly to build up Zion and not to build up that which is opposed to Zion. That embodies in these few words the policy that we should observe.

Journal of Discourses, 26:320 (August 26, 1883).

Converts are prepared to receive gospel.

Dissatisfied with existing creeds, members, in many instances of existing Churches, but conscious that there was an absence of that divine power and of those heavenly gifts which characterized the Church in ancient days; dissatisfied with this condition of things, they besought God earnestly, fervently, and anxiously, to restore His Gospel to the earth, or to send some message of life and salvation unto them. They were thus prepared for the Gospel when it came, and received it gladly, because their hearts were prepared, and it is those few who have been gathered from the nations of the earth, with others who are also open, because of the honesty of their hearts, to receive the truth. Joseph Smith said that this should be the character of this work.

Journal of Discourses, 25:172 (May 25, 1884).

False prophets to work mighty miracles.

I heard the Prophet Joseph, when I was a boy, say that the time would come when false prophets would work mighty miracles in the eyes of the people of the earth, and they would seek to establish their authority by the performance of mighty miracles, and we have heard of such things in our day, since his deathbut this does not sustain a man in claiming to be leader of a people, and to give revelations from God.

Journal of Discourses, 26:64 (December 14, 1884).

Felt he knew Joseph from premortal associations.

I was a boy when my people gathered with the Saints of God. I was very curious to know the Prophet Joseph, having heard a great deal about him. I happened to be in a large crowd of people where the Prophet was, and I selected him out of that large body of people. There were no means of recognition that I know of which would suggest him to me as the Prophet; but I recognized him as though I had always known him. I am satisfied that I had known him and been familiar with him. There are instances which all of us doubtless have known, which have proved to us that there has been a spiritual acquaintance existing between us. We frequently say, "How familiar that person's face is to me." In this way kindred spirits are brought together. We are drawn together by this knowledge and this acquaintanceship, which, I have no doubt, was formed anterior to our birth in this state of existence.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:235.

Opposition and persecution to follow the growth of the Church.

Have you not heard from the time that you entered the Church; or, if you were born in the Church, from the time that you were old enough to understand, that Joseph Smith, in the beginning of this work, predicted that it would have to meet with obstacles and difficulties of the most formidable character, and that it would have influence brought to bear against it that would be very potent? Did he not prophesy that in the commencement it would excite the opposition of a neighborhood? But said he, it will not be confined to this; it will excite the opposition of a township and of a county, and then of a State; and after awhile it will meet with opposition of a national character. Would it stop there? No? but it would extend until it would call forth the opposition of the world itself.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 1:317.

Joseph predicts false spirits and false prophets; spiritualists imitate gospel teachings.

I heard Joseph Smith predict that the day would come when there would be false spirits go forth among the children of men, and that they would deceive them. I remember on one occasion his speaking about the false prophet that should call down fire from heaven, and he warned the people in the most impressive and solemn manner against being deceived by these works that should be wrought to deceive the children of men. It was only two years after his death that spirit-rapping commenced in Rochester, New York. We had been driven out here in the wilderness, and we did not know much that was transpiring in the eastern world. But I happened, while on the Sandwich Islands in 1851, to get hold of a book that had been issued by spiritualists, and I was surprised at the manner in which they presented their claims to the public. Arguments that our Elders used they had taken and revamped, so to speak, and adapted them to their ideas. A more deceptive book in the interests of falsehood and false doctrine could not, in my opinion, have been published. And from that day until the present, belief in spiritual agencies and manifestations has spread and increased, until at the present time there is scarcely a person to be found who does not believe that there is something connected with man that he can use to bring him into close and intimate relation with the spirit world.

Collected Discourses, edited by Brian H. Stuy, 5 vols. (Burbank, California, and Woodland Hills, Utah: B. H. S. Publishing, 1987-92), 3:414-15.

To test the piety of a recent convert, Joseph challenged his brother Don Carlos to wrestle; the convert was offended and concluded Joseph was a false prophet.

There is a story told about a person who had recently joined the Church calling upon the Prophet. This visitor was very pious in his manner and wore an air of sanctity. The Prophet perceived the spirit he was of, and his brother Don Carlos being present, he proposed to Don Carlos, as they had not wrestled for some time, that they should go out and wrestle. It is said that the visitor was so shocked that he concluded Mormonism was false, and that Joseph could not be a Prophet.

George Q. Cannon, "Topics of Our Times," Juvenile Instructor 29, no. 23 (1 December 1894): 746.

Present at transfiguration of Brigham Young.

It was the first sound of his [Brigham's] voice which the people had heard since he had gone east on his mission, and the effect upon them was most wonderful. Who that was present on that occasion can ever forget the impression it made upon them! If Joseph had risen from the dead and again spoken in their hearing, the effect could not have been more startling than it was to many present at that meeting. It was the voice of Joseph himself; and not only was it the voice of Joseph which was heard; but it seemed in the eyes of the people as though it was the very person of Joseph which stood before them. A more wonderful and miraculous event than was wrought that day in the presence of that congregation we never heard of. The Lord gave His people a testimony that left no room for doubt as to who was the man He had chosen to lead them. They both saw and heard with their natural eyes and ears, and then the words which were uttered came, accompanied by the convincing power of God, to their hearts, and they were filled with the Spirit and with great joy. There had been gloom, and, in some heart probably, doubt and uncertainty; but now it was plain to all that here w as the man upon whom the Lord had bestowed the necessary authority to act in their midst in Joseph's stead.

George Q. Cannon, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Juvenile Instructor 5, no. 22 (29 October 1870): 174-75.
