Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Card, Charles Ora

(November 5, 1839-September 9, 1906)

Joseph quoted as saying England would be last nation to "go to pieces"; that England would help crush other nations, including U.S., but would be overthrown by Ten Tribes; England as a nation would never persecute the Saints.

[Friday, January 21, 1887] . . . Brother Samuel Smith of Brigham City told me he was present in a priesthood meeting in the basement of the Temple in Nauvoo in the year 1843 and heard the Prophet Joseph Smith state that England or the nation of Great Britain would be the last nation to go to pieces. She would be instrumental in aiding to crush other nations even this nation of the United States and she would only be over thrown by the ten tribes from the North. She would never persecute the Saints as a nation. She would gather together great treasures of gold and yet we should seek refuge in her dominion.

Donald G. Godfrey and Brigham Y. Card, eds., The Diaries of Charles Ora Card: The Canadian Years 1886-1903 (Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press, 1993), 30-31.

Quotes Franklin D. Richards's account of restoration of Melchizedek Priesthood.

[General Conference, October 5, 1896] Elder (Apostle) F. D. Richards arose and desired the faith of the people and began by referring to the boy Prophet Joseph Smith [who] taught them the ways of the world were wrong. Referred to the translation of the plates and bringing forth the Book of Mormon. Restoration of the Levitical [and] Melchisedek Priesthoods. The latter on the banks of the Susquehanna [River] after wading through a swamp all night and they were weary and faint and after Peter, James and John had laid their [hands] on them and ordained them to the Apostolic Priesthood they rose up and made the balance of their journey walking 17 more miles as strong as lions. Gave a synopsis of the prophet's History through Kirtland, Nauvoo, Missouri, etc. Our young people should be reminded of these things from time to time that they may retain it. Said he had lodged and ate in [Joseph Smith's] house. Testified the power of God was with the prophet.

Donald G. Godfrey and Brigham Y. Card, eds., The Diaries of Charles Ora Card: The Canadian Years 1886-1903 (Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press, 1993), 30-31. See also Addison Everett, "Words and Incidents of the Prophet Joseph's Life," Young Woman's Journal 2, no. 2 (November 1890): 76-77.
