Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Carter, Jared

(b. January 14, 1801)

Joseph blesses Carter child, who is healed instantly; on the same day, by Joseph's administration, a blind sister is given her sight.

About this time [June, 1831] there was some displays of the power of God in miraculously in the Church in Thomson, by the instrumentality of Brother Joseph, the seer, one in my own family which took place as follows:

It was my youngest child that was distressingly sick, at which time Joseph came to my house and I told him that I had faith that the babe might be healed. He then spoke in the name of the Lord that it should be according to my faith. The child was healed immediately. The same day there was one of our sisters healed from blindness by his instrumentality.

"Journal of Jared Carter," typescript copy, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Joseph spoke by the power of the Holy Ghost, more powerfully than Carter had ever heard before.

Before this [i.e., June 6, 1831] was that memorable day when God first gave the fullness of the high priesthood to the elders of the Church of Christ. At the interview, Brother Joseph, notwithstanding he is not naturally talented for a speaker yet he was filled with the power of the Holy Ghost so that he spoke as I never heard man speak for God, by the power of the Holy Ghost spoke in him and marvelous was the display of the power of the spirit among the elders present.

"Journal of Jared Carter," typescript copy, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Appointed by Joseph to preach, which he does; Joseph prophesies relative to Jared Carter, and the prophecy is fulfilled in full.

[From Kirtland I] commenced a mission to the east on [the] 22nd day of September 1831, with Brother Ebensar Page. We traveled to Hiram, in the first place, where we attended meeting where Brother Joseph and Sidney live. Brother Joseph, after I had come there, asked me if I was willing to preach to them. I told him that I was, accordingly I endeavored to on Sunday, the 25th. In the afternoon, we had a meeting and Brother Joseph, the Prophet and Seer, before the meeting closed had the spirit of prophecy come on him while he was looking upon me and I saw that the form of his countenance was changed, he while looking upon me said, "Bless the Lord" and after this prophesied relative to the mission that I had commenced and expressed what should take place on conditions I was faithful and in this I found him of the truth and to predict the truth for the whole was fulfilled.

"Journal of Jared Carter," typescript copy, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
