Mark L. McConkie, Remembering Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 2003)

Cheney, Elam

(May 16, 1825-March 24, 1912)

Heard Joseph preach, remembers him staying in the Cheney home; Cheney served in Nauvoo Legion with Joseph; gives description of Joseph.

[I was] Born in 1825, in Freedom Township, New York. My folks moved to Kirtland, Ohio. We went to meeting and heard Joseph preach. The next time I saw him was in Illinois when he was going to Washington to see the president to get redress for the mobbing and killing of the Saints in Missouri. He stayed with us all night.

Again I saw him when we laid the cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple. We lived there then and saw him every Sunday, more or less. I belonged to the Nauvoo Legion, and Joseph was the General. Brother Joseph was a man weighing about two hundred pounds, fair complexion, light brown hair. He was about six feet tall, sound bodied, very strong and quickno breakage about his body. He most always wore a silk stock, and was smooth faced. He was very sympathetic and would talk to children and they liked him. He was honest, and was liked by everybody who knew him. I got my patriarchal blessing from old Father John Smith.

Elam Cheney Sr., "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17, no. 12 (December 1906): 539-40.

Family joins Church in 1831; Elam sees angels at Kirtland Temple meeting (dedication?); wrestled with Joseph in his youth; heard Joseph say he was going as lamb to the slaughter; saw transfiguration of Brigham Young.

Both his (Elam's) father and mother were religiously inclined and were faithful members of the Methodist church until they were visited by the Prophet Joseph Smith and Orson Pratt, who taught them the gospel of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. They were baptized members of this Church in the year 1831

. . . He also helped as a boy do some of the work on the Kirtland Temple. At this time, notice was given that there was to be a meeting held in the Temple. All the family attended this meeting. The Prophet spoke in the meeting and Elam noticed that while he was speaking the Prophet looked up as if he was looking at someone, so Elam looked in that direction and saw six personages, three on each side of the room. Their appearance attracted his attention as they were dressed so differently to what he was accustomed to seeing. They had white moccasins on their feet and white caps on their heads. He asked his mother who they were and she said she could see no one. He told her they were dressed in white. He always remembered how they looked and how they were dressed. Later on when he went to the temple to receive his own endowments he discovered that the clothing that those six personages wore, were like the temple clothes. This experience was a testimony which stayed with him through his life.

. . . He also worked as a carpenter on the temple at Kirtland, Ohio and also on the temple at Nauvoo, Ill. He was a foot racer and wrestler and at times wrestled with the Prophet Joseph Smith. He wasn't a large man but he was strong. When his ox was stolen on the journey West, he yoked himself up with his cow for several days till he found the ox.

As mob violence increased and the Saints were driven from their homes in Nauvoo, Brother Cheney shared all the hardships endured by the Saints. He was at Nauvoo and saw the Prophet leave for Carthage and heard him make the remark, "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter." He was at the meeting in Nauvoo when Governor Ford was present while the tragedy was being enacted at Carthage and was among those who left Nauvoo to accompany the bodies of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum to the city. He was present at the funeral of the martyred brothers. He also attended the meeting when President Brigham Young took the stand and made manifest to the people that he was the legal successor of the Prophet Joseph. He saw the mantel of the Prophet appear upon Brigham Young at the time he addressed the congregation telling of his taking Joseph's place.

Aaron Lindon Cheney, "History of Elam Cheney"; copies in private family possession.

On 1839 trip to Washington, D.C., Joseph stopped at Cheney home in Decatur, Illinois.

The Cheney family left Kirtland in July, 1838, in the company known as "Kirtland Camp." Intending to join the Saints in Nauvoo, but owing to sickness were not able to continue the journey, so stopped temporarily at Decatur, Macon Co., Illinois. While detained at this place, they were to work and fence a piece of ground, build a small house and raise a crop. It was while they were living at Decatur that Joseph the Prophet started on his memorable trip to Washington for the purpose of laying the grievances of the Saints before the President of the United States. As Joseph was passing through Decatur, he spent the night at the Cheney home. Elam who was 14 at the time was very much impressed by the conversation of the Prophet. As soon afterward as they could, the Cheney family continued their journey to Nauvoo. While at Nauvoo, Elam played in a game of baseball [ball?] with the Prophet. Elam was present when the cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple was laid, April 6, 1841. While the temple was being built the young men were given an opportunity to work out their tithing by working on the temple, so Elam worked every tenth day and sometimes more often on the temple.

"Our Cheney Family History"; copies in private family possession.
