Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Part I

THE BOOK

Chapter 1

THE UNKNOWN SCRIPTURE

The Old Testament is the least known and least understood of the standard works of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This is unfortunate, because the Old Testament commends itself to us in many ways. It has great historical interest, covering the longest period of time in religious history. From a literary point of view, the King James Version is unequalled in English prose. Most important, it is the fountainhead of many basic religious concepts that are part of our Judeo-Christian legacy. Its teachings have profoundly influenced the culture, the legal institutions, and the political structure of Western civilization.

Why is the Old Testament so little read and appreciated? One reason is that its very age creates problems. To understand it presupposes some knowledge of the time and circumstances of its writing and of the authors and their audience and purpose. The prophets were speaking in their own century to their own people in critical historical situations. Some of their teachings have local and temporary meaning only; others have universal and enduring value. It is not always easy to distinguish between the two, but the Old Testament cannot be understood apart from the times and circumstances in which its writings were produced. This does not require a specialist's knowledge, of course; many excellent commentaries will provide a perfectly adequate introduction.

A second problem with understanding the Old Testament is its structure. People habitually read a book from cover to cover, from beginning to end; but the Old Testament was not written as a single book. Instead, it is a collection of thirty-nine separate writings brought together into a single volume centuries after they were written. It is more like a shelf of books in a library, arranged neither chronologically nor alphabetically. Proverbs and Psalms are themselves collections of writings composed over centuries. (The next chapter suggests a more helpful reading order than beginning to end.)

Some Christians have not been interested in the Old Testament for its own sake but only because it predicts the coming of Jesus Christ. Although this interest is legitimate, it can be so powerful that they may relate passages to the Savior that do not apply to him. This might be called "Christianizing" the Old Testament, a practice understandably disturbing to Jewish scholars. Certainly some passages in the Old Testament that predict the coming of a Messiah are admirably fulfilled by Christ. Moreover, Jesus, Peter, and Paul quote the Old Testament to establish the Christian faith. But looking only for Christian-related passages in the Old Testament will divert our attention from many other religious concepts that are unique to that scripture and of great importance and value.

Latter-day Saints have a strong propensity to "Mormonize" the Old Testament because of the added knowledge of Christ's mission found in the Book of Mormon and the book of Moses. The book of Moses, a revelation to Joseph Smith, greatly expands Christ's central premortal role in the creation and redemption of humankind. We have a right to enlarge our Christian understanding by reference to these other scriptures, but I believe we should recognize them for what they are— additional sources of knowledge—and not assume that they are part of the Old Testament as we have received it.

Each scripture is unique. Each has its original and special contribution to make. Each should be studied and appreciated for what it is. Each should be respected for its own integrity.

A fourth cause of difficulty in understanding the Old Testament is the perception of some modern readers that every line of the Bible except mistranslations is divine. The Old Testament, I believe, contains much that reflects the mind and will of God, especially the writings of the prophets who were confident that they spoke for him and whose thoughts bear witness to me of divine influence. But there are other writings—narrations, stories, histories, proverbs, and psalms—that have value but are less inspired. One of the Old Testament books, the Song of Solomon, is a romantic love song that seems out of place in a religious text. It became part of the canon only by the somewhat strained reasoning that it was an allegory of the love God and Israel had for each other. Another work, Ecclesiastes, though beautifully written, is quite foreign to the faith and optimism of the Old Testament as a whole. In the narrative and historical books, authors occasionally justify Israel's actions by explaining that God willed them, even though those actions are unworthy of the Deity taught by the prophets and Jesus.

In short, much of the Old Testament is valid for us today, but some of it is an expression of different conditions, attitudes, and a more limited understanding of the will of God. One indication of its limitations is that the Hebrew prophets had to correct mistaken ideas of their own people about the character and will of God, as the book of Jonah does. It is surely consistent to believe that these comparatively more enlightened prophets would also welcome further light and knowledge.

The law of Moses is a splendid achievement for its day. Much of it, such as the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, is equally valid for us. Other parts—dietary laws, hygienic rules, and sacrifices—are much less relevant, even among modern Jews.

The Old Testament is a wonderfully honest and human record as well as inspired of God. Its humanity and divinity co-mingle in a fascinating record. It works best when it is read for its own sake, not as something it is not.
