Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 2

THE BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

The Old Testament was probably over a thousand years in the making. It did not come into its present form until the end of the first century a.d. The Jewish Old Testament developed in three groupings: the Law (Torah or Pentateuch), the Prophets, and the Writings.

The Law, ascribed to Moses and consisting of Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, had become scripture for the Jews by 400 b.c. It was held to be the most authoritative and sacred part of the Old Testament.

The second group, the Prophets, came in two divisions: the former and the latter prophets. The former prophets, which are narrative, historical works, consist of Joshua, Judges, 1 and 2 Samuel, and 1 and 2 Kings. The latter prophets consist of fifteen truly prophetic books: the three great prophets (Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel) and the twelve "minor" prophets (Amos, Hosea, Micah, Zephaniah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Obadiah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi, Joel, and Jonah). They were accepted as scripture about 200 b.c.

The third group, the Writings, consists of Psalms, Proverbs, Job, the Song of Solomon, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, 1 and 2 Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah. They did not become part of the Jewish canon until about a.d. 70.

THE BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

When a lawyer asked Jesus, "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?" Jesus quoted the commandments to love God and love one's neighbor, for "on these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matt. 22:26-40.) By that, he meant the accepted scripture of the day. He did not add the Writings because they were not yet part of the Old Testament canon.

Another group of books, the Apocrypha, were part of the Jewish canon but did not have the authority of the thirty-nine books mentioned above. Written between 200 b.c. and the fall of Jerusalem in a.d. 70, they contain important historical and human-interest material. Catholics from time to time have included these books in some of their editions of the Bible, while Protestants have generally excluded them. Joseph Smith's family Bible contained them; but when he was working on his new translation of the Bible, he received a revelation instructing him:

There are many things contained therein that are true, and it is mostly translated correctly;

There are many things contained therein that are not true, which are interpolations by the hands of men.

Verily, I say unto you, that it is not needful that the Apocrypha should be translated.

Therefore, whoso readeth it, let him understand, for the Spirit manifesteth truth. (D&C 9:1-4.)

The Apocrypha is readily available today in a variety of translations, either as a separate publication or as part of a standard edition of the Bible. Its books consist of Tobit (200 b.c.), Ecclesiasticus, or the Wisdom of Jesus, the Son of Sirach (175 b.c.), Song of the Three Holy Children (150 b.c.), 1 and 2 Esdras, Judith (150 b.c.), Prayer of Manasses (150-100 b.c.), Additions to Esther (100 b.c.), the History of Susanna (100-75 b.c.), Bel and the Dragon (100-75 b.c.), 1 Maccabees (100-75 b.c.), 2 Maccabees (75-65 b.c.), and the Wisdom of Solomon (a.d. 38-41).

HOW TO READ THE OLD TESTAMENT

Each book of the Old Testament should be read as a separate work along with some information about its background, author (if known), and content. Any good Bible commentary will give this information. (Appendix A, pp. 153-57, contains a brief description of each of the thirty-nine books.) The first books of the Bible, those found in the Law and the former Prophets, can be read in the order in which they are printed with the exception that Leviticus and Numbers should be reversed because Numbers continues the account recorded in Exodus.

The end of David's life and the reign of Solomon are described in 2 Kings, chapters l through 15. The remainder of 1 Kings and all of 2 Kings deal with the divided kingdoms of Israel and Judah and describe the conditions in which the prophets of Israel—Elijah, Elisha, and the fifteen writing prophets—declare their messages. The prophetic books should be read along with 1 and 2 Kings in this order: Zephaniah, Jeremiah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Ezekiel, Haggai, Zechariah, Nehemiah, Obadiah, Joel, Malachi, and Jonah. Table 1, "A Chronology of the Prophets" (page 10) gives the approximate dates of the historical outline.

The third group of books, the Writings, can be read as a group, again considering each book as a unit with an introduction to supply context. Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Job, collectively, are called Wisdom Literature and may be read as a group. Proverbs is optimistic, full-

TABLE 1.CHRONOLOGY OF THE PROPHETS

Abraham (ca. 2100 b.c.)

Moses (1350 b.c.)

Joshua

Judges

United Kingdom of Israel (ca. 1036-937 b.c.)

Saul

David

Solomon

1 Samuel 2 Samuel 1 Kings

Division into Two Kingdoms, 937 b.c.

Kingdom of Israel

Amos (ca. 765-750 b.c.)

Hosea (ca. 745-735 b.c.)

Assyrian captivity (722 b.c.)

Micah (730-721 b.c.)

Isaiah (740-700 b.c.)

Zephaniah (627 b.c.)

Jeremiah (627-586 b.c.)

Nahum (612 b.c.)

Habakkuk (608-697 b.c.)

Ezekiel (592-567 b.c.)

Haggai (520-519 b.c.)

Zechariah (520-519 b.c.)

Nehemiah (444-432 b.c.)

Obadiah (450-400 b.c.)

*Joel (ca. 400 b.c.)

Malachi (ca. 400 b.c.)

*Jonah (ca. 350 b.c.)

Kingdom of Judah Babylonian captivity, 586 b.c. Return of some Jews to Judea, 538 b.c.

*Dated much earlier by a minority of scholars of faith, purpose, and motivation, while Ecclesiastes is pessimistic, realistic, and disillusioned. They balance each other. Job is a classic work, profound and beautifully written.

Psalms can be read any time for meditation and worship.

Esther and Ruth, written with settings centuries apart, tell the stories of two revered women in the history of Israel and Judah. Ruth, a Moabite, was the foremother of David. Esther saved her people from destruction during the Babylonian captivity.

Daniel is an inspiring historical narrative for Jews during a period of captivity and discouragement, and includes prophecies as well.

Ezra and Nehemiah give insight into the building of a new temple and the reestablishment of the religion and people of Judah after their return from the Babylonian captivity in 538 b.c. Ezra was the religious leader, Nehemiah, the political leader.

The books of l and 2 Chronicles cover the history of the Old Testament from the creation (briefly) to the Babylonian captivity, 586 b.c. Probably written at the time of Ezra and Nehemiah, these two books place special emphasis on the history of Judah and temple building.

The Song of Solomon might be read whenever you are in a romantic or literary mood.

The remaining chapters in this book will not discuss each book in sequence. Instead, they will develop some basic concepts of Old Testament religion that have value for us.
