Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 3

THE BIBLE AS LITERATURE

The ancient Israelites excelled in literature but turned away from creative efforts in the visual arts of painting and sculpture. With the exception of their temple, they did not produce architectural monuments that could be ranked with those of Greece, Egypt, or other Mediterranean countries.

The first reason for this was a religious prohibition against art. The Israelites were surrounded in Canaan by people who worshipped gods carved from wood and stone. As the Old Testament makes clear, this chosen people could be easily seduced to worship visual objects. The golden calf incident is only one event in a long history of dallying with idolatry. (Ex. 32.) Basic to the Decalogue was the warning against graven images:

Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:

Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them. (Ex. 20:3-5.)

Clearly, no matter what rationale might be used for creating an image, the Lord was interested in removing a temptation. The Greek glorification of human beings and individual arts produced an irreplaceable aesthetic and philosophical heritage for the western world. Moses and the other prophets, in turning away from the images of this world, focused attention on an even more important aspect of human life: our relationship to Deity and the invisible realities of the spiritual life.

THE BIBLE AS LITERATURE

A second reason why the Israelites produced no great visual arts lies in the accidents of its history. During the patriarchal period, the Hebrews were semi-nomads, then slaves in Egypt, then an army in Canaan. During these centuries, they could tell stories, sing hymns, and chant poetry—portable artifacts that they carried in their minds. However, such mobility would have made it difficult to produce permanent art objects. Even their literature was often expressed and transmitted orally.

This does not mean, however, that the Israelites had no aesthetic life. People have aesthetic feelings that call for expression in some way, and the Israelites of antiquity expressed their aesthetics very effectively in words. Their literature is profoundly beautiful.

I, probably like you, do not read Hebrew. I feel fortunate that in the King James Version of the Bible we have an aesthetic achievement that must match, in its own way, the achievement of the first writers. Four characteristics of the Old Testament suggest to me that it is a supreme literary achievement: its thematic significance, the concreteness and specificity of its imagery, its parallelism, and the diversity of forms it contains.

THEMATIC SIGNIFICANCE

Great literature discusses ideas of significance. Old Testament writers did not deal with trivia and superficialities, but struggled to define ideas of supreme importance: God's will and his ways, his concern for human beings and for human destiny, and the nature of truth. Again and again, they return to major questions: Why do nations rise and fall? What is good and evil? Why do the innocent suffer? What is our obligation to our neighbors and to society? Where is wisdom to be found? What is acceptable worship to our God?

In dealing with these themes, the Old Testament presents truth—not only the factual events of a particular king's reign or the outcome of a particular battle, but the truth of meaning. From the Old Testament, we understand not only what happened but the significance of what happened.

For instance, we are all familiar with the Parable of the Good Samaritan. Jesus observed life keenly and had great insight into people's motives. Certainly, he and his listeners knew of instances when travelers had been attacked and robbed, perhaps even killed; of other instances when a supposedly pious person had behaved in a selfish, perhaps openly exploitive, way; and of still other instances when an unlikely individual within a family or a community had stepped forward in a time of need. Perhaps there had never been an instance when an unfortunate traveler had been ignored by ecclesiastical officials and succored by an outcast, but the separate details of this parable were all true to life and could have happened just as Jesus described them. However, I believe that this parable was constructed by the genius of his creative mind in just this way to drive home a great idea. Perhaps if he had related "factual" details that would likely have been more common—that the traveler was discovered by a group of merchants traveling together, for instance—the significant truth of this parable would have been diluted.

In the same way, we must consider the facts and the truth of the Old Testament and some of its narratives. For instance, the debate over the accuracy of the details in the book of Job and the book of Jonah is centuries old. We will never have enough information to know if a man could survive three days inside a great fish, if Nineveh archives would show mass repentance on such- and-such a date, or if vines in Nineveh's ecology are capable of overnight growth and are particularly susceptible to large worms. These facts are beyond us, but the truth of Jonah's attempts at disobedience, of God's power, and of divine concern for all human beings does not depend on such factual accuracy. It could have happened just as the author relates, but the purposeful creativity of the story contains transcendent truths.

VIVID IMAGERY

Old Testament writings are rich with images that are concrete, vivid, and earthy. The language is not abstract philosophizing or abstruse jargon, but is drawn directly from everyday experiences. Listeners could touch and see the things the writers were talking about. Note the language of Isaiah:

Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the Lord hath spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.

The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib: but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider. (Isa. 1:2-3.)

Here Isaiah holds up Israel's deliberate dullness against the contrasting understanding of the reputedly stupid ox and the stubborn donkey. A few verses later, he paints a graphic picture of the consequence of Israel's deliberate lack of understanding, speaking in the present tense as though the conquerors were before their eyes at the very moment: "Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers." (Isa. 1:7.)

Another vivid image of Israel's contamination by sin is: "Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water." (Isa. 1:22.) Intermingled with such images—all, impressively, from a single chapter—comes a scenario for righteousness, again vivid and specific so that a sinner drawn toward repentance would know exactly what he or she should do:

Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. (Isa. 1:17-18.)

Amos, a shepherd-prophet who preceded Isaiah on the same mission, paints an equally vivid picture of Israel's sins:

Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria, which are named chief of the nations, to whom the house of Israel came! . . .

That lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall;

That chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like David;

That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. (Amos 6:1, 4-6.)

Surely, to a desert people surrounded by enemies, the images of luxuriant security and protection in the twenty- third Psalm were endlessly comforting:

The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.

He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters.

He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake.

Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I

will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.

Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

PARALLEL STRUCTURE

Hebrew poetry, which comprises much of the text of the Old Testament, exhibits several subtle forms of parallelism; but one of the most effective to me is synonymous parallelism. Instead of saying a thought once and then developing details of that idea, an Old Testament writer would frequently recast the thought twice or even oftener in different words. The effect is to engage the mind in a series of images that produce their own mood, tone, and direction instead of relying on the power of logic. To my way of thinking, this single device is extremely effective in allowing the reader to feel and absorb the thought and to perceive it in beauty. Here are some examples of synonymous parallelism:

Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place? (Ps. 24:3.)

Shew me thy ways, O Lord; teach me thy paths. (Ps. 25:4.)

Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart. (Ps. 26:2.)

The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? (Ps. 27:1.)

Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward.

Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more: the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.

From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment. . . .

Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them. . . .

Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil. (Isa. 1:4-6, 16-17.)

The following long poetic passage from Job bears quotation simply for the versatility and subtlety of its parallelism:

After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day.

And Job spake, and said,

Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, There is a man child conceived.

Let that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon it.

Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell upon it; let the blackness of the day terrify it.

As for that night, let darkness seize upon it; let it not be joined unto the days of the year, let it not come into the number of the months.

Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.

Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark; let it look for light, but have none; neither let it see the dawning of the day:

Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the belly?

For now should I have lain still and been quiet, I should have slept: then had I been at rest. (Job 3:1-7, 9, 11, 13.)

Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man be more pure than his maker? (Job 4:17.)

Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth: there-fore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty:

For he maketh sore and bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make whole. (Job 5:17-18.)

DIVERSITY OF FORMS

The Old Testament is a large book, three times the size of the New Testament and twice as large as the Book of Mormon. Many hands writing in many different epochs have produced it, and these diversities of personality and emphases are paralleled by the diversity of forms. There are prose and poetry in rich abundance, a dramatic debate in Job, oratory in Deuteronomy, the epic stories of Abraham and Joseph, narrations and history, Nathan's parable, hymns of praise, proverbs, the lyrical story of Ruth, and fascinating psychological "short stories" featuring the all-too-human characteristics of men like Samson and David. In its variety of literary forms, the Old Testament is the richest scripture.

In short, although the Old Testament deserves our attention for its religious contributions—the subject that will occupy the remainder of this volume—it is equally deserving for its literary contributions to our culture.
