Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Part II

OLD TESTAMENT CONCEPTS OF GOD

Chapter 4

"I AM THAT I AM"

The Old Testament embodies the most fundamental ideas about God available in our Judeo-Christian culture. From it, even before the process of canonization began but certainly since then, have come affirmations of his existence, his creative role in nature and in human history, his revelations to his prophets, his concern for human beings, his universal influence, and his divine sovereignty. These are all meaningful functions and attributes of Deity.

But surely undergirding all of these concepts is the faith of Old Testament writers that God exists—that he is a living, personal, ethical being who can and does communicate with human beings. He is a God who gives people a sense of security, purpose, and meaning about their lives, thus satisfying their religious needs and aspirations.

From beginning to end, Old Testament writers affirm God's existence in a variety of ways. Let me share with you five of my favorite testimonies of God from the Old Testament.

A PERSONAL VISITATION TO MOSES

In this first example from Exodus 3:1-14, God reveals himself in a mysterious, even terrifying way—through the bush that burns without being consumed. He calls Moses to a compelling mission and speaks his name in one of the most awesome scenes ever recorded.

"I AM THAT I AM"

As Moses tends the flock of his father-in-law, Jethro, the priest of Midian, he follows them in their wanderings to a portion of the desert near Mount Horeb. It is unclear whether Horeb had this name even before Moses' experience or whether it became known by that name after Moses returned with his message.

And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not con-sumed. . . .

And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I.

And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God.

And the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows;

And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and Jebusites.

Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them.

Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt.

Overcome and filled with trepidation, Moses responded, "Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?" God, responding directly to Moses' unvoiced fears, reassured him, "Certainly I will be with thee; and this shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee: When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain."

Then Moses asked the great question that human beings have addressed to God in one form or another since the beginning of the world:

Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?

And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.

THE INTIMATE TRUST OF THE PSALMIST

In a spirit of trust and rejoicing, the Psalmist provides my second example. He exultantly affirms the presence of God throughout the world in a succession of images that contrast the immensity of the universe with the intimacy of God's care:

Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?

If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there.

If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;

Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.

If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light around me.

Yea, the darkness hideth

not from thee; but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee. (Ps. 139:7-12.)

PROVERBS' VIEW OF WISDOM

The author of Proverbs affirms God as the unfailing fountainhead of wisdom, urging his hearers to rely on a close personal relationship with God as the most constant factor in an uncertain world:

Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding.

In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the Lord, and depart from evil.

It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones. (Prov. 3:5-8.)

ELIJAH'S DRAMATIC CONTEST

The prophet Elijah is one of the most colorful and dramatic witnesses for God in the Old Testament. His fervent and unwavering belief in the existence of God stands in sharp contrast to the fickleness of the Israelites, eager to be enticed into worshipping the false gods of neighboring tribes. In Elijah's day, Israel's king, Ahab, had married Jezebel, a Phoenician, who had brought with her a retinue of priests of Baal. Their activities were financed by the taxes of the Israelites whose faith they sought to undermine.

In a flamboyant public confrontation recorded in 1 Kings 18, Elijah challenged Ahab, "Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel's table."

Ahab accepted the challenge and collected the people and priests. The biblical account does not record the number present on that occasion, and surely it is not realistic to suppose that the entire population of the nation was in attendance. Certainly, however, a sizeable number of people who were not counted among the 450 priests came to the gathering, for Elijah's opening statement is to them, "all the people": "How long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him." The people, probably not only skeptical but also cautious about incurring the king's displeasure, "answered him not a word."

Rather than laying a claim to popular support, Elijah underscored and intensified the numerical odds against him by reminding the people, "I, even I only, remain a prophet of the Lord; but Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty men."

On such terms, how then could they refuse any reasonable contest of power that he proposed? And, indeed, the terms that he laid down were eminently fair:

Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under:

And call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the name of the Lord: and the God that answereth by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, It is well spoken.

And Elijah said unto the priests of Baal, Choose you one bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call on the name of your gods, but put no fire under.

And they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from morning even unto noon, saying, O Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that answered. And they leaped upon the altar which was made.

And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked.

And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them.

This spectacle continued until "the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice," attesting at least to the patience of the people and to the faith, however misplaced, of the priests of Baal. Then Elijah intervened sharply by calling the people to gather around him and the broken altar of Jehovah. With twelve stones, one for each of the twelve sons of Jacob, he repaired the altar and made a trench around it "as great as would contain two measures of seed." After arranging the wood and the pieces of slaughtered bull on top of the altar, he then asked for four barrels of water to be poured over the sacrifice and the wood. It is not clear from the record who performed this labor, whether he had some assistants who still believed in the God of Israel or whether the people themselves, fully convinced of the impotence of Baal, willingly fetched the water. In any case, Elijah had the sacrifice drenched not once but three times, filling the trench.

Then, in the dramatic dusk,

Elijah the prophet came near, and said, Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy word.

Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the Lord God, and that thou hast turned their heart back again.

Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench.

And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and they said, The Lord, he is the God; the Lord, he is the God.

Sarcastic and sharp before the priests of Baal, Elijah is humble and self-effacing before Jehovah.

ISAIAH'S WITNESSOF A LIVING GOD

Like Elijah, all of the great writing prophets declare with authority and assurance that they are spokesmen for a living God. To read Amos, Hosea, Micah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel is to be in the presence of men who have experienced God, not as an abstract ideal or as an ethical principle, but as a vital and unmediated reality. Isaiah's vision of God upon his throne, the vision that confirmed him as a prophet, illustrated his conviction:

In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple.

Above it stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.

And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke.

Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts.

Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, hav-ing a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar:

And he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.

Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me. (Isa. 6:1-8.)

CONCLUSION

It is neither possible nor necessary for us to know all we wish to know about God. There is great value in living by faith. What is vital to our life as religious persons is to believe that he exists. Our faith in his existence is the foundation of our faith that righteousness and goodness will ultimately triumph. If God exists, the things we cherish most—truth, love, beauty, goodness, integrity, and freedom—are not ultimately at the mercy of any unscrupulous individual, the hazards of mortality, or the menace of nuclear holocaust. Faith in the existence of a personal, divine being means also a faith in the eternal life of human beings. If personality is in command in the universe, human personality can be preserved.

Even if God did not exist, our human life would be rich with good and loving things; but those things would be overshadowed by the ultimate futility that would come with the inevitable end of life. The Old Testament is reassuring about God's existence and about the purposefulness of human experience. It affirms God's nature and being as one that thoughtful, sensitive human beings can worship with confidence and with fervor. It is those attributes, as revealed by the Old Testament, that succeeding chapters will explore.
