Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 5

GOD THE REVELATOR

The Old Testament can be described as a sustained narrative of God's revelation of himself and his will over and over again to his prophets. These prophets have a dual purpose. Not only do they receive God's revelation of himself to them—which makes them prophets—but they also receive his will for his people. Among the most precious words in the Old Testament are those moments of contact between God and these individuals, in which a man becomes a prophet.

Genesis 12:1-3 describes the beginning of the house of Israel when God called Abram (Abraham) to leave his native country and to establish a new nation, a people destined to be a blessing to humankind, in a country God promised him:

Now the Lord had said unto Abram, get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew thee:

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.

Abraham's feelings and first response to this commandment are not recorded, but his obedience is.

GOD THE REVELATOR

Moses, who received the revelation of God in the burning bush, resisted the prophetic call. It is oddly endearing to think of someone with the stature of Moses demurring out of fear of others or of his own inadequacies: "Behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, The Lord hath not appeared unto thee. . . . O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue." (Ex. 4:1, 10-11.) In light of Moses' public actions from that point on, such hesitancy seems to reveal the magnitude of Moses' faith.

The writing prophets—Amos, Hosea, Micah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel—all spoke for God in the first person. Amos, a prophet from the kingdom of Judah, went north to Bethel, a sacred shrine in Israel, and spoke the mind of God to the Israelites. Amaziah, the high priest, angrily told Amos: "O thou seer, go, flee thee away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy there: But prophesy not again any more at Beth-el: for it is the king's chapel, and it is the king's court."

Amos responded by declaring his call—his credentials, if you will—in two verses that breathe both conviction and humility:"I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son; but I was an herdsman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit: And the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go, prophesy unto my people Israel." (Amos 7:14-15.)

Micah also expressed confidence in his divine commission: "But truly I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin." (Micah 3:8.)

Jeremiah gives us a few more details of his own prophetic calling—again a pattern of resistance, then acceptance:

Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations.

Then said I, Ah, Lord God! Behold, I cannot speak: for I am a child.

But the Lord said unto me, Say not, I am a child: for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou shalt speak.

Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thee to deliver thee, saith the Lord.

Then the Lord put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. And the Lord said unto me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.

See, I have this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant. (Jer. 1:4-10.)

Jeremiah's writings have preserved for us the sensitivity of a personality who suffered from the rejection of his people and the burden of his calling.

The Old Testament introduced to the world a new kind of prophet. History provides two models of equally great religious leaders: exemplars and emissaries. In India and China, Lao-tze, Confucius, Buddha, and many nameless Hindu gurus won adherents by their exemplary lives. They faced the dilemmas of mortal life and suffering with wisdom, found solutions, developed interpretations, and expounded them in memorable ways. Some, particularly the Hindus and Lao-tze, believed in God but claimed no revelation from him. I believe that they were inspired of God in their ethical insights, but they did not claim God's authority as they preached and taught. In my view, they were the "angels" to their nation that Alma longed to be in a stirring Book of Mormon passage; after he expressed his wish, he realized that the Lord was already meeting that need in His own way. Acknowledging that the Lord granted all people "their desire," whether "unto salvation or unto destruction," Alma expressed his understanding of how the Lord accomplished that end in a way that was comprehensible and just and that respected the free choice of those individuals:

Now, seeing that I know these things, why should I desire more than to perform the work which I have been called?

Why should I desire that I were an angel, that I could speak unto the ends of the earth?

For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have; therefore we see that the Lord doth counsel in wisdom, according to that which is just and true. (Alma 29:6-8.)

The exemplary leaders I have mentioned were certainly teaching "their own nation and tongue" in ways acceptable to their culture. It is impressive to me that they were men who had mastered themselves and, to a great extent, their environment. They were intellectuals, reflective, meditative, serene, and clear in their thinking. Their teachings reflect these attributes.

How different were the Hebrew emissary prophets— Moses, Amos, Micah, Hosea, Isaiah, and Jeremiah. They spoke only because they believed that God had commanded them. They were sent. They made no pretense of being exemplary, and, in fact, their own record often stresses their inadequacies. They were listened to, not for the wisdom of their message, but because their hearers were convinced that the prophet spoke for God. And this belief seems to have been comparatively rare.

Emissary prophets were concerned with the present and future welfare of their people. They were emotional— angry, comforting, threatening, thundering like a force of nature and, like changes in nature, beautifully calm and serene after the storm. They have been called God- intoxicated men.

To the best of our knowledge, these emissary prophets appeared first in ancient Israel and are vividly portrayed in the Old Testament. They are the prototypes for such Christian leaders as Peter and Paul, who also spoke for Deity, and for Mohammed, who spoke for Allah.

In our own day, Joseph Smith continued the tradition of the emissary prophets who spoke for the Lord. Claiming no exemplary character, and being deeply involved in the daily struggles and survival of his people, he won adherents only when people, touched by his charisma or by the Holy Spirit, felt convinced that he spoke for God.

Hebrew prophets, the apostles of the Savior, and Joseph Smith were all exemplary in many ways, but this was not the basis of their appeal. They spoke in the name of God or Christ. None of them said. "Follow me. I have found the way to eternal life."

Jesus is the only great religious leader who spoke and acted both as an emissary and as an exemplar. In the emissary spirit, he said:

I can of mine own self do nothing; as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me. (John 5:30.)

My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. (John 7:16-17.)

His exemplary role is illustrated throughout the Gospels. Perhaps the passage that stirs me most deeply is this one:

I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.

If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also. (John 14:6-7.)

Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. (Matt. 11:28-29.)
