Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 6

GOD THE CREATOR

One of the most powerful messages of the Old Testament is announced in its opening words: "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth." (Gen. 1:1.) Then in simple, dignified language, the sequence of creation is described. Two things are made immensely clear by the simple process of repetition: God created the world, and those creations were good, serving his purposes.

Thus, two of the most important concepts the Old Testament teaches about God are that creativity is a fundamental part of his personality and that the earliest act he is recorded as performing was a creative one.

The Old Testament does not tell us much about the process or the techniques of creation. God simply said, "Let there be light: and there was light." (Gen. 1:3.) We make a big mistake, in my opinion, by trying to make a scientific account out of the biblical story. It is important to remember that it was written in a prescientific age by people whose purpose was a religious one—to glorify God, not to explain his works.

I believe that we can glorify God with the works of our intellects and that understanding God allows us to worship him more fully. However, I also firmly believe that we should not wrest texts into purposes other than those for which they were designed. In the Old Testament, we must accept God working in his vast dominions with his supernal knowledge. Isaiah, speaking for the Creator, gives us the right perspective:

For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord.

For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. (Isa. 55:8-9.)

It seems much more important to me to accept the Hebrew perspective of a purposeful world that reflects the creative will and power of God, a world designed with human beings in mind and who came into being by that same divine will to create. Such a perspective is radically different from one that sees the world as a random or capricious production by competing gods, as is common in many mythologies, or even as the reasonable and predictable result of scientific laws and processes, certainly awesome but also chillingly impersonal and uncaring.

In contrast, sense the rejoicing in creation apparent in these verses from the Psalms and from Isaiah.

The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork.

Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge. (Ps. 19:1-2.)

The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.

For he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods. (Ps. 24:1-2).

For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods.

In his hand are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the hills is his also.

The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry land.

O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our maker.

For he is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand. To day if ye will hear his voice,

Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness:

When your fathers tempted me, and saw my work. (Ps. 95:3-9.)

I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded. (Isa. 45:12.)

Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called; I am he; I am the first, I also am the last.

Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the heavens: when I call unto them, they stand up together. (Isa. 48:12-13.)

Who is not moved by the sheer exultation in God's power and overwhelming personal role in creation that the Old Testament so vividly witnesses?

In general, three philosophies define God by a relationship to his creations, including human beings.

The first philosophy, pantheism, identifies the Creator with all that is. God is in the mountains and the rivers, and God is the mountains and rivers. Although we are most accustomed to it today in the form of transcendentalism, a philosophy worked out by the American philosopher and writer Ralph Waldo Emerson, pantheism's roots run to the oldest of all nonrevealed religions. Probably it is an outgrowth of the paganism that deified the forces of nature and made gods of the thunder and rain. In pantheism, of course, Jesus Christ would simply be an extraordinary individual who was able to concentrate the God-essence that is in everything and everyone to an unusual extent and express it in a very remarkable way.

In contrast, the second philosophy, deism, developed during the Enlightenment of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when rationality and logic assumed great importance in western thought. The deist's position is that God is the clock-maker. He created nature and human beings, then left them to perform the functions for which he created them, observing but not interfering, performing miracles, or answering prayers. In a strict deistic view, Jesus Christ's claims of atonement and resurrection would have to be considered in one of two ways: either they were part of the "mechanism" built into the clock of human history since the beginning and hence inevitable—without his free choice—or else his claims of being God are overstated and he should be regarded as a good man whose life and personal example are an inspiration to others.

The third philosophy is theism. According to this view, God is a person and a personality, not just a force. He is continuously active in nature and human affairs, but he is not in them. His creative work has no end, but he has a separate identity, separate powers, and separate interests. Theism thus combines some of the elements of pantheism and deism by being both immanent (immediately concerned with human beings and the world in which we live) and transcendant (above and separate from human beings and our world).

The Old Testament depicts God in theistic terms as a personal being, apart from nature, the master of nature, but acting through nature:

The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens.

By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew.

My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom and discretion:

So shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace to thy neck.

Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble.

When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.

Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the wicked, when it cometh.

For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from being taken. (Prov. 3:19-26.)

This God is concerned with people, with their behavior and their destiny. He is responsive to prayer, to persuasion. He suffers with his people.

One of the most profound and promising aspects of the creation story in the Old Testament is this remarkable statement: "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." (Gen. 1:27.) How exhilarating to believe that human beings have partaken of the nature of God by being created in his image, and that like him they have the inborn capacity to create, to love, to be intelligent, to be free. Although our abilities are small compared to God's, we have his assurance that these divine attributes slumber within us, waiting to find expression.

To me, the hunger for creativity that is an ineradicable part of human nature is its own testimony to the creativity of God. Romain Rolland, a French novelist, expressed this concept with passionate eloquence:

Joy, furious joy, the sun that lights up all that is and will be, the God-like joy of creation. There is no joy but in creation. There are no living beings but those who create. All the rest are shadows hovering over the earth, strangers to life. All the joys of life are the joys of creation: love, genius, action— quickened by flames issuing from one and the same fire. . . . To create in the region of the body, or in the region of the mind, is to issue from the prison of the body; it is to ride upon the storm of life; it is to be He who is. To create is to triumph over death. (Jean Christophe [New York:

Modern Library, 1913], p.364.)

If we are in the image of our Creator, we too must be creative to fulfill our natures. We are not puppets or robots or sheep. We have hands, minds, imagination, and feelings that need to find expression. Only humans have hands capable of sustained, minute work. Only humans have elaborate languages and symbolic systems of thought. Great is our need to express our feelings and thoughts in ways that will relieve suffering and promote life and goodwill upon the earth. The Old Testament pushes us toward that creativity by giving us an image of God as a joyful, exultant creator, one who also created us in his image.
