Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 7

GOD THE ETHICAL

When we contrast the Old Testament with Greek myths, the closest written records in time and space to come down to us, we see an immediate contrast in the nature of the deities each presents. The gods of Olympus are spiteful, jealous, capricious, vindictive, domineering, and exploitive. Certainly, many episodes recorded in the Old Testament might justly earn one or more of these adjectives as well; but as I read the Old Testament, I see the massacre of the Canaanites and the sacrifice of Jephthah's daughter as isolated incidents against a background of moral standards.

God is ethical in his relations to human beings and unrelenting in his requirements that human beings be ethical with each other. The message of the writing prophets—Amos, Hosea, Micah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel—is unmistakable. Flattery, offerings, bribes, and praises are not part of the worship of Israel's god. On the contrary, not even praise and sacrifice are meritorious unless accompanied by moral relations with one's fellow human beings.

Moses, speaking for God, said: "Ye shall be holy; for I the Lord your God am holy." (Lev. 19:2.) In the rest of that powerful and thought-provoking chapter, he defined holiness in terms of honesty, justice, and mercy in human relations.

Amos (760-740 b.c.) was the first of the writing prophets to declare the moral character of God. Speaking for God, Amos exclaimed:

I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies.

Though ye offer me burnt offerings, and your meat offerings, I will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts.

Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols.

But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream. (Amos 5:21-24.)

And why is this worship rejected? Because in daily dealings with each other, these chosen people were unjust, deceitful, unfair, and oppressive to those least able to defend themselves:

Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria, which are named chief of the nations, to whom the house of Israel came! . . .

That lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall;

That chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like David;

That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. (Amos 6:1, 4-6.)

The psalms recognize and praise the righteousness of the Lord, reciting a veritable litany of ethical qualities:

Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth shall go before thy face. (Ps. 89:14.)

The Lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him. (Ps. 92:15.)

For he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth. (Ps. 96:13.)

The Lord reigneth; let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles be glad thereof.

Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne. (Ps. 97:1-2.)

His work is honourable and glorious: and his righteousness endureth for ever.

He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered: the Lord is gracious and full of compassion. . . .

The works of his hands are verity and judgment; all his commandments are sure.

They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and uprightness. (Ps. 111:3-4, 7-8.)

Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.

Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole heart.

They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.

Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.

O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!

Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments.

I will praise thee with uprightness of heart when I shall have learned thy righteous judgments.

I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly. (Ps. 119:1-8.)

Think of the cumulative effect on a people of bearing in their imaginations the image of an ethical and righteous God who required justice, obedience, truthfulness, honor, and compassion from his people. As generations passed, the "fear" of God capriciously punishing on a whim or for omitting a trifling part of the cult would disappear into a superstitious background, to be replaced by a relationship of truth in a God who needed to be feared only in the sense that rigorous standards and consistency of judgment always require appraisal of one's motives and behavior. Instead of being mysterious and alien, this is a God who is the model of righteous behavior for his people.

Isaiah, in eloquent language, describes God's rejection of Israel's religious ritual when keeping it has been used to justify neglecting the ethical life. How could a God of integrity and compassion accept praise from people who cheat their neighbors and take advantage of widows and orphans?

To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats.

When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to treat my courts?

Bring me no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting.

Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them.

And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood.

Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil;

Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. (Isa. 1:11-18.)

Micah speaks eloquently of the kind of religious offering acceptable to an ethical God:

Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old?

Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? (Micah 6:6-8.)

It is important to remember that ethics are not the same as religion. There are many aspects of the religious life and several legitimate ways to be religious, either individually or in a congregation. One aspect is intellectual: a knowledge of theology, scripture, and religious history is valuable. Ritual, church activity, and attending services bind an individual to his or her cobelievers. Christian service and personal worship of God through prayer are also essential to the religious life.

The unique and powerful emphasis in the Old Testament is the repeated declaration of God through his prophet-spokesmen that none of these ways of expressing religious values are acceptable to him unless they are accompanied by justice and mercy in our everyday relations with fellow human beings. In short, the Old Testament affirms that there can be no true spirituality without genuine social morality.

These ethical concepts are drawn directly from the nature of God himself. They constitute the core of the prophetic message of Elijah, Amos, Micah, Isaiah, and Jeremiah. They underlie the whole Mosaic law as spelled out in Deuteronomy. This concept is called ethical monotheism, Judaism's finest contribution to the world, in my opinion. God is ethical. And those who would serve him must also be ethical in their human relations.

Theology is of no value if it substitutes for social morality. Devils also believe and tremble. To be righteous, belief must include concern for our fellow human beings. Religious ordinances and rituals are vain if they do not encourage spirituality and morality. Church life is not an end in itself but a place to be inspired to go forth and deal honestly and compassionately with each other.

This is a lesson we must learn over and over. Reading the Hebrew prophets with their passionate clarity is, in my opinion, an excellent way to renew our commitment to justice and mercy.
