Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 8

GOD THE JUST

Among the ethical elements in the character of God that we are enjoined to seek is the principle of justice. I have not made any kind of quantitative study of how often terms like judgment, justice, or just are applied to God in the Old Testament, but the very eloquence of the prophetic statements describing God's justice are of great interest.

Accustomed as we are to thinking of the Last Judgment in terms of our inevitable shortcomings, the obvious anticipation and confidence Hebrew writers manifest in the future judgments of God and their obvious love for God in his role as judge say more than possibly any other element about that relationship we call being a "chosen" people. Certainly they do not believe that they are excused from doing the works of righteousness. On the contrary, it is obvious that God holds them to a higher standard than their neighbors. But the candor and transparency they manifest toward God shows a level of faith and trust that makes us reappraise our own relationship with the Divine.

Read these exultant and eloquent expressions of the justice of God:

Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches:

But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord which exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth: for in these things I delight, saith the Lord. (Jer. 9:23-24.)

For I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering; and I will direct their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting covenant with them. (Isa. 61:8.)

The Lord shall judge the people: judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me. (Ps. 7:8-9.)

For the word of the Lord is right; and all his works are done in truth.

He loveth righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. (Ps. 33:4-5.)

The Lord knoweth the days of the upright: and their inheritance shall be for ever. (Ps. 37:18.)

Because God is just, he requires justice in the lives of those who would serve him. Amos saw this clearly and declared it forcefully—a humble shepherd from the hills of Judea pronouncing judgment in Bethel, the shrine city of Israel. His scorching indictment of the rich who oppress the poor, thereby making mockery of their religious pretensions, is as relevant today as it was then, a permanent landmark on the road toward social justice:

They [the rich] hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhor him that speaketh uprightly.

Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poor, and ye take from him burdens of wheat: ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them; ye have planted pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of them.

For I know your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins: they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the gate from their right. . . .

Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live: and so the Lord, the God of hosts, shall be with you, as ye have spoken.

Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the gate: it may be that the Lord God of hosts will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph. (Amos 5:10-12, 14- 5.)

Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the land to fail,

Saying, When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsifying the balances by deceit?

That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat?

The Lord hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any of their works. (Amos 8:4-7.)

The other prophets, in their own words, repeat the same message: that God demands righteousness from his people out of the depths of his own justice.

For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry.

Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth! . . .

But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness. . . .

Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope: . . . Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter! . . .

Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him! (Isa. 5:7-8, 16, 18, 20, 23.)

The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people, and the princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses.

What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor? saith the Lord God of hosts. (Isa. 3:14- 5.)

Jeremiah's message is memorable in its denunciation of hypocrisy:

Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place. . . .

For if ye throughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye throughly execute judgment between a man and his neighbour;

If ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt:

Then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.

Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit.

Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not;

And come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations?

Is this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I have seen it, saith the Lord. (Jer. 7:1-11.)

The denunciations of the prophets were a reminder to the people that they stood convicted of violating the covenant made at Sinai and recorded in the books attributed to Moses. This covenant spells out not only correct principles but also correct practices:

Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him: the wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the morning. . . .

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure.

Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have: I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt.

Therefore shall ye observe all my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: I am the Lord. (Lev. 19:13, 35-37.)

That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live, and inherit the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. (Deut. 16:20.)

Three of the Ten Commandments demand justice:

Thou shalt not steal.

Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's. (Ex. 20:15-17.)

Nothing—neither piety, nor church activity, nor professions of faith—will substitute for honest dealings in human relations. This is the unequivocal message of the law of Moses and the prophets.
