Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 9

GOD THE MERCIFUL

It is interesting to me that the ancient Hebrews re-joiced in the mercy of God and invoked it with the same faith and confidence that they applied to his judgment. Obviously, these two virtues were not seen as incompatible or contradictory in their thought.

The Lord's mercy is beautifully portrayed in Hosea, whose marriage was a graphic example in miniature of the Lord's relationship to Israel. His wife, Gomer, bore him several children, then was unfaithful to him with several lovers. At some point, she came to her senses and returned to Hosea, who normally would have disowned her. However, in love and mercy he received her back and resumed the marriage.

Similarly, Israel deserted the Lord's law for the permissiveness of the cult of other gods. Hosea expresses the Lord's anger and disappointment with backsiding Israel:

O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away. . . .

For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings.

But they like men have transgressed the covenant: there have they dealt treacherously against me. (Hosea 6:4, 6-7.)

My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me: seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children. (Hosea 4:6.)

For Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer: now the Lord will feed them as a lamb in a large place. (Hosea 4:16.)

Hosea also spells out the method by which Israel can repent, meriting the Lord's mercy by doing mercifully.It is impressive to me that this call to repentance is not threatening or angry, but tender and pleading. The Lord reminds Israel of his love and promises them his mercy, appealing to them with gentleness and generosity:

Sow to yourselves in righteousness, reap in mercy; break up your fallow ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain righteousness upon you. (Hosea 10:12.)

Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment, and wait on thy God continually. (Hosea 12:6.)

O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.

Take with you words, and turn to the Lord: say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips.

Asshur shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses: neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy.

I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely: for mine anger is turned away from him.

I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.

His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon.

They that dwell under his shadow shall return; they shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine: the scent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon. (Hosea 14:1-7.)

No one could question the Lord's right to be angry and punitive, to set conditions of acceptance and probation.

Instead, he appeals to Israel's memory of the loving, trusting faith that had existed between them and stands ready to heal the breach.

Just as God is merciful, so he requires us to be merciful, particularly to those who have no particular claim on us: the poor, the widow, the stranger, the fatherless, and the afflicted. In one of the most beautiful passages of all scripture, one that I have already cited, Micah describes true religion:

Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old?

Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? (Micah 6:6-8; italics added.)

Humility before God and person-to-person mercy result in spirituality and social morality. It would be difficult to make a case for removing them from any spiritual life.

The law of Moses mandates mercy:

And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest.

And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather every grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor and stranger: I am the Lord your God. (Lev. 19:9-10.)

If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within any of thy gates in thy land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother:

But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wanteth.

Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry unto the Lord against thee, and it be sin unto thee.

Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest thine hand unto.

For the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.

And if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee.

And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let him go away empty:

Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of that wherewith the Lord thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.

And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee this thing to day. (Deut. 15:7-15.)

Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy land within thy gates:

At his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. . . .

Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the fatherless; nor take a widow's raiment to pledge. (Deut. 24:14-15, 17.)

As we read these passages, the law of Moses seems to be describing the kinds of activities we would today term "charitable work." I find it particularly appropriate that the God of love defines mercy in terms of loving behavior. Beyond our baptism, confirmation, ordinations, prayers, and offerings to the Lord, he requires our mercy, compassion, love, and generosity to one another. We learn mercy by practicing the works of mercy.

This means that we visit the widows and others who are lonely, succor the disabled of mind and body, provide work for the unemployed, take an interest in children who need attention, and help people become more self- sufficient both at home and abroad. It means that we are troubled by the suffering of fellow human beings and do something to relieve it. It also means that our sharing is somewhat selfless in that we do not praise ourselves for these works or criticize others for needing our mercy. Nothing sours the sweetness of a loving act so quickly as the merest taint of self-congratulation on our generosity or sensitivity or tact!

It is not enough to pay a generous fast offering and leave compassionate service to the bishopric and Relief Society presidency. We must set aside time, energy, and means to help low-income and lonely people, the elderly, the disabled, and the alienated—all marginal members of our community, whether they be members of the Church or not.

I know a father of nine who seeks out one or two widows each month and works in their yards, or makes minor repairs on their homes. He has been doing this for several years. He is a true disciple of the prophets and of Jesus.

There are ways to show mercy that take neither time nor money, such as refraining from gossip, showing tolerance, not judging a neighbor, and forgiving offenses.
