Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 10

GOD THE RATIONAL

In a beautiful passage in Proverbs 3:19-20, God is described as intelligence:

The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens.

By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew.

Wisdom, knowledge, understanding. For me, these qualities are inseparable from the power of God and his loving will to use that power on our behalf. His intelligence gives order to the universe and allows—even encourages—us to devote part of our attention to rational analyses of the universe because an intelligent being brought it about.

Because of this rational perception of Deity, the Old Testament rejects irrational and superstitious attempts to explain life that were typical of Israel's ancient neighbors. An example is this memorable passage from Deuteronomy:

When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those nations.

There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch,

Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer.

For all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord: and because of these abominations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before thee.

Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God.

For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the Lord thy God hath not suffered thee so to do. (Deut. 18:9-14.)

Astrology, ouija boards, fortune-telling, spiritualism (seeking contact with the dead), and divination do not get us into contact with reality in a meaningful way. In place of irrational ways of dealing with life, the Israelites were admonished to obey the commandments, statutes, and laws of God, with the promise of prosperity and well being if they would. I love this expression of the dignity and majesty of law:

Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which the Lord your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go to possess it:

That thou mightest fear the Lord thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged.

Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it; that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and honey.

Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord:

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. (Deut. 6:1-5.)

When Jesus quoted this passage, he made a significant addition: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind." (Matt. 22:37; italics added.)

Obedience to law became the foundation of Israel's religion and has had far-reaching influence on human history. It would be difficult to exaggerate the role of law in our western and modern civilization. All science rests on the assumption that there are laws of nature—uniform ways in which the forces of nature act. These can be discovered, measured, observed, understood, and used by rational human beings. In our economic endeavors, in farming and manufacturing, we reckon with laws of our physical environment and obey them if we wish to achieve our goals.

The difference between a medicine man and a modern physician is likewise explained rationally. What a medicine man does to cure smallpox, for example, has little to do with the nature of the disease, whereas the doctor knows that it is caused by a germ and can be prevented by immunization.

In a democratic government, based on constitutional law, considerable rationality is made possible in civic life. The people are not at the mercy of dictatorial whims, but the system itself provides limits and checks upon the despotic tendencies of those whom it endows with power. Through the court system, people are judged not by individuals but by laws, even though the laws are interpreted by individuals. The rule of law asserts not only the primacy of legal procedures but also the concept that decisions must be reached in a rational and lawful manner. This is a tremendous step toward greater rationality and freedom in political and civic life. In such a society, social contract is based on the idea that reasonable people, reasoning together, will not need to have recourse to violence in an attempt to solve a problem.

One of the powerful messages of the passage cited above is that we are to love God with our minds as well as our hearts, and that he is pleased with the respect accorded him by rational beings.

I believe that Old Testament writers, by emphasizing the importance of their obedience to law, have greatly influenced the economic, scientific, and political life of western civilization. It was natural and relatively easy for our forefathers, trained by their faith in the Bible to be obedient to God's laws, to learn obedience to the laws of nature and to constitutional law.

Certainly, in times of irrational and random violence that seem to characterize so much of our planet today, we need to affirm our faith in the processes of reasonable discourse, reaching deep for the faith that human beings can "reason together."

We must not forget the lesson learned from ancient Israel: that God is not capricious but instead is a rational, law-abiding being whose ways we can come to know and trust. From the prophets, we have learned to love the Lord with our minds as well as with our hearts. Religion is expressed with feeling and rests on faith, but it also includes rational elements. We need a knowledge of God's will and purpose to guide us in our expressions of faith and love. It is significant to me that the law itself includes this injunction to live in intimate knowledge of the law:

And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:

And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates.

And thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of the Lord: that it may be well with thee. (Deut. 6:6-9, 18.)
