Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 11

GOD THE ONE

Ancient, primitive religions were polytheistic. They accepted a system of many gods, usually personifying forces of nature that affected human beings for good or ill. Polytheism sometimes developed into henotheism, a system in which one's own god is superior but in which less powerful gods also exist.

The Old Testament contains intimations of both polytheism and henotheism. Rachel took the "images," or household gods, of her father, Laban, when Jacob and his family returned to Canaan. (Gen. 31.) While the Israelites lived in Canaan, they experienced a constant struggle between loyalty to Jehovah and the seductions of the pagan gods of surrounding tribes.

It is to the credit of Moses and the writing prophets that Israel arrived at faith in one universal God—or monotheism. Its strongest expression is embodied in the Ten Commandments:

Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth. (Ex. 20:3-4.)

However, God also asserts his incomparable primacy in other eloquent passages:

Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?

Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his counsellor hath taught him?

With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?

Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing. (Isa. 40:12-15.)

I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known me:

That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none beside me. I am the Lord, and there is none else.

I form the light, and create the darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things.

Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up together; I the Lord have created it. (Isa. 45:5-8.)

This expansive and eloquent statement of monotheism is one of the powers of the Old Testament. Monotheism appeals to the rational mind that sees a need for unity in the universe and a master intelligence behind it. Monotheism also meets a person's religious need for loyalty not just to the superior, but to the supreme, an entity worthy of a commitment to veneration and service.

Believing in one God who is an ethical being of justice and mercy certainly implies that he is impartial—that all people are of equal value in his eyes. The Israelites were slow to learn this. They believed themselves spe-cially favored of God above other peoples. It is possible to argue that the book of Jonah was written to correct this misconception.

The story of Jonah and the fish is so dramatic that many readers miss the religious message of the book. I once told the story of Jonah to a group of freshman medical students who squirmed all the way through it and insisted on arguing about the potential of human survival inside a fish. Whether he was or was not physically inside that fish does not affect the teachings of this book. As natural history, Jonah is a dubious source. Its value is the force and grace of its attack on ethnocentrism.

Jonah was called to preach repentance to the wicked gentile city of Nineveh. He fled in the opposite direction— to Tarshish. When the Lord renewed Jonah's mission in forceful terms, Jonah reluctantly but obediently went to Nineveh and preached repentance, threatening destruction if the people did not heed his warning. Jonah delivered his message grudgingly and anticipated the city's destruction. To his surprise and dismay, everyone in Nineveh from the king to the humblest citizen repented in sackcloth and ashes.

Jonah, meanwhile, had picked out a good vantage point on a hilltop, waiting for Nineveh's destruction, and was highly displeased with the humility of the people. God again taught his prophet a forcible lesson by preparing a gourd to shade Jonah. He later prepared a worm that destroyed the gourd, then asked pointedly, "Doest thou well to be angry for the gourd?" Jonah answered defiantly, "I do well to be angry, even unto death."

It is possible to read stinging rebuke softened by humor in God's response. It is also possible to read in it a standard of judgment that places an absolute value on human life—not Israelite life or life that obeys ritual requirements, but human life:

Then said the Lord, Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow; which came up in a night, and perished in a night:

And should not I spare Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand; and also much cattle? (Jonah 4:9-11.)

The fish incident is not the only aspect of the tale to question. As a so-called prophet, Jonah is a dubious character indeed. Imagine a prophet of God angry because the divine will is fulfilled! Imagine a prophet arguing with God over a gourd! And imagine every person in an entire city promptly and completely repenting! The book of Jonah appears to me, and to many others, to be not a historical account, but a parable created by a religious artist to teach a great idea that the people needed to understand—and to teach it in an interesting and delightful way.

The narrative of Jonah contains several ideas that the Jews needed to learn: (1) God is universal. The people of Nineveh are also his concern. (2) God is impartial. Even as Israel can repent and be saved, so can Nineveh. God's laws apply equally to all people. (3) God is merciful. His desire is to save, not destroy.

If God has these attributes, then we should have them too. Human beings have always been slow to realize that, beyond the differences of culture, talents, and capacities, we all have the same basic needs for food, shelter, health, respect, and acceptance. As persons, we are not to be judged as inferior or superior to one another. Each individual is sacred in the eyes of God and should be in ours. The book of Jonah is an effective attack on ethnocentrism.
