Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Part III

OLD TESTAMENT CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE RELIGIOUS LIFE

Chapter 12

"NOT GOOD . . . TO BE ALONE"

The creation account in the first three chapters of Genesis has many challenging and interesting ideas in it. One that we have already discussed in Chapter 6 is: "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." (Gen. 1:17.)

Just how God created man is not indicated, since the author either did not know the technical details or did not consider that aspect of creation important. The author does, however, supply additional details when it comes to the creation of the woman: Eve was purportedly made from a rib of Adam.

If taken literally as an account of a surgical operation, this narrative raises serious problems in a scientific age. In fact, Latter-day Saints do not take this story literally but are enjoined to regard it as figurative. However, if the ancient story is read as a human and religious description of the husband-wife relationship, it becomes remarkably instructive and valuable even in a modern age. Here again, the "how" of creation is not the concern of religion. Its purpose and value are. What can we learn from the creation of the first man and the first woman in Genesis?

The accounts in chapters 1 and 2 of Genesis seem to have combined two records that make several aspects of the creative process clear:

First, human beings are created in the image of God, as we have seen.

Second, Adam's body was created from the elements of the earth, although the process is not known: "And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul." (Gen. 2:7.)

Next, we see that creation was incomplete without a companion for Adam who would be fully worthy of his own divine origins: "And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him." (Gen. 2:18.)

This third concept gives us an important message. Although Adam was the first human and did not have consciousness of himself as either alone or with someone, God knew that being alone was not good for a human being. "It is not good that the man should be alone." This statement is as profound as it is simple. It is a fundamental fact of life, verified by psychology, psychiatry, social work, and everyday human experience. After obtaining the physical necessities of life, a person's most pressing need is to be accepted, wanted, needed, and loved by one or more others—from infancy through old age.

After God observes that no one should be alone, he next creates "every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them."

And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him.

And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof;

And the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man. (Gen. 2:19-22.)

Adam greets the woman with an expression of literal and metaphoric unity:

And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.

Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. (Gen. 2:23-25.)

Life is social as well as individual. "We live, and move, and have our being" in each other as well as in God. (Acts 17:28.) It is profound that this fact should be recognized in the first mention of human creation.

A related idea is Adam's recognition that the woman is "bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh," a person of the same nature with the same needs, belonging to the same kind. Marriages that are based on the differences between husband and wife, rather than their essential similarities, do violence to the very basis of human nature. I have always liked the additional symbolism that the rib is the bone closest to the heart and that it lacks virtually any other symbol than that of the heart: if it had been from the head or the foot, it could have implied superiority or inferiority; from the pelvis or thigh, mere sexual functioning; from the hand, a need to be grasped and held; or from the backbone, continual followership.

Another important message for marriage partners is Genesis 2:24: "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife." When a couple marry, their first loyalty is to each other. This means leaving home and living by themselves. I firmly believe that if they are not ready to be economically independent, they are not ready for marriage. This position contains no disrespect for in-laws. Couples can and should build and maintain fine family relationships, but undue dependence on one's extended family or being dominated by one's extended family is devastating to a tender, young relationship. Granted, the exact definition of these terms varies from culture to culture and family to family, but the principle is true universally.

The Old Testament consistently condemns promiscuity, infidelity, and adultery; but it accepts, celebrates, and even exalts marital sexuality as an important part of normal, God-approved relationships between husband and wife. Christianity has developed a concept of original sin derived from sexuality, but that belief is not present in the Old Testament. It is remarkable—and yet not at all astonishing—that the Old Testament's account of the creation of man and woman should contain so much that we still perceive as superlative good sense today.

The social emphasis in the Old Testament goes beyond personal life in the family. The law of Moses and the writings of the prophets spell out our social responsibility for the poor, the slave, the stranger, the widow, and the fatherless. Compassion is a commandment. One's duty to others is stressed much more emphatically than personal rights and privileges. The prophets were trying to save their nation; individuals within the nation will be saved as part of that collectivity.

Our modern western civilization has greatly stressed individualism. Democracy has encouraged it. Capitalism was inspired in part by Adam Smith's idea that if everyone sought his own interest, society as a whole would prosper. The Renaissance, the Enlightenment, and especially the Protestant Reformation broke away from the unifying dominance of the church and, in some instances, the state. Along with the immense power of this stress on individuality, we have also seen some of the problems that it creates, and I believe that the pendulum is swinging back to greater social consciousness.

Religion needs to recognize the value of both the individual and society. Human beings are individuals, and they also live together in society. The Hebrew prophets stressed that the well-being of the nation must be achieved through individual righteousness, and Ezekiel 18 is virtually a charter of individual responsibility for righteousness during the Babylonian captivity when there was no nation.

Latter-day Saints place a heavy emphasis on individual responsibility, growth, and salvation—on the righteous use of inalienable free agency. We also have an inspiring history of our efforts to create a Christian society. There is a great need to keep a balance by strengthening both the individual and society through our religious efforts.

The Old Testament was quite right when it stated: "It is not good that the man should be alone." We need one another. We need to think in social, as well as in individual, perspectives, both in the primary relationships of the family and in our human relationships in society.
