Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 13

THE SABBATH: A BOON TO HUMAN BEINGS

When God established the Sabbath, its purpose was clear: the Sabbath was ordained to honor the Creator:

Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee.

Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work:

But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God. (Deut. 5:12-14.)

Honoring the Lord—remembering him, worshipping him, renewing and strengthening our faith in him, and viewing life again from an eternal perspective—is still the first purpose of this commandment. It is also a blessing to human beings in other ways, especially as a day of rest from hard labor and stressful obligations. Note the compassion, the universal and equal concern for everyone, including slaves, and also for the beasts:

In it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.

And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm: therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day. (Deut. 5:14-15.)

The Sabbath has been a joyful day to devout Jews throughout the centuries. Hasidic men still dance to welcome the Sabbath, as though at a wedding. Mothers have special tablecloths and dishes for the Sabbath. A special ceremony of lighting the Sabbath candles makes each Sabbath a weekly event. In synagogue worship, the Sabbath is a time of celebrating Israel's hopes for peace and restoration, a time for reading the law of Moses again and again, so that its principles will be fresh and beloved.

When I was fourteen, I worked on a ranch during the summer. Our day began at dawn. We had the cows milked, the pigs slopped, and the horses harnessed before breakfast at 7 a.m. We worked in the fields, pitching hay or digging postholes until 6:00 p.m. Then we did evening chores. This was our schedule six days a week. Sunday was a welcome day of rest.

One Sunday the boss asked us to round up a bunch of wild horses that were feeding on our alfalfa, robbing the ranch of needed hay for winter. We were in the saddle all day, either capturing or destroying the horses. I can still remember how long the next week seemed without that Sabbath day of rest behind us.

The forty-hour week with Saturday and Sunday free is a rather recent arrangement. Through the nineteenth century and into the twentieth, having Saturday afternoons free was considered liberal. For centuries, men, women, and children worked twelve and fourteen hours a day. In Jewish and Christian societies, the Sabbath was heaven-sent. Without it, slaves and laborers might have had to work day in and day out. Dr. Louis Zucker, late professor of biblical literature at the University of Utah, once told me that the Babylonians had a sabbath but it was not weekly and it was limited only to aristocrats. What other ancient cultures did to provide a day of rest I do not know. But I am grateful to Old Testament law for creating a day of rest, a time of worship for all people, and rest even for the beasts of the field.

Jesus added a wonderful concept to the purposes of the Sabbath. He recognized that the Sabbath should be appraised in human terms, as shown by the freedom he felt to heal and save life on the Sabbath:

And it came to pass also on another sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue and taught: and there was a man whose right hand was withered.

And the scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on the sabbath day; that they might find an accusation against him.

But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand, Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. And he arose and stood forth.

Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one thing; Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy it?

And looking round about upon them all, he said unto the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did so: and his hand was restored whole as the other. (Luke 6:6-10.)

The Sabbath is a day of rest, a time to remember the Lord. And there is no better way to honor the Lord than to bring healing, comfort, and blessings to his children as Jesus did.

In our urban, impersonal society, the Sabbath has become a day of recreation, a day to watch the Superbowl or World Series. For active Latter-day Saints, the Sabbath is often consumed in attending meetings, doing home teaching or visiting teaching, or holding family counseling sessions. Can we learn the deeper meaning of Sabbath observance by remembering its importance in Israel, enriched by the emphasis of Jesus? Can it be a time of spiritual growth to the individual and a day of reconciliation in our social relations?

We frequently ignore the need people have to know that someone cares about them. There are many elderly people, mostly women, who have neither spouses nor children and who sit alone in their homes day after day, night after night. They long to talk with someone.

The Sabbath is a golden opportunity to build good human relationships in the immediate family, in the extended family, in the neighborhood, and in the community. The Sabbath is not wholly fulfilled unless someone's burden has been eased or lifted.
