Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 14

LIVE BY LAW

The Jewish word Torah, meaning the Law, is used in several ways. It is the name of the first five books of the Old Testament. It also refers to the specific moral and ritual commandments found in those five books. Furthermore, it can designate the principles of moral conduct contained within these books. It is in this last sense that we shall discuss it.

Lists of the laws are found in Exodus 20-23, Leviticus 19 and 25, and most completely in Deuteronomy 5-17. A very interesting story in 2 Kings 22:8-23 relates how the scroll of Deuteronomy was found in the temple and brought to the righteous king Josiah and the prophet Jeremiah. The king read it, was profoundly impressed, called his people together, had the book read to them, and had them vow to live by the laws contained therein. He then made a clean sweep of every figment of idolatrous worship in the temple and in the land. His own father, Manasseh, had introduced and encouraged such practices.

Scholars believe that Deuteronomy in its present form may have been written by prophets or followers of the prophets in the name of Moses and hidden in the temple to add authority to this highly prized Mosaic law. It is beautifully and forcefully written, whoever was the final author. Moses delivered this law as part of his farewell address to his people before they entered the land of Canaan.

In the first four chapters, Moses reviews all that the Lord has done to bring the Israelites to the land of Canaan. In chapters 5 through 27, he lays down the laws they are to observe in the land of Canaan. The concluding chapters, 28-34, are a promise and a curse on Israel, foretelling in graphic detail what will happen if the people obey or disobey the laws in the book. There is a foreboding that they will not obey and will be destroyed as a nation.

What are the strengths and limitations of the moral laws in Deuteronomy? What can modern Jews and Christians learn from these ancient standards of conduct?

First, these laws are specific, concrete, and detailed. They are not just correct principles but a list of correct behavior. Dr. Louis Zucker illustrated this by saying that he saw a student go through a heavy library door and let it close without looking to see if anyone were coming after him. The door struck another student on crutches who was following him. In ancient Israel there would have been a law: "When thou goest through a gate or door, thou shalt look behind thee to see if anyone is following close before thou lettest go of the gate or door." (I might add that this principle has been a law to me for some thirty years since I first heard of the incident.)

Note some examples of concreteness:

Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto thy brother.

And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him not, then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt restore it to him again.

In like manner shalt thou do with his ass; and so shalt thou do with his raiment; and with all lost things of thy brother's, which he hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest not hide thyself.

Thou shalt not see thy brother's ass or his ox fall down by the way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift them up again. (Deut. 22:1-4.)

The ancient Israelites had a form of honeymoon leave, which not only had the practical effect of allowing a young couple to spend a great deal of time establishing a firm relationship, but which also had the practical effect of virtually guaranteeing conception so that, in case the husband were killed in battle, he would leave a descendant: "When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war, neither shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken." (Deut. 24:5.)

When a loan was made, it was customary in Israel to require an article as a pledge—a guarantee or security. Note how carefully the law guarded the rights of the person seeking the loan, traditionally the vulnerable party in such an arrangement:

No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge: for he taketh a man's life to pledge. . . .

When thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go into his house to fetch his pledge. [In other words, the lender cannot appraise all of the items in the house under pretext of securing just the pledge offered by the borrower.]

Thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend shall bring out the pledge abroad unto thee.

And if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge:

In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and it shall be righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God. (Deut. 24:6, 10-13.)

Thus, if the pledge were an article of clothing, as it very well might be, the law would foresee the possibility that it might be his only spare article, or the blanket from the bed, and guarantee the family's comfort during the night.

Mosaic law was scrupulous in considering the poor and their needs:

Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy land within thy gates:

At [the end of] his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. (Deut. 24:14-15.)

Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small.

Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and a small.

But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. (Deut. 25:13-15.)

Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. (Deut. 16:19.)

Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another. . . .

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour. (Lev. 19:11, 15.)

Thus, according to the measure of this law, what it meant to be honest in the everyday life of Israel is abundantly clear. We need sermons today that are equally applicable to our time and circumstances.

The law is unusual in singling out the handicapped and marginal and specifying their rights. As I have already quoted:

Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before the blind, but shalt fear thy God: I am the Lord. (Lev. 19:14.)

And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest.

And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather every grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor and stranger: I am the Lord your God. (Lev. 19:9-10.)

If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within any of thy gates in thy land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother:

But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wanteth.

Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry unto the Lord against thee, and it be sin unto thee.

Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest thine hand unto.

For the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.

And if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee.

And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let him go away empty:

Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of that wherewith the Lord thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.

And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee this thing to day. (Deut. 15:7-15.)

Many sections of the Mosaic law seem very harsh to us today. Our own moral sensitivity, for instance, would reject the law that allows parents to impose the death penalty on a rebellious child:

If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them:

Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place;

And they shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton, and a drunkard.

And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall hear, and fear. (Deut. 21:18-21.)

It also seems unfeeling and uncompassionate to obey the law that forbids an illegitimate child to "enter into the congregation of the Lord; even to his tenth generation." (Deut. 23:2.)

Our democratic traditions of equity would be opposed to the differential treatment allowed between "strangers" and Israelites in some circumstances: "Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury: that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to possess it." (Deut. 23:20.)

The law that a childless widow must be married to her husband's brother so that the firstborn son may continue the dead man's name in Israel is another custom that we would find repugnant, especially since there is a way provided whereby a reluctant brother may escape that obligation, but there is no way for the widow to be relieved of accepting a second husband not of her choosing. (Deut. 25:5-20.)

Despite such examples that we would find unacceptable, we must also remember that this was a society that did not have an elaborate system of prisons, correctional institutions, and courts. If someone committed a wrong, the trial and the punishment needed to be swift and decisive, for rehabilitation through incarceration is a modern development.

The penalties prescribed in the law were harsh enough to serve as deterrents and, even when they caused permanent maiming, served the purpose of both being a dreadful sort of visual aid against crime for others and deliberately hampering the criminal in repeating the same crime. But even at their extreme, there were often safeguards and protections against wanton cruelty or sadism. For instance, a frequent punishment for a criminal was a physical beating, but it was administered promptly in the presence of the judge who had ordered it, and the number of blows was prescribed by law:

If there be a controversy between men, and they come unto judgment, that the judges may judge them; then they shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked.

And it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, according to his fault, by a certain number.

Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed: lest, if he should exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto thee. (Deut. 25:1-3.)

Although I applaud the humanness and the optimistic view of human nature that underlies our own judicial and correctional system, with its intense and appropriate concern for safeguarding the rights of the accused, it seems to me that it suffers greatly from the delays that clog our court calendars, from the invisible nature of much of the correction which means that our society as a whole has little interest in the criminal or in his or her rehabilitation, and in the impersonal nature of much of the punishment. Deuteronomy describes a system that does not suffer from vagueness or dilatory trials and punishment.

I am also interested in another rule that governed even the treatment of women captured during war. Aside from the modern Geneva Convention, which makes some minimal efforts toward protecting the rights of civilians, and the medieval code of chivalry, which operated in the case of well-born Christian women (but not lower-class or non-Christian women), I am not familiar with other systems that spelled out the rights of captive women, rather than simply treating them as the legitimate booty of the conquerors. This law does not attempt to safeguard such a woman's chastity, but it requires her captor to marry her and forbids him to sell her if he is not pleased. No doubt such requirements produced some happy unions, despite their violent beginnings:

When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the Lord thy God hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them captive,

And seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldst have her to thy wife;

Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house; and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails;

And she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine house, and bewail her father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go in unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.

And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt let her go whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for money, thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because thou hast humbled her. (Deut. 21:10-14.)

The Mosaic law is a highly personal expression. The repetition of the formula "For I am the Lord thy God" should be a constant reminder that the law was a bond between God and his people, to keep their relationship with him and with each other perfect and righteous. That accounts, in my opinion, for the absolute prohibitions against "divination, or [being] an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch, or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. . . . Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God." (Deut. 18:10-11, 13.) The law also, when used properly, will protect the people against false prophets:

If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a wonder,

And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them;

Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul.

Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him.

And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death; because he hath spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from the midst of thee. (Deut. 13:1-5.)

Thus, considering the time and the circumstances, the Mosaic law outlined in the Old Testament is a remarkable document. It is just, merciful, quite humane, rational, and above all concrete and specific in its application to the issues of daily life.

The strength of the Christian ethic taught by Jesus lies in its positive emphasis on principle, leaving to us the method of applying the principle in our daily walk. Often, the high-sounding principle satisfies us and, because we do not actively do evil, we fail to practice our Christian love in concrete ways. The finer ethical-religious life, I believe, would be to combine the strengths of both the Judaic and the Christian ethics, being guided by principle and taking specific, positive ethical action in the marketplace, in the community, in the family, and among nations.
