Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 15

THE WISDOM OF PROVERBS

The Old Testament book of Proverbs is traditionally ascribed to Solomon, a king extolled for his wisdom. It was an ancient custom to assign authorship to a famous character, no matter who wrote it. However, most scholars believe that Proverbs, like Psalms, is a collection of sayings amassed through the centuries. Clearly, it represents the practical wisdom of many Israelite thinkers, as well as the common sense of the people. Certainly, Solomon was foolish as well as wise, for he multiplied wives, horses, and taxes—an inevitably oppressive system that led to the division of the kingdom of Israel at his death.

Interesting and rich in subject matter, Proverbs contains much of value in its observations of daily living. Many of its passages are meaningful to me, but I would encourage readers to peruse Proverbs often and thoughtfully, with their needs in mind. This chapter contains some of my favorites.

As one who believes firmly in the collective wisdom and good of human beings, I appreciate Proverbs 11:14: "Where no counsel is, the people fall: but in the multitude of counsellors there is safety." Similar in expression and intent is Proverbs 19:18: "Where there is no vision, the people perish."

I have often seen the damage done to human relationships by people who talk without thinking, gossip, or pass on perfectly true but quite unnecessary information. These two proverbs speak to that matter: "He that covereth a transgression seeketh love; but he that repeateth a matter separateth very friends" (17:9), and "As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman which is without discretion" (11:22). This latter proverb applies equally to men, of course.

I must admit that I cannot read the following very sound advice without feeling that the writer must have had a twinkle in his eye:

He that hath knowledge spareth his words: and a man of understanding is of an excellent spirit.

Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise: and he that shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of understanding." (17:27-28.)

In the same vein is this trenchant advice against rationalization:

The way of a fool is right in his own eyes: but he that hearkeneth unto counsel is wise. (12:15.)

There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death. (14:12.)

All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes; but the Lord weigheth the spirits. . . .

A man's heart deviseth his way: but the Lord directeth his steps. (16:2, 9.)

It is hard to continue self-deceit with the reminder of Proverbs that the Lord not only sees what we are doing but also sees into our hearts and knows why.

A related form of self-control is that over one's temper. "A soft answer turneth away wrath," reminds the ever-practical Proverbs, "but grievous words stir up anger. . . . He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city." (15:1; 16:32.)

I also like the way in which Proverbs urges humility and a correct evaluation of our own relationship with God: "Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall" (16:18); and "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: and the knowledge of the holy is understanding" (9:10).

One of the longer sustained passages in Proverbs is an exposition of wisdom, which has been defined as the application of knowledge to good ends. It is to be found, according to Proverbs, in fear of the Lord, in knowledge of the holy, and in obedience to the Lord's will:

Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding.

For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.

She is more precious than rubies: and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her.

Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honour.

Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her: and happy is every one that retaineth her. (3:13-18.)

Get wisdom, get understanding: forget it not; neither decline from the words of my mouth.

Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee: love her, and she shall keep thee.

Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding.

Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to honour, when thou dost embrace her.

She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace: a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee. (4:5-9.)

It is no small matter, in a world that honors and rewards materialism with yet more material goods, to hear the echo of such words often in our minds.

Closely related—and equally a theme in Proverbs— is the issue of integrity. We are accustomed to thinking of this problem in the New Testament terms of being "in the world" without being "of the world." Proverbs talks of more than independence of judgment and intellect, however. It describes a kind of wholeheartedness that, again in New Testament terms, makes it possible to make our offerings to the Savior in an acceptable sacrifice. I think that the reason such a sacrifice is phrased in terms of a "broken heart" is that we, without thinking or without realizing the implication of our actions, "give" parts of our heart to unworthy ends and goals; then, when the desire comes to turn to the Savior and seek his atonement, we realize too late that we have "set" our hearts "so much on the things of the world" (D&C 121:35) that we can only shatter their hold on us by breaking our hearts before the Lord.

Much of the wisdom of making careful choices about where to give our hearts comes to me in this discussion from Proverbs:

Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life.

Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee.

Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee.

Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established.

Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remove thy foot from evil. (4:23-27.)

Integrity embraces many virtues of life: honesty, humility, sincerity, meekness, and moral courage. It brings inner strength, peace of mind, and self-forgetfulness in service. I believe that we cannot offer anyone real love— not another individual and not the Savior—without integrity.

Less lofty, perhaps, but not less essential in easing the sometimes difficult process of living and working together is good nature. Proverbs 18:14 points out: "The spirit of a man will sustain his [physical] infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear?" The question is obviously rhetorical. An earlier chapter in Proverbs responds to the same theme:

A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance: but by sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken. . . .

All the days of the afflicted are evil: but he that is of a merry heart hath a continual feast. . . .

Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith. (15:13, 15, 17.)

Why be defeated twice—once by circumstances and again by our attitude toward the event? Proverbs teaches us to face life with courage and good cheer.

Another important lesson taught by Proverbs is the value of work. A woman of my acquaintance who, laid up with a broken leg, watched television soap operas for a couple of weeks observed wryly at the end, "Quarreling, scrapping, falling in love, falling out, lawsuits, murder, depression, suicide—if those people had to actually work eight hours a day, they wouldn't have been in nearly so much trouble." I heartily concur. One of the great values of work is that it prevents people with small or perverse imaginations from getting in a great deal of trouble.

I deal often with the unfortunate, including the aged, the handicapped, and those who for one reason or another—many of them legitimate, some of them not—are not fully prepared to deal with the world. I see many legitimate cases of "hard luck," but I must say that I have seen many other cases where, rather than pleading hard luck, an individual has instead substituted hard work, with the result that he or she is not among those who desire or need the assistance of others in making a way through the world. Proverbs 6:6-11 reminds us all:

Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise: which having no guide, overseer, or ruler,

Provideth her meat in the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest.

How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?

Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep:

So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man.

One of the most powerful warnings against selfindulgence as it applies to drinking occurs in Proverbs 23. I like to pair this passage with the Word of Wisdom and its promises in Doctrine and Covenants 89 because Proverbs unsparingly shows the punishment that accompanies drunkenness:

Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters. . . .

Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes?

They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek mixed wine.

Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright.

At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.

Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things.

Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast.

They have stricken me, shalt thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not: when shall I awake? I will seek it yet again. (23:29-35.)

Proverbs also makes a strong case for moderation, not only for the beauty of the principle but also because excess leads to sin:

Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me:

Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain. (30:8-9.)

At least once a year, we can count on hearing a chapter of Proverbs read with fervor over the pulpit. It is Proverbs 31:10-31, which begins, "Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies." There are so few passages praising women in the scriptures that Mother's Day speakers often seize on this particular passage avidly. I, too, enjoy this passage, praising a woman who is so reliable that "the heart of her husband doth safely trust in her," who "do[es] him good and not evil," who weaves wool and flax, rises to her day's work before dawn and ends it long after dark, invests her money wisely, is provident and thrifty, wise and pious. Her husband "is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land."

It seems likely to me that this passage could have been written by a man who wanted to be well provided for by a hard-working wife but who perhaps was less willing to expend the same effort himself. It also seems to me that this ancient ideal lacks any sense that women also need intellectual, social, and spiritual fulfillment. I am not sure, looking at the average congregation of Latter-day Saint mothers, that they need to be told to stay up later, get up earlier, or work harder than they are already doing.

However, the book of Proverbs, even as this example shows, is a revelation of human nature. It is not to be absorbed in one sitting but can feed us again and again as we return to it with different needs.
