Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 16

THE REALISM OF ECCLESIASTES

Ecclesiastes, like Proverbs or the Psalms, is a collection of aphorisms or miscellaneous sayings on a variety of topics interspersed with a few longer passages on several subjects. However, it differs in many ways from the other books of the Old Testament. It is pessimistic in tone, in contrast to the sturdy optimism of Proverbs. The hope, faith, and purpose found in other books of the Old Testament are also absent. A repeated refrain is "all is vanity," sometimes translated as "all is emptiness" (as in the New English Bible) or "all is futility."

The God of Ecclesiastes is remote and unfathomable—a decided change from the God of the prophets who is deeply and compassionately concerned with human beings. The book is not unified nor are its ideas wholly consistent with each other. Nevertheless, I am glad that this book was incorporated into the Old Testament canon because of the aesthetic quality of its writing and also because its very pessimism throws into high relief the sense of joy and trust running under the other books. Consider, for example, this well-known passage:

To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven:

A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted;

A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up;

A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance;

A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;

A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time to cast away;

A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to keep silence, and a time to speak;

A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace. (Eccl. 3:1-8.)

While it may first strike us as shocking to think of a time to kill or a time to hate, the basic idea expressed in these verses is sound. Change is the stuff of life. Attempting to make rules or philosophical systems that will prevent change from occurring—insisting either internally or aloud that something must always be the same—is a futile endeavor, one that denies the "season" of each life stage.

Youth and early adulthood are the time to get an education and vocational training as an economic foundation for the rest of one's life. The twenties are a good time in our culture to marry and begin a family. Even old age, which cannot be changed or overcome, should be accepted with grace.

It is appropriate to work at times and to play at others, to laugh at some events and to weep at others. It is part of life to win and to lose, to have good fortune and bad luck. The message of this passage is to take these changes with gratitude and with courage, accepting whatever comes until it can be changed or overcome—or until it simply gives way to a new part of the cycle.

At first glance, the author of Ecclesiastes would seem to contradict himself and this celebration of change by writing a bitterly pessimistic passage like this:

Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the fool, so it happeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I said in my heart, that this also is vanity.

For there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for ever; seeing that which now is in the days to come shall all be forgotten. And how dieth the wise man? as the fool.

Therefore I hated life; because the work that is wrought under the sun is grievous unto me: for all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

Yea, I hated all my labour which I had taken under the sun: because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me. (2:15-18.)

I feel that, rather than contradiction, we see here an important part of the cycle. Many times the relinquishment and resignation that precede acceptance come only when there is a period of disillusionment or disappointment that makes us stop and think. Our natural inclination is to behave as we have always behaved, to think that things not only will but should remain the same. Sometimes the fact that things have already changed must forcibly confront our desires. In the shock that follows, disappointment and discouragement are natural feelings. But out of them may come a new acceptance and a new integration of our life's values that accommodate and simultaneously rise above our previous understanding.

As I continue to add full, rich years to those that have already gone before, I perceive also the limitations that those years bring and accept the inevitability of the end of my own life. I think that Ecclesiastes must be a sympathetic voice to many people who are beginning to understand that death may be delayed but not defeated, and that it is the common end of us all. After all our particular experiences, death is the great universal experience through which we each must pass but which none of us can fully share with another:

For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast: for all is vanity.

All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again.

Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth? (3:19-21.)

For all this I considered in my own heart even to declare all this, that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God: no man knoweth either love or hatred by all that is before them.

All things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath.

This is an evil among all things that are done under the sun, that there is one event unto all: yea, also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after that they go to the dead.

For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope: for a living dog is better than a dead lion.

For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten.

Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the sun. . . .

I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.

For man also knoweth not his time: as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon them. (9:1-6, 11-12.)

There is much truth in the author's description, bitter though it may seem, that death removes us from our best efforts and the arenas of action where we have been used to taking charge. All people are subject to the same laws of nature. Volcanoes, earthquakes, and hurricanes strike at random. Heart disease attacks saint and sinner alike. The drunken driver can run anyone down. Death comes to all. Nature eventually gets the upper hand. The most powerful general and the wisest mother die like everyone else.

Although it is true that none of us can claim exemption from trouble, risk, pain, and death, it is certainly true that the righteous person, the disciple of Christ, can be spared the suffering that comes from greed, selfishness, loneliness, hate, and dissipation.

Those who find the approach of Ecclesiastes' author oppressively negative would do well to remember that Jesus, in a more positive way, was equally realistic in recognizing the common experiences of humankind:

But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you;

That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. (Matt. 5:44-45.)

Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock:

And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock.

And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand:

And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it. (Matt. 7:24-27.)

Religion is not an escape from the realities of life, but the power to deal with them with faith and equanimity. Ecclesiastes seems to miss the strength of that faith with such passages as this:

Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than the living which are yet alive.

Yea, better is he than both they, which hath not yet been, who hath not seen the evil work that is done under the sun. (4:2-3.)

However, the author does not totally despair of life but instead admonishes us to make the most of it here and now:

Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God now accepteth thy works.

Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no ointment.

Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of . . . thy [life], which he hath given thee under the sun, . . . for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest under the sun.

Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might: for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest. (9:7-10.)

The author freely recognizes the innocence of youth and its natural high spirits—also recognizing that both these good things can lead the unwary into temptation:

Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment.

Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity. (11:9-10.)

I find particular interest in the book's closing verses. First, the author observes: "Of making many books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh." (12:12.) Although this verse is addressed as "admonish[ment]" to "my son," it still strikes a note of humor with me, as though the author realizes that his book is one of those of which "there is no end." The final two verses, however, are profoundly religious—and one reason why I would encourage anyone who begins this book, with its pessimism and even cynicism, to continue reading to the end:

Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.

For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. (12:13-14.)
