Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 17

THE PROBLEM OF SUFFERING: JOB

Many scholars consider the book of Job the greatest piece of religious literature ever written. It certainly has many of the hallmarks of good literature: a profound theme, concrete images, beautiful language, deep feeling, and a strongly portrayed leading character. It is clearly the work of a talented and subtle mind.

The book presents, in strong juxtaposition, two concepts in apparent opposition: the fact of unmerited human suffering and the goodness of God. Why do human beings suffer? Job's so-called friends argue that his sufferings are punishment for his sins and urge him to confess his sins, promising that his suffering will cease. Job strongly asserts his innocence and maintains the integrity of his moral life, demanding that God himself explain the paradox. At the end of the debate, God intervenes, rejects the false piety of Job's friends, and gives Job a new perspective.

The book opens with a prologue, chapters 1 and 2, which takes place in heaven. In it, God and Satan discuss Job's character, Satan arguing that Job is righteous only because he is happy, healthy, wealthy, and favored with a large family. He has every incentive to be righteous and none to be rebellious, but what, argues Satan, would he do if these gifts were taken away? Satan receives permission to destroy Job's children, flocks, and herds:

Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped,

And said, Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.

In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. (1:20-22.)

Satan was then allowed to afflict Job with painful boils. At that point, even his wife bitterly incited him to "curse God and die."

But he said unto her, Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips. (2:20.)

At this point, Job's three friends arrive and the philosophical debate begins. It seems reasonable to me to see the prologue as the unknown author's dramatic setting to heighten the human tensions around the issues that follow. However, it does not make good theology to interpret this prologue as literal fact. I do not believe that God permits Satan to kill members of our family, nor do I believe that Satan has the power to afflict us with physical ailments. This would violate our free agency and is unmerciful. Similarly, the epilogue (42:10-17), which has Job again receive ten children and even more flocks and herds, seems to make most sense as the addition of a pious scribe who wanted to restore Job to his original material prosperity. Again, it seems bad theology to equate prosperity with righteousness.

This issue aside, however, I believe that any reader who comes to the debate through the setting of the prologue has a keener interest in the arguments of God's goodness and the paradox of human suffering that make up the body of the book. And there is a certain amount of human satisfaction in the "happily ever after" quality of the epilogue.

Although Job will not curse God, he expresses, in some of the most beautiful and eloquent language in the Old Testament, the misery of his existence through the metaphor of regretting the day of his birth:

Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, There is a man child conceived.

Let that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon it. (3:1-2.)

He continues in this vein for most of the chapter. Then Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar approach, mourn with Job, and probe for the causes of his misfortune, at first cautiously and sympathetically, then more aggressively until they are accusing Job and defending themselves. Another sign that this book is deliberately constructed by a gifted writer is the structure of the debate. Each friend speaks and Job answers; this pattern is repeated three times, forming a "three-round" debate.

In the first "round," chapters 4 through 14, Eliphaz enunciates a traditional philosophy that the righteous are somehow protected from misfortune and that only the wicked suffer:

Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off?

Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same.

By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they consumed. . . .

Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man be more pure than his maker?

Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged with folly:

How much less in them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the moth? (4:7-9, 17-19.)

Job protests this facile philosophy, which will convict him of guilt, adding to his emotional burdens:

What doth your arguing reprove?

Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind?

Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and ye dig a pit for your friend.

. . . Look upon me; for it is evident unto you if I lie. (6:24-28.)

He continues his defense through chapter 7, demanding to know what sins he has committed and insisting on his innocence.

Bildad, the second comforter, reiterates Eliphaz's perspective in chapter 8, repeating that Job must be suffering for his sins. In his reply in chapters 9 and 10, Job expresses his weariness, his confusion, and his lack of understanding of the ways of God. Raising his complaint to God, he again invokes his righteousness:

My soul is weary of my life; I will leave my complaint upon myself; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.

I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou contendest with me.

Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress, that thou shouldest despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked?

Hast thou eyes of flesh? or seest thou as man seeth?

Are thy days as the days of man? are thy years as man's days,

That thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin?

Thou knowest that I am not wicked; and there is none that can deliver out of thine hand.

Thine hands have made me and fashioned me together round about; yet thou dost destroy me. (10:1-8.)

In chapter 11, Zophar, the third friend, intensifies the attack on Job, brutally accusing him of hidden sin:

Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?

For thou hast said, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes.

But oh that God would speak, and open his lips against thee;

And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that which is! Know therefore that God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity deserveth. (11:3-6.)

Goaded by these accusations, Job responds with equal passion, again returning to his relationship with God and seeking to understand why these changes have come about:

Hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on me what will. . . .

Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but I will maintain mine own ways before him. . . .

How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgression and my sin.

Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy? (13:13, 15, 23-24.)

Then in an exquisite passage on the fragility of life, Job laments:

Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble.

He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not. . . .

For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease.

Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground;

Yet through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant.

But man dieth, and wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is he?

As the waters fail from the sea, and the flood decayeth and drieth up:

So man lieth down, and riseth not: till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep. (14:1-2, 7-12.)

The second interchange, which covers chapters 15 through 21, sees a heightening of emotions. Eliphaz begins the second round. Apparently realizing that Job cannot reasonably be convicted of personal iniquity, he falls back on a general denunciation of all human beings as unrighteous creatures, thus accusing Job by virtue of accusing the entire human race:

What is man, that he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?

Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, the heavens are not clean in his sight.

How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinketh iniquity like water? (15:14-16.)

At this point, Job does not respond directly to his friend's accusations but returns with renewed vigor to his suit against God. Courageously, he accuses God of injustice:

Know now that God hath overthrown me, and hath compassed me with his net.

Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard: I cry aloud, but there is no judgment.

He hath fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and he hath set darkness in my paths.

He hath stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head. . . .

Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand of God hath touched me. (19:6-9, 21.)

Energetically he refutes the specious logic of his comforters, pointing out that there is no simple equation between sin and misfortune or between prosperity and righteousness:

Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power?

Their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring before their eyes.

Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them.

Their bull gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, and casteth not her calf.

They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance.

They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ.

They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave. (21:7-13.)

The same themes, with ingenious variations and unfailing eloquence, continue. In the third bout, chapters 22 through 31, Job sets aside his own bewilderment and anger—without abating one jot of his complaint against God—to powerfully affirm his faith as the moral center of his life:

As God liveth, who hath taken away my judgment; and the Almighty, who hath vexed my soul;

All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils;

My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit.

God forbid that I should justify you: till I die I will not remove mine integrity from me.

My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. (27:1-6.)

Elihu, the youngest and confessedly the least experienced of the friends, has a long speech (chapters 32- 37), in which he affirms the wisdom and justice of God, counsels humility, and admits that he has no solution to the paradox of Job's situation.

At that point, in chapters 38 through 41, God intervenes, deluging Job with a dazzling catalogue of creative mysteries and unanswerable questions:

Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou has understanding. . . .

When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy? . . .

Where is the way where light dwelleth? . . .

Hath the rain a father? or who hath begotten the drops of dew?

Out of whose womb came the ice? . . .

Who hath put wisdom in the inward parts? or who hath given understanding to the heart?

Knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth?

Hast thou given the horse strength? hast thou clothed his neck with thunder? (38:4, 7, 19, 28-29, 36; 39:1, 19.)

Job, completely overwhelmed, no longer urges his claim on God's justice, but God does not convict him of impiety or lack of faith. Instead, it is the false reasoning of his friends that God categorically rejects: "The Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job hath." (42:7.)

The effect is to let Job know—as Job is fully willing to admit, at this point—that he has a very limited perspective on life compared with God's. The question of why human beings suffer is not answered, except to make it clear that suffering cannot simply be equated with sinfulness. Rather, the teaching of the book of Job is to trust God, who knows and understands life from a different perspective than we do.
