Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 18

THE BEAUTY OF PURE WORSHIP: THE PSALMS

Writers of the Old Testament often promise well- being and prosperity to those who obey divine commandments, and retribution and punishment to those who disobey or ignore God's laws. Deuteronomy 28 describes in eloquent detail the blessings that will follow the Israelites if they will "hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord . . . to observe and to do all his commandments"—blessings of prosperity, protection, health, children, holiness, and power. But if they are disobedient, parallel curses will follow them: ill health, poverty, misery, plague, drought, "madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart" (Deut. 28:28), the sorrows of the captive, frustration, the loss of children, work without fruit, servitude, and constant worry and unease:

Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee:

And they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever.

Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things. (Deut. 28:45-47.)

We hear a good deal in our day about keeping the commandments to receive blessings and avoid punishment. The Doctrine and Covenant teaches:

There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated. (D&C 130:20-21.)

There is an absolute logic about this statement. The commandments of God are the laws of life. The Word of Wisdom, generosity in sharing our material goods, diligence, fidelity, honesty, Christian love, and repentance bear good fruit. Obeying them brings their own reward. And the rewards of obedience are very specific. We obtain some measure of good health by obeying the known laws of health. By practicing safe, defensive driving, we arrive at our destinations safely. By keeping our integrity, we enjoy peace of mind. By loving our neighbors, we enjoy harmonious relations with others. To increase love, we give more and find new ways to serve.

But as we have learned from Job, reinforced by our own experience, righteous living guarantees no freedom from illness or misfortune. Cancer can strike anyone— sinner or saint. Furthermore, the desire for a blessing may not be the highest motive for obeying a law. A quid pro quo exchange of obedience for blessings is hardly the finest expression of religion. Self-concern will detract from the quality of our service for God and taint the purity of our worship. I do not think that God can be pleased with a believer who "keeps score" on his or her own righteousness. Instead, I recommend to our attention the teachings of a little-known Old Testament prophet named Habakkuk. To me, he epitomizes pure worship.

Habakkuk witnessed the downfall of his people in the kingdom of Judah. While he acknowledged their sins, he was troubled because Babylon, a nation even more wicked, was permitted to take the Jews into captivity and to destroy the holy city of Jerusalem and its sacred temple. But his faith in the Lord was based not on his own welfare, but on his conception of God. Under any and all circumstances, he resolved, he would praise the Lord for his being:

Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls:

Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

The Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds' feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. (Hab. 3:17-19.)

Psalm 73 has much the same feeling. Its author recognizes that the wicked prosper, live untroubled, and "have more than heart could wish" (v. 7). How could such a thing be? The answer comes in the transcendant knowledge that shows a broader view than the limits of this life only and reassures him that God alone, who is beyond understanding, merits his worship and devotion:

When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me;

Until I went into the sanctuary of God; then understood I their end.

Surely thou didst set them in slippery places; thou castedst them down into destruction. . . .

So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.

Nevertheless I am continually with thee: thou hast holden me by my right hand.

Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.

Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee.

My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

For, lo, they that are far from thee shall perish: thou hast destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee.

But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy works. (Ps. 73:16-18, 22-28.)

Job learned in the end that, despite the tragedies of his life, he must keep faith with God and put his trust in him, trusting beyond understanding, trusting beyond reason, trusting despite the bewilderments and discrepancies of mortal existence.

Confucius, sage of ancient China, did not teach his people to worship God, but he certainly taught them to love and live the truth for its own sake—not out of fear, hope, or reward, or even as a duty. I find his statement delightful in its humility and humor:

They who know the truth are not equal to those who love it, and they who love it are not equal to those who delight in it.

At thirty I stood firm. At forty I had no doubts. At fifty I knew the decrees of heaven. At sixty my ear was an obedient organ for the reception of the truth. At seventy I could follow what my heart desired without transgressing what was right.

Our actions are certainly important, but so are the motives that move us to act. Our motivation varies from time to time and from deed to deed. I think it very likely that Confucius's behavior did not alter drastically between the time he was thirty and the time he was sixty, but that the deeper understandings he brought to those behaviors and the purity of his motives made the difference between mere obedience and true wisdom.

Or let's use the illustration of paying tithing. I doubt very much that we always have the same reasons for paying tithing throughout our lives. Sometimes we may pay tithing out of fear of not being acceptable to the Lord. Sometimes we may do it to receive the promised blessings of prosperity. Sometimes we may feel it our duty, an obligation to support the Church. Sometimes it is an act of sheer faith, without even any hope that we will be rewarded or that it will make a difference except to our own integrity. And sometimes we pay tithing out of gratitude to God, freely, with no other motive.

The finest experiences of life are those which have great meaning and value in and of themselves, irrespective of external values like what future good it could bring or what others may think of us. I am thinking of such things as friendship, the moments of looking deep into the eyes of a beloved companion and realizing the blessings of a good marriage, enjoying a walk through a spring garden, listening to the thunder and passion of Beethoven, or drinking a glass of fresh orange juice on a hot day. The more that life can be lived for its own sake, the richer life is and the greater our own integrity. Our relationship to our Father in heaven and to Jesus belongs in this category. They merit our whole-souled devotion.

Religion reaches its highest expression when we live it—not for a reward either here or in heaven but because it is true, it is good, and it is deserving of our loyalty and love. Love of God, love of neighbor, and humility bring their own rewards—but only if we do not seek them. God is to be honored, revered, and loved for what he is— for his own sake. Such is the message of Habakkuk and the Psalmist.

Explore with me, if you will, the passion and exquisite joy of the Psalms in their expression of wholehearted praise and true worship. It seems most appropriate to me that they are attributed to David, an innocent but not helpless youth, who stood between danger and his father's sheep, who rejoiced in the beauties of the natural world around him, and whose pure voice and instinct for harmony could dispel even the evil spirit that troubled Saul. It is obvious from their content that many were written centuries after David's time but reflecting the same intimate worship of God and the same rejoicing in his creations.

It is also obvious that they were meant to be sung, accompanied by such musical instruments as the harp, viol, lyre, horn, trumpet, drums, or cymbals. I wish that we had the ancient settings for some of these lovely Psalms. I deeply appreciate the inspiration of modern composers who have created new and beautiful settings for some of them.

I have referred to the Psalms often in earlier chapters, for they are among my favorite scriptures in the Old Testament. If any of these, my favorites, appeal to you, let me suggest that you mark them in your own scriptures and continue to browse, making a treasure house of these rich expressions for yourself.

Psalm 8 expresses praise of human nature and gratitude to God for life:

O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast set thy glory above the heavens.

Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength because of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger.

When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;

What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour.

Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet:

All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field;

The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas.

O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! (Ps. 8:1-9.)

I love the emphasis on ethics in the Psalms, which echoes that of the prophetic writings. Worship of God must be accompanied by righteous living:

Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill?

He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart.

He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour.

In whose eyes a vile person is contemned; but he honoureth them that fear the Lord. He that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not.

He that putteth not out his money to usury, nor taketh reward against the innocent. He that doeth these things shall never be moved. (Ps. 15.)

The sacred sense of the next verse communicates the Psalmist's sense of worship:

The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? (Ps. 27:1.)

I can believe that David composed Psalm 51. In his youth, he was an idealist. In later years, he committed adultery with the wife of a friend and brought about the friend's death. Nathan the prophet made David's sin vivid to him. That psalm is a cry of repentance:

Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy lovingkindness: according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be clear when thou judgest.

Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me.

Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom.

Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.

Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice.

Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me.

Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy free spirit.

Then will I teach transgressors thy ways; and sinners shall be converted unto thee.

Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation: and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

O Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise.

For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt offering.

The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise. (Ps. 51:1-17.)

For God-centered worship, I like Psalms 96, 98, and 138:

Psalm 96

O sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord, all the earth.

Sing unto the Lord, bless his name; shew forth his salvation from day to day.

Declare his glory among the heathen, his wonders among all people.

For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above all gods.

For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the Lord made the heavens.

Honour and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.

Give unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the people, give unto the Lord glory and strength.

Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: bring an offering, and come into his courts.

O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: fear before him, all the earth.

Say among the heathen that the Lord reigneth: the world also shall be established that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people righteously.

Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof.

Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the trees of the wood rejoice

Before the Lord: for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth.

Psalm 98

O sing unto the Lord a new song; for he hath done marvellous things: his right hand, and his holy arm, hath gotten him the victory.

The Lord hath made known his salvation: his righteousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the heathen.

He hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel: all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth: make a loud noise, and rejoice, and sing praise.

Sing unto the Lord with the harp; with the harp, and the voice of a psalm.

With trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful noise before the Lord, the King.

Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.

Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful together

Before the Lord; for he cometh to judge the earth: with righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.

Psalm 138

I will praise thee with my whole heart: before the gods will I sing praise unto thee.

I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name for thy lovingkindness and for thy truth: for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name.

In the day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul.

All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord, when they hear the words of thy mouth.

Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord: for great is the glory of the Lord.

Though the Lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly: but the proud he knoweth afar off.

Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me: thou shalt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand shall save me.

The Lord will perfect that which concerneth me: thy mercy, O Lord, endureth for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands.

Two of the supreme expressions of trust in the Lord's loving care are in the Psalms:

Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?

If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there.

If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;

Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.

If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me.

Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee. (Ps. 139:7-12.)

The other is equally beautiful and even better known:

The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.

He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters.

He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake.

Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.

Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. (Ps. 23.)

In modern life, the Psalms are seldom used for devotional purposes except privately, with the exception of those that have been set to modern arrangements. I cannot read "The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?" (Ps. 27:1) without having the stirring strains of music also go through my mind.

Many of our hymns are similarly God-centered and amount to genuine expression of worship and rejoicing. We need to think about how we can praise the Lord in our time and culture, for the heart desires to give voice in suitable expressions as well as befitting actions.

What a joy it is to feast upon the Psalms! To live with such words is to live with "the beauty of holiness" and the power of pure worship. Surely every life would be richer for such companions.
