Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Part IV

SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE OLD TESTAMENT

Chapter 19

THE QUESTION OF POWER: A TRANSCENDENTAL REFERENT

One of the most persistent problems in human relationships is that of domination. Who has the power to rule over others, and what is the basis of that power?

Historically, political power has been held most often by individuals rather than collectively—by kings, dictators, judges, or priests. It has often claimed as the basis of its authority the will of the gods or the duty to protect the more helpless from the domination of others, but such noble goals have all too often been at the mercy of simple human greed and desire for power.

Israel abandoned its prophets for kings, but seldom had an absolute monarchy for long periods of time. Instead, the authority of the king was always held in tension with—and sometimes against—the authority of the prophets who stood outside the system and retained the power to call it to account. It referred itself to a transcendent control unique in human history. We see in this system the beginning of the checks and balances system built into every functioning democracy today.

Authority to control or govern others is a difficult power to exercise wisely and in the interest of the governed. Lord Acton's epigram still rings true: "Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely." Equally true is its modern variant: "Power attracts corruptibility, and absolute power attracts absolute corruptibility." Hitler, Mussolini, and Stalin all demonstrated the spiral of evil that can be set in motion by power operating to accrue more power.

In that remarkable modern revelation on how the priesthood should be exercised, we read: "We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion." (D&C 121:39.)

If this insight is true in the idealistic setting of the gospel and the Church, how much truer is it of authority in the political and social arena!

Beginning with Saul, Israel gave its allegiance to kings, both in the united kingdom under Saul, David, and Solomon, and then in the divided kingdoms of Israel and Judah until their respective captivities by Assyria in 722 b.c. and Babylonia in 586 b.c. Unlike kings elsewhere in the world, the rulers of Israel were not laws unto themselves, though some tried to be. They were monitored by prophets of God who, as God's spokesmen, interpreted his will.

As early as the days of Moses, the Israelites had been warned of the difficulties monarchs would bring upon the people:

When thou art come unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;

Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose: one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy brother.

But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses: forasmuch as the Lord hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way.

Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.

And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which is before the priests the Levites:

And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do them:

That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of Israel. (Deut. 17:14-20.)

Despite this antimonarchial tradition, the diverse tribes of Israel both wanted and needed a king—rather than judges who were periodically "raised up"—to unify them, to help them protect themselves against competing tribes and countries, and to give them more concrete identity as a nation. Samuel, a prophet of God, acting on God's instructions, chose Saul and anointed him king of Israel, but monitored his actions closely and terminated his reign because of disobedience. (1 Sam. 15.) His rebuke to the erring king, even though Samuel had violated his own obligation to perform the prebattle sacrifice to send the soldiers into war more confidently, was a stinging one: "Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams." (1 Sam. 15:22.)

As Israel's prophet, Samuel also chose David to succeed Saul. David was an idealistic, beloved, and honored king, a charismatic leader, and a brilliant military strategist who brought Israel to her greatest moment. However, his power corrupted his sense of values. He thought that as king he could do as he pleased. When he desired Bathsheba, he seduced her. When she became pregnant with his child, David issued orders that placed her husband, Uriah, at the forefront of the battle, where he was killed. David then married the widow.

But another prophet, Nathan, confronted David in his sins by relating to him a trenchant parable:

There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor.

The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds:

But the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter.

And there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring man that was come unto him; but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come to him.

And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely die:

And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.

And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man. Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul;

And I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such things.

Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon.

Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife.

Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun.

For thou didst it secretly: but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun. (2 Sam. 12:1-12.)

Another dramatic illustration of God's righteous will being superior to that of the king's is the story of the prophet Elijah and Ahab, king of Israel. Ahab wished to enlarge his palatial estate by annexing Naboth's vineyard. Naboth refused to sell his land because he would be untrue to his heritage—his inheritance in Israel. As Ahab lay on his bed, sulking like a child, his foreign wife, Jezebel, took the situation in charge and said to him: "Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? arise, and eat bread, and let thine heart be merry: I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite." (1 Kings 21:7.)

Jezebel had Naboth falsely accused of blaspheming God and the king. After Naboth was stoned to death, Jezebel told Ahab: "Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth . . . for Naboth is not alive, but dead." (1 Kgs. 21:15.)

Such a solution is fully in the tradition of absolute monarchies, but in Israel, kings were not beyond criticism and a higher judgment:

And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,

Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria: behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to possess it.

And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the Lord, Hast thou killed, and also taken possession? And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the Lord, In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.

And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? And he answered, I have found thee: because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the Lord.

Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity. . . .

And of Jezebel also spake the Lord, saying, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel. (1 Kgs. 21:17-21, 23.)

The writing prophets, particularly Micah, Isaiah, and Jeremiah, continued to monitor and chastise princes and kings of Israel. People in high places—perhaps especially people in high places—were still subject to a higher power. The will of God took precedence over the rights of kings. About 730 b.c., Micah attacked the power structure of Israel:

And I said, Hear, I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel; Is it not for you to know judgment?

Who hate the good, and love the evil; who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones;

Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off them; and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron.

Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them: he will even hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved themselves ill in their doings.

Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him.

Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.

Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of God.

But truly I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin.

Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity.

They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.

The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us.

Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of the forest. (Micah 3:1-12.)

The later chapters of Isaiah eloquently proclaim the power of God and the comparative insignificance of earthly kingdoms:

Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his counsellor hath taught him?

With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?

Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing. (Isa. 40:13-15.)

For centuries, people have struggled to gain political freedom and to limit the power of autocratic rulers. England has led the way in modern times, beginning with the Magna Carta in a.d. 1215. The American Revolutionary War and the French Revolution reveal the high price people have been willing to pay to rid themselves of monarchial power.

What power the Old Testament may have had in such events by supplying a precedent of God as the ultimate authority! And would that all men and women with power and influence would respect a moral order in the universe as the Old Testament prophets did!
