Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 20

A COVENANT PEOPLE

The Old Testament reveals a new and remarkable relationship between the Lord and Israel, a relationship that, in its turn, becomes the structural foundation for the rest of the events of the Old Testament.

It all began with a call to Abraham to leave his native country and establish his posterity as a new people, a separate nation who would become a blessing to all people:

Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will show thee:

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. (Gen. 12:1-3.)

A covenant is an agreement between parties, each committed to perform certain things on behalf of the other. In this instance, the Israelites accepted the obligation to obey God, keep his commandments, and be a blessing to all the families of the world. God in turn bound himself to prosper them, prolong their lives, preserve their country, and call them his very own. In Hosea, God calls his relationship to Israel a marriage, he being a husband.

For the sake of Abraham, God renewed the covenant with Isaac:

And the Lord appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of:

Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father;

And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;

Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws. (Gen. 26:2-5.)

God also covenanted with Jacob:

And [Jacob] dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.

And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed;

And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

And, behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of (Gen. 28:12-15.)

And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name: and he called his name Israel.

And God said unto him, I am God Almighty: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins;

And the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land. (35:10-12.)

Great promises were made to Joseph:

Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall:

The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:

But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)

Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:

The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren. (Gen. 49:22-26.)

Before the Israelites entered the land of Canaan, Moses renewed the covenant between his people and the Lord:

And Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and keep, and do them.

The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.

The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day. (Deut. 5:1-3.)

In beautiful, earnest language, Moses states the people's relationship to God. This passage has been read in Jewish synagogues every sabbath for centuries:

Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it; that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and honey.

Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord:

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:

And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates. (Deut. 6:3-9.)

These scriptures represent something deeply satisfying to the human soul. It is part of our nature to seek a connection with the divine. We yearn to know and be known by our Creator. A covenant is a reciprocal relationship, one that God offers to men and women, and his own invitation to us to enter into a relationship of promise and sanctification with him. In a world that is always changing and often threatening, such a covenant offers us security, a point of permanence, a promise that we will be cherished and nurtured through life's vicissitudes.

However, if the desire for such a covenant relationship speaks to the deepest roots of human nature, the clearest lessons of human history are that such a covenant is desperately difficult to keep. There is plenty of evidence that Israel and Judah, with the exception of a few prophets and possibly their disciples, were not true to their covenants. They practiced neither justice nor mercy. They served God with burnt offerings, rituals, and feasts, but not with purity of heart. Israel, the northern kingdom, fell to Assyria in 721 b.c. and Judah to Babylon in 586 b.c. as the prophets predicted.

Israel had forfeited the protection of the Lord through unrighteousness.

The Israelites misinterpreted what it means to be a chosen people. They thought it meant power, favors, and privileges, not duties and responsibilities. I am not sure, however, that they failed completely. By their mere existence, sinful and wayward though they were, they reminded the nations of the earth of the existence of God, were a living lesson in faith even in their infidelity, and were a constant reminder of the steadfastness of God's covenant. I wonder if Abraham saw the tangled and ambiguous history of his descendants when he swore that first oath and covenant. I wonder if he hoped to help God establish a people who could fulfill the Lord's purposes in human history.

As we have already noted, the author of Jonah spoke strongly against the egocentric and shortsighted idea of Israel that gospel principles applied only to them. The later chapters of Isaiah describe Israel's calling in other words, as God's servant to be a light to the Gentiles:

I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles;

To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house. (Isa. 42:6-7.)

Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction. (Isa. 48:10.)

And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. . . .

And he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth. (Isa. 49:3, 6.)

Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.

For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.

And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising. (Isa. 60:1-3.)

Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. (Isa. 43:10.)

The prophets of Israel came to understand Israel's true mission of a covenant people of the Lord. They conclude their writing in the faith that the Lord will redeem Israel, despite her backslidings, because he is a merciful God who honors the promises made to Father Abraham. The covenant rests not only upon the faithful past of Father Abraham but upon the expectation of salvation of every believing member of the house of Israel. It is a present claim upon the living God, who is a merciful God, that keeps the covenant alive in every heart:

Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy.

He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.

Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old. (Micah 7:18-20.)

For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth.

And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory: and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name.

Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.

Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be called Hephzi-bah, and thy land Beulah: for the Lord delighteth in thee. . . .The Lord hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength, Surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies; and the sons of the stranger shall not drink thy wine, for the which thou hast laboured:

But they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the Lord; and they that have brought it together shall drink it in the courts of my holiness.

Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.

Behold, the Lord hath proclaimed unto the end of the world, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.

And they shall call them, The holy people, The redeemed of the Lord. (Isa. 62:1-4, 8-12.)

Latter-day Saints call themselves modern Israel. Patriarchal blessings declare them to be descendants of Joseph through Ephraim and Manasseh. We are also a covenant people, called to fulfill the mission that ancient Israel and the Nephites failed to realize. God needs a people who will lead the rest of humankind to faith in God and his righteousness as taught by the Hebrew prophets and Jesus.

Heaven forbid that we think ourselves better than other peoples. May we rather believe that we were chosen to fulfill a mission by demonstrating what it means to serve God and do his will. May we, in the words of Micah, do what the Lord requires of us: "to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with [our] God." (Micah 6:8.)
