Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Chapter 21

THE VISION OF PEACE: SWORDS INTO PLOWSHARES

The history of the Near East in Old Testament times is a round of repeated warfare between Israel and her neighbors, including the great empires of the Nile and Mesopotamia. Canaan, caught in the middle both politically and geographically, found itself under the actual or potential domination of Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia, Persia, and later Greece and Rome. As the prophets had predicted, both Israel and Judah went into captivity, and their people were scattered among the nations.

Since biblical days, we have done no better. The inspiring restoration of the modern nation of Israel to its ancient homeland has taken place in a context no less threatening than that facing Moses' people in the first conquest of Canaan. A challenging presence in the Middle East, Israel has defended itself from annihilation repeatedly in the short decades since its reestablishment in 1948, its very presence disturbing to its hostile neighbors.

Elsewhere on our globe, constant warfare has been the burden and tragedy of humankind. And it is still with us—but now with the threat of total annihilation.

It is encouraging and inspiring that the prophets, despite their terrifying understanding of the destruction that awaited disobedient human beings, also had a vision of a golden age of peace. Both Micah and Isaiah make this promise in the same words, suggesting that one may have borrowed from the other:

But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall flow unto it.

And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it.

For all people will walk every one in the name of his god, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. (Micah 4:1-5; see also Isa. 2:1-4.)

In contemporary life, these beautiful words mean that we can spend less for armaments and more for health care, shelter for the homeless, food for the hungry, education, arts, and research. Who would not pray the Lord to hasten the day of fulfillment?

Despite our concerns for living well in the present and honoring worthy past achievements, we must also look forward in faith and hope to a great future. The redemption of Israel and the establishment of peace will be achieved with the coming of a Messiah. In this belief, we can sense close affinity with our Old Testament kinfolk in spirit. For Christians, this Messiah will be Jesus Christ, returning a second time to the earth. In addition to the Old Testament passages interpreted in the New Testament as predictions of Christ's coming, Latter-day Saints have corroborating passages in The Book of Mormon and in the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price. (See James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, ch. 5.)

However, if we scrutinize the Old Testament by itself, without reference to other scriptures, we observe that Christ is not named and we do not gain a clear picture of the nature of the Messiah. Because the Jews were dominated by their larger neighbors, they quite naturally looked for a temporal savior in the image of a King David. But the prophets, particularly Isaiah and Micah, had intimations of a spiritual Messiah. Christ's coming fulfills many of their expectations:

Now gather thyself in troops, O daughter of troops: he hath laid siege against us: they shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek.

But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting. (Micah 5:1-2.)

A clear reference to a spiritual Messiah is found in Isaiah:

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of peace.

Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this. (Isa. 9:6-7.)

Jesus Christ fulfills this passage admirably.

The tone of Isaiah changes radically from chapter 40 on—to such an extent that scholars speak of Deutero- Isaiah, or second Isaiah. The setting for these chapters is the Jewish captivity in Babylon.

Isaiah 53 describes the humiliation and suffering of God's servant on behalf of others. Some scholars think this passage describes the role of Israel. Christian students see in it a very detailed and specific anticipation of the mission, life, and death of Jesus Christ. The gospel accounts fulfill this chapter of Isaiah faithfully:

Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.

He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.

Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed.

All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.

He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation: for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken.

And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth.

Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.

Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. (Isa. 53:1-12.)
