Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

EPILOGUE

We come to the end of this Old Testament review, very much aware that we have barely touched upon the many important concepts in this rich, ancient record. Nor have we considered many books of the Old Testament as such. My purpose has been to reveal some basic, significant ideas that occur in many of the books.

Not all of the Old Testament is of one quality. Much of it bears witness to a God of truth and righteousness who made known his will to his servants, the prophets and prophetesses of Israel. Some of the writings by unknown, well-intentioned authors reflect a limited understanding of Deity. We can learn from the errors and sins of Israel as well as from their religious and ethical insights. To discern the meaning and truth of scripture, we need to bring to our study humility, a knowledge of the great fundamentals of religion, the emphasis of Jesus (for Christians), and the influence of the Holy Spirit.

With the help of a Bible commentary and the appendixes, you will be able to study the individual books with interest and, I hope, greater insight and understanding. The ideas still relevant to our religious living today connect us with the eternal themes of the gospel and with those who have, with faith and hope, sought the ways of the Lord before us.

What are some of the most important teachings of the Old Testament? I find them in the perception the prophets arrived at concerning God and his relationship to human beings. God is an ethical being, a person of integrity and compassion, deeply committed to the well- being of his children, who have been created in his image and likeness. Because we are in the divine image, we too must be just and merciful.

A second important concept is that there is a moral order in the universe. Ethical laws govern the lives of human beings. There can be no prosperity, no well-being, no peace in the life of an individual, a nation, or the world until people learn to practice justice and mercy. Rituals, holy days, and sacred beliefs are a means to an end—not to be worshipped in themselves but of value as they draw us nearer to God and to our fellow human beings.

Our Christian faith and living can be enormously strengthened by the Old Testament concepts of ethical monotheism and by the concrete and specific illustrations of proper human relationships in the law of Moses.

Until we learn to hold human life—every human life—sacred, we shall not have peace on earth. Peace presupposes "good will toward men." (Luke 2:14.) Both the Old Testament and our Christian faith challenge us to put human values—the well-being of all people—above material values and even above our own interests. Jesus said, "He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." (Matt. 10:39.) Jesus, like the prophets before him, was concerned with people—the sick and the afflicted, the poor, sinners, publicans, the alienated of society. So were Moses, Isaiah, and Micah. Are we?

Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Job are eloquently and beautifully written, containing much practical wisdom. They merit our reflection and meditation.

Psalms inspire and encourage us to worship God in "the beauty of holiness."

Characters of the Old Testament portray both the virtues and the follies of human beings. Vicariously, they teach us of the good and evil mingled in all human experience.

All in all, the Old Testament is a unique and priceless record, Israel's religious interpretation of life and history.
