Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Appendix A

THE BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

I. THE LAW (PENTATEUCH, TORAH)

1.Genesis. Describes the creation; tells of Cain and Abel, Noah and the flood; portrays in considerable detail the lives of the great forebears of Israel: Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebekah, Jacob, Rachel and Leah, and Joseph.

2.Exodus. Relates the call of Moses to lead Israel out of Egyptian bondage and how it was done; contains the Decalogue (Ten Commandments); is an interesting study of the character of Moses and his relationship to God and his people.

3.Numbers. Continues the account in Exodus; describes life in the wilderness on the way to Canaan; contains the Lord's blessing upon the children of Israel ("The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face shine upon thee"—Num. 6:23-27).

4.Leviticus. Contains a description of much of the ritual life of Israel: sacrifices, things clean and unclean, and so forth. Chapters 19 and 25 contain some fine ethical-religious teachings.

5.Deuteronomy. Contains the most complete and finest statement of specific Mosaic laws; given as an oration by Moses before Israel entered the land of Canaan, mingling both warning and promise.

II. THE FORMER PROPHETS, HISTORICAL BOOKS

6.Joshua. Tells of Joshua's role as leader in replacing Moses and of his conquest of Canaan and the distribution of the land among the tribes; Joshua praised for his faithfulness.

7.Judges. Covers the period between Joshua and Samuel; relates the exploits of such heroes as Deborah, Gideon, and Samson. Not a religiously inspiring book.

8.1 Samuel. Contains the call and mission of the prophet Samuel, the rise and fall of Saul, and David's relationship to Saul.

9.2 Samuel. Records David's glorious and tragic reign.

10.1 Kings. Records Solomon's reign, the division of the kingdom at his death, and the couragous mission of Elijah.

11.2 Kings. Records the fall of Israel to Assyria in 722 b.c. and the fall of Judah to Babylon in 586 b.c. Age of the great writing prophets: Amos, Hosea, Micah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel.

III. THE LATER PROPHETS

12.Amos (ca. 760-740 b.c.). Records the mission of Amos, shepherd from the kingdom of Judah, to northern Israel (Bethel); he condemns Israel for its lack of social morality and predicts its captivity; powerful message of justice.

13.Hosea (ca. 745-735 b.c.). Describes the faithfulness of Israel to God in terms of his own faithless wife; predicts the captivity and ultimate redemption of Israel.

14.Micah (ca. 730-720 b.c.). Records the mission of a villager from Judea who condemns the materialistic and uncompassionate life of Jerusalem and attacks the political and ecclesiastical framework; defines true religion (Micah 6:6-8).

15.Isaiah (ca. 740-700 b.c.). Describes the mission of an aristocratic advisor to the kings of Judah who expresses great trust in God through righteous living and (from chapter 40 on) predicts the divine triumph on behalf of Israel.

16.Jeremiah (ca. 62l-586 b.c.). Describes the mission of the last great prophet before the fall of Judah, who predicted the coming captivity in Babylon and tried to prepare his people for it; insisted on purity and righteousness.

17.Ezekiel (ca. 592-567 b.c.). Records the mission of this prophet to Israel in Babylonian captivity; makes a transition from national to individual emphasis in religion. See Chapter 18.

18.Zephaniah (ca. 627 b.c.). Records his warning that divine wrath is about to be poured out on Judah, Jerusalem, and all unbelievers; a remnant will eventually be saved.

19.Nahum (ca. 612 b.c.). Contains a powerful, poetic prediction of the fall of proud, wicked Nineveh; pleads with Judah to trust in the Lord.

20.Habakkuk (ca. 608-597 b.c.). Portrays the prophet's despair over the fall of Judah and Jerusalem but ends on a note of triumphant trust in and loyalty to God.

21.Haggai (ca. 520-519 b.c.). Records the prophet's mission to Judah after the return from the Babylonian exile; urges the people to rebuild the temple.

22.Zechariah (ca. 520-519 b.c.). Contains a prophetic vision of the restoration of Jerusalem and the triumph of God on Israel's behalf.

23.Obadiah (ca. 460-450 b.c.). Gives a brief prediction of the destruction of Edom for its persecution of Israel.

24.Joel (ca. 400 b.c.). Contains prediction of a locust plague as a forerunner to the coming of the day of the Lord.

25.Malachi (ca. 400 b.c.). Contains instructions from the Lord to obey, pay tithing; tells of the mission of Elijah.

26.Jonah (ca. 350 b.c.). Records a classic story teaching the impartiality, mercy, and universality of God.

IV. THE WRITINGS

27.Proverbs. Records the wisdom of centuries in a collection of proverbs and admonishments to Israel; positive, affirmative, motivational, and practical.

28.Ecclesiastes. Gives an eloguent appraisal of life from late in the history of Israel—realistic and even pessimistic in tone.

29.Job. Contains a dramatic, poetic debate focusing on explanations of human suffering in a world created by God; a classic in religious thought and literary form.

30.Psalms. Presents a collection of songs of praise sung in Israel over the centuries.

31.Ruth. Records the idyll of a Moabite woman who accompanies her beloved mother-in-law to Israel, marries Boaz, and becomes the great-grandmother of King David; teaches tolerance for the non-Jew.

32.Esther. Contains the narrative of a Jewish woman who becomes queen of Persia and saves her people from destruction at the hands of a jealous minister; historical accuracy uncertain.

33.Ezra (ca. 520 b.c.). Records the mission of a religious leader who restored the Israelite religion when the exiles returned to Judah; asked Israelite men to abandon Gentile wives.

34.Nehemiah (ca. 465-424 b.c.). Continues the account in Ezra from the perspective of a secular leader; Nehemiah rebuilds the walls of Jerusalem.

35.Lamentations. Records mourning over the fall of Jerusalem; ascribed to Jeremiah.

36.Daniel. Contains a heroic account of the triumphs of Daniel and associates in captivity; gives hope to Israel at a difficult time in its history.

37.The Song of Solomon. Preserves a Hebrew love poem.

38-39.1 and 2 Chronicles. Covers history from the creation of the world to the fall of Jerusalem, with heavier emphasis on the events in the kingdom of Judah; overlaps the prophetic books; author unknown but probably written after the Babylonian captivity.
