Lowell L. Bennion, Unknown Testament ( 1988)

Appendix B

EPIC STORIES FROM GENESIS

The book of Genesis contains foundation stories, narratives that explain how the world came to be as it is and who the founders were. These narratives gave the house of Israel—and all Judeo-Christian adherents after them—a framework for understanding how things fit together into a world purposefully created by God for the benefit of his prime creations, human beings. It also assured the Israelites that their nation was established by Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph—men blessed of God to establish the people of Israel.

The creation is described in simple, meaningful language that a child can understand. Relatively free of obvious mythology, it is a profoundly religious statement declaring that God was the author of creation and that creation was good because it was purposeful. Noteworthy is the final statement that human beings, male and female, were created in the image of God and that this creation was very good. This account of creation was written by a nonscientific author before a scientific world- view existed. Therefore, to read it as though it were a textbook in geology, astronomy, or any other science would be an inappropriate use of the text. Its purpose is religious: to glorify God as the creator of the earth and all of its life forms, including human beings. Humans have a special relationship with God by being created in his image and also a special responsibility by being given dominion over the earth and its animals.

Following the creation stories comes the important story of Cain and Abel (Genesis 4). After Cain killed his brother Abel, the Lord called him to account. Cain asked, "Am I my brother's keeper?" The obvious answer was yes; and the principle of interrelationship and concern with treating other persons ethically was reiterated in the law of Moses and in the writings of the prophets. People have social responsibilities and must be benevolently concerned with the welfare of their fellow creatures.

That is the first important principle to be learned from this narrative. The second is that there is no place for vengeance in punishments for crime. God set his mark on Cain so that no one, meeting him, would take justice into his or her own hands and slay this first murderer. Punishment belongs to society. The offended party cannot be trusted to mete out justice. I think it is particularly important to remember that God set that mark on Cain, not as a curse but as a protection.

The next important narrative is that of Noah and the flood (Gen. 6-10). Some aspects of the flood story are hard to believe in detail. How could Noah literally catch, house, and feed two animals of every species? How could he, without experience, construct a seaworthy craft of that size? But these details need not concern us, nor need the question of whether the flood literally covered the globe or whether it simply inundated the lands that Noah knew. We simply need to understand that there was a cataclysmic flood. The important religious message of this story is the teaching that moral law prevails in the universe. Individuals or peoples who ignore or otherwise transgress basic ethical principles cause profound disharmonies with universal moral law. This wrongness demands redress, and the process of that redressing can cause immense destruction.

Most of the remainder of Genesis (aside from several genealogies) is a series of fascinating stories about the patriarchs and matriarchs of Israel who were called and blessed of God with great promises for their posterity. Here we learn of Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebekah, Jacob and Rachel and Leah, and Joseph and Asenath.

Abraham and Sarah, father and mother of the Hebrews, are honored as the source and fountainhead of the house of Israel. Both were individuals of great faith. Their first act of faith was to leave their home country, go to a strange land, and live among unknown people who would not likely welcome their coming. It is significant that Sarah was a partner in this process, even though the initial revelations came to Abraham and he was almost certainly the person who initiated the action.

An unusual incident illustrating the generosity of Abraham is recorded in Genesis 13. His nephew Lot accompanied him into the land of promise. Each had flocks and herds, too many for the available pasture. Generously, Abraham offered Lot his choice of lands to eliminate the conflict between Abraham's herdsmen and Lot's, not to mention the local people. Abraham explained his offer: "Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee . . . for we be brethren." (Gen. 13:8.) Lot observed the "plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord." (Gen. 13:10.) Lot made his choice and went to the plain of Jordan, clearly the better land, while Abraham dwelt in the land of Canaan. Lot's choice created difficulty with his neighbors and exposed him to capture. Instead of saying, "I told you so," Abraham promptly mobilized his servants and freed Lot, restoring his possessions and, more importantly, maintaining their relationship intact.

It was a great joy to both Abraham and Sarah when the Lord fulfilled his promise to make Abraham a "nation" and Sarah gave birth to her only child, Isaac. The ultimate test of faith for Abraham was his belief that he must sacrifice his only son to God. No mention is made of Sarah's role in this event. Perhaps she did not know it was occurring, or surely she would have intervened in some way. It is impossible for me to believe that a mother who had experienced God as tender, protective, and responsive to her patient prayers would have acquiesced in such a demand. It is also difficult to believe that God would test a man's faith by asking him to violate not only a clear commandment but also the deepest human feelings that he possessed (see Micah 6:6-8). I doubt that we have the whole story of this incident.

When Isaac became of marriageable age, Abraham sent a trusted servant back to Abraham's people to find him a wife. The servant used good judgment, as well as faith, to carry out his mission and find Rebekah. The story introduces romance into the Bible, even though Rebekah and Isaac eventually fomented strife between their sons, Esau and Jacob, through blatant favoritism.

Jacob's love for Rachel is a second romantic tale in Genesis that has important consequences for the children. Jacob's clear favoritism for Rachel's two sons, to the exclusion of his other ten sons by Leah and the two concubines, caused them to hate Joseph, sell him as a slave, and eventually meet him in Egypt as second in importance only to the pharaoh—a dazzling tale.

The story of Joseph is a moving account. His life anticipates, in some respects, the history and fate of Israel. Joseph rose from slavery to be administrator of Egypt. He was honorable in an hour of temptation. He saved his family in the day of famine and found a home for them in the land of Goshen, where they were eventually enslaved by a pharaoh who did not know Joseph. A very eloquent and emotional part of the story is the plea of his brother Judah for Joseph to let him remain a servant but to permit another brother, young Benjamin, to return to their aged father:

Then Judah came near unto him, and said, O my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou art even as Pharaoh.

My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother?

And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.

And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him.

And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father: or if he should leave his father, his father would die.

And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.

And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.

And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.

And we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down: for we may not see the man's face, except our youngest brother be with us.

And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife bare me two sons:

And the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since:

And if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the lad be not with us; seeing that his life is bound up in the lad's life;

It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with us, that he will die: and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.

For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father for ever.

Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren.

For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me? lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my father. (Gen. 44:18-34.)

Genesis wins us by its candor. With such moments of nobility are mingled the records of behavior contrary to the ethical standards taught elsewhere in the Law and the Prophets. It does not hide or excuse the deceit and intrigue of its heroes and heroines. Rebekah and Jacob deceive Isaac, robbing Esau of the firstborn's birthright blessing. Laban deceives Jacob by giving him Leah instead of Rachel as the reward for his seven years of labor. Jacob takes advantage of Laban by observing heredity at work in the breeding of sheep and cattle. Esau, the mistreated brother, proves to be the most magnanimous of the lot, forgiving Jacob his wrongdoing and refusing the appeasing gifts. Genesis 34 describes the deception and killing carried out by Jacob's sons to avenge the rape of their sister. Genesis 38 recounts the adultery of Judah, who was ready to burn his daughter-in-law until he found out that he was the father of her child. The daughters of Lot, driven out of Sodom and husbandless, made their father drunk and conceived by him.

Genesis is a record of human beings—violent, lustful, quarrelsome, jealous, and greedy. And yet God found these people worthy of being a covenant people. What greater encouragement could we have, in our moments of discouragement and unworthiness, than to turn to the record of Genesis and its reminder that, whatever human vagaries, the standards of God and also the steadfastness of God do not waver? 1988
