About two weeks before the rededication of the Washington D.C. Temple in August 2022, my boss and I noticed that one of the European hornbeam trees leading to the temple looked sick. It was sparse in the middle and had some scraggly branches.

As the temple groundskeeper, I was concerned that the beautiful temple grounds were ready except for that one little spot. The tree was next to the fountain near the entrance to the temple.

We had a healthy backup tree growing nearby, and we discussed the possibility of swapping out the healthy tree for the sick one. But first we would have to take up the nearby sidewalk and grass and then move the sprinkler and electrical lines running through the area. My worst fear was that we would pull out the sick tree, transplant the replacement tree, and not have time to make everything around the tree look good for the rededication.

When I told my wife, Carolyn, that we might have to move the tree, she replied: “Just trim off the scraggly branches, and I’ll get my scripture sisters across the country to pray for it. The temple grounds are the Lord’s. He’ll bless the tree.”

Carolyn has a group of friends she calls her scripture sisters—members of the Church who used to live in the same ward. They studied Come, Follow Me together until they all moved, but they keep in touch. When prayer is needed, they call on each other.

After Carolyn told them about the sick tree, they told their children and other family members. Carolyn had no idea how many prayed for the tree, but she had faith that Heavenly Father would hear their prayers.

Within only a few days, the tree sprouted new leaves, filling in the sparse area. “Of course it’s looking better,” Carolyn said. She sent pictures of the tree to her scripture sisters, telling them, “Look how the Lord answered us!”

I knew that people were praying for the tree, so I wasn’t surprised either. I also knew that President Russell M. Nelson would soon bless the temple and the temple grounds during his dedicatory prayer. The tree would be OK.

We were grateful the Lord had honored our offering and faith.
