No light could pierce the deep, terrible blackness that covered the earth. Great destruction covered the land. Earthquakes and fires destroyed the more wicked part of the people. Nothing could be seen, and only cries of agony were heard.

After three days the darkness left and many people gathered around the temple. They marveled at the great destruction. Some of the people remembered the signs that had been given when Jesus was born. They also recognized that the darkness and destruction fulfilled Samuel’s prophecy of the signs of the Savior’s death.

Suddenly, they heard a voice that seemed to come from heaven. It was not a loud voice, but it pierced them to the very center so that every part of their being felt its message. It warmed their hearts, but still they could not understand what the voice said. Again the voice was heard, but still they did not understand. The third time they understood; the voice said, “Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.”

As the multitude looked up, they saw a man, clothed in a white robe, descending out of heaven. He came down and stood in the midst of them. He stretched forth his hand and announced, “Behold I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.” The people fell to the earth, overwhelmed to be in the presence of their Savior.

“Arise and come forth unto me,” invited the Master, “that ye may thrust your hands into my side and feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel and have been slain for the sins of the world.” The multitude went forth one by one and felt his side and the prints of the nails in his hands and feet. They saw with their eyes and felt with their hands; they knew that Jesus Christ had given his life and had been resurrected. The multitude cried out, “Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God!” And they fell down at the feet of Jesus and worshiped him.

Jesus then taught them many beautiful gospel principles. He instructed them to follow the commandments so they could be happy, and he taught them about baptism. He commanded them not to argue and fight, but to love one another, even their enemies. He called twelve special men, who were known as disciples, to lead the Church. He spoke of the people he had taught in Jerusalem and explained he still had others to visit. He told the people, “Go to your homes, ponder upon the things which I have said, and ask the Father in my name that ye may understand. I will return tomorrow.”

However, the people loved him so much they began to weep. They wanted him to remain longer, so he stayed. “Have ye any that are sick among you?” asked the Savior lovingly. “Bring them hither and I will heal them.” As they brought the sick to him, he healed them one by one. The people were so happy they kissed his feet and bathed them with their tears.

“Bring unto me your little ones,” said Jesus. When the children gathered around, he said, “Kneel down upon the ground.” Then Jesus knelt with the faithful children and prayed. So marvelous were the things he said, that they could not be written. When Jesus finished praying, the multitude was overcome with joy because of this sacred experience.

“Blessed are ye because of your faith,” explained the Master. “And now behold, my joy is full.” Then Jesus wept because of his great joy.

One by one Jesus blessed each precious child. Then he prayed for the children and wept again. The children and such faith and love for Jesus that the heavens were opened and angels came down to bless them. The angels encircled the children and ministered unto them.

The Savior then gave the people the sacrament, explaining that they should think of him whenever they took the sacrament. He also said, “Pray in your families unto the Father always in my name, that your wives and your children may be blessed.”

Then after Jesus blessed the disciples, giving them power to act in his name, a cloud overshadowed the multitude, and Jesus went back up into heaven. But the people remembered his visit and the things he taught; and in turn they taught the gospel to their children and grandchildren. Because of these teachings there was continual peace among the people for the next 170 years.
