“Let your minds be filled with the goal of being like the Lord, and you will crowd out depressing thoughts as you anxiously seek to know him and to do his will.” President Ezra Taft Benson

“My son, be faithful in Christ; … may [he] lift thee up, and may his sufferings and death, and the showing his body unto our fathers, [his resurrection] and his mercy and long-suffering, and the hope of his glory and of eternal life, rest in your mind forever.” (Moro. 9:25).

“Now the God of hope fill you with joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost.” (Rom. 15:13.)

“And now my beloved brethren, seeing that our merciful God has given us so great knowledge concerning these things, let us remember him, and lay aside our sins, and not hang down our heads, for we are not cast off.” (2 Ne. 10:20).

“Don’t let infamy, don’t let sin, don’t let what is happening in the world, weigh you down. That is not what Christ is all about; don’t let it grieve you. Let him lift you up. And let all that he represents for us rest in your minds forever.” Elder Marion D. Hanks

“No matter what your past has been, you have a spotless future.” President Hugh B. Brown

“With the gospel in our lives and our feet firmly planted on the road to the celestial kingdom, we can move forward and upward. There will be some steep climbs ahead, but our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has covenanted and promised to climb with us every step of the way. Your hope, when united with the hope of thousands of others, can bring the light and the hope of the gospel of Jesus Christ to a troubled world.” Ardeth G. Kapp, Young Women General President

“In the message of the Divine Redeemer there is an offer of hope to all, including those who feel poor in spirit and downtrodden, unloved and unlovely. It is the transcending hope of a new birth. There is a great freedom for those who are born of the spirit.” Elder James E. Faust

“We have a hope in Christ here and now. He died for our sins. Because of him and his gospel, our sins are washed away in the waters of baptism; sin and iniquity are burned out of our souls as though by fire; and we become clean, have clear consciences, and gain that peace which passeth understanding.

“We have an eternal hope in Christ. We know this life is given us to prepare for eternity.” President Spencer W. Kimball
