J. Roger Fluhman, President, Washington Spokane Mission

You have heard correctly. There is more to a fast than not eating. Consider the following:

1.  We fast to learn more about the Lord and to worship him.

2.  We fast to increase our spirituality and our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

3.  We fast to gain a testimony of the gospel and to strengthen that testimony.

4.  We fast to feel the voice of the Spirit and receive inspiration.

5.  We fast to better understand the plan of salvation and our dependence upon the Lord.

6.  We fast for those who are sick and need special blessings.

7.  We fast to help the poor through our fast offerings.

There are other reasons for fasting. I’ve mentioned some which are important to me.

The true law of the fast is explained in Isaiah 58:3–12 [Isa. 58:3–12]. Here many of the reasons for fasting are given—for example “to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, … to deal thy bread to the hungry” (Isa. 58:6–7)—and also the blessings that can come from fasting: “Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am” (Isa. 58:9). These verses have made a deep impression on me. They have helped me understand how to fast and the blessings it brings.

Fasting and prayer are companions. They are mentioned together often in the scriptures. Alma told the people how he knew the things he spoke were true. He said, “Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days that I might know these things for myself.” (Alma 5:46.) Fasting should always be accompanied by prayer.

Remember, too, that we do not fast in a hypocritical way with a “sad countenance” to impress others (see Matt. 6:16–18 and 3 Ne. 13:16–18). Nor do we fast if we are sick or if it would be medically unwise to fast.

I do not have a perfect understanding of fasting. I am not able to use words very well to tell you what happens when we fast or why it happens. But the feelings that come from tasting are sacred and very powerful. They inspire, edify, build, and strengthen. Fasting and feeling, to me, are related.

Our son, Spencer, has tried to learn to fast since his baptism two years ago. We have not made him feel he must fast at his young age, and he may not fast as long as we, his parents, do on some Sundays. However, in fast and testimony meeting some time ago, he whispered to me, “I think I’ll bear my testimony.” I smiled and nodded my approval, His sincere testimony touched my heart. Obviously, he was feeling something work within him because he was fasting.

We, too, can develop special feelings within us if we enter into fasting with proper intent and with the foundation of prayer.
