Anyone who has served a mission knows that expecting a transfer phone call can be stressful. Expecting the call after my new mission president arrived was an especially anxious time for me.

I wondered where I would serve and who my new companion would be. I also wondered what my new mission president would be like and how he would do things.

One morning as transfers approached, I read the account of the angel Gabriel appearing to Mary. I was struck by the testimony Gabriel shared with her: “With God nothing shall be impossible” (Luke 1:37). I was also amazed at Mary’s humble response: “Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word” (Luke 1:38).

Surely, Mary could have felt terrified of the future. How would Joseph react? What would others think? Yet Mary placed submissive trust in God and in His plan for her.

I realized that as I faced my own fears, I wanted to be like Mary. I wanted to say in my own way, “Behold the handmaid of the Lord.” I wanted to do whatever God asked of me and go wherever He called me. I was comforted by Gabriel’s reminder that with God, all things are possible.

For the rest of the week, whenever anxious thoughts crept into my mind, I thought of Mary. Her example gave me courage and strength to put my worries aside.

Our Savior exemplified this same attitude of humility and strength when He said in the Garden of Gethsemane, “Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt” (Mark 14:36; emphasis added). In that moment, the Savior acknowledged that all things are possible with God. But like His mother, He placed submissive trust in His Father’s will.

I had wonderful experiences with my new companion in our new area. Today I face even more daunting unknowns. But when I remember Mary—and my Savior—I’m reminded that instead of worrying, I can choose to trust in God and His plan for me. When He asks me to do something hard, I can face that task with faith because with Him nothing is impossible.
