An estimated 550 poverty-stricken families living in Megenagna, Addis Ababa, have received food from the Church over the past several months, with a total of more than 2,500 hungry stomachs filled.

Local government officials from Megenagna in Woreda (district) 5, which has a large population of people who are homeless and economically struggling, are working alongside the Church to identify the families to receive food. The food parcels will be distributed by nonprofit organisation Real Humanitarian.

On July 16, 2022, the Church participated in a food drive to kick off the initiative. Elder Joseph Nelson, a missionary in the Ethiopia Addis Ababa Mission, said it was an opportunity to provide support to those in the community who either are looking for work or to assist the many people who have been displaced because of the war in Northern Ethiopia.

One of those people is Tigist Negus Kiros. “I came to Addis Ababa alone because my family was in need due to the war in our village,” he said. “By having this food, I will be able to save more money to send to my family so that they can come here and be with me to be safe from the war.”

Another recipient was Selam Mattieos Ayele, who said that the food parcel represented hope for his family. “The times in Ethiopia have been very difficult and it is hard to find work and to find food,” he said.

“I hope that this food will feed my family and we can survive through this rainy season.”

At the event, Birhanu Molla, president of the Megenangna Branch told media, community members and leaders that the Church had given the donations in an effort to follow the teachings of Jesus Christ.

“Since we are all created in the image of God, we need to do good for our fellow beings and share what we have with the needy,” he said.

“We have to do our part to bring peace and prosperity to our country. The Church will continue to help the needy.”

Elder Joshua Caleb Folau, a missionary for the Church who was at the event, shared his feelings about the experience.

“This opportunity to partner with the local community in order to meet the needs of those who are suffering enabled us to make a difference while serving as the Saviour would,” he said. “He loves each of us more than we can ever imagine.”
