From 4 to 8 July 2022, the Africa Central Area held its first-ever For the Strength of Youth (FSY) conference. This inaugural conference is the first in a series of FSY conferences scheduled to happen in the Area. The theme of the conference was “Trust in the Lord” as found in Proverbs 3:5–6.

Attending the conference were 695 youth, 77 young single adults, and three couples in charge of logistics and the session. An array of speakers was lined up to give talks on different issues affecting the youth.

FSY conferences are five-day events that include activities, devotionals, and classes designed to help youth strengthen their faith in Jesus Christ and provide opportunities for them to grow spiritually, socially, physically, and intellectually. FSY conferences have been held extensively outside the United States and Canada for several years and have been modeled after Brigham Young University’s Especially for Youth conferences. In the Africa Central Area, youth from Nairobi, Kenya, had the chance to experience this amazing event that had been called off after the onset of COVID-19. Other countries within the area will have theirs soon.

Brother and Sister Mukasa, the session directing couple of FSY explained the objectives of the conference, expounded on the theme, and invited the youth to socialize, have fun, and above all, be spiritually edified.

“As the youths go through FSY, we hope that they strengthen their faith in our Saviour Jesus Christ and they may know with surety that they can always trust in the Lord,” said Sister Eunice Mukasa.

Participants included Brother and Sister Badu, Brother Carlos and Sister Harlaine, Brother and Sister Mukasa, 77 counsellors under the leadership of Brother Hillary Okoth and Sister Cynthia Trinity. The invited speakers included Sister Emma Mbithi, Sister Lilian Odiero, Brother and Sister Andika, and Brother Erick Onyango. From the FamilySearch booth, we had Elder and Sister Spackman, Elder and Sister Staffler, and Brother Robert Opiyo.

The crowning event of the conference was a special devotional by Elder Joseph W. and Sister Gladys Sitati. Sister Sitati shared her experience as a youth where she was able to overcome temptation by being obedient and steadfast in keeping the commandments. She shared how she often ran over 3 km when she was sent by her parents and like Nephi, she did not murmur. She invited the youth to be chaste, valiant, and obedient in keeping the commandments of God with emphasis on the law of chastity.

Elder Sitati emphasized the importance of using our agency to choose the right, for it brings safety to the soul. “All the commandments of God are meant to ensure your eternal happiness that includes having peace on earth. God has given unto you to choose. Do not be deceived. Follow the scriptures, leaders, prophet, parents and you will not be led to do wrong or break the law of chastity”. He concluded by imploring the youth to avoid deception, to be strong and courageous to keep the law of chastity.

“Agency is the power to choose. Moroni 7:12–17 teaches that all good things come from God. Please remember this scripture and go for it when in doubt.”
