This past year, I had the joy of holding three new grandchildren. Looking into their eyes I marveled at their innocence, their purity, and the promise they bring with them as they begin their life in mortality.

The birth of a newborn child typically brings joy and wonder, celebration and hope. The hope is that the life of the baby will bring new opportunity and greater happiness and joy. For family and friends—especially parents—there is awe at witnessing the miracle of new life as the innocent new baby begins his or her mortal sojourn.

The birth of a royal child brings additional expectations of the promise for new opportunity. The people of the kingdom look forward to a continuing, uninterrupted, reign of the monarchy. This is particularly true with a king and queen who are wise, kind, and beloved of their people.

For the citizens of the kingdom of an all-knowing, loving Heavenly Father, the announcement of the birth of the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh carried great awe and hope. Ancient prophets foretold of the mission of this Anointed One, this Child of Promise, this Messiah, this Saviour and Redeemer of the world, the baby Jesus Christ:

“For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace” (Isaiah 9:6).

Angels declared on the night of His birth: “Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.

“For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. . . .

“Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men” (Luke 2:10–11, 14).

The baby Jesus was full of promise and brought great hope to the world with His birth. And Jesus Christ certainly fulfilled His divine mission.

What was that mission specifically? Jesus Christ himself shared His mission:

“I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning” (3 Nephi 11:11).

“Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me.

“And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil” (3 Nephi 27:13–14).

He came to do the will of the Father.

In addition to fulfilling the will of our Father as expressed in the verses above, what else did Christ do?

He healed many whose bodies were diseased, broken, or dead.

He lifted the hands that hung down and strengthened the weak.

He cast out evil spirits and freed many from the bondage of sin.

He taught eternal truths to His followers.

And when the time came for Him to complete one of the most difficult parts of His mission, the agony of Gethsemane, the pain of crucifixion on Golgatha, and the victory over death through the Resurrection, He bravely stated to His followers: “the cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?” (John 18:11).

As disciples of Jesus Christ and members of His kingdom, are we following Christ’s example to drink the cup which our Heavenly Father has given us, individually, to do His will, even if what is asked of us to do is difficult? As you consider what gift you can give to Christ this year, I urge you to fulfill the mission Heavenly Father has given you.

At this season of the year, when we celebrate the birth of the baby Jesus, the Saviour of the world, we can have greater hope in our lives. Christ provided a perfect example for all mankind to follow as He bravely fulfilled the mission God sent Him to fulfill. Because of Him, we can truly express the words, “Joy to the world, the Lord is come; Let earth receive her King!”

I testify that Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, born an innocent baby like each one of us. He lived a perfect life. He was crucified and resurrected. He lives today and invites us all to come unto Him and He will heal us and change us if we trust in Him and follow Him.
