E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Acknowledgments

I am indebted to a number of people whose kindness and cooperation helped make this book possible and made it better. I wish to thank Ronald M. Mann for reviewing the manuscript and generously sharing his extensive knowledge about the Founding Fathers. The manuscript was also reviewed by Richard Vetterli, Robert S. Clark, Shawn D. Mitchell, and R. J. Snow, and the Columbus portion of the manuscript by De Lamar Jensen; to all of these I express my thanks for their helpful comments and suggestions.

My angel mother, Verna S. Clark, spent many long hours meticulously proofing the quoted material to assure accuracy. Her kind contribution puts me yet further in debt to her. I am also grateful to Clarence Felix, who expertly typed the manuscript and then patiently and cheerfully endured many a revision.

I am also indebted to the people at Deseret Book who worked with me and went the second mile in producing this book. Suzanne Brady's editorial expertise made the manuscript tighter and more readable, and Richard Erickson's art direction clothed the book in an attractive cover.

This book could not have been completed without the encouragement and support of my loving wife, Mila. To her and our delightful daughter, Christine, I owe more than I can repay.

Notwithstanding, however, the many who helped me with this book, for any errors that it may contain I remain solely responsible.

Writing this book effected an unexpected transformation in my perception of America's Founders. For so many years they had been for me revered but iconographic heroes whose accomplishments loomed larger-than-life. But as I studied their lives and words, my heroes were transformed into three-dimensional, flesh-and-blood people who had humanly struggled, wondered, and worried, but who had faced their adversity with profound faith in God and in his purposes for the work in which they were engaged. Along with this increased understanding came an increased gratitude for their sacrifices, made not just for themselves but for future generations.

Finally, I rejoice that God has sent prophets to establish Zion in this free land for the blessing of all nations — prophets like our beloved President Ezra Taft Benson. He has repeatedly emphasized the Lord's grand design in establishing America and our duty to preserve our freedom and build Zion. To President Benson, and for him, I am profoundly grateful.
