E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Prologue

The Quincentary and Beyond

Anniversaries are by nature a time of reflection, and so it is with the five-hundredth anniversary of Christopher Columbus's discovery of America. "The Columbus Quincentenary should be a time of contemplation," wrote the editor of a recent work chronicling a number of sweeping changes that have followed in the wake of Columbus's momentous voyage.fn According to another writer, with this "500th anniversary, we have an opportunity to pause and reflect on the significance of a milestone in human history that, however it may be interpreted from diverse points of view, must be considered a watershed in the history of our globe."fn So monumental was Columbus's discovery, in fact, that our reflection on it during its quincentenary is destined "to outlast its appointed year and, quite possibly, this decade."fn

For such an anniversary we would expect not only pensive contemplation but also jubilant celebration, especially after the gala bicentennial ceremonies observed by Americans commemorating the signing of the Declaration of Independence and the ratification of the Constitution. And celebration there surely has been, for "the quincentenary of the Columbus voyage [is] our nation's first-ever quincentenary of anything."fn But, as William F. Buckley pointed out, "It is at this point that we brace ourselves for the great shock of 1992,"fn for this celebration has been marked, and marred, by a vociferous dissent. "Increasingly," observed one writer, "there is a counterchorus" to the voices raised in praise of Columbus.fn And the controversy begins over the term traditionally used to describe what Columbus accomplished.

Did he really discover America? Not according to the National Council for Social Studies, which has asked teachers to abandon that term in teaching school children about Columbus.fn Nor according to the lead article in Newsweek's 1991 special issue on Columbus:

No, Columbus didn't discover America. Let's lay to rest that old notion right at the start. First of all, the verb's all wrong for our multicultural, interdependent, ultrasensitive modern world. "Discover" suggests that "we" went out and found a strange and unknown "them." . . . Then, too, it's pretty clear by now that Columbus was not the first outsider to set foot in the Western Hemisphere.fn

By this logic, "the notion of Columbus as a 'discoverer [is] deemed to be a form of Eurocentric theft of history from those who watched Columbus' drop anchor off their shores."fn

In a broad sense, what happened on the morning of October 12, 1492, when Columbus set foot on an island in the Bahamas was more than a discovery, as noted by John Noble Wilford: "To say without qualification that Columbus discovered America . . . is to accept the Eurocentric view." The "more cosmopolitan view of what happened in 1492," said Wilford, would be that expressed by historian J. H. Parry, who wrote that Columbus "established contact between two worlds, both already old."fn Columbus's acclaimed biographer Paolo Emilio Taviani made a similar point: "Encounter is more accurate than discovery," he said of Columbus's landing in the New World, "because it was not humanity discovering a new and deserted land but two portions of humanity, two worlds, coming together that morning."fn

Even so, Taviani continued to use freely the term discovery in describing Columbus's achievement, and with good reason. For, as other scholars explained, "to discover is to draw the veil. It is not to run into something and keep it to oneself. It is to push back the frontier of infinity and to pass the news on to posterity as part of its heritage"—which is precisely what Columbus did.fn The news that the returning Columbus brought back with him "drew back the veil that had concealed from each other the people of the two halves of the world."fn Accordingly, to argue that Columbus did not discover America because there were already people there "would make 'discovery' an almost useless term, by limiting it to uninhabited lands. It misses the point that discovery is not a matter of being in a place, but of getting to it, of establishing routes of access from somewhere else."fn And that is the critical distinction between Columbus's trip to America and previous visits by foreigners:

If others besides the indigenous people themselves preceded Columbus in finding America, and they almost certainly did, their imprint on history was negligible. They may have crossed the Ocean Sea, or Western Sea, as the Atlantic was then called. But they either failed to make their way back or left no account to inform and inspire succeeding generations.fn

Call what happened the "encounter" or the "contact," as fashion dictates, but the historical truth is that [Columbus] made known something that had been unknown — which is the definition of discovery.fn

So if the term discovery fails to describe everything that happened on October 12, 1492, it nevertheless captures the critical essence of why Columbus's landing so dramatically altered the course of history. Lehi himself, the prophetic forefather of the Indians (or Lamanites), spoke of the land his posterity would occupy as being "kept . . . from the knowledge of other nations" (2 Ne. 1:8) and would hardly have objected to the term discovery for what Columbus would accomplish.

But dispute over the term discovery is just the beginning of the controversy surrounding the Columbus Quincentenary. "A funny thing happened on the way to the quincentennial observation of America's 'discovery,'" wrote Garry Wills. "Columbus got mugged. This time the Indians were waiting for him. He comes now with an apologetic air — but not, for some, sufficiently apologetic. . . . He comes to be dishonored."fn Similarly, the New York Times reported that for the Columbus Quincentenary," around the country . . . American Indian groups are planning their own observances — but in protests, not parades."fn And they are joined by others who have denounced Columbus as responsible for the cruelty and despoliation that followed him in much of America.fn Newsweek observed:

Slavery, conquest, disease and humiliation — these are the legacy of Columbus, in the eyes of some people today. They see nothing to celebrate in the 500th anniversary of his crossing; instead, they think it should be an occasion for protest — or at best a vast, doleful silence.fn

The Trouble with History

Such controversy may be confusing to those of us who thought we were quite sure of the story of Columbus. "Few stories in history," noted Wilford, "are more familiar than the one of Columbus sailing west for the other side of the Old World and finding a world then unknown to Europe: the New World." Nevertheless, Wilford continued:

The familiarity of the story is deceptive, leaving the impression that it is firmly grounded in fact and that historians agree on those facts and their interpretation. Nothing could be further from the truth. The history of Columbus is frustratingly incomplete. . . .

Leopold von Ranke admonished his fellow scholars to write history "wie es eigentlich gewesen" — how it really was. But this ideal, as Bernard Lewis of Princeton University says, "is neither as simple nor as easy as it sounds." Lewis was speaking of the profession of history in general, but the Columbus story presents a textbook example of the problems. History has given us many Columbuses and left us an incomplete record from which to reconstruct the Columbus who really was.

Part of the problem is the understandable consequence of the passage of time. Although the record of Columbus by contemporaries is more substantial than that for any other fifteenth-century explorer, surviving accounts are often difficult to assess from this temporal distance. Whose version is to be trusted? Too many important documents either are missing or exist only in extracts. These lacunae are an invitation to confusion: Hagiographers can fill the gaps in ways that magnify their hero. Detractors can make a case diminishing the man. Who is closer to the truth? Serious historians can honestly arrive at widely differing interpretations of motives and actions, and so they have.

Much of the confusion is traceable to Columbus himself. . . . He was secretive. . . .

But the story of Columbus is incomplete not only because of missing or conflicting documentation. It is incomplete also because that is the nature of history.fn

Indeed, such is the nature of even more recent history, such as the founding of the United States. "Our recurrent urge to look again at our past — to pose new questions to it, to try making sense of what we have been and what we have become — is especially strong in this season of national anniversary," wrote noted scholar Ralph Lerner at the time of the bicentennial of the Constitution of the United States. "Yet, wanting more than ever to see into the past, more than ever our vision is obscured."fn

How pervasive the problem of history is can be seen from statements made by Will and Ariel Durant, who, after completing their multivolume work, The Story of Civilization, wrote: "Our knowledge of any past event is always incomplete, probably inaccurate. . . . We must operate with partial knowledge, and be provisionally content with probabilities."fn Hence, the problem is inherent in the very nature of history, as historian Alexandre Koyre observed:

The past, exactly because it is the past, forever remains inaccessible to us: it vanishes, it is no longer there; we cannot touch it, and it is only starting from its vestiges and its traces, its still-present remains — books, monuments, documents which have escaped the destructive action of time and men — that we try to reconstruct it. But objective history — the history that men make and undergo — cares very little about the history of historians; it lets things without value subsist and destroys pitilessly the most important documents.fn

So intrinsic and intractable is this problem, it would seem that nothing short of supernatural means could provide a solution — which was precisely the point of a story by the famed novelist Henry James. In the words of Harvard historian Simon Schama:

In The Sense of the Past, Henry James has the young historian Ralph Pendrel, the improbable author of "An Essay in the Aid of Reading History," reflect that "recovering the lost was at all events . . . much like entering the enemy's lines to get back one's dead for burial." That this novel remained unfinished at James's death should not surprise us. For it sets out the habitually insoluble quandary of the historian: how to live in two worlds at once; how to take the broken, mutilated remains of something or someone from the "enemy lines" of the documented past and restore it to life or give it a decent interment in our own time and place.

Pendrel yearns for the kind of communion with the dead denied him by the customary practises of his profession. "He wanted the unimaginable accidents, the little notes of truth for which the common lens of history, however the scowling muse might bury her nose, was not sufficiently fine. He wanted evidence of a sort for which there had never been documents enough or for which documents mainly, however multiplied, would never be enough." And he succeeds only through a metaphysical mystery by which, in the year 1910, he walks through the front door of the London house left to him in legacy and enters 1820.

Without this convenient epiphany, historians are left forever chasing shadows, painfully aware of their inability ever to reconstruct a dead world in its completeness, however thorough or revealing their documentation. Of course, they make do with other work: the business of formulating problems, of supplying explanations about cause and effect. But the certainty of such answers always remains contingent on their unavoidable remoteness from their subjects. We are doomed to be forever hailing someone who has just gone around the corner and out of earshot.fn

A Book about and beyond History

Are we so doomed who reflect on the history of America since Columbus's discovery? Without some clarifying and corrective supernatural means, we indeed would be, conceded David Henige, who has recently published the most complete critical study ever made of the text of Columbus's journal of his first voyage: "For those deprived of revelation, the truth can be reached only by dialectic and interrogation."fn

In our day the providential means to understand the truth about that history — what really happened and why it happened — is the Book of Mormon. While that book is itself history, it also contains express prophecies — history in reverse, one might say — about the rise of latter-day America, beginning with its European discovery by a man upon whom "the Spirit of God . . . came down and wrought." (1 Ne. 13:12.) That discovery is but the first in a series of divinely directed events in which the Spirit of God successively inspires and strengthens the American colonists and the Founding Fathers — all of which finds impressive corroboration in traditional historical sources, which document that the key participants in the discovery and rise of America were keenly aware, as they themselves report, that they were being directed and assisted by God.

But the sweeping prophetic vista of America given by the Book of Mormon goes quite beyond 1830, the year the book was published; it extends to a future time by providing specific and descriptive warnings about wicked conditions that would prevail in latter-day America. Those warnings, as Hugh Nibley emphasized, seemed worlds away from Joseph Smith's America of the early nineteenth century, but they do fit our own dayfn — striking evidence of the inspired prophetic nature of the Book of Mormon text. The most troubling thing about the wickedness described in the Book of Mormon and enacted about us in America today is that it evokes the ancient but continuing decree pronounced by God upon this land, as recorded in the Book of Mormon: those who dwell on this the choicest of all lands must serve God or incur his wrath and be swept off when their iniquity reaches a fullness. The colonists and the Founders likewise believed — and expressly warned — that America would survive only if it continued to obey the laws of God.

Equally clear in Book of Mormon prophecy is the reason why God has so conspicuously intervened in the discovery and the establishment of America. His intent was to prepare a place where he could establish his latter-day kingdom for the blessing of all nations in fulfillment of the ancient Abrahamic covenant. And at the center of that kingdom would be an American Zion, a holy city located, as we learn in other revelation, on the very same continent where the ancient city of Enoch's Zion once stood before its literal translation to heavenly realms, from where it will one day return to join the latter-day Zion on American soil. Remarkably, this divinely appointed destiny for America was also suggested in statements made by God's agents in discovering, colonizing, and liberating America. They somehow sensed that their labors were not for America alone but for the benefit of all mankind and that the United States of America was to serve as a kind of city that God had set upon a hill to shine forth to the rest of the world. Indeed, the man who set it all in motion, Columbus, ardently believed that his discovery had begun a sequence of prophesied events that would culminate in the glorious, triumphant reign of the kingdom of God on earth.

To build latter-day Zion and to preserve America as a bastion of liberty is the call of prophets, both ancient and modern, to our generation. If we are to accomplish these tasks we need, as President Ezra Taft Benson has counseled, not only the prophetic guidance of the Book of Mormon but also the powerful lessons taught by the lives of those who have preceded us in the rise of America.fn In President Benson's own words, we must "prize the treasures" of freedom we have, we must "retain the same quality of faith in God that our founders manifested," and we must "teach our children about the spiritual roots of this great nation."fn To that end this book is dedicated.
