E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Chapter 1

A Fractured Europe and a Hidden America

The Book of Mormon prophecies concerning the latter-day rise of America begin with a look at a highly fractured medieval Europe, as the prophet Nephi reported of his vision some six centuries before Christ:

And it came to pass that the angel spake unto me, saying: Look! And I looked and beheld many nations and kingdoms. . . .

And he said unto me: These are the nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles. (1 Ne. 13:1-3.)

Meanwhile, across the ocean lay a vast, unspoiled continent, hidden away from the knowledge of Europe and the other high civilizations. This unique land was being divinely reserved for those whom God would bring:

I, Lehi, prophesy according to the workings of the Spirit which is in me, that there shall none come into this land save they shall be brought by the hand of the Lord.

Wherefore, this land is consecrated unto him whom he shall bring. . . .

And behold, it is wisdom that this land should be kept as yet from the knowledge of other nations; for behold, many nations would overrun the land, that there would be no place for an inheritance. (2 Ne. 1:6-8.)

European Fragmentation and Its Consequences

The fragmentation of Europe stood in sharp contrast to the former political unity of the Roman empire.

The Roman Empire, which stretched from England to Constantinople, brought a certain unity. But after the fall of Rome the organization collapsed and the continent fell into largely tribal darkness. It was the spread of Christianity and the medieval Holy Roman Empire (under mostly Germanic kings) which gave the peoples of this land a first sense of European identity. They fought about everything, especially about the rites and dogmas of religion, though this was often the excuse and justification for wars of conquest and dominion by monarchs on secular or sacred thrones. (Lewis, Europe, 22.)

Physical security was . . . the most pressing problem. . . . Beside the original barbarian invasions of the Empire, disorder throve on long-continuing incursions . . . [by] Muslims . . . Huns . . . Scandinavians . . . and internecine strife induced by political fragmentation. (T. Parsons, as cited in Miller, Painted in Blood, 6.)

[During this] period of disintegration and political anarchy several traditions and interests operated at . . . cross purposes. There were feudal kings engaged in continual conflict with their feudal vassals who often held larger fiefs and wielded more power. There were feudal principalities, both lay and clerical. . . . There were also city-states that sometimes combined in powerful organizations such as the Lombardy and Hanseatic leagues. And in opposition to the particularist interests of the preceding three groups, there was the striving for a united Latin Christendom headed by the Pope in Rome or by a "Roman" emperor as the successor to Charlemagne and his predecessors. This complex of conflicting interests produced an infinite variety of constantly changing alliances and alignments at all levels of political life. (Stavrianos, World Since 1500, 70.)

The political fragmentation proved economically significant in encouraging competition and capitalism and thus the ensuing maritime activity and exploration by European nations — a fact best appreciated in contrast with the situation in China:

The fateful expansion of Europe was largely the product of [such] historical forces [as] . . . technological progress, the population increase, the resulting growth in economic productivity and resources, the emergence of dynamic capitalism, and the rise of the national monarchies. . . .

The significance of [the] unique West European complex of interests, institutions, and traditions is pointed up by the remarkable history of the famous maritime expeditions sent out from China during the Ming period. Between 1405 and 1433, seven ventures were made under the superintendency of the chief court eunuch, a certain Cheng Ho. The expeditions were startling in their magnitude and in their achievements. The first, composed of 62 ships, carried 28,000 men. The average ship had a beam of 150 feet and a length of 370 feet, but the largest were 180 feet wide and 444 feet long. They were veritable floating palaces compared to Columbus' little flagship, the Santa Maria, which was 120 feet long and 25 feet wide. And the Santa Maria was twice as large as Columbus' two other ships, the Pinta and the Nina. The Chinese expeditions were impressive in performance as well as in size. They sailed around Southeast Asia to India; some went on to Aden and the head of the Persian Gulf; while individual ships entered ports on the east coast of Africa. During this time, it should be recalled, the Portuguese were only beginning to feel their way down the coast of Africa, not reaching Cape Verde until 1445.

And yet these remarkable Chinese expeditions were suddenly halted by imperial fiat in 1433. Why they were halted remains as much a mystery as why they were started in the first place. But the significant point here is that such a cessation would have been utterly inconceivable in Europe. There was no European counterpart to the Chinese emperor who could and did issue orders binding on his entire realm. Instead, there were rival national monarchies that were competing in overseas ventures, and there was no imperial authority to prevent them from doing so. (Stavrianos, World Since 1500, 73-74.)

Commercial competition in overseas trading ventures also assured that once Columbus opened the door to the New World, that door would remain forever open.

Before any real commercial interest existed, all voyages over [the Atlantic] ocean — like those of the Vikings, for instance — were written on water and lost in the infinite silence of the shackled ages. . . .

What made Columbus possible? Why was it that, as soon as he opened the Atlantic, that ocean became the most profitable trade route for European vessels? Recall what a quantity of gold, silver, pearls, slaves, tobacco, brazilwood — the riches of the time — was immediately being transported. . . . All of this business, as well as the events that followed the initial bustle, can be seen as the masterpiece of the mercantile middle class, the Renaissance's enterprising class of burghers. In 1500, the world was already oriented toward the merchant. Merchants enabled each nation to make a profit from seagoing explorations and put the discoveries to work for an already mature and powerful bourgeoisie, the motor behind the Great Expeditions. (Arciniegas, America in Europe, 6-7.)

The European economy was poised to take advantage of the expanded trade that a direct ocean route to Asia would afford. (Phillips and Phillips, Worlds of Christopher Columbus, 273.)

For it was Asia that Europeans deemed to be the land mass directly across the Ocean Sea, and it was the prospect of tapping the fabled Asiatic wealth that Columbus held out as the principal inducement to the Spanish sovereigns, who knew nothing of any "New World."

The Indies, meaning most of Eastern Asia — India, Burma, China, Japan, the Moluccas and Indonesia — cast a spell over European imagination in the fifteenth century. These were lands of vast wealth in gold, silver and precious stones, in silk and fine cotton, in spices, drugs and perfumes, which in small quantities were taken by caravans across Asia to Constantinople or to Levantine ports, thence distributed through Europe by ship, wagon and pack train. The cost of handling by so many middlemen and over such long and complicated routes made the prices of Oriental goods to the European consumer exorbitant; yet the increase of wealth and luxury in European cities kept the demand far ahead of the supply. That is why the kings of Portugal made repeated attempts to get around Africa to India, where Oriental products could be purchased cheap. Columbus decided that the African route was the hard way to the Indies; he proposed to find a bold but easy way, due west by sea. . . .

We must constantly keep in mind that nobody in Europe had any conception or suspicion of the existence of the continent that we call America. (Morison, Christopher Columbus, Mariner, 15-16.)

The Land Hidden Away

The likelihood of finding concealed lands of any value was expressly dismissed by the commission of scholars who advised Isabella against backing Columbus.

The experts advised the Queen that the West-to-the-Orient project "rested on weak foundations"; that its attainment seemed "uncertain and impossible to any educated person"; that the proposed voyage to Asia would require three years' time, even if the ships could return, which they judged doubtful; that the Ocean was infinitely larger than Columbus supposed, and much of it unnavigable. And finally, it was not likely that God would have allowed any uninhabited lands of real value to be concealed from His people for so many centuries. (Morison, Christopher Columbus, Mariner, 27.)

If the wisdom of the world discounted the possibility of hidden lands, a higher wisdom had hidden America from the knowledge of other nations. (2 Ne. 1:8.) In the words of President Ezra Taft Benson:

God deliberately kept the American continent hidden until the Holy Roman Empire had broken up and the various nations had established themselves as independent kingdoms. Keeping America hidden until this time was no accident. (This Nation Shall Endure, 153.)

America was hidden, said Lehi, because otherwise "many nations would overrun the land, that there would be no place for an inheritance." (2 Ne. 1:8.) Lehi's words cannot be fully appreciated without a brief glimpse at what Columbus would open up to the view of Europeans coming from the Old World patchwork of closed-in "kingdoms and nations."

Everywhere at home, the visions of Europeans fell upon horizons closed in by known land marks or by defined frontiers — not only at the remote marches across which total strangers held sway but also at the nearby boundaries of counties, baronies, estates, communes — all barred off, unavailable, already appropriated by others. Comfort in closeness offset the confining quality of narrow boundaries. Sight of the neighboring village was a reminder both of the limits of this one and of the proximity of the next. . . .

Lands of closed horizons narrowed ambitions, so that thoughts ran within circumscribed bounds. (Handlin, Liberty in America, 23-24.)

The New World [was] plainly different . . . , rich and large and mysterious, a place of new peoples, new vistas, new treasures, new species. . . . We can scarcely imagine what this could have meant at the time, but Europeans must have adjusted to it with as much bewilderment as fascination, as much dread as curiosity, as much trepidation as covetousness; it was not long before it came to take on mythic proportions as the land of the New, the Other, the Unknown, the Possible. It was for some a Paradise . . . where there was thought to be innocence and fertility and abundance such as Europe had never known, and where anyone might find regeneration and salvation. It was for others the land of opportunity, a new frontier from which to escape the sickness and violence and corruption and repression that made up daily life for the large majority of Europeans. It was for still others a treasure trove of gold and silver and who knows what manner of riches, where even the poor and the uncultured might become wealthy. . . . And it was for some a vast and mysterious land of Nature, raw and powerful, strange and fearful, replete with wondrous sights and creatures, dangerous, plentiful, and irresistible.

Each of these visions, these concepts, was new to the European psyche — nothing like the Discovery had ever happened before, nothing would again — but as they took hold over the decades, and the centuries, they came to act as an inevitable impetus toward the west. And each was understood to be, at least on some level, the gift of the celebrated Spanish admiral [Columbus], for as even the English explorer Humphrey Gilbert recognized, "by him it was in a manner first discovered, made knowen, and profitably communicated unto the Christian world, in the yeere of our Lord 1492." (Sale, Conquest of Paradise, 234-35.)

The French observer Alexis de Tocqueville described the timely discovery of a land "kept in reserve by the Deity," reminiscent of Lehi's words .

When the earth was given to men by the Creator, the earth was inexhaustible; but men were weak and ignorant, and when they had learned to take advantage of the treasures which it contained, they already covered its surface and were soon obliged to earn by the sword an asylum for repose and freedom. Just then North America was discovered, as if it had been kept in reserve by the Deity and had just risen from beneath the waters of the Deluge. (Democracy in America [I:XVII], 1:291.)

Tocqueville had observed as a visitor in 1831-32 what the New England colonists had felt as participants in America's settlement: that this vast land had indeed been held in reserve for them by God. In 1673 Urian Oakes, soon to be president of Harvard College, prepared a treatise that was frequently cited in later sermons.

There [was] an Allotment, in the Counsel of God, of these Ends of the Earth unto this part of our Nation for the Bounds of their Habitation. This wilderness was the place which God decreed [for] you. And what he thought in his heart, he hath fulfilled with his hand, in bringing you to this good Land, and providing wonderfully for your well-being here. (Stout, New England Soul, 73.)

According to Tocqueville,

The chief circumstance which has favored the establishment and the maintenance of a democratic republic in the United States is the nature of the territory that the Americans inhabit. Their ancestors gave them the love of equality and of freedom; but God himself gave them the means of remaining equal and free, by placing them upon a boundless continent. . . .

In what part of human history can be found anything similar to what is passing before our eyes in North America? The celebrated communities of antiquity were all founded in the midst of hostile nations, which they were obliged to subjugate before they could flourish in their place. . . . But North America was inhabited only by wandering tribes, who had no thought of profiting by the natural riches of the soil; that vast country was still, properly speaking, an empty continent, a desert land awaiting its inhabitants. (Democracy in America [I:XVII], 1:290-91.)

Time for the Discovery

The vast majority of the future inhabitants of America were in the premortal existence awaiting Columbus's inspired discovery of the choice land that would be their home, the same land that hid an inspired ancient record. Elder Orson Hyde declared:

The time had arrived for the discovery to be made. Millions of spirits in the spirit world, who had not yet taken bodies, nor passed the ordeal, in earthly tenements, of a residence on this benighted globe, were waiting with anxious eye for the area of heaven-born intelligences to be extended or opened to the gaze of mortal eye, that there might be room for them to come down and play their part, in their time and in their season, on the stage of human life. . . . Another important reason why the discovery should be made: The history and record of a fallen people, containing light from the spirit land, and truth from heaven, were buried in the soil of the Western Continent; and although engraven on golden leaves in a strange and unknown tongue, still they must come forth, being among the secret things that should be revealed. (Journal of Discourses, 7:108.)

That ancient record had been hidden by Moroni, lone survivor of the once-great Nephite nation. As a fugitive prophet facing the most dire of circumstances (Morm. 8:1-13; Moro. 1:1-4), Moroni had completed the record and sealed it up to come forth later by the power of God. His tremendous personal sacrifice in preserving the record that would be of such benefit to America foreshadowed similar personal sacrifice by individuals designated by God to labor for the discovery and establishment of America — all of which would proceed, according to Elder Hyde, under the direction of that same Moroni, who "presides over the destinies of America, and feels a lively interest in all our doings." (Journal of Discourses, 6:368.) Having been kept in reserve for so long, the land over which Moroni presided was finally ready to be unveiled by Christopher Columbus. In the words of Paolo Emilio Taviani:

The most memorable undertakings of the Norse in the northwest Atlantic had no lasting effect on the history of humankind. The American mainland remained wrapped in mystery. That veil of mystery was torn asunder only by the genius, tenacity, and faith of Christopher Columbus. (Columbus, 261-62.)

According to Columbus's contemporary, Bartolome de Las Casas,

The Admiral [Columbus] was the first to open the gates of that ocean which had been closed for so many thousands of years before. (Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 247.)

Las Casas's words echo those written by Columbus himself in recording the words spoken to him by a heavenly voice on his final voyage:

Of those barriers of the Ocean Sea, which were closed with such mighty chains, He [God] hath given thee the keys. (Morison, ed., Journals and Other Documents, 378.)

But before Columbus's discovery, in his own words ,

[The] land, until then, remained concealed. (Watts, "Prophecy and Discovery," 102, n.61)

Concealed not by chance, thought Columbus, but by divine design:

The secret of the Ocean Sea had not been penetrated earlier because God wanted it hidden until He was ready. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 63.)
