E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Chapter 2

Columbus and the Discovery of America

Nephi's vision of the latter days at first encompasses the broad picture of medieval Europe, but suddenly the focus narrows to one man, whose inspired and intrepid action would irrevocably alter everything:

I looked and beheld a man among the Gentiles, who was separated from the seed of my brethren by the many waters; and I beheld the Spirit of God, that it came down and wrought upon the man; and he went forth upon the many waters, even unto the seed of my brethren, who were in the promised land. (1 Ne. 13:12.)

Columbus as Foreordained Fulfiller of Prophecy

Nephi's prophetic vision of Columbus's voyage of discovery some two millennia before the fact implies that Columbus was foreordained to his mission (the concept of foreordination expressly occurs elsewhere in Nephi's same vision; see 1 Ne. 14:18-25). That Columbus believed that he himself had been foreordained is indicated in his own writings, particularly in a passage he included in a remarkable compilation he made called the Book of Prophecies.

[Columbus][believe[d] that he was predestined. . .[.[I]n the Book of Prophecies [he included] . . . a prophetic passage taken from . . . a popular devotional work attributed to St. Augustine,[evok[ing] the inevitability of [his] personal destiny. . . . "Before you formed me in the belly, you knew me, and before I left the womb, whatever pleased you was preordained for me. And those things that concerned me were written in your book, in the secret of your counsel." (Watts, "Prophecy and Discovery," 94; and see West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 141.)

One of the most striking aspects of the life of Christopher Columbus was his self-awareness as a man of destiny. He viewed himself as the chosen and appointed messenger of God, predestined to open the way for evangelization and colonization of lands newly discovered by himself on behalf of the household of God. . . . Columbus's self-awareness as a man of destiny appears everywhere in his writings. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 8.)

Columbus . . . believed that the Holy Spirit had spoken to him, saying that his name would be proclaimed throughout the world. He does not specify when or where this happened, only that it was "in my youth." In his mind, he connected it to his success in discovering the New World. (West and Kling, Libro de las Perofecias, 53-54.)

Columbus believed that his voyages had fulfilled not only that prophecy given to him but also ancient prophecies spoken by the holy prophets — a remarkable fact in light of Nephi's ancient prophecy about Columbus. In a letter written to the Spanish sovereigns, which he included in his Book of Prophecies, Columbus wrote:

The Lord purposed that there should be something clearly miraculous in this matter of the voyage to the Indies. . . . I spent seven years here in your royal court discussing this subject with the leading persons in all the learned arts, and their conclusion was that all was in vain. That was the end, and they gave it up. But afterwards it all turned out just as our redeemer Jesus Christ had said, and as he had spoken earlier by the mouth of his holy prophets. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 107.)

Of this matter, Columbus spoke often.

Columbus frequently insisted that his "enterprise of the Indies" was the fulfillment of prophecy. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 18.)

Man of Mystery

But as with so many fulfillers of prophecy and agents of the divine will, Columbus has for many historians been an enigma:

A certain mystery — almost suspicion — hovers around the figure of Columbus from the very beginning. Everything is disputed — his character, his achievement, his development, the events of his life, and his origin. (Wassermann, Columbus, 4.)

Mystery surrounds him. . . . No one knows who he is, where he comes from, what he actually wishes to do. (Madariaga, Christopher Columbus, 16; and see 19.)

To paraphrase Winston Churchill, Columbus is a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma. At almost every turn of the maze there is an obstruction. (Fuson, Log of Christopher Columbus, 13; and see Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, x; and Granzotto, Christopher Columbus, 282.)

That such mystery still shrouds Columbus and his enterprise is amazing, given the amount of documentation by and about him that has survived:

We are extremely well informed about Columbus. No contemporary of humble origins or maritime vocation has left so many traces in the records, or so much writing of his own. (Fernandez-Armesto, Columbus, ix.)

Fernandez-Armesto used that documentation to, in his words, "defy" the "mystifying tradition" prevalent in many treatments of Columbus but expressly conceded that his portrait of the Discoverer is only one of several possible, for "it would no doubt be possible to reconstruct the image, from the same evidence, in other ways." (Columbus, viii.) Part of the problem has simply to do with the nature of history and historical sources, but that still does not fully explain why so many scholars and historians have reached the same conclusion about Columbus as a man of mystery. One explanation has been offered by Hugh Nibley:

No man knows [Columbus's] history, though his is one of the most richly documented careers on record. Why should this be? The parallel case of Joseph Smith at once springs to mind, and the explanation of the mystery may well be the same. For as Madariaga points out, most of what is mysterious and contradictory in the story of Columbus comes from the refusal of the experts to believe what he tells them. They say he was an outrageous liar when he was actually telling the truth! (Collected Works, 8:50.)

Columbus and the Search for Gold

Among the "mysterious" facets of Columbus's life is the principal motive in his great venture. Was it gold? According to the scholar widely considered to be Columbus's greatest living biographer, Paolo Emilio Taviani, gold was for Columbus merely a means to an end:

It must be repeated that his continuous, obsessive search for gold and riches was always directed toward a very definite goal: a crusade to reconquer the Holy Sepulcher. (Columbus, 255.)

Acclaimed American biographer Samuel Eliot Morison also emphasized that Columbus's overriding purpose was not pecuniary:

This conviction that God destined him to be an instrument for spreading the faith was far more potent than the desire to win glory, wealth and worldly honors. (Admiral of the Ocean Sea, 47.)

This assessment of Columbus's motive is borne out by his own writings, particularly his Book of Prophecies, as noted by its translator:

We cannot deny that the Admiral wanted a comfortable income for himself and his heirs, but the primary motivation in his quest for gold was spiritual. . . . Gold had religious value as it was the means by which he could carry out his divine mission. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 69; and see Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 230.)

Man with a Mission

Columbus was, if anything, a man with a divine mission. His son Ferdinand wrote of him:

The Admiral was chosen for his great work by Our Lord, . . . [and] his affairs were directed by a secret Providence. (Keen, ed., Life of the Admiral Christopher Columbus by His Son, 3-4.)

Las Casas, who knew Columbus and had access to his papers, observed:

From all sides and in many ways did God give Columbus motives and causes that he should not doubt to undertake so great a deed. . . . God seemed to move on him by constant pushes. (Madariaga, Christopher Columbus, 88-89.)

In all aspects of his life, Columbus perceived the hand of God guiding him.

Above all he was deeply religious. . . . He was fully assured that he was under the special care of the Almighty; again and again, he declares that God always guided and guarded him, and in his very trials, he saw the hand of Providence so forming his character and so shaping his ends that he might be the better fitted to fulfil that purpose which Heaven had decreed that he should fulfil. (Jane, ed., Four Voyages of Columbus, 1:cviii.)

A sense of a mission entrusted to him from on high drives and illumines him. . . . No one can fail to feel that he is possessed of an idea, bent on an action, bearer of a message, entrusted with a mission. (Madariaga, Christopher Columbus, 16.)

Columbus's awareness of divine assistance was reflected in his constant religious devotions, and his sense of mission helped him surmount tremendous obstacles, as explained by Morison:

Persistent to the point of stubbornness, and so confident of being right that Las Casas said he seemed to know the world as if it were his own chamber, Columbus believed that God willed him to discover this short route to the Indies, therefore he must succeed. . . . He daily read the Divine Office like a priest, observed faithfully all church festivals, cultivated the company of ecclesiastics, headed every letter with a little cross, and often concluded with the prayer

Jesus et Maria

Jesus and Mary

Sint nobis in via

Be with us on the way

Confident of being God's instrument, Columbus met the hardships of the sea with stoic endurance. (Great Explorers, 390-91.)

Columbus was a Man with a Mission. . . . He was Man alone with God against human stupidity and depravity, against greedy conquistadors, cowardly seamen, even against nature and the sea.

Always with God, though; in that his biographers were right; for God is with men who for a good cause put their trust in Him. Men may doubt this, but there can be no doubt that the faith of Columbus was genuine and sincere, and that his frequent communion with forces unseen was a vital element in his achievement. (Morison, Admiral of the Ocean Sea, 46-47; and see Taviani, Columbus, 256.)

Columbus's Motivation and Preparation for His Mission

Increasingly popular is a trend among scholars to argue that it was only later in life, years after his voyage of discovery, that Columbus developed the idea that he had been God's agent and the recipient of divine inspiration. For example, according to Fernandez-Armesto,

[There was] a 'promotional' image which Columbus projected in his own writings in the latter part of his life. His aim was not only to dramatize his story and to emphasize the unique basis of his claims to material rewards but also to support a broader picture of himself as a providential agent. (Columbus, x; and see Granzotto, Christopher Columbus, 246.)

But the trend to discount or dismiss the spiritual aspect of Columbus's motivation is inaccurate, as Pauline Moffitt Watts explained:

[Columbus's] self image [as God's messenger] has proved discomfiting to Columbus scholars. It is more often than not treated as the product of his unhappy, waning years, an unfortunate but inevitable surfacing of the deposits of medieval religious sentiment in an otherwise modern prototype. But to deprive Columbus of his spiritual identity misrepresents him and his culture. There was an important religious dimension to Columbus's understanding of the genesis and historical significance of his enterprise. (Bedini, ed., Columbus Encyclopedia, 2:651.)

To assess Columbus's religious motivation, we must consider a document he prepared years after his first voyage, as Wilford explained:

A remarkable document, prepared after his third voyage but long ignored by historians, reveals the depth and passion of Columbus's belief that he was God's messenger. This work can be read as compelling evidence that his spirituality was the force motivating his vision and sustaining him through years of ridicule, hardship, and achievement. . . .

The manuscript is now known as Libro de las profecias, the Book of Prophecies, and it resides in the Biblioteca Colombina at Seville. The first full translation of it into English has just been completed by Delno C. West. . . .

Historians have ignored the Book of Prophecies, West charges, because they are "curiously reluctant to admit that the first American hero was influenced by prophetic ideas." . . .

Columbus opened the Book of Prophecies with a letter to the king and queen. He described how God had favored him with "the spirit of intelligence." . . . He also wrote that neither reason nor mathematics nor maps of the world had enabled him to fulfill the Enterprise of the Indies. Instead, he firmly believed it had been God's will:

"With a hand that could be felt, the Lord opened my mind to the fact that it would be possible to sail from here to the Indies, and he opened my will to desire to accomplish the project. This was the fire that burned within me when I came to visit Your Highnesses. All who found out about my project denounced it with laughter and ridiculed me. . . . Only Your Majesties had faith and perseverance. Who can doubt that this fire was not merely mine, but also of the Holy Spirit who encouraged me with a radiance of marvelous illumination. . . ."

Some of this is a rehearsal of familiar Columbus expressions: the ridicule and rejection never to be forgotten, and his undying gratitude to the king and queen. But Columbus was also claiming, more explicitly than before, divine origins for his vision of sailing west to the Indies and suggesting that this was a critical element at the time of his negotiations with the monarchs. The Book of Prophecies calls for a serious reassessment of the decisive factors, spiritual as well as rational, motivating the enterprise that led to the discovery of America. . . .

Columbus acknowledged that critics might think him "someone speaking presumptuously out of ignorance." In his defense, he called attention to the words from Matthew (11:25): "O Lord . . . because thou has hid these things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them to little ones." God's messenger left no room for doubt that he had been so favored. . . .

In [the] view [of Pauline Moffitt Watts], based on a study of the book and other aspects of Columbus's life, his spiritual dimension was no latter-day manifestation but was "a major stimulus for his voyages." His apocalypticism, Watts concludes, "must be recognized as inseparable from his geography and cosmology if a balanced picture of the historical significance of his Enterprise of the Indies is to be achieved."

West takes a similar position:

"Explorers do not go forth and probe about. They search for definite objects which they believe to exist based on the geographic information they have. Such information can be empirical or nonempirical. Columbus had what we would call a 'spiritual map' in his mind as well as a physical map when he undertook each of his four voyages. The 'spiritual map' included those imagined areas of the world mentioned in the Scriptures either lost after antiquity, and/or predicted to be found in the 'last days' of the history of the world."

But when did Columbus form his spiritual map? If this was indeed decisive in mounting his venture, it must be established that he was thinking along such lines before 1492. (Mysterious History of Columbus, 217-20, 226-27.)

How can that proposition be established? By consulting the numerous marginal notes made by Columbus in books that he owned and read long before 1492 — notes too long overlooked by scholars, Delno C. West has insisted. (Bedini, ed., Christopher Columbus Encyclopedia, 2:748.) What the marginal notes demonstrate, he has argued, is that the ideas expressed in the Book of Prophecies were developed by Columbus years before his voyage of discovery.

There can be little doubt that Columbus's systematic study of Bible history and prophecies began at least as early as 1481, concurrently to forming his great plan. The Libro de las profecias [Book of Prophecies] of 1501-2 was but one further elaboration of the Admiral's studies of the Bible and church theologians. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 91-92.)

Some of Columbus's writings made years before the first voyage anticipated his Book of Prophecies:

Columbus made a practice of writing extensive notes in the margins and blank pages of books he was studying. One of these books was a copy of Historia Rerum Ubique Gestarum, written by Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini (Pope Pius II) and printed in 1477. Four postilles, or marginal notes, found there indicate to West that, when he was only thirty years old, Columbus's "use of the Bible and his plan for a voyage of discovery are already discernible." . . .

Taken together, West concludes, the four postilles "form an exact and complete outline of the plan that was executed in 1501-1502 in the compilation of the Libro de las profecias." Thus, the postilles and the Book of Prophecies, he says, "serve as bookends around his mind and his discovery." (Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 217-20, 226-28; and see Lyon, "Search for Columbus," 30-34.)

Accordingly, said West,

Christopher Columbus was a man with a vision. The vision came first, long before it reached fulfillment in the discovery. . . . Only after long years of single-minded dedication came at last a discovery. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 2.)

And, it should be noted, only after years of divinely directed preparation. But divine direction sometimes comes disguised:

In May 1476, in his twenty-fifth year, came the adventure that changed the course of Christopher's life. Genoa organized an armed convoy to carry a valuable cargo to Northern Europe, and in this convoy Christopher sailed as seaman in a Flemish vessel named Bechalla. On August 13, when it had passed the Strait of Gibraltar and was off the southern coast of Portugal, the fleet was attacked by a French task force. The battle raged all day, and by nightfall three Genoese ships and four of the enemy's had gone down. Bechalla was one of the casualties. Christopher, though wounded, managed to grasp a floating sweep and, by alternately kicking it ahead and resting on it, reached the shore six miles distant. The people of Lagos, near which he landed, treated him kindly, and on learning that his younger brother Bartholomew was living at Lisbon, sent him thither as soon as he could travel.

That was one of the best things that could have happened to Christopher Columbus. (Morison, Christopher Columbus, Mariner, 7-8.)

How so? Because Portugal was the most progressive maritime kingdom in Europe, bustling with sailors and mapmakers anxiously pushing forward the frontiers of exploration. In time Columbus came to recognize the hand of Providence in this near-tragedy that took him off course from his ship's destination and placed him squarely on course for his life's mission.

[Columbus] later wrote about his fortunate arrival on the Portuguese coast in a letter of May 1505 to King Ferdinand of Spain: "The Lord our God miraculously sent me here so I could serve Your Highness; I say miraculously because I landed in Portugal." Miraculously and landed — the first used twice — clearly and unequivocally indicate how the future admiral arrived unexpectedly on the Portuguese coast under lucky circumstances. Thus, 13 August 1476 was a memorable day in Columbus's life.

The believer sees in the shipwreck of the Genoese sailor on the coast of Lagos the hand of Divine Providence. (Taviani, Columbus, 15.)

Divine inspiration — in answer to Columbus's own prayers — further assisted him in acquiring all the diverse skills necessary to carry out his enterprise, as he himself later attested in a letter he wrote to the Spanish sovereigns:

At a very early age I began to navigate upon the seas, which I have continued to this day. Mine is a calling that inclines those who pursue it to desire to understand the world's secrets. Such has been my interest for more than forty years, and I have sailed all that can be sailed in our day. I have had business and conversation with learned men among both laity and clergy, Latins and Greeks, Jews and Moslems, and many others of different religions. I prayed to the most merciful Lord concerning my desire, and he gave me the spirit and the intelligence for it. He gave me abundant skill in the mariner's arts, an adequate understanding of the stars, and of geometry and arithmetic. He gave me the mental capacity and the manual skill to draft spherical maps, and to draw the cities, rivers, mountains, islands and ports, all in their proper places. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 105.)

Columbus's conviction that his navigational skill was a divinely bestowed gift becomes particularly persuasive in light of scholarly assessment of that skill:

[Columbus was] certainly the best navigator of his time. (Fuson, Log of Christopher Columbus, 34.)

[Columbus was] the greatest intuitive sailor of all time. (Obregon, Columbus Papers, 5.)

Such assessments of Columbus's seafaring skill are but the latest in a long line of similar assessments by the best authorities:

Among the greatest Columbus scholars, Thacher, Harrisse, Caddeo, De Lollis, Revelli, Morison, Ballesteros, Beretta, Madariaga, and Nunn fully confirm Las Casas's judgment: "Christopher Columbus surpassed all his contemporaries in the art of navigation." Just a handful disagree with that assessment. The most drastic critic of Columbus's sailing skills was Vignaud, whose nautical experience seems to have been limited to outings on passenger steamers on the Seine River. The great French explorer Charcot calls Columbus "a mariner who had 'le sens marin,' that mysterious and innate ability that allows one to pick the right course in the middle of the ocean. . . . The dogs have barked and will continue to do so, but the caravels have sailed into history. The achievement of Christopher Columbus is so great it moves one to the point of rapture." Such is one great sailor's judgment of another, of the man who, except for Cook, has no peer among the sailors of all time. (Taviani, Columbus, 258.)

[He was] the greatest sailor of all time, the brilliant protagonist of the greatest adventure in history. (Taviani, Columbus, 248.)

Adversity and Faith

What Columbus did find difficult was obtaining the financial backing that would allow him to use his navigational skill in the great venture he envisioned. Years spent in Portugal seemed to come to naught when Columbus failed to persuade King John that the proposed venture was viable:

Columbus's disappointment was, to say the least, profound. Imagination had met face to face with power, and power had banished it from its hallowed rooms. . . . All those years, those eight years in Portugal, had come to nothing. Failure remained the only tangible result of so many expectations and hopes. (Granzotto, Christopher Columbus, 60.)

But Columbus refused to give up. He went to Spain, where he boldly continued pursuing his dream. It was an audacious undertaking.

The scale of what this man was attempting was breathtaking. An obscure, poor, foreign, self-taught mariner with neither financial resources nor academic standing was endeavoring to sell to Christianity's most powerful monarchs a highly unorthodox concept. In such circumstances, his nerve was nothing short of amazing. (Dyson, Columbus, 80-81.)

Thus began the great discoverer's long years of waiting. He had already used up eight years of his life in Portugal and was to spend another six in Spain before knowing whether his plan was to become reality or not. He went through periods in which it seemed that all hope was lost and others in which hope was suddenly reborn. All in all, it was a time of anguish and restlessness for Columbus, who was like the man in the desert for whom the mirage vanishes every time he is at the point of reaching it. (Granzotto, Christopher Columbus, 69; and see Morison, Christopher Columbus, Mariner, 24.)

Much of the frustration arose from his long confrontation with the committee appointed by Queen Isabella to oversee Columbus's project. Las Casas observed:

He began to sustain a terrible, continued, painful and prolonged battle; a material one of weapons would not have been so sharp and horrendous as that which he had to endure from informing so many people of no understanding, although they presumed to know all about it, and replying patiently to many people who did not know him nor had any respect for his person, receiving insulting speeches which afflicted his soul. (Morison, Admiral of the Ocean Sea, 87-88.)

According to Granzotto,

The committee members . . . began to lose their patience. "They thought my project was some kind of joke," Columbus later wrote. Derision was the only way the judges knew how to deal with imagination, which for them was a mystery. . . . Sarcasm and mockery began to follow Columbus around, often accompanied by insults. He suffered a madman's fate.

This was the period of Columbus's life that he later called the "years of great anguish." (Christopher Columbus, 82.)

But adversity did not weaken Columbus's resolve, as Elder Orson Hyde noted:

Trammelled by poverty and by an unpopular cause, yet his persevering and unyielding heart would not allow an obstacle in his way too great for him to overcome. (Journal of Discourses, 6:368.)

Inspired of the Almighty God of heaven, [Columbus] encountered the ridicule and jeer of a faithless and unbelieving world. . . . Brooking every difficulty — combating opposition, calumny, and reproach from almost every quarter, he surmounted every obstacle. (Journal of Discourses, 7:108.)

What kept Columbus going? His biographers have explained:

[Columbus's objective] stood out as a vision before his mind's eye. . . . Las Casas has often emphasized this extraordinary assurance of [Columbus] . . . : "for, as I understand, when he decided to seek a Christian Prince who should help and back him, he was already certain that he would discover lands and people in them, as if he had been there personally." (Madariaga, Christopher Columbus, 109.)

He was a stranger to doubt. . . . Las Casas wrote that Columbus "had developed in his heart the unshakable conviction that he would find what he said he would find, as if he had it locked away in a trunk somewhere." . . . He had an uncanny prophetic sense of the things that lay in store for him. . . . Faith is the poetry of life, the past that maps out the future. (Granzotto, Christopher Columbus, 55-56.)

Columbus still hoped; he still believed. . . . Fortune would smile on that stubborn hope, that obstinate faith. (Taviani, Columbus, 71.)

The faith that saw Columbus through was a faith that had seen ahead, as is evident in a letter written by the Spanish sovereigns to Columbus in 1494:

It seems to us that all which at the beginning you told us that you could find has, for the greater part been true, as if you had seen it before you spoke of it to us. (Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 82.)

Columbus's faith was precisely of the type spoken of by Moroni at the end of his record — faith that sees into the future and that qualifies for divine and sometimes miraculous power. (Ether 12:6, 18, 30.) Such was the power experienced by Columbus when "the Spirit of God . . . came down and wrought upon the man." (1 Ne. 13:12.) Or, in Columbus's own words:

The most holy Trinity . . . inspired me with the idea, and afterward made it perfectly clear to me, that I could navigate and go to the Indies from Spain, by traversing the ocean westwardly. (Ford, Writings of Christopher Columbus, 83.)

Guidance across the Ocean

If divine power prepared Columbus for his voyage and urged him on, that same power seemed to guide him across the vast uncharted "Ocean Sea" in the courageous undertaking that no one else had dared attempt.

In the modern age, Columbus was the first to navigate in the open sea, the first, that is, to dare move away, deliberately and for a long period, from sight of land. (Taviani, Christopher Columbus, 212.)

And what he achieved in that bold adventure is nothing short of amazing.

It cannot be said too often that not only did Columbus discover the New World, but also — even more important from the scientific point of view — the routes to and from Europe and America, routes that were to remain unchanged as long as sailing ships plied the Atlantic. (Taviani, Christopher Columbus, 131; and see 211.)

Nor can we fully appreciate Columbus's achievement without contrasting it to the later hit-and-miss attempts by other Europeans to find passage across the Pacific Ocean:

Contrast the passage of the Atlantic with the discovery of the routes across the Pacific. The first crossing of the Pacific from east to west was by Magellan in 1520-1521. The attempted return trip of the Trinidad, one of Magellan's vessels, from the Spice Islands to America in 1522 under Espinosa, did not succeed. After him similarly Saavedra failed in 1528, again in 1529, Gaetan in 1543, and Ortiz de Retez in 1545. The eastward passage was not accomplished until Urdaneta discovered the way in 1565. There intervened between the first crossing westwards and the first eastward passage forty-five years of failure, involving also the loss of the Spice Islands to Spain.

Contrast this with the work of Columbus. On his first voyage he discovered that route which is still followed by all sailing vessels as the best possible from any part of Europe to North America. He also discovered the route homeward by way of the Azores that later experience to the present time likewise has accepted as the best. . . .

[Thus] there were really three discoveries made by Columbus instead of one. His discovery of the two ocean routes was so overshadowed by the discovery of land that it has passed unnoticed. However, in the very nature of the case the really great ocean discoveries could not be appreciated by any one until later generations had become acquainted with the whole Atlantic Ocean. By that time people forgot to give credit where it was due. (Nunn, Geographical Conceptions of Columbus, 51-52.)

The weather into which Columbus sailed on his first voyage seems to have been miraculous:

Columbus, who believed he had been chosen by God . . . must have had the hand of providence on his shoulder. He sailed in the hurricane season, right into the track of the killer cyclones but he experienced only ". . . the most temperate breezes . . . [and] great was the pleasure of the mornings, lacking only the singing of the nightingales." Happy the sailor who lacks gales as well as nightingales, and for whom the winds are "very gentle, as in April in Seville."

So it went, day after pleasant day, "downhill" sailing except for six days when contrary winds forced Columbus to make a bight to the northward, then return to his westward course. (Fuson, Log of Christopher Columbus, xvi.)

The most important voyage in history had the calmest seas of Columbus's eight transatlantic crossings. Except for a few hours — on 23 September — the ocean was never rough nor terrible nor dark. The ships glided lightly on waters always as calm "as the river at Seville." Then, on the very last day, "there were heavy seas, heavier than they had seen on the whole voyage." The waves covered the sterns, strengthening the push toward the goal. History borders on fable: the ships seem guided by a fairy's hand. (Taviani, Columbus, 96.)

Taviani was right about the presence of an unseen being to guide Columbus's ship. If Columbus's voyage of discovery had been foretold by the first writer of the Book of Mormon, it was the book's last writer, Moroni, who literally helped to carry it out. Moroni's precious record lay hidden under the soil of America, the destinies of which, according to Elder Orson Hyde, Moroni was appointed to direct.

This same angel [Moroni] was with Columbus, and gave him deep impressions, by dreams and by visions, respecting this New World. . . . The angel of God helped him — was with him on the stormy sea, calmed the troubled elements, and guided his frail vessel to the desired haven. (Journal of Discourses, 6:368; and see Appendix.)

Such angelic guidance could also explain Columbus's flawless, even miraculous, performance on that voyage of discovery. Hugh Nibley observed:

Sailing into a perfect blank on the map, Columbus infallibly did the right thing: "He did not make a single false move in the entire voyage!" says the geographer Professor Nunn. He maintains that Columbus must have been the discoverer of the Trade and prevailing Westerly Winds since it was only by taking fullest advantage of both that his journey was possible — yet his subsequent voyages show that Columbus knew nothing about the wind system. This was not Columbus's doing. Neither was the flight of birds that appeared just in time to keep the ships from turning back, nor the sudden rising of the sea that at another time inspired the expedition to continue. Call it what you will, Columbus was convinced he was being helped. . . .

About eight or nine hours before the discovery, at sunset on October 11, Columbus gave a strange and sudden order for a marked change of course. "Why he did this, nobody has explained," writes Professor Morison, a very sober historian and a nautical expert. But he assures us that if he had not done it, the great discovery of October 12, 1492 would have been a tragic discovery of deadly reefs that lay but a short distance dead ahead of the little fleet on its original course. . . .

"No man alive," says Morison, speaking as a mariner, "limited to the instruments and means at Columbus's disposal, could obtain anything near the accuracy of his results." . . .

If any man is going to tell us what made Columbus tick, he had better first show that he can do the equivalent in the way of honest brainwork to handling those crude instruments of navigation with a tenth the knowledge and skill of a Columbus. This man was no impostor and no hysterical neurotic — and no man would have said "Amen" to the words of Nephi more fervidly than he. (Nibley, Collected Works, 8:52-53.)

How conscious Columbus himself was of divine guidance during his momentous voyage is clear from several sources, beginning with his log entry for September 23, 1492. Already a month and a half out to sea, Columbus's men were worried that the wind patterns would not allow them to return home. Then something occurred that set their mind at ease, and which was for Columbus nothing less than a miracle sent from heaven.

Later, when the sea made up considerably without wind, they were astonished. I saw this as a sign from God, and it was very helpful to me. Such a sign has not appeared since Moses led the Jews out of Egypt, and they dared not lay violent hands on him because of the miracle that God had wrought. As with Moses when he led his people out of captivity, my people were humbled by this act of the Almighty. (Fuson, Log of Christopher Columbus, 66; and see Dunn and Kelley, Diario, 41.)

The entry for October 10, 1492 — just two days before land was sighted — tells of Columbus's perseverance and continued reliance on God in the face of opposition from his crew:

Here the men could no longer stand it; they complained of the long voyage. But the Admiral encouraged them as best he could, giving them good hope of the benefits that they would be able to secure. And he added that it was useless to complain since he had come to find the Indies and thus had to continue the voyage until he found them, with the help of Our Lord. (Dunn and Kelley, Diario, 57.)

It was that divine help that Columbus immediately and gratefully acknowledged when he first set foot on the newly discovered land, as recounted later by his son Ferdinand:

The Admiral went ashore with an armed boat, displaying the royal standard. The captains of the other two ships did the same in their boats with the banner of the expedition, on which was depicted a green cross with an F on one side, and crowns in honor of Ferdinand and Isabella on the other.

After all had rendered thanks to Our Lord, kneeling on the ground and kissing it with tears of joy for His great favor to them, the Admiral arose and gave this island the name San Salvador ["Holy Savior"]. (Keen, ed., Life of the Admiral Christopher Columbus by His Son, 59.)

The log's account of how the Santa Maria ran aground on a sandbar off the island of Hispaniola (Espanola), on Christmas Eve, 1492, manifests, according to John V. Fleming of Princeton University, the scriptural mindset of Columbus. Based on this and other instances, said Fleming,

I do find considerable evidence even in the journal of the first voyage that Columbus . . . presents the details of his own biography as refracted through the prism of a certain kind of scriptural understanding. (Burrows and Rorem, eds., Biblical Hermeneutics, 181.)

Just over a week later, on January 2, 1493, Columbus gave parting instructions to some of his men who were remaining behind on Hispaniola. He began by emphasizing, as Las Casas later reported, the necessity of continuing to rely on God, whose blessings had already been conspicuously manifest:

I charged them to consider the great blessings that God has bestowed upon me and upon all of them up until now, and the benefits he has offered them, for which they must always give Him endless thanks and dedicate themselves to His goodness and mercy, taking care not to offend Him and placing all their hope in Him. They must pray to Him for my return, which, with His aid, I promised them would be as soon as possible — which, I trust to God, would please everyone. (Fuson, Log of Christopher Columbus, 162.)

The return voyage proved perilous, as when on February 14 a severe storm separated the remaining two ships. Columbus's log reflects his grave concern but also his recognition of God's many past favors. Las Casas reported:

He was comforted by the favors that God had done for him in giving him such a victory in discovering what he had discovered, and in God's fulfilling for him all his desires, having passed in Castile, in his affairs, many adversities and hindrances; and [he writes here] that, since earlier he had entrusted his destiny and dedicated all of his enterprise to God, Who had heard him and given him all he had asked for, he ought to believe that God would grant him the completion of what he had begun and would take him to safety. And more so since He had delivered him on the outward voyage, when he had greater reason to fear from his troubles with the sailors and people that he took with him, who all, with one voice, were determined to go back and to rise against him in protest. And the eternal God gave him strength and resolution against all of them. And there were other very wonderful things that God had shown in him and through him on that voyage, beyond those that their Highnesses knew about. (Dunn and Kelley, Diario, 369; brackets in original.)

An even more severe storm hit Columbus's ship on March 3, nearly tearing the sails from the masts. Once again, the log entry reflected recognition of divine protection:

Last night we experienced a terrible storm and thought we would be lost because the waves came from two directions, and the wind appeared to raise the ship in the air, with the water from the sky and the lightning in every direction. It pleased Our Lord to sustain us, and we continued in this fashion until the first watch, when Our Lord showed us land. . . . Thus God protected us. (Fuson, Log of Christopher Columbus, 192.)

The land they had sighted turned out to be Portugal, and on the morning of March 4 they anchored at Restelo, an outer harbor of Lisbon.

When they reached land, the crew realized just how fortunate they had been to escape destruction. The townspeople . . . had been watching them all morning in earnest prayer, and after they anchored people approached them marveling at their success in reaching land. The sailors of Restelo told them that the winter had been the stormiest in memory and that in Flanders twenty-five ships had been lost. (Phillips and Phillips, Worlds of Christopher Columbus, 179-80.)

Despite the recent exhausting difficulties, Columbus incurred no delay in reporting the providential success of his voyage to the Spanish court via a letter addressed to the royal treasurer, Luis de Santangel, who had been his friend and supporter at court. That same day, March 4, 1493, Columbus dispatched the letter, which is now known as the Barcelona Letter of 1493. The letter, among the most influential ever written, announced to the world Columbus's discovery — and the divine means that had made it possible. Columbus began:

Sir: Because I know you will take pleasure in the great victory that Our Lord has given me in my voyage, I write this letter to inform you . . . (Obregon, Columbus Papers, 65.)

Columbus closed the letter in the same manner he had begun it, thus framing the entire letter with grateful acknowledgment of God's indispensable assistance:

This is enough, and Eternal be God our Lord, who grants, to all those who walk in His path, victories over things that appear impossible. And indeed this was a great victory. (Obregon, Columbus Papers, 68.)

The log of the first voyage ended with the entry for March 15, 1493, in which Columbus emphasized that his voyage had proved successful because of God's miraculous intervention:

The writing is now completed, except that I intend to go by sea to Barcelona, where, I have been informed, Your Highnesses are staying. This is in order to give them a full account of my voyage, which Our Lord has permitted me to make, and for which He inspired me. His Divine Majesty does all good things . . . , and nothing can be imagined or planned without His consent. This voyage has miraculously proven this to be so, as can be learned from this writing, by the remarkable miracles which have occurred during the voyage and for me. (Fuson, Log of Christopher Columbus, 196.)

Fulfilling Prophecy and Turning the Tide of History

Columbus's miraculous voyage was, as we have seen, the fulfillment of prophecies preserved in scripture. And as Columbus and his men had stepped ashore on that first day in the New World, they carried the royal standard on which was a cross — calling to mind yet another prophecy, this one preserved by the Indians themselves:

The most outstanding prophecy of the [Maya] Chilam Balam is that which foretold the coming of the Spaniards . . . :

" . . . and he told them that within a short time a white and bearded race would come from where the sun rises and that they would bear on high a sign like this [a cross]. . . ."

The prophecy is considered to be a genuine, aboriginal Maya text by most scholars, and not a text inspired by missionary influence. (Pearce, View from the Top of the Temple, 19.)

Nephi's prophecy foretold that Columbus would come "to the seed of my brethren" — descendants of those whom the resurrected Christ addressed elsewhere in the Book of Mormon (3 1 Ne. 15:11-24) as the "other sheep" of whom he had spoken to his Jewish disciples (John 10:16). It is striking, then, that Columbus himself apparently considered the natives of this new world to be precisely the "other sheep" alluded to in John 10:16:

In the Book of Prophecies [Columbus paid] . . . particular attention . . . to John 10:16: "And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." This famous verse . . . was quoted in its entirety in the Book of Prophecies along with glosses from Augustine, John Chrysostom, Gregory the Great, and Nicholas of Lyra. (Watts, "Prophecy and Discovery," 93; and see West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 229-31.)

By the time of Columbus's arrival, the posterity of Nephi's brothers would have experienced "wars and rumors of wars" and "dwindled in unbelief" through "many generations." (1 Ne. 12:21-23). Both the natives' experience in warfare and their apparent lack of religion were mentioned by Columbus in his description of the people he met on his very first landing:

I saw some who had marks of wounds on their bodies and I made signs to them asking what they were; and they showed me how people from other islands nearby came there and tried to take them, and how they defended themselves. . . . I believe that they would become Christians very easily, for it seemed to me that they had no religion. (Dunn and Kelley, Diario, 67, 69.)

Columbus's discovery would prove as momentous for world history as it was for him personally, and the fact of its being singled out in prophecy by Nephi as the event that would set in motion the latter-day era is significant. The magnitude of Columbus's achievement and his pivotal role in ushering in the modern era has been emphasized by historians from the beginning:

Many times I have wished that . . . I had the eloquence of Cicero to extol the indescribable service to God and to the whole world which Christopher Columbus rendered at the cost of such pain and dangers when he so courageously discovered the New World. . . . Is there anything in the world comparable to the opening of the tightly shut doors of an ocean that no one dared enter before? . . . But since it is obvious that at that moment God gave this man the keys to the awesome seas, he and no other unlocked the darkness. (Las Casas, in West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 49.)

The world of the Western Hemisphere . . . stood completely apart and isolated from the Old World, as it had been for thousands of years.

Columbus's voyages shattered that isolation once and for all, in what is arguably the most fateful encounter between disparate human groups that history has ever known. (Phillips and Phillips, Worlds of Christopher Columbus, 1.)

The Columbian discovery was of greater magnitude than any other discovery or invention in human history. . . .

[Columbus] was the person who brought the new continent to the awareness of the old continents, who thrust it suddenly and overwhelmingly into the development of civilization, effecting a decisive turning point in human history. (Taviani, Columbus, 260-61; and see Williams, "Man Who Touches the Stars," 99; Hughes, "Just Who Was That Man?" 59.)

Columbus and the New World

Did Columbus himself ever suspect that he had really discovered a new world apart from Asia?

His private letters on the fourth voyage suggest that he knew the land he had found was not the part of Asia known to European travel books. (Phillips and Phillips, Worlds of Christopher Columbus, 12; and see Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 244-46.)

Revisionist historian Kirkpatrick Sale has argued that Columbus finally knew that he had not reached Asia. Sale's view is significant not only for its careful analysis on this point but also because it goes against the general trend in his work to downplay and attack Columbus's life and achievements. Sale observed:

One significant confirmation that the Admiral had given up the idea of a strait to Asia by this time [the fourth voyage] and had begun to realize the true dimension of his discovery [is found] in a remarkable and little-noticed document in the Book of Privileges. In Document 43 (undated but presumably late 1501 or early 1502, certainly not later), Colon's [Columbus's] dictated account of his discoveries actually used the phrase "Indias Occidentales" — West Indies — for the first time, and added, "the said West Indies which were unknown to all the world" until he "miraculously found them through his great skill and knowledge of the sea." West Indies: this was an extraordinary geographical conception, and something quite new to the world. It shows that Colon was aware that da Gama had discovered some other Indies, the old Indies, and that his were unrelated, even hemispheres apart. If they were both part of the same Asian landmass, then da Gama's of course would lie farther west and Colon's to the east, and his would then be the East Indies. But no, these new lands were the West Indies; they lay in the west — that is, in the Western Hemisphere — and were half a world away from India. To underscore this, Colon emphasized that they were previously "unknown to all the world," thus obviously not part of China or Malaysia or India, places long known to geographers. This was truly an Other World, newly found, to the west, and Colon now clearly recognized it. (Conquest of Paradise, 204-5.)

Sale noted that Columbus's description of this New World coincided precisely with maps that others made shortly thereafter of the New World, implying that the source for these maps was none other than Columbus himself. (Conquest of Paradise, 206-7.)

The record is ample and remarkably clear. There is no doubt about this extremely important fact: Admiral Colon claimed to have found a new continent, surmised its dimensions, calculated its rough geographic position, and asserted as much, more than once, to his royal patrons. In the pithy summary of the Columbus historian John Boyd Thacher, "He knew that between the country of the Great Khan and the shores of Europe lay great continental lands and that he — Christopher Columbus — and none other was their discoverer." And this time he was right. (Sale, Conquest of Paradise, 209; and see West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 12.)

Hence, as Taviani explained,

Columbus gave the Old World two great revelations. One was foreseen by some scholars and expected by some sailors, but no one had the courage to verify it: beyond the Ocean was not the abyss but more land. Columbus landed there on 12 October 1492, beginning a new era. The other revelation, fabulous and fantastic until then, Columbus received at the mouth of an immense river, the Orinoco. That evening, 15 August 1498, he wrote in his Journal: "I think that this is a vast mainland, unknown till today." A few years later he would write, "Your Highnesses are masters of these vast lands, which are another World." "Another world, a new world": only with Columbus's undertaking did Europe, Islam, India, China, and Japan learn of the existence of a New World. And that changed the course of human history profoundly. (Columbus, 262.)

Columbus and His Testament to the World

Columbus never lost his gratitude for the singular divine favors granted him. During his third voyage, for example, he wrote to the Spanish sovereigns:

In everything He who is eternal has helped and is helping me, He who has always been merciful with me. (Phillips and Phillips, Worlds of Christopher Columbus, 223.)

Later, during the same voyage, on his humiliating trip homeward while bound in chains, Columbus wrote to Dona Juana de Torres:

Hope in Him Who created all men sustains me; His succor has been always very near. On one occasion, and that not long ago, when I was deeply distressed, He raised me with His divine arm, saying: "O man of little faith, arise, it is I, be not afraid." (Phillips and Phillips, Worlds of Christopher Columbus, 226.)

After the third voyage Columbus began preparing his remarkable Book of Prophecies, which was "a summary of related eschatalogical ideas that constantly flooded his mind during his long career." (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 9.) In the book's prefatory letter to the Spanish monarchs, Columbus stated:

I am only a most unworthy sinner, but ever since I have cried out for grace and mercy from the Lord, they have covered me completely. I have found the most delightful comfort in making it my whole aim in life to enjoy his marvelous presence. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 111.)

Years later, during the last months of his life, when he was keenly "conscious of approaching death," Columbus added a poem to the last page of the Book of Prophecies. It "expresses the mood in which Columbus approached his end" and is "virtually Columbus's own epitaph." (Fernandez-Armesto, Columbus, 180-81.) The poem is a fitting testament of one who, in Nephi's words, had been wrought upon by the Spirit of God:

REMEMBER, Man, in time of trial, To hold, whoever thou may'st be, Steadfast to God without denial, If thou wouldst reign, within due while, With Him in immortality. Our end in death we all shall see. Give thought to making thy provision To clear the way for thy last mission, When the time comes to sail that sea. UNHEARD-OF DEEDS have been provided By holy saints, time and again, Who fled the world, its ways derided, Upon Christ's service they decided. By travails wracked, enduring pain, They spurned the motley and the strain

Of flesh, which is all vanity. So thou in due humility Must now thy passion's frenzy rein. OF THINE OWN deeds the contemplation Must be thy very urgent case, And if thy wrongs shall lead apace To wicked men's last destination Or whether to that joyful station Attained by just men, who have paid, To God and Caesar, duly weighed, Their ultimate consideration. AND thou must raise uplifted thought Henceforth to heaven and must flee The coarse world's dull depravity, In wisdom seeking glory's court, Ever resolved to set at nought The vicious sins that would enslave thee. Follow the counsel that shall save thee And learn to shun the other sort. EVER shall thy joyful sleep Who embraced good without alloy And ever, too, shall others weep Who feed the fires of the deep. Because their lives they did employ Maliciously, and did enjoy The pleasures of the world and greed, Forever forfeit is their mede Of riches that can never cloy. SINLESS BE, and contemplate The agonies of those who die, How grief and terror are the fate Of sinners in their wretched state. Think well, as far as in thee lie, Upon the just, released at last From travails suffered in the past, Into the light eternally. (Fernandez-Armesto, Columbus, 181-82.)
