E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Chapter 3

The Colonists

Columbus's inspired voyage was foretold in the Book of Mormon as the first of a sequence of rapidly unfolding events in a divine plan for the latter days — a scenario echoed in Columbus's own understanding of the spiritual significance of his voyages in the Lord's latter-day work. The next event recounted in the Book of Mormon is the arrival in America of the colonists seeking freedom. According to Nephi's vision, they, like Columbus, were inspired by the Spirit of God:

And it came to pass that I beheld the Spirit of God, that it wrought upon other Gentiles; and they went forth out of captivity, upon the many waters. . . .

And I beheld the Spirit of the Lord, that it was upon the Gentiles, and they did prosper and obtain the land for their inheritance. . . .

And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles who had gone forth out of captivity did humble themselves before the Lord; and the power of the Lord was with them. (1 Ne. 13:13, 15-16.)

Out of Captivity

The captivity out of which the early American colonists fled was, according to Nephi's vision, the result of oppression by a powerful, apostate religious organization whose influence spread across the European nations and kingdoms. (1 Ne. 13:4-9.)

[John] Adams set down his fullest discussion of America's role in the progressive unfolding of human liberty in his Dissertation on the Canon and Feudal Law, written and published in 1765. The modern struggle between liberty and tyranny, Adams observed, had begun with the Reformation. During the Middle Ages, priests and monarchs, "the artificers of the canon and feudal law," had joined in a "wicked confederacy" to keep the people "ignorant of everything but the tools of agriculture and of war." Under this unholy alliance, men had sunk into a condition of "sordid ignorance and staring timidity." With ecclesiastical reform, the dissolution of both the religious and civil tyranny that had for centuries held men in submission began. Since the days of the church reformers, history had become the story of the spread of knowledge and liberty. In direct proportion to their advance, oppression had fallen away.

Enlightenment first appeared in Europe, yet found its greatest success in England. There the Roman church lost its authority. There, also, men developed a tradition of political liberty, unrivalled in any other nation. On two occasions during the seventeenth century, they demonstrated how deeply rooted in their lives this tradition was, by casting down "the execrable race of the Stuarts."

The struggle against the tyranny of priest and king, however, had not been confined to the Old World, for out of it had come the settlement of North America. The English colonies, Adams asserted, had been settled by persons unwilling to live with even the remnants of the old canon and feudal systems. In America, they found a place where liberty could flourish unmolested. (Howe, Political Thought of John Adams, 40-41.)

The very founding of the [Pilgrims'] colony had been a declaration of independence. Those who one day decided to shake off the yoke of the Church of England had transferred themselves to Holland and from there emigrated to the New World. . . . When they embarked on the Mayflower, they were already morally independent and ready for adventure. Rebelling against the official Church, although they invoked the king's name, they fled to elude his determination to subjugate the Puritans. They were bound for a colony that they themselves would have to organize, giving themselves their own laws, ordinances, acts, constitutions, and establishing their own government positions, for which they celebrated a pact. . . . They freely elected their deputies so that the community council would decree their taxes. By 1680, the New England settlers were already governing themselves; and if they formally looked to the king as their sovereign, they nevertheless had their own laws, traded according to their own norms, raised forces to defend themselves from the Indians. "Their link with England was more sentimental than imposed, and they developed in complete liberty." (Arciniegas, America in Europe, 118-19.)

Governor William Bradford's Account of the Pilgrims

The story of the early colonists who sailed to America seeking liberty is best told in their own words. Governor William Bradford's careful and eloquent chronicle of the Pilgrims' experience opened with a description of the religious oppression experienced in England:

It is well known unto the godly and judicious, how ever since the first breaking out of the light of the gospel in our honourable nation of England, (which was the first of nations whom the Lord adorned therewith after the gross darkness of popery which had covered and overspread the Christian world), what wars and oppositions ever since, Satan hath raised, maintained and continued against the Saints, from time to time, in one sort or other. Sometimes by bloody death and cruel torments; other whiles imprisonments, banishments and other hard usages; as being loath his kingdom should go down, the truth prevail and the churches of God revert to their ancient purity and recover their primitive order, liberty and beauty. (Morison, ed., Of Plymouth Plantation [I], 3.)

Seeking liberty, the Pilgrims sailed for Holland. Bradford continued:

[They] endured a fearful storm at sea, being fourteen days or more before they arrived at their port; in seven whereof they neither saw sun, moon nor stars, and were driven near the coast of Norway; the mariners themselves often despairing of life, and once with shrieks and cries gave over all, as if the ship had been foundered in the sea and they sinking without recovery. But when man's hope and help wholly failed, the Lord's power and mercy appeared in their recovery; for the ship rose again and gave the mariners courage again to manage her. . . . When the water ran into their mouths and ears and the mariners cried out, "We sink, we sink!" they cried (if not with miraculous, yet with a great height or degree of divine faith), "Yet Lord Thou canst save! Yet Lord Thou canst save!" . . . Upon which the ship did not only recover, but shortly after the violence of the storm began to abate, and the Lord filled their afflicted minds with such comforts as everyone cannot understand, and in the end brought them to their desired haven, where the people came flocking, admiring their deliverance. (Morison, ed., Of Plymouth Plantation [II], 13.)

During their first years in Holland, they seemed to have found their desired haven, which allowed them to seek their God. According to Bradford's own words, they enjoyed the Spirit of God, recalling to our minds Nephi's prophecy that "the Spirit of God . . . wrought upon[other[s]." (1 Ne. 13:13 .)

So as they grew in knowledge and other gifts and graces of the Spirit of God, and lived together in peace and love and holiness and many came unto them from divers parts of England, so as they grew a great congregation. (Morison, ed., Of Plymouth Plantation [III], 17-18.)

But when they saw many of their children being drawn away by the enticements of the surrounding worldly society, they determined to move elsewhere. Bradford wrote:

The place they had thoughts on was some of those vast and unpeopled countries of America, which are fruitful and fit for habitation, being devoid of all civil inhabitants. (Morison, ed., Of Plymouth Plantation [IV], 25.)

Objections were raised because of the potential difficulties and dangers that seemed to loom large in such a venture. But courage born of trust in God won the day:

It was granted the dangers were great, but not desperate. The difficulties were many, but not invincible. For though there were many of them likely, yet they were not certain. It might be sundry of the things feared might never befall; others by provident care and the use of good means might in a great measure be prevented; and all of them, through the help of God, by fortitude and patience, might either be borne or overcome. (Morison, ed., Of Plymouth Plantation [IV], 27.)

When all was finally ready for the Pilgrims' ocean voyage, they fervently sought the blessings of God through fasting and prayer. Bradford continued:

So being ready to depart, they had a day of solemn humiliation, their pastor taking his text from Ezra viii.21: "And there at the river, by Ahava, I proclaimed a fast, that we might humble ourselves before our God, and seek of him a right way for us, and for our children, and for all our substance." Upon which he spent a good part of the day very profitably and suitable to their present occasion; the rest of the time was spent in pouring out prayers to the Lord with great fervency, mixed with abundance of tears. . . . So they left that goodly and pleasant city which had been their resting place near twelve years; but they knew they were pilgrims, and looked not much on those things, but lifted up their eyes to the heavens, their dearest country, and quieted their spirits. (Morison, ed., Of Plymouth Plantation [VII], 47.)

So difficult was the ocean voyage that when it was over, they knew that a higher power had preserved them and "brought them" to this New World. Bradford's account reminds us of Lehi's words that "there shall none come into this land save they shall be brought by the hand of the Lord." (2 Ne. 1:6.)

Being thus arrived in a good harbor, and brought safe to land, they fell upon their knees and blessed the God of Heaven who had brought them over the vast and furious ocean, and delivered them from all the perils and miseries thereof. (Morison, ed., Of Plymouth Plantation [IX], 61.)

This first act of the Pilgrims upon landing in the New World echoes that of Columbus and his crew, who similarly had fallen upon their knees, weeping and thanking God for leading them to this land. The Pilgrims' action also recalls Nephi's words that they "did humble themselves before the Lord; and the power of the Lord was with them." (1 Ne. 13:16.) They continued to rely on the Lord as they faced the austere hardships confronting them.

Being thus passed the vast ocean, and a sea of troubles before in their preparation (as may be remembered by that which went before), they had now no friends to welcome them nor inns to entertain or refresh their weatherbeaten bodies; no houses or much less towns to repair to, to seek for succour. It is recorded in Scripture as a mercy to the Apostle and his shipwrecked company, that the barbarians showed them no small kindness in refreshing them, but these savage barbarians, when they met with them . . . were readier to fill their sides full of arrows than otherwise. And for the season it was winter, and they that know the winters of that country know them to be sharp and violent, and subject to cruel and fierce storms. . . . Besides, what could they see but a hideous and desolate wilderness, full of wild beasts and wild men. . . . If they looked behind them, there was the mighty ocean which they had passed and was now as a main bar and gulf to separate them from all the civil parts of the world. . . .

What could now sustain them but the Spirit of God and His grace? May not and ought not the children of these fathers rightly say: "Our fathers were Englishmen which came over this great ocean, and were ready to perish in this wilderness; but they cried unto the Lord, and He heard their voice and looked on their adversity," etc. "Let them therefore praise the Lord, because He is good: and His mercies endure forever." (Morison, ed., Of Plymouth Plantation [IX], 62-63.)

Nor was their faith in God dimmed by the awful adversity of the first winter, described by Bradford as follows:

But that which was most sad and lamentable was, that in two or three months' time half of their company died, especially in January and February, being the depth of winter, and wanting houses and other comforts; being infected with the scurvy and other diseases which this long voyage and their inaccommodate condition had brought upon them. So as there died some times two or three of a day in the foresaid time, that of 100 and odd persons, scarce fifty remained. And of these, in the time of most distress, there was but six or seven sound persons who to their great commendations, be it spoken, spared no pains night nor day, but with abundance of toil and hazard of their own health, fetched them wood, made them fires, dressed them meat, made their beds, washed their loathsome clothes, clothed and unclothed them. In a word, did all the homely and necessary offices for them. . . . And what I have said of these I may say of many others who died in this general visitation, and others yet living; that whilst they had health, yea, or any strength continuing, they were not wanting to any that had need of them. And I doubt not but their recompense is with the Lord. (Morison, ed., Of Plymouth Plantation [XI], 77-78.)

Others Also Seek Religious Freedom

The same themes of seeking religious liberty and relying upon God are conspicuous in the writings of the early founders of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, whose first governor, John Winthrop, observed:

All other churches of Europe are brought to desolation, and . . . who knows but that God hath provided this place to be a refuge for many whom he means to save out of the general[calamity[,] . . . seeing the church hath no place left to fly into but the wilderness. (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 71.)

One event recorded in Winthrop's journal is a public fast held to seek blessings in the face of inclement weather:

The court, with advice of the elders, ordered a general fast. . . . So soon as the fast was agreed upon, the weather changed, and proved fair after. (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 100.)

Such reliance on God was in accord with the counsel Winthrop and his followers had received from the eminent English Puritan John Cotton, who had addressed them before they set sail for America:

Neglect not walls, and bulwarks, and fortifications for your own defense, but ever let the name of the Lord be your strong tower; and the word of his promise the rock of your refuge. (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 80.)

John Cotton himself was soon forced to flee to America; he later explained why he had come:

Under the leadership of Christ and not by ourselves alone, . . . we made the decision to leave [that] country. . . . [God being good] we reached these shores and . . . came to enjoy that liberty of conscience and those pure institutions of Christ which we had eagerly been seeking. (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 110.)

Another Englishman forced to flee for his religious convictions was John Lathrop, ancestor of Joseph Smith and a host of other prominent Americans (Holt, Exiled, 219-21). According to Elder Mark E. Petersen:

The Reverend [John] Lathrop was a Church of England minister. As he read the Bible carefully, he discovered that there was little harmony between the teachings of that denomination and the scriptures. Being a very conscientious man, he felt that he could not go contrary to the sacred word, so he resigned his position with the state church in 1623 and became the pastor of the First Independent Church of London. In doing so he rejected the state religion and flew in the face of both government and clergy by setting up a separatist group. But he had the courage of his convictions, and he proceeded, regardless of the risks involved.

By direction of the bishop of London, he was arrested and cast into prison. While he was thus incarcerated, his wife died. He was not so much as allowed to attend her funeral, and his children were left with no one to care for them. He made repeated appeals for clemency, but the bishop refused even to listen to him. Finally the orphaned children went to the bishop as a group and personally pleaded for mercy. So pitiful were they in their misery and dejection that the bishop was finally moved, and he released Lathrop on condition that he leave the country. This he did, and, with thirty-two members of his congregation, he went to America. (Great Prologue, 34-35.)

Conspicuous throughout many accounts of the early Puritan colonists is a persevering faith in the face of tremendous adversity and uncertainty, the same kind of faith that had been exercised earlier by Columbus. If in both cases the Spirit of God wrought upon these individuals, in both cases also divine inspiration came in response to the exercise of great faith in the most trying circumstances. As one Puritan preacher said in 1776:

Men who know nothing of the power of Religion may wonder that they would venture so much in such a cause, but our Fathers knew not how to temporize, they . . . could not put on an appearance in Religion which was contrary to the sentiments of their hearts. They chose rather to venture among Savages and to encounter the harshness of a wilderness, than to live in ease at the expense of a good conscience or to give up those sacred liberties which they had a right to enjoy as men and as Christians. (Stout, New England Soul, 273.)

In making such sacrifices to worship God, they recognized his gracious hand in their lives — as did Cotton Mather, for example, in his history of New England published in 1702.

The most important question [Mather] asked the reader to consider was, "What can I see of the Glorious GOD in these occurrences?" What he saw in the unfolding saga of New England was the calling of an elect nation and a history that was nothing short of miraculous. The Great Migration, in which thousands survived shipwreck and scurvy and made it "as upon eagles' wings" to the New World, was only the beginning of a remarkable story that had no living counterpart:

"If we were able to recount the singular workings of divine providence, for the bringing on this work, to what it is come unto, it would stop the mouths of all. . . . Look from one end of the heaven unto another, whether the Lord hath assayed to do such a work as this, in any nation?" (Stout, New England Soul, 138.)

God was their strength, and they were determined to obey his law.

If there was any codification of Puritan beliefs, it was in the Word of God. The Puritans wished to be "guided by one rule, even the Word of the most high." More perhaps than for any other Christians of their age, the Bible was their guide. Through it . . . every man could find the design of life and the shape of the Truth. . . . The Ten Commandments were, of course, in the foreground of their thinking, [and] the Bible as a whole was the law of their life. (Boorstin, Americans, 18-19.)

Religion was, indeed, the raison d'etre of New England, as emphasized by Puritan minister John Higginson in 1663:

It was not for worldly wealth, or a better livelyhood here for the outward man . . . it was another thing and a better thing that we followed the Lord into the wilderness for. My Fathers and Brethren, this is never to be forgotten, that New-England is originally a plantation of Religion, not a plantation of Trade. (Stout, New England Soul, 72.)

Still other groups of early colonists came to America seeking religious freedom, as President Ezra Taft Benson noted:

Our earliest American fathers came here with a common objective — freedom of worship and liberty of conscience. The Pilgrim Fathers, the Puritans in New England, the Quakers in Pennsylvania, the Catholics in Maryland, the Lutherans in Georgia and Huguenots in Virginia, all came seeking God and the enjoyment of God-given, self-evident rights based on eternal principles. Familiar with the sacred scriptures, they believed that liberty is a gift of heaven. They acknowledged their dependence upon God as they exhibited their humble faith in, and devotion to, Christian principles. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 596.)

Unfettered Liberty in the Vast New World

Religious freedom was at the heart of an even broader and more expansive freedom discovered by those who, in Nephi's words, "had gone forth out of captivity" from an oppressive Europe to colonize America. (1 Ne. 13:16.) According to historian Henry Steele Commager:

The settlement of America was indeed the unsettlement of Europe; for perhaps the majority of newcomers it was a repudiation, conscious or unconscious, of the Old World. It was not just a migration; it was, more often than not, a flight. No one saw this more clearly than the "American Farmer," Hector St. John de Crevecoeur, whose Letters are the first perceptive study of the American character:

"In this great American asylum, the poor of Europe have by some means met together. . . . Everything has tended to regenerate them: new laws, a new mode of living, a new social system; here they are become men . . . by the power of transplantation, like all other plants, they have taken root and flourished. . . ."

America was not Europe! Here men and women, if white, were free to live where they would and as they would and to marry whom they would; free to worship in their own churches — or not to worship; to work at their own trades, to go to their own schools and colleges; free to have souls and minds of their own and, what is more, to bare their souls and speak their minds. Even the most cosmopolitan among them could rejoice that here they could escape the luxury which enervated society in the Old World and the corruption that debased it. For the repudiation of the Old World was not just political, or religious, economic or social; it was — or sought to be — moral. (Baron, America, 66-67.)

From the moment Columbus opened up the Atlantic for European navigation, millions — not just the passengers of the Mayflower — have been pilgrims compelled to leave the Old World in search of a land of emancipation, their Utopia. (Arciniegas, America in Europe, 119.)

This newfound freedom in America had much to do with the vastness of the unspoiled land, which had not, in Lehi's words, been "overrun" by "many nations." (2 Ne. 1:8.) The new land encouraged enterprise and prosperity, so that, in Nephi's words, the settlers "did prosper and obtain the land for their inheritance." (1 Ne. 13:15.) Nephi's linking of prosperity with the land is significant; this same connection has been made by historians today:

Between Florida and Maine in 1607 only scattered handfuls of indigenous people occupied the soil; and no towns or villages marked off a pattern Europeans recognized. Space welcomed the new arrivals, afforded them opportunities to make of the land what they wished, free from old restraints. And the condition was permanent, affecting not the first comers only but generation after generation able to reach beyond the line of settlement, wherever it was, to glimpse the ever renewed promise of space. (Handlin, Liberty in America, 29.)

The America into which men and women of the Old World escaped was new in . . . its spaciousness — land enough, Jefferson was to say, for our descendants to "the thousandth and thousandth generation." By comparison with Europe, that spaciousness was so astonishing that it took on not just a quantitative but a qualitative character. . . . Crevecoeur perceived that "There is room for everybody in America," and added that "An European, when he first arrives, seems limited in his intentions as well as in his views; two hundred miles formerly appeared a very great distance, it is now but a trifle. He no sooner breathes our air than he forms schemes and embarks in designs he never would have thought of in his own country. . . . Thus Europeans become Americans." (Baron, America, 68.)

What made an American? Perhaps because of the challenges and opportunities in dealing with the vastness of the land as well as the challenges presented to the new immigrants, the major characteristics might be said to be independence, self-reliance and optimism. Americans relied on themselves, their families and their neighbors. They had little reason to expect help from the national government and they would have looked with displeasure on any interference in their lives from the federal government.

Henry Steele Commager, in his excellent book The American Mind, wrote . . .:

"Nothing in all history had ever succeeded like America, and every American knew it. Nowhere else on the globe had nature been at once so rich and so generous, and her riches were available to all." (Baron, America, 10.)

The rich land fostered prosperity of the kind noted in a Puritan thanks-giving sermon in 1759 by Thaddeus Maccarty:

It is well known . . . that our renowned Ancestors left their pleasant habitations and fair inheritances on the other side of the Atlantic, and came into this howling wilderness, namely, that they might enjoy their Liberties and Priviledges, especially their Religious ones, and handed them down as the best legacy to those who came after them. . . . And what a fair and glorious Superstructure has been raised upon the foundation laid by them. . . . How have we grown and flourished and prospered. (Stout, New England Soul, 252.)

Notwithstanding its growing prosperity, the young American nation seemed generally to retain its heritage of humility before God, judging from what Alexis de Tocqueville saw in 1831:

In the United States on the seventh day of every week the trading and working life of the nation seems suspended; all noises cease; a deep tranquillity, say rather the solemn calm of meditation, succeeds the turmoil of the week, and the soul resumes possession and contemplation of itself. On this day the marts of traffic are deserted; every member of the community, accompanied by his children, goes to church, where he listens to strange language which would seem unsuited to his ear. He is told of the countless evils caused by pride and covetousness; he is reminded of the necessity of checking his desires, of the finer pleasures that belong to virtue alone, and of the true happiness that attends it. On his return home he does not turn to the ledgers of his business, but he opens the book of Holy Scripture; there he meets with sublime and affecting descriptions of the greatness and goodness of the Creator, of the infinite magnificence of the handiwork of God, and of the lofty destinies of man, his duties, and his immortal privileges. (Democracy in America [II:II:XV], 2:143.)

Once again we hear an echo of Nephi's words:["[They] did humble themselves before the Lord." (1 Ne. 13:16.)

"The Power of the Lord Was with Them"

Because of the colonists' humility, "the power of the Lord was with them," wrote Nephi, before he began speaking about the Revolutionary War, at which time he again wrote, "the power of God was with them." (1 Ne. 13:16, 18.) A dramatic manifestation of God's power on behalf of the colonists before the Revolution came during the French and Indian War when, in October 1746, French warships were headed toward New England. A day of fasting was held to pray for deliverance, and everywhere people thronged to the churches:

In Boston the Reverend Thomas Prince, from the high pulpit of the Old South Meeting-house, prayed before hundreds. The morning was clear and calm, people had walked to church through sunshine. "Deliver us from our enemy!" the minister implored. "Send Thy tempest, Lord, upon the waters to the eastward! Raise Thy right hand. Scatter the ships of our tormentors and drive them hence. Sink their proud frigates beneath the power of Thy winds!"

He had scarcely pronounced the words when the sun was gone and the morning darkened. All the church was in shadow. A wind shrieked round the walls, sudden, violent, hammering at the windows. . . .

Two of the largest French frigates . . . sunk. . . . The whole fleet was nearly lost, the men very sick with scurvy or some pestilential fever. . . .

Pestilence, storm and sudden death — how directly and with what extraordinary vigor the Lord had answered New England prayers!

The country fell on its knees. Pharaoh's hosts overwhelmed in the Red Sea were no greater miracle. (Bowen, John Adams and the American Revolution, 10-11.)

With good reason, then, had Nephi prophesied that the Lord would deliver the colonists "out of the hands of all other nations" (1 Ne. 13:19), not just from England.
