E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Chapter 4

The Plight of the Lamanites

Taking possession of this rich new land often meant dispossessing its native inhabitants, whom Nephi identified as "the seed of my brethren." By the time Columbus discovered America, most of Nephi's own seed had long since been destroyed because of wickedness, as Nephi had foreseen. (1 Ne. 12:19-20; 13:30.) That the seed of his brethren had survived was not attributable to their better conduct but rather to their errors having derived largely from the false traditions of their fathers (2 Ne. 4:6-7; Jacob 3:6-7), which caused them to become, said Nephi, a people "full of idleness and all manner of abominations" (1 Ne. 12:23). In that state they would incur "the wrath of God," making them weak against the onslaught of European colonists:

And it came to pass that I beheld many multitudes of the Gentiles upon the land of promise; and I beheld the wrath of God, that it was upon the seed of my brethren; and they were scattered before the Gentiles and were smitten.

". . . And I beheld that they [the Gentiles] were white, and exceedingly fair and beautiful, like unto my people before they were slain. (1 Ne. 13:14-15.)

Other Prophecies about the Europeans

The essence of Nephi's prophecy about the coming of the white Europeans seems to have been preserved in various Indian traditions. For example, in a text considered aboriginal, the Mayan prophet Chilam Balam is reported to have prophesied of the coming of the white man, to the potential peril of his people:

He told them that within a short time a white and bearded race would come from where the sun rises and . . . would rule the land and . . . kill those who made war on them. (Pearce, View from the Top of the Temple, 19.)

The Mayas were by no means alone in expecting the white man:

The coming of the Hopis' lost white brother, Pahana, like the return of the Mayas' bearded white god, Kukulcan, the Toltecan and Aztecan Quetzalcoatl, was a myth so common throughout all pre-Columbian America that we can regard it as arising from a concept rooted in the unconscious. Whatever its symbolic meaning, the event was long hailed by prophecy. (Waters, Book of the Hopi, 251.)

Such prophecy included the white man's confiscating lands. Said a modern Hopi chief:

Our Prophecies tell us in the last stages [of the world] the White Man will steal our lands. (Wall and Arden, Wisdomkeepers, 95.)

According to a modern Seminole chief, his people had been warned of God that just before the end of the world they would lose their language — implying subordination to a newly arrived people. (Wall and Arden, Wisdomkeepers, 79.) Among New England tribes, some reportedly had predicted the coming of the white man, to the peril of the Indians.

Before the coming of the white man, a great and wise chief . . . on his death-bed . . . said that a strange white people would come to crowd out the red men. (Simmons, Spirit of the New England Tribes, 71.)

[Another] Indian said, before the English came, that a white people should come in a great thing of the sea, and their people should be loving to them and receive them; but if they did hurt or wrong the white people, they would be destroyed. (Simmons, Spirit of the New England Tribes, 68.)

Columbus and Slavery

It often took no provocation for the first Europeans, particularly the Spanish seeking gold and expanded empire, to make cruel war on America's native inhabitants. Within a few years of Columbus's discovery of the New World, Las Casas recorded:

The greatest outrages and slaughterings of people were perpetrated, whole villages being depopulated. . . . The Indians saw that without any offence on their part they were despoiled of their kingdoms, their lands and liberties and of their lives, their wives, and homes. . . . They saw themselves each day perishing by the cruel and inhuman treatment of the Spaniards. (Sale, Conquest of Paradise, 159.)

An increasing number of writers have charged that Columbus himself initiated the pattern of cruelty to the Indians, or at least should be held responsible for it. (See Sale, Conquest of Paradise; and Elson, "Good Guy or Dirty Word?" 79.) Of the principle of slavery, the Lord has spoken unequivocally and absolutely in declaring that "it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another." (D&C 101:79.) But it would not be accurate to pin the blame on Columbus for the slavery that occurred in the New World. According to William F. Buckley:

There is now a movement to consider Christopher Columbus the agent of terrible days, weeks and centuries in America. . . .

Yet here are the words of Christopher Columbus dated January 2, 1493, addressed to his captains to guide the conduct of his soldiers and crewmen while they were on Espanola:

". . . they should avoid as they would death annoying or tormenting the Indians, bearing in mind how much they owe these people, and why it is necessary to keep them content, since they are remaining in Indian land and under Indian dominion. They should strive by their honest and gentle speech, to gain the good will of the Indians, keeping their friendship and love, so that our relationship with them will be friendly and pleasant. . . . I ordered them and begged them earnestly to do no injury or use any force toward any Indian — man or woman — nor take from them anything against their will." (Morison, Christopher Columbus, Mariner, vii.)

Columbus's regard for this newly discovered race was reflected in a number of journal entries made during his first voyage, beginning the first day he set foot in the New World:

I recognized that they were people who would be better freed [from error] and converted to our Holy Faith by love than by force. [October 12, 1492.]

The admiral [Columbus] ordered that they should all be treated courteously because they are the best and most gentle people in the world. [December 16, 1492.]

In the whole world there cannot be better or more gentle people. . . . [They] are of singularly friendly behavior; and they speak pleasantly. [December 24, 1492.]

I believe that in the world there are no better people or a better land. They love their neighbors as themselves, and they have the sweetest speech in the world; and [they are] gentle and always laughing. [December 25, 1492.] (Dunn and Kelley, Diario, 65, 231, 273-75, 281.)

How, then, do we interpret Columbus's statement in the log, made on the first day ashore, that these newfound people "should be good and intelligent servants"? The caution that should be exercised in interpreting in isolation any particular statement in the log of the first voyage is underscored by considerations of what that surviving "log" really is:

The original has never been found, and . . . the transcription we have was made by Las Casas, a friar . . . who tells us he worked from a copy, not from the original; he also paraphrased a great deal and says so. (Obregon, Columbus Papers, 22.)

The only copy of any shipboard log [of the first voyage], then, that is known to modern scholarship is at least two transcriptions removed from any original. Moreover, the information in any shipboard log was so valuable to several interested parties that it probably underwent changes on behalf of these parties, each of which had ample opportunity. . . . (David Henige, in Bedini, ed., Christopher Columbus Encyclopedia, 2:741; and see Henige, In Search of Columbus, 4.)

Accordingly, as Robert Fuson noted, interpretation of an isolated statement in the log must depend on context:

Those who see Columbus as the founder of slavery in the New World are grossly in error. This thought occurred to Morison (and many others), who misinterpreted a statement made by Columbus on the first day in America, when he said, "They (the Indians) ought to be good servants." In fact, Columbus offered this observation in explanation of an earlier comment he had made, theorizing that people from the mainland came to the islands to capture these Indians as slaves because they were so docile and obliging.

All through the Log, Columbus expresses nothing but love and admiration for the Indians. His affection for the young chief in Haiti, and vice versa, is one of the most touching stories of love, trust, and understanding between men of different races and cultures to come out of this period in history. His instructions to the men he left behind at La Navidad, on January 2, clearly illustrate his sincere fondness and respect for the Indians.

There is no contradiction between Columbus' warm feelings for the natives and his desire to secure Spanish authority over them. After all, Europeans were subjects of this ruler or that — and a subject is one who is subjected. (Log of Christopher Columbus, 31-32.)

It is true that Columbus afterwards suggested to the Spanish sovereigns the idea of "conquering" the natives and putting them to work — words for which Bishop Las Casas censured him. (Granzotto, Columbus, 162.) And later, during a war with the Indians, Columbus took prisoners and shipped a number of them back to Spain to be sold as slaves. But context is again critical in understanding Columbus. Slavery is as old as the human race itself and has been nearly as widespread; its decline is, historically speaking, a very recent phenomenon.

In the fifteenth century slavery was the traditional, unavoidable result of every war fought outside Christendom. That standard, valid in the relations between Christians and Muslims, [Columbus] applied to the relations between the Christian Spaniards and the non-Christian Tainos when war broke out between them. (Taviani, Columbus, 184.)

Columbus was neither ahead of the time nor behind. He had seen Africans seized and brought to Portugal and Spain as slaves (which the church condoned), and never thought of it as anything more than the normal state of affairs. . . .

The principle was that anyone captured in a "just war" could be enslaved. When the Indians rebelled against the soldiers and settlers at La Isabela, the Spanish retaliated with force throughout the countryside. The Tainos shipped to Spain in 1494 were captives in a just war, which the Spanish defined as virtually any hostile act against them. (Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 185-86.)

And in a more immediate way, religion seems to have motivated Columbus's choosing as slaves some natives who were cannibals and who, thought Columbus, were desperately in need of reform for the welfare of their eternal souls:

If we are to believe Columbus, their slavery could be justified not only by their defiance of the Europeans but also because it was for their own good. Columbus instructed [Antonio de] Torres to tell the monarchs, "it is thought here that to take some of the men and women and to send them home to Castile would not be anything but well, for they may one day be led to abandon that inhuman custom . . . of eating men, and there in Castile, learning the language, they will much more readily receive baptism and secure the welfare of their souls." (Phillips and Phillips, Worlds of Christopher Columbus, 202.)

Nor was Columbus introducing a practice foreign to the newly discovered peoples — a point overlooked by those such as Kirkpatrick Sale who accused Columbus of introducing slavery to the New World. Said a recent article in Time magazine in reference to the Tainos, the people Columbus met on the first island:

Sale does not mention evidence of the Tainos' hierarchic social structure, which included, at the bottom level, slaves. (Gray, "The Trouble with Columbus," 56.)

Columbus's accusers have also failed to consider the existence of slavery among the neighbors of the Tainos, who, as is clear from a comment in the log, were wont to raid the Tainos to capture slaves. (October 11 [12], 1492; Dunn and Kelley, Diario, 67.) Indeed, the widespread practice of slavery among pre-Columbian Indian peoples influenced the practice of slavery as administered by the Spanish and Portuguese in the New World. (Bedini, ed., Columbus Encyclopedia, 2:632.) To retrospectively pin the blame on Columbus for slavery in the New World is to ignore the entire context.

Of course, what happened — or better stated, began — in 1492 has long been debated, and is being debated now, exactly five centuries later. For native Americans, Columbus' discovery of America initiated an invasion which culminated in what can only be termed a tragedy. . . .

But was Columbus responsible for this? . . . Clearly, what happened after 1492 would have happened even if the initial discovery of America had been made by an individual with the morality of a saint. For the discovery unleashed forces in European society for which no single person — and certainly not Columbus — was responsible. The tragedy of the American Indian was truly the result of these impersonal forces associated with the expanding economy and society of Renaissance Europe. (Bowen, Columbus and the Crowns, 10-11.)

Perhaps most revealing about Columbus's character with respect to the issue of slavery is the judgment of Bartolome de Las Casas, the greatest early authority on the life of Columbus. Las Casas's own life and writings were described by Samuel Eliot Morison:

Bartolome de Las Casas wrote Historia de las Indias, the one book on the discovery of America that I should wish to preserve if all others were destroyed. . . . Las Casas had all Columbus's papers at hand, including the Journals and the lost Spanish original of Ferdinand's biography; his room in the College of San Gregorio at Valladolid was reported to be so full of manuscripts that one could hardly get in and out.

Las Casas's father and uncle came to Hispaniola as colonists on Columbus's Second Voyage. He himself arrived there in 1500, a brisk young university graduate of 26 ready to make his fortune like the others. Conversion came instead, and in 1510 Las Casas was the first priest to be ordained in the New World. Out of his experience as a missionary in Cuba arose a passionate conviction that the Indians were men and brothers who should be converted and treated as fellow Christians; and he devoted the rest of his life to this cause. At all times he was the Indians' apostle, protector and friend; and at various times their advocate at court, governor on the Pearl Coast, and bishop of Chiapa in Mexico. The Historia de las Indias, written by a scholar and divine who was also a man of action over a wide field, is at once solid, spiritual and robust. Las Casas admired Columbus with reservations, and has no hesitation in reproving his policy towards the natives. (Admiral of the Ocean Sea, 51; and see Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 36.)

In Las Casas's conversion to the Indian cause, he experienced "as complete a change of life as did Saul of Tarsus on the road to Damascus." So completely and effectively did Las Casas thereafter devote his life to the Indians that "the story of the struggle [for Indian justice] becomes to a considerable extent the story of his life." (Hanke, Spanish Struggle for Justice, 21-22.) If anyone, then, is qualified to pass judgment on the character of Columbus — treatment of the Indians and all — it is Las Casas. Here is his judgment:

The divine and supreme Master chose from amongst the sons of Adam who dwelt in these our days on the earth that illustrious and great Colon [Columbus], . . . to trust to his virtue, mind, zeal, labours, knowledge and wisdom, one of the mightiest divine exploits which in our century He wished to achieve in His world, and as the supreme divine Providence usually sees to each thing according to its natural condition . . . and as this enterprise was to be so high, arduous and divine, . . . hence it is to be believed that God endowed His minister and first apostle of these Indies with such natural and acquired qualities. (Madariaga, Christopher Columbus, 16.)

That Las Casas, himself known as the apostle to Indians, should so highly praise Columbus as the first such apostle, is striking. Columbus's singular greatness was not for Las Casas — and should not be for us — obscured by Columbus's human failings, failings for which he himself was toward the end of his life brought "to weep for my transgressions." (Morison, ed., Journals and Other Documents, 378.) Criticism of Columbus has grown more popular, but according to William and Carla Phillips, the trend to debunk Columbus is as distorting as the previous trend to paint him in superhuman colors beyond the pale of mortal frailty. (Worlds of Christopher Columbus, 7-8.) Furthermore, much of the denigration of Columbus arises directly from current disillusionment with our own society:

The problem is that those who denounce Columbus today . . . are looking at history through contemporary glasses. (Auchincloss, "When Worlds Collide," 12.)

The Columbus controversy has very little to do with 1492 and almost everything to do with [today]. (Gray, "The Trouble with Columbus," 54.)

He is only a convenient scapegoat for our own self-hate and our own very modern doubts about the value of our culture. (Sokolov, "My Turn: Stop Knocking Columbus," 82; and see Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 265.)

Despite the wave of criticism, Columbus continues to be held in high esteem by many scholars:

An inspired Columbus responded to the urge to reach out and discover, applying intelligence, zeal, and fortitude to expand knowledge and human potential. . . . His urge . . . was acted on without comprehension of all the ramifications, most of which were, as often is the case, unknowable. (Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 279; and see Fuson, Log of Christopher Columbus, 34.)

Fittingly, however, the controversy over Columbus's character would, if he were here, be of little consequence to him.

[Columbus] knew that he would be misunderstood and maligned, but he accepted that as the lot of a divinely chosen person. . . .

The chief concern of Christopher Columbus was not what men would think of him but what God would think of him. His earliest biographers reveal this character [trait] clearly. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 74.)

Tragedy for the Indians

For the Indians, the ramifications of Columbus's discovery proved devastating. Within three centuries after Columbus arrived,

On the mainland of America, the Wampanoags of Massasoit . . . had vanished, along with the Chesapeakes, the Chickahominys, and the Potomacs of the great Powhatan confederacy. (Only Pocahontas was remembered.) Scattered or reduced to remnants were the Pequots, Montauks, Nanticokes, Machapungas, Catawbas, Cheraws, Miamis, Hurons, Eries, Mohawks, Senecas, and Mohegans. (Only Uncas was remembered.) Their musical names remained forever fixed on the American land, but their bones were forgotten in a thousand burned villages or lost in forests fast disappearing before the axes of twenty million invaders. (Brown, Bury My Heart, 7.)

The Frenchman Alexis de Tocqueville, who traveled America in 1831 and 1832, observed much the same:

I have crossed vast tracts of country formerly inhabited by powerful Indian nations who are now extinct; I have passed some time among remnants of tribes, which witness the daily decline of their numbers and of the glory of their independence; and I have heard these Indians themselves anticipate the impending doom of their race. (Democracy in America [I:XIII], 1:231.)

Speaking about our collective national guilt in our treatment of the Indians, President Spencer W. Kimball stated:

Mile by mile we crowded them back. When the Indians resisted our encroachments, we called them "murderous redskins" and continued our relentless aggression. When they killed us "whites," we called it massacre, but when we took their lives, we termed it a necessary riddance of a menace. We were fighting for their lands and rivers and forests and minerals, but they were fighting for their rights, their homeland, their families, their very lives. (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 602.)

According to Peter Matthiessen,

Increasingly, as the whites achieved dominion (and the red men were lumped with other mammals in the New World natural histories), it was perceived that "savages" had no claim to lands that were going to waste as wilderness, as hunting grounds. (Indian Country, 5.)

Indian Voices of Lament

The sad tale is most eloquently told by some of the Indians whose lives were drastically altered by the invading white man. Ten Bears of the Yamparika Comanches recounted:

I was born where there were no enclosures and where everything drew a free breath. I want to die there and not within walls. I know every stream and every wood between the Rio Grande and the Arkansas. I have hunted and lived over that country. I lived like my fathers before me, and, like them, I lived happily. . . . But [now] . . . the white man has the country which we loved, and we only wish to wander on the prairie until we die. (Brown, Bury My Heart, 236-37.)

Cochise of the Chiricahua Apaches spoke of the displacement of his people within his own lifetime:

When I was young I walked all over this country, east and west, and saw no other people than the Apaches. After many summers I walked again and found another race of people had come to take it. (Brown, Bury My Heart, 188.)

Not only did the white race take over the land but they also left behind "a trail of blood," according to Red Cloud of the Oglala Sioux:

What has been done in my country I did not want, did not ask for it; white people going through my country. . . . When the white man comes to my country he leaves a trail of blood behind him. (Brown, Bury My Heart, 101.)

Oppression became the lot of the Indians, as Tecumseh of the Shawnee explained:

Every year our white intruders become more greedy, exacting, oppressive, and overbearing. . . . Wants and oppressions are our lot. . . . Are we not being stripped day by day of the little that remains of our ancient liberty? (McLuhan, Touch of the Earth, 69.)

Where today is the Pequot? Where are the Narragansetts, the Mohawks, the Pokanoket, and many other once powerful tribes of our people? They have vanished before the avarice and the oppression of the White Man, as snow before a summer sun. (McLuhan, Touch the Earth, 157.)

Plenty-Coups of the Crow graphically described the plight of his people:

The ground on which we stand is sacred ground. It is the dust and blood of our ancestors. On these plains the Great White Father at Washington sent his soldiers armed with long knives and rifles to slay the Indian. Many of them sleep on yonder hill where Pahaska — White Chief of the Long Hair [General Custer] — so bravely fought and fell. A few more passing suns will see us here no more, and our dust and bones will mingle with these same prairies. I see as in a vision the dying spark of our council fires, the ashes cold and white. I see no longer the curling smoke rising from our lodge poles. I hear no longer the songs of the women as they prepare the meal. The antelope have gone; the buffalo wallos are empty. Only the wail of the coyote is heard. . . . My heart is cold within me. (McLuhan, Touch the Earth, 136.)

In what has become perhaps the most famous of all American Indian speeches, noble Chief Joseph of the Nez Perce surrendered to the United States Army with these words:

I am tired of fighting. Our chiefs are killed. . . . The old men are all dead. . . . It is cold and we have no blankets. The little children are freezing to death. My people, some of them, have run away to the hills, and have no blankets, no food; no one knows where they are — perhaps freezing to death. I want to have time to look for my children and see how many of them I can find. Maybe I shall find them among the dead. Hear me, my chiefs! I am tired; my heart is sick and sad. From where the sun now stands I will fight no more forever. (Brown, Bury My Heart, 312.)

The terms of surrender called for Chief Joseph and the other surviving Nez Perce to be returned to their own country, but — as was sadly typical — the promise was never honored. Instead, the Nez Perce were shipped away like cattle and confined first to a swampy bottomland and later to a barren plain. In a plea for justice to the United States government, Chief Joseph expressed his disappointment and heartache:

I have heard talk and talk, but nothing is done. Good words do not last long unless they amount to something. Words do not pay for my dead people. They do not pay for my country, now overrun by white men. . . . Good words will not give my people good health and stop them from dying. Good words will not get my people a home where they can live in peace and take care of themselves. I am tired of talk that comes to nothing. It makes my heart sick when I remember all the good words and broken promises. . . . You might as well expect the rivers to run backward as that any man who was born a free man should be contented when penned up and denied liberty to go where he pleases. . . . I have asked some of the great white chiefs where they get their authority to say to the Indian that he shall stay in one place, while he sees white men going where they please. They cannot tell me. (Brown, Bury My Heart, 313.)

The Wrath of God

According to Nephi's vision, the plight of the Indians resulted from "the wrath of God." (1 Ne. 13:14.) How did the Indians themselves see it? Toqueville reported that in a petition to Congress by the Cherokee nation, the demise of the Indian was attributed to the will of God:

By the will of our Father in heaven, the Governor of the whole world, the red man of America has become small, and the white man great and renowned. (Tocqueville, Democracy in America [I:XVIII], 1:353.)

Chief Seattle of the Suquamish tribe likewise lamented the demise of his people and attributed it to the withdrawal of the Great Spirit:

There was a time when our people covered the whole land as the waves of a wind-ruffled sea covers its shell-paved floor, but that time has long since passed away with the greatness of tribes now almost forgotten. . . .

Our God, the Great Spirit, seems . . . to have forsaken us. . . .

The Indian's night promises to be dark. No bright star hovers above his horizon. Sad-voiced winds moan in the distance. Some grim Fate of our race is on the Red Man's trail. (The Famous Oration of Chief Seattle, 3-4, 6.)

A similar perception was shared by the Sioux chief Red Cloud:

There was no hope on earth, and God seemed to have forgotten us. (Brown, Bury My Heart, 413.)

Likewise, a seventeenth-century New England colonist recorded that he had heard an Indian from the Nauset tribe tell of a dream he had had shortly before the coming of the white man:

He saw a great many men come to those parts in cloths, just as the English now are apparelled, and among them there arose up a man all in black, [who] . . . told all the Indians that God was moosquantum or angry with them. (Simmons, Spirit of the New England Tribes, 67.)

A modern Indian chief, Matthew King of the Lakota (Sioux) tribe, recalls the time when his people bore the wrath of their God. Nonetheless, King testifies, God never ceased to love them:

We were being punished for having strayed from God, for not knowing Him. His wrath was on us. But still God loved us. (Wall and Arden, Wisdomkeepers, 32.)

Indeed, even in God's anger there can be loving purpose, and so it is with the Indians. For among the white men would come one whose faith would qualify him to translate a sacred record written by the Indians' ancient forefathers and relatives, a record that would tell the Indians who they are and what glorious promises await them — all in fulfillment of the prayers of their ancient righteous kinsmen, including Moroni. Thus would God's wrath turn to mercy, as the resurrected Christ had foretold in quoting Isaiah to the forefathers of the Indians: "In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer." (3 Ne. 22:8.)
