E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Chapter 5

The Declaration and the War of Independence

Nephi foresaw that the divine power that the Gentiles obtained by["humbl[ing] themselves before the Lord" (1 Ne. 13:16) would help liberate them from England:

And I beheld that their mother Gentiles were gathered together upon the waters, and upon the land also, to battle against them.

And I beheld that the power of God was with them, and also that the wrath of God was upon all those that were gathered together against them to battle.

And I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles that had gone out of captivity were delivered by the power of God out of the hands of all other nations. . . .

And the angel of the Lord said unto me: . . .

Thou beholdest that the Gentiles who have gone forth out of captivity . . . have been lifted up by the power of God above all other nations. (1 Ne. 13:17-19, 24, 30.)

The Image of the "Mother Gentiles"

Even Nephi's terminology in describing events he foresaw more than two millennia before the fact was prophetically precise. His use of the phrase "mother Gentiles" to describe England at war with her colonies was echoed in the words actually employed by the colonists themselves.

In the decades leading up to the Revolution scarcely a piece of American writing, whig or tory, did not invoke the parent-child image to describe the imperial relationship. The king was the "father" and Great Britain was the "mother country" and the colonists were their "children." Because the image was so powerful, so suggestive of the personal traditional world in which most colonists still lived, almost the entire imperial debate was inevitably carried on within its confines. At times the polemics between whigs and tories appeared to be little more than a quarrel over the proper method of child-rearing. Whigs argued that Britain was an unnatural parent, cruel and unfeeling in her harsh treatment of her children. "Where is maternal affection?" asked John Dickinson. In reply the tories accused the colonists of being insolent and ungrateful brats and demanded to know "whether any parent can put up with such disrespectful and abusive treatment from children, as Great Britain has lately received from her colonies." The whole imperial struggle collapsed into a family squabble. (Wood, Radicalism of the American Revolution, 165.)

This parent-child image is poignantly illustrated in the allegiance that young Thomas Jefferson felt for "Mother England."

Jefferson's early writings . . . evince a profound anguish over separating from the British Empire. This separation from the affectionate ties of allegiance to America's mother country was a kind of death itself, revealing the familial ties engendered by the original English settlement. In his Summary View of the Rights of British America (1774), considered a very radical pamphlet at the time, Jefferson beseeches the king to restore "fraternal love and harmony thro' the whole empire," securing a "well-poised empire" of harmony and reciprocity. And even in his overtly revolutionary tract, The Declaration of the Causes and Necessity for Taking Up Arms (1775), Jefferson attributes the colonies' prior toleration of Parliament's incursions into their affairs to the "warmth of affection" between America and "Mother England." (Sheldon, Political Philosophy of Thomas Jefferson, 21.)

The Preordained and Prophesied Revolution

In light of Nephi's ancient prophecy of the successful Revolutionary War, it is noteworthy that some colonial clergymen of the day believed that the Revolution and its outcome had been preordained by God. In 1775 William Emerson, a young minister in Concord, Massachusetts, urged his congregation to be valiant in the struggle with Britain.

The road ahead would be difficult, Emerson cautioned, but the outcome was one preordained from the beginning of time. Accordingly, the soldiers could go forth to war assured that "the Lord will cover your head in the Day of Battle and carry you on from Victory to Victory." In the end, he concluded, the whole world would know "that there is a God in New England." (Stout, New England Soul, 290.)

In a sermon in Plymouth, Massachusetts, in December 1776, Sylvanus Conant spoke of the Declaration of Independence as fulfilling a prophecy of Isaiah:

The step that is taken hath the appearance of a literal accomplishment of one of those scripture prophecies which (if it is to be understood in a literal sense) must sooner or later take place. There is a prophetic query in Isa. 66:8 — Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day, or shall a nation be born at once? . . . Is there any thing that makes . . . a more literal fulfillment . . . as when these thirteen united States, by the voice of their deputies in Congress assembled, were led to declare themselves free and[independent[?] (Stout, New England Soul, 307-8.)

Seeking Liberty

Religious liberty was what the Puritans and others had sought in coming to America, and the lack of it in the Old World was what Nephi referred to in foretelling that the colonists would go "out of captivity." (1 Ne. 13:13). Freedom they had found, but gradually the British Empire was, in the eyes of the colonists, attempting to unduly curtail that freedom. Accordingly, the American Revolution was a continuation of the search for freedom begun by the earlier colonists, whom John Adams called "the founders," and to whom, he insisted, Americans in his day should look for inspiration.

Throughout the Revolution, Adams emphasized that Americans were continuing the struggle for freedom begun by their fathers. "The principles and feelings which contributed to produce the revolution," he explained many years later, "ought to be traced back for two hundred years, and sought in the history of the country from the first plantation in America. Americans should set before themselves the conduct of their ancestors, who "defended for us the inherent rights of mankind against foreign and domestic . . . usurpers . . . arbitrary kings and cruel priests. . . ." He called upon his contemporaries to examine the nature of the oppressions that had driven the exiles from their homes; to "read and recollect and impress upon" their souls the purposes of the founders. Above all, Americans needed to set before themselves "the civil and religious principles . . . which constantly supported" the founders through all their hardships. (Howe, Political Thought of John Adams, 43-44.)

But if the Revolutionaries were following their liberty-loving heritage, the step they took on July 4, 1776, in declaring independence from England was something even bolder and broader. Their Declaration justified the severance of ties with England by an appeal to certain inalienable rights that the Creator had bestowed upon all mankind. The Declaration was, according to Hugh Nibley, nothing less than a restoration of the ancient "law of liberty" known to the early Christians:

Irenaeus in the middle of the second century set forth what he called the "Ancient Law of Liberty." Plainly, it does not originate with him. The law is illustrated, he says, by the scripture "How often would I have gathered thy children together, . . . and ye would not!" (Matt. 23:37.) God wants men to do right, but he does not coerce them to it. "For," says Irenaeus, "God made man free from the beginning. . . . For God never uses force." . . . The ancient law of liberty is that God trusts men while on this earth to make their own choices, while they trust him alone to judge whether those choices have been good or bad. . . .

. . . Trespasses against persons and property are things that can be and always have been settled among men themselves by payment of one sort or another. But the particular concern of despots in every age has been to prevent and punish trespasses against God. . . . Sin in wrong; therefore all possible means should be taken to prevent men from sinning. What could more logical? From the earliest to the latest times kings have claimed to be what the Roman emperor called himself, the virtutum rector of the world, the magnus parens mundi, whose mission was to force all men to be virtuous. For a man to set himself up as judge and parent of the human race is to usurp divine authority, but the kings of old always had an answer to that: "We are God's representatives on earth," they said, "and whatever we do is, after all, in the name of virtue; we want everyone to be virtuous, and it is our business to see to it that everybody is virtuous." . . .

Satan's plan, you will recall, was to make everybody virtuous, not vicious, and in that he was the model and archetype of those monarchs of old who insisted on abolishing all sin by edict. Time and again the panegyrists hail this or that emperor for having abolished all sin and nonconformity from the world. God was against sin; very well, the emperor would see to it that nobody sinned — he would close the door on sin and make it possible for the human race to walk one way and one way only — the way of light, the path of compulsory virtue. . . .

On July 4, 1776, the ancient law of liberty was again established upon the earth. Everywhere in America, says John Adams, the people received the Declaration of Independence "as though it was a decree promulgated from heaven." And well they might, for it was a strange and wonderful thing. "Freedom hath been hunted round the globe," wrote Tom Paine. "Asia and Africa have long expelled her. Europe regards her like a stranger, and England hath given her warning to depart. O! receive the fugitive and prepare in time an asylum for mankind." It was a radical departure from the established order of things. Ancient precepts were renounced, and men disowned an allegiance to which they had taken oaths, however reluctantly. For that trespass a price was paid, and the right to the "new order of things," the novus ordo seclorum that appears on the national seal, was purchased by the shedding of blood. (Collected Works, 3:182, 185-87.)

The Price of Liberty

The shedding of their blood was a price that the patriots were willing to pay.

When the American patriot Patrick Henry shouted his immortal "Give me liberty or give me death," he did not speak idly. When at Philadelphia in 1776, the signers of the Declaration of Independence affixed their signatures to that sacred document, they, in a very real sense, were choosing liberty or death. Not one of them but knew full well that if the revolution failed, if the fight for freedom should come to naught, they would be branded as rebels and hanged as traitors. (Benson, Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 626.)

The men who adopted the Declaration knew perfectly well that if things went wrong their signatures would lead them to an ugly death on the scaffold and in the reeking pit below the scaffold, where the hangman with his bloody knife would wait beside a little bonfire. They accepted this, and jested about it, Hancock by writing his signature extra large so that King George could read it without his glasses, Charles Carroll by adding "of Carrollton" to his name so that the executioner would not seize an innocent Charles Carroll by mistake. Franklin, when all had signed, quietly remarked that they must hang together now because if they did not they would assuredly hang separately, and well they all knew it. (Catton and Catton, Bold and Magnificent Dream, 265-66.)

As with the colonial leaders, so with many of the followers: they likewise willingly committed to stand firm in the fight for freedom, even to the loss of their lives. In a sermon delivered in Boston in 1776, Samuel West told his listeners:

It is an indispensable duty, my brethren, which we owe to God and our country, to rouse up and bestir ourselves, and, being animated with a noble zeal for the sacred cause of liberty, to defend our lives and fortunes, even to the shedding of the last drop of blood. . . . To save our country from the hands of our oppressors ought to be dearer to us even than our own lives, and, next [to] the eternal salvation of our own souls, [it] is the thing of greatest importance, — a duty so sacred that it cannot justly be dispensed with for the sake of our secular concerns. (Stout, New England Soul, 298.)

Even so, the colonists looked forward with faith to the day when that act of declaring independence would be remembered with reverence and celebration. On the day after the resolution for independence was passed by the Continental Congress, John Adams wrote to his wife, Abigail:

[Yesterday] will be the most memorable Epocha, in the History of America. I am apt to believe that it will be celebrated, by succeeding Generations, as the great anniversary Festival. It ought to be commemorated, as the Day of Deliverance, by Solemn Acts of Devotion to God Almighty. (Bowen, John Adams and the American Revolution, 598-99.)

In one such commemoration on July 4, 1854, in the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City, Elder Orson Hyde declared:

The bold, manly, and daring act of our fathers in the Declaration of the Independence and Sovereignty of these United States [is] an act worthy to be engraven in letters of living light upon the tablets of our memory, and to be transmitted to our children, with the sacred charge that they teach it to their children, and to their children's children. . . . They had not only the moral courage to sign the Declaration of our nation's Independence, but hearts of iron and nerves of steel to defend it by force of arms against the fearful odds arrayed against them. (Journal of Discourses, 6:367.)

The Revolutionaries well knew that the odds were against them:

[The colonial] leaders were sober . . . , agreeing with John Adams that the war that had to be won would be "long, obstinate and bloody." (Catton and Catton, Bold and Magnificent Dream, 268.)

This Declaration was a promise that would demand terrible sacrifice on the part of its signers. . . . The Lord said He "redeemed the land by the shedding of blood" (D&C 101:80). (Benson, Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 627.)

Thus the promise made by the signers of the Declaration — who did "mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred Honor" — came to be fulfilled:

The names now so familiar . . . from the several signatures on that Declaration of Independence . . . were kept secret for six months. For each knew the full meaning of that magnificent last paragraph . . . in which his signature pledged his life, his fortune and his sacred honor.

Fifty-six men placed their names beneath that pledge. Fifty-six men knew — when they signed — that they were risking everything.

They knew if they won this fight, the best they could expect would be years of hardship in a struggling nation. If they lost, they'd face a hangman's rope.

But they signed. . . .

And they did, indeed pay the price. . . .

Of the fifty-six, few were long to survive.

Five were captured by the British and tortured before they died. Twelve had their homes . . . from Rhode Island to Charleston . . . sacked, looted, occupied by the enemy, or burned. Two lost their sons in the army. One had two sons captured. Nine of the fifty-six died in the war, from its hardships or from its more merciful bullets. . . .

They were not poor men or wild-eyed pirates. They were men of means. Rich men, most of them, who enjoyed much ease and luxury in their personal living.

Not hungry men. Prosperous men. Wealthy landowners, substantially secure in their prosperity.

But they considered liberty . . . — they had learned that liberty — is so much more important than security — that they pledged their lives . . . their fortunes . . . and their sacred honor.

And they fulfilled their pledge.

They paid the price.

And freedom was born. (Harvey, Our Lives, Our Fortunes, Our Sacred Honor.)

"With a Firm Reliance on the Protection of Divine Providence"

The signers of the Declaration had made their sacred pledge with an express appeal to the protection of heaven, as President Ezra Taft Benson emphasized:

The founders recognized that if the new nation were to survive, there must be reliance on the protection of God. The Declaration of Independence concluded with this affirmation: "With a firm reliance on the protection of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honor." (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 626.)

What the signers so eloquently declared was no mere rhetoric. When the First Continental Congress had convened in 1774, it opened with prayer, for which one delegate even knelt:

Bishop White, who was present, says that [George] Washington was the only member who knelt on that occasion. (Schroeder-Lossing, Life and Times of Washington, 2:658.)

The following year, when the Continental Congress issued its "declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking up Arms" on July 6, 1775, the closing paragraph contained this appeal for divine assistance:

With an humble confidence in the mercies of the supreme and impartial Judge and Ruler of the Universe, we most devoutly implore his divine goodness to protect us happily through this great conflict. (Commager and Morris, Spirit of 'Seventy-Six, 1:279.)

In fact, Benjamin Franklin said at the Constitutional Convention that prayers for divine assistance in the war had been offered daily in the Continental Congress:

In the Beginning of the Contest with Britain, when we were sensible of Danger, we had daily Prayers in this Room for the Divine Protection. Our Prayers, Sir, were heard; — and they were graciously answered. All of us, who were engag'd in the Struggle, must have observed frequent Instances of a superintending Providence in our Favour. (Smyth, ed., Writings of Benjamin Franklin, 9:600-601.)

To marshal the collective faith and prayers of the colonists for the favorable outcome of the War for Independence, the Continental Congress appointed days of national fasting and humiliation. (Stout, New England Soul, 295.) But even before conflict broke out, New England ministers urged renewed dependence on God, as seen in the words of a sermon delivered the Sunday following the Boston Massacre in March 1770:

Let us carry every difficulty to him, cast our burdens upon him and commit our cause to him. This need not prevent the use of all other means so far as they are consistent with religion. A just regard to our liberties and to the privileges of our fathers is so far from being displeasing to God that it would be ingratitude to him who has given them to us to despise them or tamely give them up. We are bound in conscience to stand fast in the liberty with which Christ has made us free. We deserve not the name of men much less of Christians if we are willing to be in bondage to any man. But while we contend for our civil liberties let us be more concerned to be the Lord's free-men. If the Lord shall make us free, then shall we be free indeed. (Stout, New England Soul, 273.)

Several weeks later the Boston Sons of Liberty invited Charles Chauncy to speak. His message was summarized in the title he chose for his sermon: "Trust in God."

New England's long enjoyment of civil liberties and self-rule, [Chauncy] explained, was not owing to the English constitution or enlightened legislators but to God's sovereign protection. The cases of Israel and New England proved that as long as God's people trusted in him they would not be enslaved. As David could say, "Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted and thou didst deliver them," so Chauncy went on, "There are no people, now dwelling on the face of the earth, who may, with greater pertinency, adopt the language of King David."

. . . Chauncy traced the numerous occasions when God's New England people called on him and were saved. Whatever the threat, be it drought, war, earthquake, or tyranny, God delivered them as he had "his Israel of old." (Stout, New England Soul, 275.)

Trusting in God also meant submitting to the trials he sent upon his people to induce them to repent, as Puritan minister William Gordon said in 1774:

Do we join piety to our prudence and fortitude; do we confess and repent of our sins, justify God in his so trying us, accept . . . our punishment at his hands without murmuring and complaining; do we humble ourselves, amend our ways and doings, give up ourselves to God, become a holy People, and make the Most High our confidence? [Then] we may hope that he will be on our side; and "if the Lord is for us, what can men do unto us?" Have we the God of hosts for our ally, we might bid adieu to fear, though the world was united against us. (Stout, New England Soul, 287.)

After the war began, New Englanders were urged to continue to trust in God.

Already they were at war with England and had severed their connections to the obnoxious idea of monarchy. But this, [Samuel] Langdon said, was not enough. Americans must reform their own society, ridding themselves of "corrupt" English practices and ideas: "Nothing but a general reformation can give good ground to hope that the public happiness will be restored." If armed resistance and spiritual reform were combined, New England's natal groanings would issue forth in a new creation; one that was "unexampled in any history" since Israel and that would complete the long "errand" embarked upon by the founders one and one-half centuries earlier. British troops might mock "our Solemn Fasts and every appearance of serious Christianity in the land," Langdon concluded, but that was to their great misfortune. The same God who could "command the stars in their courses to fight his battles" would intervene for his professing people. "In a variety of methods he can work salvation for us, as he did for his people in ancient days." (Stout, New England Soul, 295.)

New England's history taught the undeniable lesson that God always delivered his people when they trusted in him. As Samuel Webster told it, "Our fathers trusted in God, and he did deliver them. And the same Lord yet reigneth, therefore let New-England, yea let the earth rejoice!" (Stout, New England Soul, 286.)

When Concord minister William Emerson urged his listeners to be ready to defend their freedom, he emphasized trust in God.

Many in attendance would soon be called upon for "real Service." Were they ready? Real readiness, Emerson explained, depended not only on martial skill and weaponry but also on moral and spiritual resolve. To be successful, soldiers must believe in what they were fighting for, and they must trust in God's power to uphold them. Other-wise they would scatter in fear before the superior British redcoats.

To supply martial resolve, Emerson recalled the history of Israel and New England with particular reference to their military encounters. He reminded the soldiers that they were the descendants of "worthy Ancestors" who fought to establish and maintain their religious and civil liberties. By virtue of their trust in God, they were never defeated. (Stout, New England Soul, 289.)

Another such call was sounded by Peter Thacher, who addressed the Massachusetts militia in 1777:

Let us spring to action, let us gird on the sword of the Lord and of Gideon, and determine to conquer or die! . . . It becomes us all to remember that we depend . . . upon God alone. It is not our own sword nor our own bow which must get us the victory. God forbid that I should lead you to such a presumptuous confidence! God forbid that I should fail urging upon you that repentance and reformation, which, with the atonement of Jesus Christ, are necessary in order to avert the divine displeasure and secure his favor unto us. If we are saved God alone must save us. . . . Can I conclude my address to you without solemnly blessing you in the name of the god of the fathers of New England! May he be with you as he was with those illustrious men! May he keep you at all times as in the hallow of his hand! May he cover your heads in the day of battle and enable you to play the men for your people and the city of your God! (Stout, New England Soul, 306.)

Abigail Adams similarly prayed as she watched smoke ascend from the burning city of Charlestown:

Almighty God, Cover the heads of our countrymen and be a shield to our dear friends. God of Israel, give strength and be a power to our people. (Bowen, John Adams and the American Revolution, 535.)

Nephi foresaw that the colonists "did humble themselves before the Lord" and that "the power of God was with them" in their struggle for independence. (1 Ne. 13:16, 18.) In a sermon delivered in 1776 after the victory at Bunker Hill, the Puritan minister Ebenezer Chaplin gratefully stated:

It highly desires to be remembered what signal salvations God has wrought for us since the commencement of the present wars with Britain. How wonderfully God wrought for us at the first when we were raw and naked as to Defense in the several battles on the Islands near Boston and even in the Bunker Hill fight. . . . How wonderfully did God fight for us by his strong wind the night after our People took possession of the Heights of Dorchester in all which the hand of God is most visible. (Stout, New England Soul, 303.)

Another manifestation of divine assistance was in the performance of many of the American revolutionaries. David Ramsay of South Carolina, writing some six years after the end of the war, attested:

[Men] spoke, wrote, and acted, with an energy far surpassing all expectations, which could be reasonably founded on their previous acquirements. (Morgan, Genius of George Washington, 4.)

General Washington and the Hand of Providence

The man at the helm of the American army, General George Washington, expressly and profoundly relied upon divine assistance. On June 19, 1775, he wrote to his wife, Martha ("Patsy"), telling her of his appointment as commander-in-chief of the Continental Army.

You may believe me, my dear Patsy, when I assure you, in the most solemn manner that, so far from seeking this appointment, I have used every endeavor in my power to avoid it, not only from my unwillingness to part with you and the family, but from a consciousness of its being a trust too great for my capacity. . . . But as it has been a kind of destiny, that has thrown me upon this service, I shall hope that my undertaking it is designed to answer some good purpose. . . . I shall rely, therefore, confidently on that Providence, which has heretofore preserved and been bountiful to me, not doubting but that I shall return safe to you. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 3:293-94; and see 3:301.)

As the war progressed, Washington saw continued evidence of the divine assistance he sought, as he wrote to Joseph Reed on January 4, 1776:

How it will end, God in his great goodness will direct. I am thankful for his protection to this time. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 4:211-12.)

Washington wrote to the Massachusetts legislature several months later, in March 1776:

The interposition of . . . Providence . . . has manifestly appeared in our behalf through the whole of this important struggle. . . .

May that being, who is powerful to save, and in whose hands is the fate of nations, look down with an eye of tender pity and compassion upon the whole of the United Colonies; may He continue to smile upon their counsels and arms, and crown them with success, whilst employed in the cause of virtue and mankind. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 4:441-42; and see 5:93.)

But divine assistance was to be obtained only by supreme human exertion in this cause that Washington knew would have profound consequences for generations yet unborn. In orders issued to his troops on July 2, 1776, General Washington urged:

The time is now near at hand which must probably determine, whether Americans are to be, Freemen, or Slaves. . . . The fate of unborn Millions will now depend, under God, on the Courage and Conduct of this army — Our cruel and unrelenting Enemy leaves us no choice but a brave resistance, or the most abject submission; this is all we can expect — We have therefore to resolve to conquer or die: Our own Country's Honor, all call upon us for a vigorous and manly exertion, and if we now shamefully fail, we shall become infamous to the whole world. Let us therefore rely upon the goodness of the Cause, and the aid of the supreme Being, in whose hands Victory is, to animate and encourage us to great and noble Actions. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 5:211.)

Aid from the Supreme Being was not long in coming when, in August 1776, the American army faced an enormous armada of British warships in New York harbor, "the greatest expeditionary force Britain had ever sent from its shores." Gale-force winds repeatedly kept the warships at bay, but even so, General Washington's army found itself in "the greatest danger it had yet known" as the British threatened to land on Long Island and easily defeat Washington's stranded army. But once again, strong winds kept the British warships offshore, allowing the Americans to begin a nighttime, hushed evacuation by ferrying to safety within shouting range of the British. (Lancaster, American Revolution, 144-49.) Before the evacuation was complete, however,

There was deadly peril once more in the late hours as the wind died, but suddenly, miraculous as the gales that had tied down the British fleet, a dense fog blanketed shore and river. Thick and binding, it held while the oarsmen labored on through their sixth consecutive hour of rowing. They had snatched a whole army from defeat, death, and capture. (Lancaster, American Revolution, 149.)

Grateful for such miraculous assistance, General Washington reminded Americans that continued divine aid was predicated upon their own maximum exertion. On April 23, 1777, he wrote to an officer:

All agree our claims are righteous and must be supported; yet all, or at least, too great a part among us, withhold the means, as if Providence, who has already done much for us, would continue his gracious interposition and work miracles for our deliverance, without troubling ourselves about the matter. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 7:456.)

Washington's admonition is reminiscent of that given anciently by the Book of Mormon general Moroni to his people in wartime. (Alma 60:11.) Furthermore, just as Moroni had instructed his people that divine assistance was predicated upon their righteousness (Alma 46:11-27), so Washington instructed his troops on July 9, 1776:

The blessing and protection of Heaven are at all times necessary but especially so in times of public distress and danger — The General hopes and trusts, that every officer and man, will endeavor so to live, and act, as becomes a Christian Soldier defending the dearest Rights and Liberties of his country. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 5:245.)

General Washington led not only by word but also by deed, in integrity and bravery, as on January 3, 1777, during the battle of Princeton. In the midst of particularly violent fighting, panic seized the American troops. At that moment,

Mounted on a white horse, the commander in chief himself raced out far into the[van[guard], in the thick of bullets and bayonets. An aide, watching, flung his cloak over his eyes to shut out what he was sure was the death of his chief. When the smoke cleared, Washington and his white horse were still there, plunging from this knot of fugitives to that. (Lancaster, American Revolution, 167-68.)

Four days later one of the American officers who had been in the battle wrote:

Our army love their General very much, but they have one thing against him, which is the little care he takes of himself in any action. His personal bravery, and the desire he has of animating his troops by example, make him fearless of danger. This occasions us much uneasiness. But Heaven, which has hitherto been his shield, I hope will still continue to guard so valuable a life. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 6:470, n. 44.)

Heaven did continue to guard that life and to help the American cause. In a letter to his stepson, John Parke Custis, on January 22, 1777, Washington described the deplorable lack of resources at his disposal, and then added:

How we shall be able to rub along till the new army is raised, I know not. Providence has heretofore saved us in a remarkable manner, and on this we must principally rely. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 7:53; and see 9:211.)

Indeed, the experience of the American patriots in receiving divine assistance in their fight for freedom was not unlike the experience of Columbus and the early Puritan colonists. The pattern was that the blessings of heaven were granted in the context of great personal sacrifice, such as that made at Valley Forge during the winter of 1777-78.

With Howe's army snugly settled in Philadelphia, Washington's battle-worn Continentals went into the bleakest of winter quarters at Valley Forge two dozen miles away. . . . Unless the men who camped there remained firm in the faith, all that had been won at Saratoga would be lost forever here in Pennsylvania. . . .

Washington had taken 15,000 men to Valley Forge, and by mid-winter . . . nearly half of them were out of action from illness or lack of clothing. Some were just plain naked and could not even go out to build the cabins they were to live in unless they could borrow a pair of pants. It was common to see men doing guard duty without shoes, or going out in the snow naked to the waist to gather firewood. In the matter of rations they were no better off, and at times the army seemed about to go out of existence for sheer lack of basic supplies. (Catton and Catton, Bold and Magnificent Dream, 286-87.)

On Christmas Day the men were still in drafty tents. The number of sick increased, and they were treated more often with grog than with medicine. Some of the men did not have a single shirt or pair of breeches, and they went through camp wrapped in blankets and walked barefoot through the snow to haul water from the creek. For sentry duty they would stand with their naked feet inside their hats. Feet and legs froze, turned black and were amputated.

George Washington pleaded with the Congress for clothing and food. Even though his men were naked and starving, he said, they weren't deserting now and they didn't mutiny. When they could, they joked instead; one unit announced a dinner party limited to men without a whole pair of trousers. As the winter deepened and the cold increased, men were setting their tots of liquor on fire and swilling them down with the flame. A French volunteer was struck by the contrast between the men's attitude and their condition. So ragged, he said. And so merry. (Langguth, Patriots, 468.)

Such optimism in the face of circumstances so difficult bespeaks a profound faith. Fittingly, the greatest story of faith told of Valley Forge centers on the commander-in-chief, George Washington. John Eidsmoe wrote:

The U.S. Capitol has a private chapel for congressmen, one feature of which is a stained-glass window. Called "Washington's Gethsemane," the window depicts the kneeling figure of George Washington at Valley Forge, praying to God for his soldiers and his country.

The Reverend Mason Locke Weems, in his famous biography, Life of George Washington, first published in 1800, gives an account of what happened at Valley Forge:

"In the winter of '77, while Washington, with the American army lay encamped at Valley Forge, a certain good old friend, of the respectable family and name of Potts, if I mistake not, had occasion to pass through the woods near headquarters. Treading his way along the venerable grove, suddenly he heard the sound of a human voice, which as he advanced increased on his ear, and at length became like the voice of one speaking much in earnest. As he approached the spot with a cautious step, whom should he behold, in a dark natural bower of ancient oaks, but the commander in chief of the American armies on his knees at prayer! Motionless with surprise, friend Potts continued on the place till the general, having ended his devotions, arose, and with a countenance of angel serenity, retired to headquarters: friend Potts then went home, and on entering his parlour called out to his wife, 'Sarah, my dear! Sarah! All's well! all's well! George Washington will yet prevail!'

"'What's the matter, Isaac?' replied she; 'thee seems moved.'

"'Well, if I seem moved, 'tis no more than what I am. I have this day seen what I never expected. Thee knows that I always thought the sword and the gospel utterly inconsistent; and that no man could be a soldier and a Christian at the same time. But George Washington has this day convinced me of my mistake.'

"He then related what he had seen, and concluded with this prophetical remark — 'If George Washington be not a man of God, I am greatly deceived — and still more shall I be deceived if God do not, through him, work out a great salvation for America.'"

There are numerous other accounts of George Washington at prayer at Valley Forge. In 1832, eighty-year-old Devault Beaver claimed to have received the account directly from Isaac Potts. Another account came from Dr. James Ross Snowden, whose father knew Potts, and yet another from Benson J. Lossing. General Knox, Washington's close associate at Valley Forge was recorded as saying that Washington frequently used the grove for prayer. (Christianity and the Constitution, 113-15; and see Cunliffe, ed., Life of Washington, xxxvi n. 43.)

General Washington's prayers on behalf of his people in their struggle for liberty are reminiscent of the prayer of the ancient Nephite general Moroni, who prayed "mightily unto his God for the blessings of liberty to rest upon his brethren." (Alma 46:13.) How mighty Washington's prayers were can best be judged by their effect, for that spring the colonial cause received fortuitous aid in the form of intervention by France, which allied with the colonies against England. Washington's view of this event is clear from the orders he issued to his troops on May 5, 1778:

It having pleased the Almighty ruler of the Universe propitiously to defend the Cause of the United American-States and finally by raising us up a powerful Friend among the Princes of the Earth to establish our liberty and Independence[up[on] lasting foundations, it becomes us to set apart a day for gratefully acknowledging the divine Goodness and celebrating the important Event which we owe to his benign Interposition. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 11:354.)

And in private correspondence later that month to Landon Carter, Washington expressed gratitude for heaven's assistance to an army that had been so destitute.

To paint the distresses and perilous situation of this army in the course of last winter, for want of cloaths, provisions, and almost every other necessary, essential to the well-being, (I may say existence,) of an army, would require more time and an abler pen than mine; nor, since our prospects have so miraculously brightened, shall I attempt it, or even bear it in remembrance, further than as a memento of what is due to the great Author of all the care and good, that have been extended in relieving us in difficulties and distress. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 11:492.)

It was by means of that same providential aid that American troops achieved victory at Monmouth, according to the orders Washington issued afterward, on June 30, 1778:

Seven o'Clock this evening is appointed that We may publickly unite in thanksgiving to the supreme Disposer of human Events for the Victory which was obtained on Sunday over the Flower of the British Troops. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 12:131; and see 12:157.)

Nor were the results of repeated divine intervention visible to Washington alone, as he stated in a letter to one of his officers on August 20, 1778:

The hand of Providence has been so conspicuous in all this, that he must be worse than an infidel that lacks faith, and more than wicked, that has not gratitude enough to acknowledge his obligations. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 12:343.)

Accordingly, when things later deteriorated to a yet worse condition than Washington had seen since the beginning of the war, he could write, as he did in December 1778 to Benjamin Harrison:

I feel more real distress on acct. of the prest. appearances of things than I have done at any time since the commencement of the dispute; but it is time to bid you once more adieu. Providence has heretofore taken us up when all other means and hope seemed to be departing from us, in this I will confide. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 13:468; and see 15:99.)

But the greatest trials were yet ahead:

In discouragement close to despair, Washington wrote in December, 1779, "I find our prospects are infinitely worse than they have been at any period of the war, and that unless some expedient can be instantly adopted, a dissolution of the army for want of subsistence is unavoidable. A part of it has been again several days without bread." Battle in the Carolinas and Georgia, in spite of local victories, had brought reverses which now threatened to split the South in fatal division from the northern colonies. Misfortune augmented in May, 1780, when the fall of Charleston, with the capture of 5,000 American soldiers and four ships, marked the heaviest defeat of the war.

In September, 1780, Washington sustained a sharper personal blow in the treason of Benedict Arnold, whose planned betrayal to the British of West Point, key to the Hudson Valley, was foiled by the chance arrest of his go-between with the British, Major Andre, Clinton's aide, only hours before the keys and plans to the fortress were to be handed over.

Winter quarters of 1779-80 at Morristown, New Jersey, were more severe even than the year before at Valley Forge. Rations were reduced for already hungry men who had been shivering in the snows to one-eighth of normal quantities. Two leaders of a protest by Connecticut regiments demanding full rations and back pay were hanged to quell an uprising. In January of 1781, Pennsylvania regiments mutinied and, with troops of New Jersey, deserted to the number of half their strength before the outbreak was suppressed. At the frontiers, Indians out of the woods guided by Loyalists were burning farms and homes and massacring civilians. Even to keep an army in the field was problematical, because soldiers of the militia had to be furloughed to go home to harvest their crops, and if leave were refused, they would desert. Fighting a war in such circumstances, said General von Steuben, the army's Prussian drillmaster, "Caesar and Hannibal would have lost their reputations."

Washington's desk overflowed with letters from his generals in the field, pleading their shortages of everything an army requires: food, arms, field equipment, horses and wagons for a regular system of transportation, all of which had to be taken by military requisition from the local inhabitants, rousing antagonism toward the patriot forces. . . .

To rise above, and persevere, in spite of such discouragement required a spiritual strength, a kind of nobility in Washington rare in the history of generalship. (Tuchman, First Salute, 182-83.)

Through it all he had "no doubt but that the same bountiful Providence which has relieved us in a variety of difficulties before will enable us to emerge from them ultimately and crown our struggles with success." In the face of the piling up of frustrations and disappointments . . . Washington was still able . . . to state to a member of Congress with the confident assurance that made him unique, "The game is yet in our hands . . . a cloud may pass over us, individuals may be ruined and the country at large or particular States undergo temporary distress, but certain I am that it is in our power to bring this war to a happy conclusion." (Tuchman, First Salute, 206.)

The depth of Washington's faith is also indicated in a letter he wrote on March 26, 1781, to one of his officers:

Our affairs are brought to an awful crisis, that the hand of Providence, I trust, may be more conspicuous in our deliverance.

The many remarkable interpositions of the divine governmt. in the hours of our deepest distress and darkness, have been too luminous to suffer me to doubt the happy issue of the present contest. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 21:378; and see 21:332 and 23:109.)

The Victorious Cause of God and His Angels

Washington was not the only one to discern God's hand even in the severe difficulties of the Revolution. John Adams held a similar view.

That the Revolution was a period of trial fit for testing and tempering American character, Adams was convinced, was not an accident of history, but part of a grand design intended to mold the American people for the job history had assigned them. History was not governed by "Blind and Unintelligent Necessity." It was rather the visible working out of Providential will. . . .

America's struggle was God's. The American people were His present agents for effecting His design. Our trial, Adams wrote to Josiah Quincy in 1775, "seems to be in the designs of providence. . . . America's fight against British tyranny was clearly "the work of the Lord. . . ."

Even as God was using Americans to accomplish His purposes, however, He was in the process of making them more effectual agents. . . .

God was using the trials of the Revolution not to punish Americans, but to cleanse them further for the tasks He had appointed them; to purify them, as Adams frequently suggested, in "the furnace of affliction." . . . By meeting and overcoming adversity, they would emerge strengthened and renewed. In this struggle, God would support them. The God for whom they did battle would not allow them to fall. And He would reward their obedience. . . . It made a difference that the American people had divine resources at their disposal. (Howe, Political Thought of John Adams, 46-49.)

Indeed, according to the Puritan preacher Judah Champion, the American cause was assisted by the unseen hosts of heaven.

"Methinks we may this day, well nigh see the ghosts of our departed progenitors, and hear those blessed worthies, in solemn accents, through the vast Heaven, addressing us, saying, 'Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free.'" Besides the founders, Champion continued, "God, angels and spirits in glory all look on" America's cause with approval. Therefore, none should speak evil of the current stand for liberty, nor fear the outcome:

"Under the Jewish Theocracy, God destroyed those who were intimidated and discouraged their brethren. We may be sorely chastised, but the righteous cause so dearly purchased will prevail. The Lord of Hosts will arm the whole creation — level the artillery of heaven — send all his angels, and martial all the elements in battle array, against his enemies, before his cause shall suffer." (Stout, New England Soul, 299.)

Was such talk of God's sending angels to help the American cause mere hyperbole? Not according to Elder Orson Hyde, who taught that the same angel who had guided Columbus also guided General George Washington in the midst of the Revolutionary War:

He [Moroni] was in the camp of Washington; and, by an invisible hand, led on our fathers to conquest and victory. (Journal of Discourses, 6:368; and see Appendix.)

Invisible though the hand may have been, its effects were clearly visible, as General Washington emphasized in orders to his troops after Cornwallis surrendered at Yorktown in October 1781.

Divine Service is to be performed tomorrow in the several Brigades or Divisions.

The Commander in Chief earnestly recommends that the troops not on duty should universally attend with that seriousness of Deportment and gratitude of Heart which the recognition of such reiterated and astonishing interpositions of Providence demand of us. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 23:247.)

With the war won, it would have been easy to bask in victory and speak no more of divine intervention. But Washington refused to be silent about the determinative role that divine assistance had played in the war. In his farewell address to his troops, he stated:

But before the Comdr in Chief takes his final leave of those he holds most dear, he wishes to indulge himself a few moments in calling to mind a slight review of the past. . . .

A contemplation of the compleat attainment (at a period earlier than could have been expected) of the object for which we contended against so formidable a power cannot but inspire us with astonishment and gratitude. The disadvantageous circumstances on our part, under which the war was undertaken, can never be forgotten. The singular interpositions of Providence in our feeble condition were such, as could scarcely escape the attention of the most unobserving; while the unparalleled perseverence of the Armies of the[U[nited] States, through almost every possible suffering and discouragement for the space of eight long years, was little short of a standing miracle. (November 2, 1783; Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 27:223; and see Flexner, Washington, 58.)

That the American army in its "feeble condition" could come off victorious against "so formidable a power" is still a cause of wonder.

When a crowd of American farmers opened fire on the regular troops of the British army some two hundred years ago, the action must have seemed foolhardy to any impartial observer. Such an observer might have been a little surprised at the events that immediately followed, when the farmers put the regulars to rout, chased them from Concord to Boston, and laid siege to that town. But however impressive this performance, it did not alter the fact that the British army was probably the most powerful in the world, having succeeded scarcely a dozen years before in defeating the armies of France, England's only serious rival. For a handful of colonists, unorganized, without any regular source of arms or ammunition, with no army and no navy, to take on the world's greatest power in open war must still have looked like a foolhardy enterprise.

Somehow or other it proved not to be. Yet it remains something of a puzzle that the farmers were able to bring it off. (Morgan, Genius of George Washington, 3; and see Andrist, ed., George Washington, 1:99.)

Such was but one manifestation of what Washington had insisted was a higher power directing the American cause, despite the feeble condition of its army. According to President Benson,

From the standpoint of numbers, equipment, training, and resources, the rag-tag army of the colonists should never have won the War for Independence. But America's destiny was not to be determined by overwhelming numbers or better military weapons or strategy. As John Adams purportedly declared: "There's a divinity which shapes our ends" (Shakespeare). God took a direct hand in the events that led to the defeat of the British. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 588.)

God's Great Agent in Establishing Independence

After the victory at Yorktown in 1781,

The name of Washington became at least as hallowed as that of Moses and was more frequently on the tongue. The Pennsylvania Journal confessed that "all panegyrick is vain, and language too feeble to express our ideas of his greatness." Hailed as the country's savior, he was feted, dined, courted, cheered all the way from Virginia to Philadelphia. (Gaustad, Faith of Our Fathers, 78.)

For Washington's part, he continued to ascribe the victory to divine intervention — as had General Moroni, who likewise attributed his phenomenal military victory to the power of God (Alma 44:4; 46:1 12-27). In responding to a congratulatory letter from friends and neighbors in Alexandria, Virginia, Washington wrote:

The great Director of events has carried us thro' a variety of Scenes during this long and bloody contest. (November 20, 1781; Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 23:356.)

On another occasion Washington again deflected praise directed to himself:

If my endeavours to avert the evil, with which this Country was threatned, by a deliberate plan of Tyranny, should be crowned with the success that is wished; the praise is due to the Grand Architect of the Universe; who did not see fit to Suffer his Superstructures, and justice, to be subjected to the ambition of the princes of this World, or to the rod of oppression, in the hands of any power upon Earth. (August 10, 1782; Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 24:497; and see 26:484.)

Similarly, when speaking in New York to a religious group that had showered him with congratulations, he responded:

Gentlemen: The illustrious and happy event on which you are pleased to congratulate and wellcome me to this City, demands all our gratitude. . . .

Disposed, at every suitable opportunity to acknowledge publicly our infinite obligations to the Supreme Ruler of the Universe for rescuing our Country from the brink of destruction; I cannot fail at this time to ascribe all the honor of our late successes to the same glorious Being. And if my humble exertions have been made in any degree subservient to the execution of the divine purposes, a contemplation of the benediction of Heaven on our righteous Cause, the approbation of my virtuous Countrymen, and the testimony of my own Conscience, will be a sufficient reward and augment my felicity beyond anything which the world can bestow. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 27:249; and see 27:262.)

Washington's humility only added to the luster of his reputation, and he found himself in a position of unrivaled popularity and power — things for which the modest man from Mount Vernon cared very little.

Among the legacies of the Revolution to the new nation, the most widely recognized and admired was a man: George Washington. He had no rivals. When the war ended, not a single officer was really powerful in the army who had not been elevated and trained by the Commander in Chief — and who was not loyal to him. In the civilian sphere no individual had national stature comparable with Washington's. The General had more than any political figure served as the nation's chief executive. Yet no continuation of leadership figured in his happy imaginings.

"At length, my dear Marquis," Washington wrote Lafayette, "I am become a private citizen on the banks of the Potomac, and under the shadow of my own vine and my own fig tree. Free from the bustle of a camp and the busy scenes of public life, I am solacing myself with those tranquil enjoyments which the soldier who is ever in pursuit of fame . . . can have very little conception. (Flexner, Washington, 183-84.)

A further window into the soul of Washington is the esteem in which he was held by his officers, one of whom recorded the touching scene of Washington's farewell to his officers:

The time now drew near when the Commander-in-Chief intended to leave . . . for his beloved retreat at Mount Vernon. On Tuesday, the fourth of December [1783], it was made known to the officers then in New York that General Washington intended to commence his journey on that day.

At twelve o'clock the officers repaired to Fraunces Tavern in Pearl Street, where General Washington had appointed to meet them and to take his final leave of them. We had been assembled but a few moments when His Excellency entered the room. His emotion, too strong to be concealed, seemed to be reciprocated by every officer present.

After partaking of a slight refreshment, in almost breathless silence, the General filled his glass with wine, and turning to his officers, he said, "With a heart full of love and gratitude, I now take leave of you. I most devoutly wish that your latter days may be as prosperous and happy as your former ones have been glorious and honorable."

After the officers had taken a glass of wine, General Washington said, "I cannot come to each of you, but shall feel obliged if each of you will come and take me by the hand."

General Knox, being nearest to him, turned to the Commander-in-Chief, who, suffused in tears, was incapable of utterance, but grasped his hand, when they embraced each other in silence. In the same affectionate manner, every officer in the room marched up to, kissed, and parted with his General-in-Chief.

Such a scene of sorrow and weeping I had never before witnessed, and hope I may never be called upon to witness again. . . . Not a word was uttered to break the solemn silence . . . or to interrupt the tenderness of the . . . scene. The simple thought that we were then about to part from the man who had conducted us through a long and bloody war, and under whose conduct the glory and independence of our country had been achieved, and that we should see his face no more in this world, seemed to me utterly insupportable.

But the time of separation had come, and waving his hand to his grieving children around him, he left the room, and passing through a corps of light infantry who were paraded to receive him, he walked silently on to Whitehall, where a barge was in waiting. We all followed in mournful silence to the wharf, where a prodigious crowd had assembled to witness the departure of the man who, under God, had been the great agent in establishing the glory and independence of these United States. As soon as he was seated, the barge put off into the river, and when out in the stream, our great and beloved General waved his hat and bid us a silent adieu. (Scheer and Rankin, Rebels and Redcoats, 583-84; and see Lancaster, American Revolution, 342-45.)

Washington's last official act as commander-in-chief of the Continental Army was to surrender his commission to the Continental Congress in Annapolis, Maryland, on December 23, 1783. He again expressed gratitude for the divine assistance the American cause had received:

I resign with satisfaction the Appointment I accepted with diffidence. A diffidence in my abilities to accomplish so arduous a task, which however was superseded by a confidence in the rectitude of our Cause, the support of the Supreme Power of the Union, and the patronage of Heaven.

The Successful termination of the War has verified the most sanguine expectations, and my gratitude for the interposition of Providence, and the assistance I have received from my Countrymen, encreases with every review of the momentous Contest. . . .

I consider it an indispensable duty to close this last solemn act of my Official life, by commending the Interests of our dearest Country to the protection of Almighty God, and those who have the superintendence of them, to his holy keeping.

Having now finished the work assigned me, I retire from the great theatre of Action; and bidding an Affectionate farewell to this August body under whose orders I have so long acted, I here offer my Commission, and take my leave of all the employments of public life. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 27:284-85.)

Once again there are striking parallels between the ancient Nephite general Moroni, who had been beloved by his officers (Alma 56:2; 61:9, 21) and who, after leading his army to victory and becoming easily the most powerful man in Nephite society, simply "yielded up the command of his army" and "retired to his own house that he might spend the remainder of his days in peace" (Alma 62:43). But the ancient pattern familiar in Washington's day and evoked by his selfless relinquishment of power was the life of the famous Roman Cincinnatus.

At the moment the ancient legend of Cincinnatus — the Roman called from his plow to rescue Rome, and returning to his plow when danger had passed — was resurrected as a fact of modern political life. The fame of the deed sped around the world. The painter John Trumbull wrote his brother from London on May 10, 1784, that it "excites the astonishment and admiration of this part of the world. 'Tis a Conduct so novel, so inconceivable to People, who, far from giving up powers they possess, are willing to convulse the Empire to acquire more." (Wills, Cincinnatus, 13.)

Washington was one of the rare exceptions to the general rule that "it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion." (D&C 121:39.) Washington thought he was heading for peaceful retirement from public life, but the mission of this "man who, under God, had been the great agent in establishing the glory and independence of these United States," was far from over.
