E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Chapter 6

The Constitution and a New Nation

Having empowered the American colonies to win their independence from the king of England, God would not allow the establishment of an American monarchy, as foretold by the Book of Mormon prophet Jacob:

[Upon] this land, said God, . . . the Gentiles shall be blessed. . . .

And this land shall be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles, and there shall be no kings upon the land, who shall raise up unto the Gentiles. (2 Ne. 10:10-11.)

God himself would raise up a powerful nation, as Nephi prophesied:

The Lord God will raise up a mighty nation among the Gentiles, yea, even upon the face of this land. (1 Ne. 22:7.)

The most significant thing about this mighty nation, as the resurrected Christ foretold, is that it would be free.

It is wisdom in the Father that they should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father. (3 Ne. 21:4.)

The Providential and Prophesied Rise of America

Because prophecies about America were set by Nephi and Christ in a larger context explaining the fulfillment of prophecies by Isaiah, it is noteworthy that latter-day prophets have pointed to a particular verse in the book of Isaiah as speaking of the Constitution of the United States of America. President Ezra Taft Benson testified:

The coming forth of the Constitution is of such transcendent importance in the Lord's plan that ancient prophets foresaw this event and prophesied of it. In the dedicatory prayer for the Idaho Falls Temple, President George Albert Smith indicated that the Constitution fulfilled the ancient prophecy of Isaiah that "out of Zion shall go forth the law." (Isa. 2:3.)

He said: "We thank thee that thou hast revealed to us that those who gave us our constitutional form of government were wise men in thy sight and that thou didst raise them up for the very purpose of putting forth that sacred document [the Constitution of the United States]. . . .

"We pray that kings and rulers and the people of all nations under heaven may be persuaded of the blessings enjoyed by the people of this land by reason of their freedom and under thy guidance and be constrained to adopt similar governmental systems, thus to fulfill the ancient prophecy of Isaiah and Micah that 'out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.'" (Constitution, 16.)

Years before the Constitutional Convention, some Americans already were convinced that God would raise up a mighty nation in America.

No one wrote more enthusiastically of America's rising fortunes than John Adams. His earliest view of America's future place in the continuing succession of nations, he spelled out in a letter of October 1755 to his cousin, Nathan Webb. "All that part of creation which lies within our observation," Adams wrote, "is liable to change. Even mighty states and Kingdoms are not exempted." Then he continued:

"If we look into history, we shall find some nations rising from contemptible beginnings, and spreading their influence till the whole globe is subjected to their sway. When they have reached the summit of grandeur, some minute and unsuspected cause commonly effects their ruin, and the empire of the world is transferred to some other place. Immortal Rome . . . by degrees . . . rose to a stupendous height, and excelled, in arts and arms, all the nations that preceded it. But . . . [it sank] into a debauchery, and . . . [became] at length an easy prey to barbarians."

Following Rome's decline, England began to increase in power and wealth, and became the greatest nation upon earth. Soon after the Reformation, however, a few people had come over to the New World for conscience's sake. "Perhaps this apparently trivial incident," Adams speculated, "may transfer the great seat of empire into America. It looks likely to me." (Howe, Political Thought of John Adams, 37.)

A contemporary of Adams, the Puritan pastor Ebenezer Baldwin, shared a similar vision of the future.

Declared Reverend Ebenezer Baldwin: the American colonies were certain to become the "Foundation of a great and mighty Empire; the Largest the World ever saw, to be founded on such Principles of Liberty and Freedom, both civil and religious, as never before took place in the World." (Howe, Political Thought of John Adams, 36-37.)

As noted by one of his biographers, Samuel Adams emphasized that the future American nation would be raised by the hand of divine providence.

No patriot had firmer faith in the future greatness of America than Sam Adams. . . . [H]is conviction . . . [was] that "providence will erect a mighty empire in America." (Miller, Sam Adams, 311.)

"No Kings upon the Land"

As the war for American independence had progressed, power became increasingly concentrated in the hands of one man, General George Washington.

Washington became, while still Commander in Chief, as much of a chief executive as the United States then had.

This did not escape observation, and many influential patriots considered that the possibility of making Washington a one-man government was an asset which could be fallen back on in a severe emergency. . . . In May, 1782, he had received from one of his colonels, Lewis Nicola, a letter urging him to accept the responsibility of becoming king of the United States.

The suggestion seemed to Nicola highly reasonable. Every major nation in the world was then ruled by a king, and royalty had been throughout history almost exclusively the accepted form of government. But Washington replied, "No occurrence in the course of the war has given me more painful sensations than your information of there being such ideas existing in the army. . . . I must view with abhorrence and reprehend with severity" a conception that was "big with the greatest mischiefs that can befall my country." (Flexner, Washington, 173.)

With victory came even more suggestions that Washington be made king.

At the height of his power . . . voices were repeatedly raised suggesting that Washington be crowned king, [but] the General chose to retire to Mount Vernon. (Kaminski and McCaughan, eds., A Great and Good Man, 2.)

Nor was Washington swayed to change his mind when the Articles of Confederation proved ever more dangerously weak.

He was outraged . . . by the reaction of Americans who talked . . . of substituting a monarch for the ineffective Congress. (Morgan, Genius of George Washington, 20.)

So sure were Americans of the selfless integrity of Washington that his presence was determinative in the monumental meeting convened in Philadelphia in 1787.

In 1787 George Washington was the most popular man in America. When he abandoned power in 1783, Americans were convinced that he was truly unique — a man uncorrupted by power. Thus, when a convention was called to revise the Articles of Confederation, the Virginia legislature quite logically elected Washington to lead the state's delegation. With Washington appointed, Virginia's seriousness would be apparent, and the other states would appoint prominent delegates. Furthermore, Americans would have confidence in the convention knowing that the former commander in chief would thwart any attempts to create a monarchical or aristocratical government. (Kaminski and McCaughn, eds., A Great and Good Man, 45.)

America, then, would have "no kings upon the land," as God had decreed through his prophet Jacob, "for I, the Lord, the king of heaven, will be their king." (2 Ne. 10:14.) Moroni's words "The God of the land . . . is Jesus Christ" (Ether 2:12) seem to be echoed in Thomas Paine's influential pamphlet Common Sense, in which he recounted the Old Testament story of Gideon, who responded to the Israelites' offer of kingship by["charg[ing] them with disaffection to their proper sovereign, the King of Heaven." (Kuklick, ed., Thomas Paine, 10.) Paine continued:

But where, say some, is the king of America? I'll tell you, friend, he reigns above. (Kuklick, ed., Thomas Paine, 28.)

The Hand of Providence at Philadelphia

The War of Independence had been won, as General Washington repeatedly emphasized, thanks to the help of divine providence. And as delegates from the thirteen colonies met in Philadelphia in the summer of 1787, it was clear to the wise Benjamin Franklin that the Constitutional Convention likewise needed that same providential assistance. On June 28, 1787, when the Convention was on the verge of breaking up, Franklin made a motion:

Mr. President,

The small Progress we have made, after 4 or 5 Weeks' close Attendance and continual Reasonings with each other, our different Sentiments on almost every Question, several of the last producing as many Noes as Ayes, is, methinks, a melancholy Proof of the Imperfection of the Human Understanding. We indeed seem to feel our own want of political Wisdom, since we have been running all about in Search of it. We have gone back to ancient History for Models of Government, and examin'd the different Forms of those Republics, which, having been orignally form'd with the Seeds of their own Dissolution, now no longer exist; and we have view'd modern States all round Europe, but find none of their Constitutions suitable to our Circumstances.

In this Situation of this Assembly, groping, as it were, in the dark to find Political Truth, and scarce able to distinguish it when presented to us, how has it happened, Sir, that we have not hitherto once thought of humbly applying to the Father of Lights to illuminate our Understandings? In the Beginning of the Contest with Britain, when we were sensible of Danger, we had daily Prayers in this Room for the Divine Protection. Our Prayers, Sir, were heard; — and they were graciously answered. All of us, who were engag'd in the Struggle, must have observed frequent Instances of a superintending Providence in our Favor. To that kind Providence we owe this happy Opportunity of Consulting in Peace on the Means of establishing our future national Felicity. And have we now forgotten that powerful Friend? or do we imagine we no longer need its assistance? I have lived, Sir, a long time; and the longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this Truth that GOD governs in the Affairs of Men. And if a Sparrow cannot fall to the Ground without his Notice, is it probable that an Empire can rise without his Aid? We have been assured, Sir, in the Sacred Writings, that "except the Lord build the House, they labour in vain that build it" I firmly believe this; and I also believe, that, without his concurring Aid, we shall succeed in this political Building no better than the Builders of Babel; we shall be divided by our little, partial, local Interests, our Projects will be confounded, and we ourselves shall become a Reproach and a Bye-word down to future Ages. And, what is worse, Mankind may hereafter, from this unfortunate Instance, despair of establishing Government by human Wisdom, and leave it to Chance, War, and Conquest.

I therefore beg leave to move,

That henceforth Prayers, imploring the Assistance of Heaven and its Blessing on our Deliberations, be held in this Assembly every morning before we proceed to Business; and that one or more of the Clergy of this city be requested to officate in that Service. (Smyth, ed., Writings of Benjamin Franklin, 9:600-601.)

Roger Sherman at once seconded Franklin's motion. But Hamilton "and several others" — wrote Madison — feared that calling in a clergyman at so late a stage might lead the public to suspect dissensions in the Convention. To this Franklin countered dryly that a measure of alarm out of doors might do as much good as ill. Williamson of North Carolina made the flat statement that everyone knew the real reason for not engaging a chaplain: the Convention had no funds. (Bowen, Miracle at Philadelphia, 126-27.)

Franklin's motion was lost, not because the delegates disbelieved in prayer, but because they had no money to pay a chaplain. The states which had elected them provided neither salary nor expense account. (Morison, Oxford History of the American People, 308.)

Even so, the divine power Franklin had so fervently insisted was essential to their endeavor was in fact forthcoming:

In the framing of the Constitution, as in the winning of the Revolution, George Washington again saw the steady providential hand. "To that superintending Power alone is our retraction from the brink of ruin to be attributed." (Gaustad, Faith of Our Fathers, 77.)

Although circumstances precluded formal action on Franklin's motion to make prayer a part of the proceedings, the Framers' reliance on God is, according to Hugh Nibley, as evident in the Constitution as it is in the Declaration:

Both the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States contain statements of general principles along with specific and particular provisions for their implementation. The principles are the really important thing. Both documents specifically render back to God those rights of judgment and execution which men had usurped. That is why both have a strongly negative tone. "Hands off!" is the theme — there are certain rights which all men enjoy which the Creator himself has declared inalienable and with which no man or group of men has any right to interfere. Men may check and admonish each other in their little affairs, but where the great decisions of life are concerned, God alone is the judge. That is the key to the whole thing: "In God we trust." The Founding Fathers did trust God. They trusted him enough to give back to him and him alone the right to judge the hearts and minds of men. In the eyes of absolutism, our Constitution is hopelessly soft on sinners. Here, heresy, held for centuries to be the quintessence of subversion and the worst of all crimes, does not fall under human jurisdiction at all; people with wrong ideas are expressly allowed to talk about them and even hold meetings; Congress may never declare one religion more desirable than another (Article VI and Amendment I), or one person more noble than another (Article I, D&C 10). God alone knows who is really virtuous and who is not. The king may be right some of the time or even all the time, but that, as Macaulay observes in his "Essay on Civil Disabilities," is beside the point, which, according to the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, is that men must be free individually and collectively to make their own choices, no matter how bad. That, as we have seen, is the ancient law of liberty. (Collected Works, 3:187-88.)

How did the delegates themselves view the result of the Constitutional Convention? According to South Carolina delegate Charles Pinckney:

When the general convention met, no citizen of the United States could expect less from it than I did, so many jarring interests and prejudices to reconcile! The variety of pressing dangers at our doors, even during the war, were barely sufficient to force us to act in concert, and necessarily give way at times to each other. But when the great work was done and published, I was not only most agreeably disappointed, but struck with amazement. Nothing less than that super-intending hand of Providence, that so miraculously carried us through the war (in my humble opinion), could have brought it about so complete, upon the whole. (Ford, Essays on the Constitution, 412.)

Connecticut delegate William Samuel Johnson stated:

I cannot but impute it to a signal intervention of divine providence, that a convention of States differing in circumstances, interests, and manners, should be so harmonious in adopting one grand system. (Groce, William Samuel Johnson, 156.)

Such a view was also shared by Virginia delegate James Madison, who was called the "Father of the Constitution" and who later served as president of the United States:

The real wonder is that so many difficulties should have been surmounted, and surmounted with a unanimity almost as unprecedented as it must have been unexpected. It is impossible for any man of candor to reflect on this circumstance without partaking of the astonishment. It is impossible for the man of pious reflection not to perceive in it a finger of that Almighty hand which has been so frequently and signally extended to our relief in the critical stages of the revolution. (Hamilton, Jay, and Madison, Federalist [37:16], 193.)

Such unanimity stood in sharp contrast, Madison noted, to the divisiveness characterizing most political councils throughout history.

The history of almost all the great councils and consultations held among mankind for reconciling their discordant opinions, assuaging their mutual jealousies, and adjusting their respective interests, is a history of factions, contentions, and disappointments, and may be classed among the most dark and degraded pictures which display the infirmities and depravities of the human character. If, in a few scattered instances, a brighter aspect is presented, they serve only as exceptions to admonish us of the general truth; and by their lustre to darken the gloom of the adverse prospect to which they are contrasted. (Hamilton, Jay, and Madison, Federalist [37:17], 193-94.)

The word Madison chose to describe that unanimity was miracle.

Very early, Washington had sent Jefferson a copy of the Constitution. Madison did the same, dispatching with it a tremendous letter, describing in detail the work of the Federal Convention. It was "impossible," Madison said, "to consider the degree of concord which ultimately prevailed as less than a miracle." (Bowen, Miracle at Philadelphia, 278-79.)

The word miracle was likewise used by Washington when he wrote to Lafayette about the results of the Convention:

As to my sentiments with respect to the merits of the new Constitution, I will disclose them without reserve. . . . It appears to me . . . little short of a miracle, that the Delegates from so many different States (which States you know are also different from each other in their manners, circumstances and prejudices) should unite in forming a system of national Government, so little liable to well founded objections. (February 7, 1788; Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 29:409-10.)

"So Little Liable to Well Founded Objections"

Washington's recognition that the Constitution was "so little liable to well founded objections" seems to imply that not everything in the Constitution was necessarily inspired — a matter noted by President Brigham Young:

The signers of the Declaration of Independence and the framers of the Constitution were inspired from on high to do that work. But was that which was given to them perfect, not admitting of any addition whatever? No; for if men know anything, they must know that the Almighty has never yet found a man in mortality that was capable, at the first intimation, at the first impulse, to receive anything in a state of entire perfection. They laid the foundation, and it was for after generations to rear the superstructure upon it. It is a progressive — a gradual work. (Journal of Discourses, 7:14.)

In what way, then, was the Constitution inspired? Rex E. Lee wrote:

It is my opinion that the guiding hand of Deity is not reflected in each individual provision of the Constitution. I believe that some of the individual provisions were divinely inspired — those that guarantee against governmental infringement on individual liberties. But on a far grander scale, an appreciation of the divine guiding hand can be captured by focusing on the Constitution as an entirety; it is the grand view more than the micro view that must be taken. The "Miracle at Philadelphia," to use Catherine Drinker Bowen's term, was . . . the fact that the Constitution was adopted as an entire organic document, the fact that the delegates to the convention, representing as they did such divergent interests and possessed of such disparate philosophies, were able to reconcile their differences and to achieve the compromises characteristic of the document.

Most of the controlling constitutional concepts — separation of powers, federalism, written prohibitions against governmental intrusion on individual liberties, and, in my opinion, judicial review — are not confined to individual provisions. They pervade the entire document. Inspiration is reflected in the constitutional framework, in the total concept and overall structure. . . .

Probably the most remarkable single aspect of the United States Constitution is that it has continued to serve as our controlling organic document through almost two centuries of the most far-reaching political, social, and economic change that any nation has ever experienced. . . .

How . . . is [this] possible . . . ? The answer is found in the breadth — or if you will, the vagueness — of the most important constitutional principles. . . . Our Founding Fathers did not attempt to prescribe with detail the governmental powers and prohibitions contained in our national Constitution. They set the general course for the new ship of state, but left the helmsmen ample navigational freedom. (Hillam, ed., "By the Hands of Wise Men," 101.)

Another legal scholar also pointed to the wisdom of the flexibility of the Constitutional fabric and emphasized the uniquely precious legacy of freedom left by the Founders:

How could a shifting mixture of fifty-odd men sitting in a sweltering room in Philadelphia for four months lay down a charter under which we still live two hundred years later, in a world that would be unrecognizable to any of them? The short answer is that they gave their countrymen and their descendants a philosophy — constitutionalism — not a black-letter code. Philosophies, unlike codes, can outlast the conditions that give them birth. Far longer than codes, philosophies can shape the future. . . .

We who are their beneficiaries often lose sight of what these framers wrought. Throughout human history, political freedom has been a chimera. Rulers, subjects, and philosophers, those theoreticians of the good life and proper government, have variously denounced freedom as unholy or impractical or have despaired of it as impossible. Here and there, briefly, some societies managed to survive in freedom (at least for many). But these were all small, homogeneous societies, and none lasted long free and unfettered.

In 1776, the sun shone on something new. A revolutionary generation proclaimed its independence in the name of the people, and five years later succeeded in wresting political power from an ancient monarchy. Unlike the Cromwellian uprising in the mother country more than a century earlier, the American Revolution depended on no single figure and easily outlasted George Washington, its most charismatic leader, a reluctant president eager to relinquish power. Throughout Washington's tenure and since, the system that the founders established preserved for an expanding nation a wide realm of freedom, so that today, scarcely two centuries later, we are the oldest republic in the world. (Lieberman, Enduring Constitution, 10-11.)

"A Religious People Whose Institutions Presuppose a Supreme Being"

Despite the continuing relevance of the Constitution, it would be perilous to forget the providential power that made America free. After being elected to serve as the nation's first president, George Washington stated on April 20, 1789:

When I contemplate the interposition of Providence, as it was visibly manifested, in guiding us through the Revolution, in preparing us for the reception of a general government, and in conciliating the good will of the People of America towards one another after its adoption, I feel myself oppressed and almost overwhelmed with a sense of the divine munificence. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 30:289.)

Ten days later, when he was inaugurated as president, Washington declared:

It would be peculiarly improper to omit in this first official Act, my fervent supplications to that Almighty Being who rules over the Universe, who presides in the Councils of Nations, and whose providential aids can supply every human defect, that his benediction may consecrate to the liberties and happiness of the People of the United States, a Government instituted by themselves for these essential purposes. . . . In tendering this homage to the Great Author of every public and private good, I assure myself that it expresses your sentiments not less than my own; nor those of my fellow-citizens at large, less than either. No People can be bound to acknowledge and adore the invisible hand, which conducts the Affairs of men more than the People of the United States. Every step, by which they have advanced to the character of an independent nation, seems to have been distinguished by some token of providential agency. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 30:292-93.)

No one, of course, was more qualified to comment on how the United States had "advanced to the character of an independent nation" than was Washington, he having served as delegate to the First Continental Congress, as commander-in-chief of the American army, and as president of the Constitutional Convention. It was no exaggeration for Washington to say that his view was shared by others, as evidenced by a resolution passed several months later, in September 1789, by the First Congress:

Resolved, That a joint committee of both Houses be directed to wait upon the President of the United States, to request that he would recommend to the people of the United States a day of public thanksgiving and prayer, to be observed by acknowledging, with grateful hearts, the many signal favors of Almighty God, especially by affording them an opportunity peaceably to establish a Constitution of government for their safety and happiness. (Gales, ed., Debates and Proceedings in the Congress, 914; and see 915, 923-24.)

Responding to the resolution, President Washington issued a proclamation on October 3, 1789, calling for the first national day of thanksgiving:

Whereas it is the duty of all Nations to acknowledge the providence of Almighty God, to obey his will, to be grateful for his benefits, and humbly to implore his protection and favor, . . .

Now therefore I do recommend and assign Thursday the 26th. day of November next to be devoted by the People of these States to the service of that great and glorious Being, who is the beneficent Author of all the good that was, that is, or that will be. That we may then all unite in rendering unto him our sincere and humble thanks, for his kind care and protection of the People of this country previous to their becoming a Nation, for the signal and manifold mercies, and the favorable interpositions of his providence, which we experienced in the course and conclusion of the late war, for the great degree of tranquillity, union, and plenty, which we have since enjoyed, for the peaceable and rational manner in which we have been enabled to establish constitutions of government for our safety and happiness, and particularly the national One now lately instituted, for the civil and religious liberty with which we are blessed, and the means we have of acquiring and diffusing useful knowledge and in general for all the great and various favors which he hath been pleased to confer upon us.

And also that we may then unite in most humbly offering our prayers and supplications to the great Lord and Ruler of Nations and beseech him to pardon our national and other transgressions, to enable us all, whether in public or private stations, to perform our several and relative duties properly and punctually, to render our national government a blessing to all the People, by constantly being a government of wise, just and constitutional laws, discreetly and faithfully executed and obeyed, to protect and guide all Sovereigns and Nations (especially such as have shown kindness unto us) and to bless them with good government, peace, and concord. To promote the knowledge and practice of true religion and virtue, and the encrease of science among them and Us, and generally to grant unto all Mankind such a degree of temporal prosperity as he alone knows to be best. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 30:427-28.)

As the office of president was in turn occupied by other Founding Fathers, they, like Washington before them, acknowledged their dependence on that Supreme Being whose favor upon the young Republic had been so conspicuous. In 1797, John Adams concluded his inaugural speech with these words:

May that Being who is supreme over all, the Patron of Order, the Fountain of Justice, and the Protector in all ages of the world of virtuous liberty, continue His blessing upon this nation and its Government and give it all possible success and duration consistent with the ends of His providence. (Richardson, ed., Messages and Papers of the Presidents, 1:222.)

Thomas Jefferson, who had asserted in the Declaration of Independence that mankind's inalienable rights were bestowed by the Creator, closed his second inaugural address, in 1805, with the following:

I shall need, too, the favor of that Being in whose hands we are, who led our fathers, as Israel of old, from their native land and planted them in a country flowing with all the necessaries and comforts of life; who has covered our infancy with His providence and our riper years with His wisdom and power, and to whose goodness I ask you to join in supplications with me that He will so enlighten the minds of your servants, guide their councils, and prosper their measures that whatsoever they do shall result in your good, and shall secure to you the peace, friendship, and approbation of all nations. (Richardson, ed., Messages and Papers of the Presidents, 1:370.)

James Madison, who had been the chief architect of the Constitution, declared at his first inauguration as president, in 1809:

In these [the virtues of my fellow citizens] my confidence will under every difficulty be best placed, next to that which we have all been encouraged to feel in the guardianship and guidance of that Almighty Being whose power regulates the destiny of nations, whose blessings have been so conspicuously dispensed to this rising Republic, and to whom we are bound to address our devout gratitude for the past, as well as our fervent supplications and best hopes for the future. (Richardson, ed., Messages and Papers of the Presidents, 1:453.)

James Monroe stated at his first inauguration, in 1817:

I enter on the trust to which I have been called by the suffrages of my fellow-citizens with my fervent prayers to the Almighty that He will be graciously pleased to continue to us that protection which He has already so conspicuously displayed in our favor. (Richardson, ed., Messages and Papers of the Presidents, 2:579.)

Such statements belie the popular myth that the Founders did not believe in God.

[One] fallacy . . . holds that most of the Founding fathers were essentially agnostics or atheists. . . . But as the pages in this book [The Republic of Reason: The Personal Philosophies of the Founding Fathers] seek to make clear, each of these men had highly developed personal beliefs. There was nothing unsubstantial or uninspired about their personal articles of faith. Such criticisms as they may have had of religious institutions were based less on theological than political grounds. It was only when a church, demanding freedom for itself, sought to deny it to others that they expressed opposition to religious organization. (Cousins, Republic of Reason, 14.)

Indeed, it was their very concern for the conditions under which free religious belief was possible that caused them to invest so much of their thought and energy into the cause of human rights. (Cousins, Republic of Reason, 12.)

Washington himself, after the successful conclusion of the war and shortly before resigning as commander-in-chief, stated:

The establishment of Civil and Religious Liberty was the Motive which induced me to the Field; the object is attained, and it now remains to be my earnest wish and prayer, that the Citizens of the United States would make a wise and virtuous use of the blessings, placed before them. (November 27, 1783; Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 27:249.)

The Founders' belief in God has been expressly acknowledged by the United States Supreme Court. In 1963, for example, the Court stated:

In Zorach v. Clauson, 343 U.S. 306, 313, 72 S.Ct. 679, 684, 96 L. Ed. 954 (1952), we gave specific recognition to the proposition that["[w]e are a religious people whose institutions presuppose a Supreme Being." The fact that the Founding Fathers believed devotedly that there was a God and that the unalienable rights of man were rooted in Him is clearly evidenced in their writings, from the Mayflower Compact to the Constitution itself. (School District of Abington Township v. Schempp, 374 U.S. 203, 213 [1963]; and see Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. 668, 675 [1984], rehearing denied 446 U.S. 994 [1984].)

"Wise Men Whom I Raised Up"

The Founders believed in God and acknowledged his miraculous intervention in the establishment of America. But in a larger sense, the miracle included the Founders themselves. According to President Benson:

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Savior declared, "I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose." (D&C 101:80.) These were not ordinary men, but men chosen and held in reserve by the Lord for this very purpose. (Constitution, 11.)

The Lord's "raising up" of those great men included physical protection from danger. During the French and Indian War, Washington, who at age twenty-two was commander of the Virginia militia, was marching with the British general Braddock towards Fort Duquesne when they were ambushed by the enemy.

No enemy was visible, but the men in the road began to fall in bloody heaps. Panic now took over completely. . . .

The officers on their horses were perfect targets. One after another they went down. Washington's horse was shot from under him. He leapt on another. Bullets tore his coat. Braddock toppled over. Washington's second horse crumpled; his hat was shot off. However, as he later wrote, "the miraculous care of Providence . . . protected me beyond all human expectation." (Flexner, Washington, 22, 24; and see Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 1:152.)

Washington's early military experience prepared him for his later pivotal role in the Revolutionary War, when he was joined by others whom the Lord had similarly "raised up." Indeed, the array of talent that suddenly stepped forward when Americans fought for their independence and established themselves as a nation has astonished historians.

It has often been asked how, within a short span of time on the east coast of the North American continent, there should have sprung up such a rare array of genius — men who seemed in command of historical experience and who combined moral imagination with a flair for leadership. (Cousins, Republic of Reason, 5.)

What was extraordinary about the Revolution was the talent it generated, the number of men of genius who stepped out of farmyards and plantations, out of countinghouses and courtrooms, to play a leading role in winning the war and then in building a national government.

People noticed this from the beginning. Already in the summer of 1775 members of the Continental Congress were observing that "Times like these call up Genius, which slept before, and stimulate it in action to a degree, that eclipses what might before have been fixed as a Standard." Fourteen years later, looking back on the crowded events that had followed, David Ramsay of South Carolina reflected that the Revolution had "not only required, but created talents." . . . And indeed if one were to make a list of the great men of American history, by whatever standards one chooses to measure greatness, an astonishingly large proportion would be found whose careers began or culminated in the Revolution. It would be hard to find in all the rest of American history more than two or three men to rank with Washington, Franklin, Jefferson, Hamilton, Madison, or John Adams.

To say this does not bring us any closer to an explanation of why the Revolution created such an array of talent. If we knew what the conditions were for generating talent of this kind, we ought all to be busy trying to reproduce them, for we certainly need it now. Unfortunately I do not know how the Revolution generated talent. (Morgan, Genius of George Washington, 3-4.)

For President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., however, such a phenomenon was readily explainable:

No more clearly does it appear that Moses was so trained in the royal Egyptian courts that he could lead ancient Israel out of bondage . . . than [that] these Framers were trained for their [work] — rich in intellectual endowment and ripened in experience. They were equally . . . in God's hands. . . .

The Framers were deeply read in the facts of history; they were learned in the forms and practices and systems of the governments of the world, past and present; they were, in matters political, equally at home in Rome, in Athens, in Paris, and in London; they had a long, varied, and intense experience in the work of governing their various Colonies; they were among the leaders of a weak and poor people that had successfully fought a revolution against one of the great Powers of the earth; there were among them some of the ablest, most experienced and seasoned military leaders of the world. (Stand Fast by Our Constitution, 397.)

President Clark's judgment about the sagacity of the Framers has been echoed by modern historians.

The generation of Americans coming into leadership in the late 1780s had gone through a series of laboratory exercises of unmatched diversity. Collectively they had experimented with British rule in its many forms, with a variety of state constitutions, with revolutionary regimes during the War of Independence. They had tried weak executives and strong, governors appointed by the Crown, by the legislatures, by the "better people" in councils or upper chambers, by "all the people," by various combinations thereof. They had tried bicameral legislatures and unicameral; legislatures elected in a variety of ways, under a variety of suffrage arrangements, holding a variety of legislative, executive, and even judicial powers. They had experimented with conventions that sprang directly from the people and bypassed legislatures.

These men, self-conscious and thoughtful experimenters, had not merely observed the laboratory exercises; they had conducted them, suffered from them, learned from them. Madison himself had helped draft the Virginia Constitution of 1776; served in the Continental Congress for three years and in the Virginia House of Delegates for two; and attended the Annapolis Convention. By 1787 he was back in Congress, now convened in New York. Many of his colleagues could boast of even broader experience, including service in executive and military establishments.

Learning illuminated experience. Rarely has a generation of activists been so thoroughly schooled in classical political thought. . . . For them the works of the Greeks and Romans constituted neither dead languages nor dead learning. Many read Montesquieu in his own language. They liked to cite the great English thinkers — Hobbes and Locke and Hume — against English rule itself. (Burns, Vineyard of Liberty, 28.)

In retrospect, Americans now see the year 1787 as an explosion of political genius. One scholar [James MacGregor Burns] has called it "a classic perhaps even unparalleled example of the power of political leadership by intellectuals in a situation where their understanding of human nature was firm and realistic, their grasp of earlier thinking broad and acute, their capacity to learn from their own and others' experiences discriminating," and the time ripe for resolution of "the problem of curbing power and protecting people's liberties."

"If all the delegates named for this Convention at Philadelphia are present," commented the French charge d'affaires, "we will never have seen, even in Europe, an assembly more respectable for the talents, knowledge, disinterestedness, and patriotism of those who compose it." On the whole these men were not neophytes as political leaders. Three had been in the Stamp Act Congress, seven in the First Continental Congress. Eight had signed the Declaration of Independence, and two, the Articles. Two would become President, one Vice President, and two Chief Justices of the Supreme Court. Sixteen had been or would later hold state governorships. Forty-two at one time or another had sat in one or another of the Continental Congresses, while at least thirty were Revolutionary War veterans. Many had served their states with distinction, drafting constitutions and codifying their laws. (Morris, Forging of the Union, 268-69.)

According to British prime minister William Pitt, the American colonial leaders constituted a body of talent unsurpassed in the annals of recorded history. Pitt declared to the British House of Lords concerning the delegates to the First Continental Congress, many of whom later attended the Constitutional Convention:

When your Lordships consider their decency, firmness and wisdom, you cannot but respect their cause and wish to make it your own. For myself, I must avow that in all my reading — and I have read Thucydides and have studied and admired the master states of the world — for solidity of reasoning, force of sagacity and wisdom of conclusion under a complication of difficult circumstances, no body of men can stand in preference to the general Congress at Philadelphia. The histories of Greece and Rome give us nothing equal to it, and all attempts to impose servitude upon such a mighty continental nation must be vain. (Bowen, Miracle at Philadelphia, 514.)

And if prior ages had never produced a comparable collection of such surpassing statesmen, neither have the succeeding years.

There has not been another such group of men in . . . our history, no group that even challenged the supremacy of this group. [In 1878 British Prime Minister William] Gladstone solemnly declared:

"The American Constitution is the most wonderful work ever struck off at a given time by the brain and purpose of man." (Clark, Stand Fast by Our Constitution, 396.)

Who can doubt that in the last quarter of the eighteenth century it was the New World . . . that provided the most impressive spectacle of leadership, rather than the nations of the Old World? Who can doubt, for example, that in the crisis of 1774-1783, the American colonies and States enjoyed far more competent leadership than the British Empire?

The situation is too familiar to rehearse. In the last quarter of the century the new United States — a nation with a white population of less than three million, without a single major city, and wholly lacking in those institutions of organized society or civilization so familiar in Europe — boasted a galaxy of leaders who were quite literally incomparable: Franklin, Washington, Jefferson, Hamilton, John Adams, Samuel Adams, John Jay, James Wilson, George Mason, Benjamin Rush, James Madison, and a dozen others scarely less distinguished. . . .

This remarkable outpouring of political leadership, this fertility in the production of statesmen [has been] unmatched since that day. . . .

The eighteenth century . . . vouchsafed us the most distinguished leadership that any nation has enjoyed in modern times. (Commager, Freedom and Order, 149-50, 170.)

The Incomparable Washington

The Founders were distinguished not only in wisdom but also in character, beginning with Washington himself. His greatness is so legendary (see Wills, Cincinnatus), that perhaps the most persuasive testimonial to his character comes from a modern biographer, James Thomas Flexner, whose express purpose was to separate the man from the myth.

My continuing effort has been to disentangle the Washington who actually lived from all the symbolic Washingtons, to rescue the man and his deeds from the layers and layers of obscuring legend that have accreted around his memory during some two hundred years. This involved, in the first place, an act of will. I tried to forget everything I had ever heard about George Washington. Rather than endeavor to emend old images, I determined to start with a blank canvas.

Beginning thus, as it were anew, I found a fallible human being made of flesh and blood and spirit — not a statue of marble and wood. And inevitably — for that was the fact — I found a great and good man. In all history few men who possessed unassailable power have used that power so gently and self-effacingly for what their best instincts told them was the welfare of their neighbors and all mankind.

Most of the brickbats now being thrown at Washington are figments of the modern imagination. In being ourselves untrue to the highest teaching of the American tradition, we of this generation have tended to denigrate that tradition, to seek out all that was unworthy, to emphasize whatever justifies national distrust. In so doing, we have discarded an invaluable heritage. We are blinding our eyes to stars that lead to the very ideals many of us most admire: the sanctity of the individual, the equality of all men before the law, government responsive to the people, freedom for all means of communication, avoidance of what Washington denounced as international "ambition," the self-determination of people everywhere. (Washington, xiv-xv.)

In preparing his biography of Washington, Flexner discovered and drew from a long-lost manuscript that was part of a biography written by one of Washington's aides-de-camp, Lieutenant Colonel David Humphreys. Humphreys was also a close friend — as close as anyone got to the general — and his biography was the only one that Washington ever authorized. Indeed, in 1786 Humphreys went to Mount Vernon at Washington's invitation and lived there for three years while working on the biography. But until Flexner's discovery of part of that biography in the 1960s, scholars had assumed that Humphrey's work had never been completed or that it had been lost. Even Flexner's discovery was fragmentary; and it remained for another scholar, Rosemarie Zagarri, to discover and piece together the remaining portions of the lost manuscript, which was finally published in 1991. Humphreys's biography recounts, among other things, Washington's deep reluctance to accept the office of president of the United States:

The first conversation which General Washington ever held with any person on the question of his accepting or refusing the Office of the President of the United States (in case it should be offered to him; as, from the facts which gave rise to that conversation it appeared almost certain it would be) was with the Author of this work. The General had then resolved to decline accepting the Office, from a persuasion it was not necessary, as he believed that there were others better able than himself to perform the duties of it. After a conversation of four hours they separated, the General receiving the counsel that it was proper to postpone his ultimate determination as long as the circumstances would allow without detriment to the public cause. For several months afterwards they scarcely failed one day of conversing on the same subject or subjects connected with it. From a variety of considerations & correspondencies the General became convinced that it was his indispensable duty to accept the Presidency. . . . In all this proceeding, which was then certainly unknown to the World, & which it has not been considered eligible should be published while he was living, there was nothing discoverable but the operation of reason without affectation. Influenced by principles of duty, his private inclination was overcome by a sense of public obligation. (Zagarri, ed., David Humphreys' "Life of General Washington," 54-56.)

According to Zagarri, even if Humphreys overstated his own role in the convincing of Washington to accept the presidency, Humphreys's biography is important for what it tells us about Washington:

Whatever Humphreys' role in getting the general to accept the presidency, his biography fleshes out our understanding of Washington the man. Washington genuinely agonized over whether to accept the nation's highest office, debating the subject endlessly with Humphreys. He was not merely expressing his insecurities in the hope of being flattered, nor was he attempting to be coy. Concerned about the substance as well as the appearance of impropriety, he feared not only for his own reputation but for the future of the country that he had helped to found. Today people automatically suspect the worst about politicians and doubt the sincerity of their emotions. Humphreys' account, however, proves that the first president was a man of integrity. He expressed the same sentiments to his confidants as to his casual acquaintances; he was the same person in private as in public. (David Humphreys' "Life of General Washington," xlix.)

Such an assessment confirms what others said who were well acquainted with Washington.

Congressman Henry Lee, fellow Virginian, . . . observed that "vice shuddered" in Washington's presence, adding that "the purity of his private character gave effulgence to his public virtues." . . .

And Jefferson . . . [stated]: "His integrity was most pure, his justice the most inflexible I have ever known." He was indeed, Jefferson concluded, "in every sense of the words, a wise, a good and a great man." (Gaustad, Faith of Our Fathers, 74-75.)

Wise, Good, and Great Men

Wise, good, and great — the terms also describe many of the men with whom Washington associated. Concerning the delegates to the Constitutional Convention, for example, James Madison wrote:

Whatever may be the judgment pronounced on the competency of the architects of the Constitution, or whatever may be the destiny of the edifice prepared by them, I feel it is a duty to express my profound and solemn conviction, derived from my intimate opportunity of observing and appreciating the views of the Convention, collectively and individually, that there never was an assembly of men more pure in their motives, or more exclusively or anxiously devoted to the object committed to them, than were the members of the Federal Convention of 1787, to the object of devising and proposing a constitutional system which should best supply the defects of that which it was to replace, and best secure the permanent liberty and happiness of their country. (Hamilton, Jay, and Madison, Federalist, xi.)

And President Benson stated:

After he became President of the Church, President Wilford Woodruff declared that "those men who laid the foundation of this American government were the best spirits the God of heaven could find on the face of the earth. They were choice spirits [and] were inspired of the Lord." (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 604.)
