E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Chapter 7

Fulfilling the Abrahamic Covenant

The divine power that crucially assisted those effecting America's discovery, colonization, and independence (see 1 Ne. 13:12-19) appears to have been granted directly pursuant to the Abrahamic covenant. The resurrected Christ told the Nephites that after they had received their blessings,

Then fulfilleth the Father the covenant which he made with Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed — unto the pouring out of the Holy Ghost through me upon the Gentiles, which blessing upon the Gentiles shall make them mighty above all, unto the scattering of my people, O house of Israel. (3 Ne. 20:27.)

Then, explained Nephi, after raising up the "mighty nation among the Gentiles" (1 Ne. 22:7) ,

The Lord God will proceed to do a marvelous work among the Gentiles, which will be of great worth unto our seed. . . .

And it shall also be of worth . . . not only unto the Gentiles but unto all the house of Israel, unto the making known of the covenants of the Father of heaven unto Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. (1 Ne. 22:8-9.)

The resurrected Christ elaborated on that marvelous work and what would precede it, explaining that all would be in fulfillment of the ancient covenant to the house of Israel:

It is wisdom in the Father that they [the Gentiles] should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel;

Therefore, when these works and the works which shall be wrought among you hereafter shall come forth from the Gentiles, unto your seed which shall dwindle in unbelief because of iniquity;

For thus it behooveth the Father that it should come forth from the Gentiles, that he may show forth his power unto the Gentiles, for this cause that the Gentiles, if they will not harden their hearts, that they may repent and come unto me and be baptized in my name and know of the true points of my doctrine, that they may be numbered among my people, O house of Israel;

And when these things come to pass that thy seed shall begin to know these things — it shall be a sign unto them, that they may know that the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the people who are of the house of Israel. (3 Ne. 21:4-8.)

The Scope of the Abrahamic Covenant

Elder Mark E. Petersen wrote:

Few people think of the discovery of America, the Revolutionary War, and the establishment of a constitutional form of government here as being steps toward the fulfillment of the Lord's ancient covenant with Abraham. But it is a fact that they were. (Great Prologue, 3.)

To comprehend those events in context, we must keep in mind the promises of the Abrahamic covenant, promises that were repeated to Abraham several times throughout his life but were finally sealed by God's swearing by himself after Abraham had demonstrated his willingness to offer up his beloved son Isaac. The following account of the blessings promised on that occasion is from a recent translation of the scriptures by the Jewish Publication Society.

By Myself I swear, the LORD declares: Because you have done this and have not withheld your son, your favored one, I will bestow My blessing upon you and make your descendants as numerous as the stars of heaven and the sands on the seashore; and your descendants shall seize the gates of their foes. All the nations of the earth shall bless themselves by your descendants, because you have obeyed My command. (Gen. 22:16-18, in Tanakh, 32.)

Columbus and a New Age of Worldwide Blessing

The blessing of all nations through Abraham's posterity seems to presuppose a kind of global interaction unknown in the ancient world and which has come about only in the wake of Columbus's momentous voyage of discovery.

Until 1500, man had lived largely in regional isolation. The various racial groups had been scattered about in a pattern of virtual global segregation. Only about 1500 was there for the first time direct contact amongst them all. Not until approximately that date were they at last all brought together. . . .

The year 1500 represents, therefore, a major turning point in human history. A parallel may be drawn between Columbus breaking the bonds of regional isolation in landing on San Salvador and the astronauts likewise breaking the bonds of planetary isolation in landing on the moon.

Indeed, world history in the strict global sense did not begin until the voyages of Columbus. . . . Prior to [that time] . . . , there were relatively parallel histories of separate peoples rather than one unified history of mankind. (Stavrianos, World Since 1500, 3; and see Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 150.)

In light of the Book of Mormon's portrayal of Columbus as a key figure in the latter-day fulfillment of the Abrahamic covenant, it is noteworthy that Columbus considered himself on God's errand to help bring about the Lord's latter-day work as foretold by the prophets. Describing Columbus's motivation to embark on his great voyage, Washington Irving wrote:

The ends of the earth were to be brought together, and all nations and tongues and languages united under the banners of the Redeemer. (Works, 2:15.)

Irving's biography of Columbus has been criticized, and justly so, for its often romanticized version of events, such as its distorted reconstruction of Columbus's debates with the Talavera commission, and for its perpetration of the myth that in Columbus's day most people believed that the earth was flat. (See Russell, Inventing the Flat Earth, 51-56.) But Irving's assessment of Columbus's self-image as a key link in God's latter-day work is not to be lightly dismissed, for one of the sources that Irving consulted and relied on was Columbus's Book of Prophecies. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 86.) Regarding the Book of Prophecies, Pauline Moffitt Watts observed:

Columbus's apocalyptic vision of the world and of the special role that he was destined to play in the unfolding of events that would presage the end of time was a major stimulus for his voyages. . . .

Columbus intended to set forth his vision of history and the role that he was destined to play in it in a volume called the Book of Prophecies, which he worked on for a number of years, including the period of the last of his four voyages to the New World, but never completed. What survives is a collection of materials assembled by himself and a friend, . . . that Columbus apparently planned to incorporate into the Book of Prophecies. It consists of excerpts from the Bible and from a number of well-known ancient and medieval authors . . . , and an incomplete letter (written by Columbus . . . and addressed to Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain) that became the preface to the work. . . .

[olumbus['s] . . . eschatology [had] . . . a mathematically determinable beginning and end, unfolding in time and space according to divine plan. Certain events forecast by the prophets would have to take place in order for that plan to be completed. . . . In the Book of Prophecies Columbus intended to set forth that eschatology and to explain his role in it. . . .

Columbus's preoccupation with the final conversion of all races on the eve of the end of the world is also reflected in the particular attention that he paid to John 10:16: "And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." . . .

. . . In the prefatory letter to the Book of Prophecies Columbus affirmed his certainty that his own discoveries . . . had greatly accelerated this final process of world-wide conversion. . . .

. . . Columbus came increasingly to see himself as a divinely inspired fulfiller of prophecy, the one who inaugurated the age of the unum ovile et unus pastor ["one fold, one shepherd"] forecast by John the Evangelist and John of Patmos. (Watts, "Prophecy and Discovery," 74, 85, 92-94, 99.)

Columbus thus viewed his own role as instrumental in bringing to pass a worldwide conversion, which is the essence of the covenant to Abraham that through his seed all nations would be blessed — or, more accurately, would bless themselves. Speaking of Columbus's role as he expressed it in the Book of Prophecies, Wilford observed:

[The] second recurring theme is Columbus's preoccupation with the final conversion of all people to Christianity. . . . As Columbus saw it — and he said as much in his prefatory letter — his discoveries of the many islands of the Indies had surely set in motion the worldwide conversion that must precede the gathering at Zion. (Mysterious History of Columbus, 221.)

Abraham and His Covenant As Seen by Columbus and the Colonists

The connection between Columbus and Abraham is even more expressly made in a letter Columbus wrote describing his fourth voyage to the New World, where he was plagued at once by an Indian uprising, inclement weather, and a fatiguing illness. Groaning with exhaustion, he fell asleep, whereupon he heard a "compassionate voice" deliver the following message that combined a call to repentance with promises of glory. Not only is Abraham specifically mentioned but he is implicitly held out as the culminating example that God unfailingly fulfills his promises. Said the voice to Columbus:

O fool, and slow to believe and serve thy God, the God of every man! What more did He do for Moses or for David His servant than for thee? From thy birth He hath ever held thee in special charge. When He saw thee at man's estate, marvellously did He cause thy name to resound over the earth. The Indies, so rich a portion of the world, He gave thee for thine own, and thou hast divided them as it pleased thee. Of those barriers of the Ocean Sea, which were closed with such mighty chains, He hath given thee the keys. Thou wast obeyed in so many lands, and thou hast won noble fame from Christendom. What more did He do for the people of Israel, when He carried them out of Egypt; or for David, whom from a shepherd He raised to be king over Judea? Turn thou to Him and acknowledge thy faults; His mercy is infinite; thine old age shall not hinder thee from performing mighty deeds, for many and vast heritages He holdeth. Abraham was past 100 when he begat Isaac, and Sarah was no young girl. Thou criest out for succor with a doubting heart. Reflect, who has afflicted thee so grievously and so often, God or the world? The privileges and promises which God bestows, He doth not revoke; nor doth He say, after having received service, that that was not His intention, and that it is to be understood differently. Nor doth He mete out suffering to make a show of His might. Whatever He promises He fulfils with interest; that is His way. Thus I have told thee what thy Creator hath done for thee and what He doth for all men. He hath now revealed to me a portion of the rewards for so many toils and dangers thou hast borne in the service of others. (Morison, ed., Journal and Other Documents, 378.)

Like Columbus, many of the early American colonists saw themselves as accomplishing something significant for the whole of mankind and doing so in conscious remembrance of the patriarch Abraham and his covenant. While still aboard the ship Arbella on the transatlantic voyage in 1630 to New England, John Winthrop delivered his now-famous sermon titled "A Model of Christian Charity," in which he adjured his followers to Christian conduct so that

The Lord will be our God, and delight to dwell among us as his own people, and will command a blessing upon us in all our ways, so that we shall see much more of his wisdom, power, goodness, and truth, than formerly we have been acquainted with. We shall find that the God of Israel is among us, when ten of us shall be able to resist a thousand of our enemies; when he shall make us a praise and glory that men shall say of succeeding plantations, "the Lord make it like that of New England." For we must consider that we shall be as a city upon a hill. The eyes of all people are upon us. (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 91.)

And how could Winthrop and his associates accomplish such a great work? By following the example of Abraham, said Winthrop:

Man . . . [is] commanded to love his neighbor as himself. Upon this ground stands all the precepts of the moral law, which concerns our dealings with men. To apply this to the works of mercy, this law requires two things. First, that every man afford his help to another in every want or distress. Secondly, that he performed this out of the same affection which makes him careful of his own goods, according to that of our Savior. Matthew: "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you." This was practiced by Abraham . . . in entertaining the angels. (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 83-84.)

Similar themes appear in the writings of another prominent New England colonist, Peter Bulkeley, who "could not have heard Winthrop's Arbella sermon, however much he seems to echo it." (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 118.) About 1640 Bulkeley wrote:

And for ourselves here, the people of New England, we should in a special manner labor to shine forth in holiness above other people. . . . We are as a city set upon an hill, in the open view of all the earth; the eyes of the world are upon us because we profess ourselves to be a people in covenant with God, and therefore not only the Lord our God, with whom we have made covenant, but heaven and earth, angels and men, that are witnesses of our profession, will cry shame upon us, if we walk contrary to the covenant which we have professed and promised to walk in. (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 120.)

Once again, their high purpose could be accomplished only by following the example of Abraham .

For Bulkeley, New England . . . was a rigidly circumscribed tribe, each and every member obliged to walk as Abraham walked: "The old way is the good way." (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 117.)

Indeed, doing the works of Abraham would bring the blessings of Abraham, counseled Bulkeley, as he referred to the incident in Abraham's life that brought the guarantee of the covenant — the offering of Isaac. Bulkeley spoke of Abraham's naming the site of the offering "In the mount will the Lord be seen" in memorial of the Lord's miraculous provision of the ram for a sacrifice. There was a timeless lesson in this, said Bulkeley:

Though means fail, yet let not our hearts fail. For the faithful God will not fail us. . . . Though all means fail, yet will I rejoice, In the mount will the Lord be seen, Gen. 22:14. (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 119.)

Abraham was also pivotal for the influential John Cotton, who arrived in New England in 1630.

Within three years of his arrival in Massachusetts Bay, John Cotton was preaching, with a remarkable sense of urgency, a series of passionate sermons on the new covenant — the promise of free grace that God made to Abraham and his seed (Gen. 17). (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 149.)

In one sermon, for example, Cotton claimed for himself and his followers (along with all believers) descent from Abraham, whose covenant received such emphasis in Cotton's preaching.

[Regarding] Abraham's sanctification, how [did] the Lord . . . reveal it? We may see, Gen. 22:12, By this I know that thou fearest me, seeing thou has not withheld thy son, thine only son from me. But for his justification, the Lord had revealed that in another promise, Gen. 15:5-6, wherein God brought him forth and bids him, Look now towards heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them. And he said unto him, so shall thy seed be, and among them he shows him that seed, that shall be a blessing unto all nations. This is a thing beyond his capacity, but this he believed, and it was counted unto him for righteousness. . . . As it was with the father of the faithful, so it is also with all believers, which are his children: that as he considered not his own body that was dead, nor the deadness of Sarah's womb, so neither should we. (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 151.)

Thus Abraham and his covenant occupied a central place in the thinking of the colonists, who were, according to Nephi, helping to fulfill that very covenant. Abraham continued to be an exemplar of faith and courage for the colonists as they began to feel England's oppressive hand. In 1774 the Puritan minister Thomas Bradbury encouraged his hearers to face their adversity as true children of Abraham by following Abraham's example. Bradbury made his point by contrasting two different tribes of Israel (as foreshadowed in their ancestral blessings): the tribes of Issachar and Dan, who, although both descended from Abraham, yet did not equally qualify as true "children" of Abraham. (Hyneman and Lutz, American Political Writing, 1:241.) The tribe of Issachar came into servitude, noted Bradbury, in contrast to the tribe of Dan, who followed the example of Abraham in opposing oppression. The lesson would have been obvious to Bradbury's hearers in their contest with England.

But Dan kept up the Dignity of his Family, and show'd that his Descent from so many Patriarchs was not in vain. Those antient Worthies, whom God had call'd out from the rest of the World, led him the way to it. One of the most remarkable Things that Abraham did in a publick Manner, was the taking of Five Kings Captive [in the rescue of Lot]. . . . The Right that he had to bring down and plunder so many Tyrants, appears from his paying Tythes to Melchisedek. (Hyneman and Lutz, American Political Writing, 1:251.)

As New England played its part in the Revolutionary War against Britain, various Puritan ministers declared that America's destiny was directly tied to the ancient Abrahamic covenant.

Throughout the war-torn days of 1775-1776, ministers issued a steady barrage of fast sermons [and]. . . . reminded their audiences that America's sense of peoplehood and destiny did not depend upon the British constitution but went back to a special covenant promise begun with Abraham and carried through to the founding of New England. (Stout, New England Soul, 295.)

Covenant Theology and the Constitution

In fact, "covenant theology" exercised a profound influence in the formulation of the United States Constitution — which, according to the Book of Mormon, is a key factor in the fulfillment of the Abrahamic covenant. According to law professor Lynn Wardle,

The Constitution of the United States is the legacy of "a peculiar moment in history when all knowledge coincided, when classical antiquity, Christian theology, English empiricism, and European rationalism could all be linked." And covenant was the linking concept. The religious idea of covenant was particularly and profoundly important in the evolution and inspiration of the American Constitution, for the political idea of, and the political concepts embodied in, the Constitution can be traced in "an unbroken line of descent" to the seventeenth-century covenant theology. . . .

. . . The covenant perspective "permeated the mind of the American Puritan." The Puritans were "obsessed with the covenant or contract, relying on this handy instrument to explain almost every relation of man to man and man to God."

. . . The heart of covenant theology was the idea that God's predestination of mankind was not arbitrary and impersonal, but was the fulfilling of the covenant of grace made with Abraham and his seed. . . .

The political theory of social compact can be traced to its roots in covenant theology. . . . A Critical Bibliography of Religion in America states: "The covenant is the clue to the New England Puritan understanding of . . . the order of the church and society — the 'Holy Commonwealth.' . . . To the Puritan, God had always dealt with his children by covenant. . . . It was not only individual, between each man and God: it was also public, respecting the formation of Churches and of civil government. . . . The state was established upon a covenant, like the Mayflower Compact of 1620." . . .

. . . The theological doctrine that government and society are predicated upon covenant "paved the way" for the ultimate triumph of popular sovereignty in America.

An indispensable component of covenant theology was the rejection of absolute authority and the belief that rulers were subject to limitations and boundaries, defined in the civil covenant, which God required them to observe. The governor or government that exceeded its proper limits "did not have the sanction of God." The God of covenant theology was a God who governed by laws which even he observed. The universe He ruled was a constitutional one. If God had bound himself by covenant to observe certain laws, no earthly delegate could claim unlimited authority. . . .

Thus, starting with a belief in the supremacy of God's law, covenant clergy emphasized that even the rulers were subject to that law, and therefore there were God-given limits on the powers of government and governors. As God's boundaries on government were derived from the covenant, the government was limited by the power given to it by the people who made the covenant. . . .

With their covenant theology background, Americans in 1787 viewed a constitution as "a fundamental law designed by the people to be separate from and controlling of all the institutions of government." The government created by a constitution would be circumscribed and limited by it. . . .

. . . The most fundamental concepts and institutions that were incorporated into the Constitution of the United States evolved out of the values and institutions of covenant theology, including popular sovereignty, limited government, and the notion of supreme, immutable law. ("Constitution as Covenant," 11-17, 24.)

For the Benefit of All Mankind

Hence the Constitution, which helped fulfill the Abrahamic covenant, grew out of a theology based on that covenant. In light of that covenant's universal scope of blessing encompassing all nations, it appears significant that America's Founding Fathers perceived that they were acting on behalf of all mankind.

It was crucial to liberty everywhere that the United States experiment be successful. That's what the Founding Fathers thought. (Morris, "United States," 73.)

To their everlasting credit, the Founding Fathers spoke for mankind, not just for Americans and their fledgling nation. . . .

The Founding Fathers were animated by a sense of obligation, and of mission . . . to the peoples of the world . . . [and] to posterity. (Commager, "The Revolution as a World Ideal," 13, 18.)

Indeed, their own statements convey the depth of their conviction along with the sense of urgency that conviction imposed. Benjamin Rush, for example, declared:

I was animated constantly by a belief that I was acting for the benefit of the whole world, and of future ages. (Commager, "The Revolution as a World Ideal," 18.)

Writing from Paris, Benjamin Franklin observed:

'Tis a common observation here that our Cause is the Cause of all Mankind, and that we are fighting for their Liberty in defending our own. (Commager, "The Revolution as a World Ideal," 18-19.)

Tom Paine similarly declared:

America made a stand, not for herself only, but for the world, and looked beyond the advantages which she could receive. (Commager, Freedom and Order, 173.)

John Adams, as quoted and summarized by one historian, held similar beliefs.

"I always considered the Settlement of America with Reverence and Wonder," [John Adams] wrote solemnly in 1765, "as the opening of a grand Scene and Design of Providence, for the Illumination of the Slavish Part of Mankind all over the Earth." The American people, he repeated, thought that "the Liberties of Mankind and the Glory of human Nature" were in their keeping. They knew that liberty had been hunted and persecuted in all countries. But they flattered themselves that America "was designed by Providence for the Theatre, on which Man was to make his true figure, on which science, Virtue, Liberty, Happiness and Glory were to exist in Peace." (Howe, Political Thought of John Adams, 44.)

Thomas Jefferson wrote to a friend:

We feel that we are acting under obligations not confined to the limits of our own society. It is impossible not to be sensible that we are acting for all mankind. (Commager, "The Revolution as a World Ideal," 13.)

In a public epistle celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson declared:

May it be to the world, what I believe it will be, the signal for arousing men to burst the chains under which monkish ignorance and superstition had persuaded them to bind themselves, and to assume the blessings and security of self-government. All eyes are opened, or opening, to the rights of man. (Commager, Freedom and Order, 176.)

And lest we dismiss Jefferson's words about the Declaration as overzealous rhetoric by its author, we should note that his view was shared by the eminent historian Henry Steele Commager:

Should we not say today, that men everywhere ought to be free; that they ought to be independent; that they ought to enjoy equality; [that] they ought to share in a higher standard of living and in the pursuit of happiness?

The Declaration of Independence is not merely a museum piece. It is not a parchment to take out once a year, celebrate with ceremonial reverence, and then return to the sterility of a glass case. It is not merely an historical document, something to learn in school as we learn so many things that we promptly forget. It is vital and immediate. It argues a case that is still valid and announces principles that are still true. It still calls upon us to pledge our lives, our fortunes, and our honor to their vindication. (Freedom and Order, 177.)

Thus, according to President Ezra Taft Benson,

The Declaration of Independence . . . constitutes a spiritual manifesto, declaring not for this nation alone, but for all nations, the source of man's rights. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 625.)

As with the Declaration, so with the Constitution. In his Farewell Address to the American people, George Washington expressed this hope:

That Heaven may continue to you the choicest tokens of its beneficence; that your Union and brotherly affection may be perpetual; that the free constitution, which is the work of your hands, may be sacredly maintained; that its Administration in every department may be stamped with wisdom and Virtue; that, in fine, the happiness of the people of these States, under the auspices of liberty, may be made complete, by so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this blessing as will acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the applause, the affection, and adoption of every nation which is yet a stranger to it. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 35:217-18.)

That Washington's perception was in harmony with the Divine Providence on which he placed so much reliance is indicated by a revelation given by the Lord to Joseph Smith in 1833:

[The] constitution . . . should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles; that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment. (D&C 101:77-78.)

Hence, the Prophet Joseph Smith could say,

The Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner; it is to all those who are privileged with the sweets of liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun. (History of the Church, 3:304.)

Those prophetic words were written while their prophet-author was languishing in Missouri's Liberty Jail, deprived of his constitutional rights by men acting under color of the infamous "Extermination Order" issued in 1838 by Missouri governor Lilburn W. Boggs and officially repealed finally on June 25, 1976, by Missouri governor Christopher S. Bond in an executive order declaring the extermination order to have "clearly contravened the rights to life, liberty, property and religious freedom as guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States, as well as the Constitution of the State of Missouri." But being deprived of his own constitutional rights did not blur the Prophet Joseph Smith's vision of the glorious destiny of the Constitution, which from the beginning exerted a profound influence abroad. The French philosopher Marquis de Condorcet described the effect that the establishment of the United States had on Europe:

For the first time, a great nation was seen to break away from every chain that bound it and serenely to give itself the constitution and the laws that it deemed suitable for the attainment of its happiness. This great cause was defended before the court of public opinion, in the presence of all Europe; the rights of man were fervently upheld and exposed without reserve or restriction in writings that circulated with total freedom from the banks of the Neva to those of the Guadalquivir. All this penetrated deep into the most oppressed regions, reached the most backward nations, and the men who lived there were astounded to hear that they had rights, learned to know them and learned about other men who had dared to reconquer and keep them. The American revolution would soon expand to encompass all of Europe. (Arciniegas, America in Europe, 117-18.)

Over time, the principles of God-ordained liberty enunciated in the Declaration and the Constitution have indeed spread throughout the globe.

America became a symbol of freedom and of opportunity, envied as a new land, free from the burdens and encrustations of past millennia. (Stavrianos, World Since 1500, 193.)

The American example was infectious. . . .

And the power of that example was to emerge again and again on the stage of history, even into our own time. . . .

Revolution, independence, nation-making, new political institutions — all these set examples and standards which excited and encouraged imitation around the globe. (Commager, "The Revolution as a World Idea," 19.)

From America have emerged the cornerstones of the political philosophy that has transformed the world. (Arciniegas, America in Europe, 3.)

The United States is a nation with a great mission to perform for the benefit and blessing of liberty-loving people everywhere. (Benson, Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 589.)

God's Marvelous Work in the Land of Liberty

Such is and will be the fulfillment of God's words to Joseph Smith that the Constitution was established "for the rights and protection of all flesh." The very fact that there could be a modern prophet to receive and disseminate such divine truths arises from the liberty — particularly the religious liberty — guaranteed by the Constitution. The value of that liberty is easily appreciated in light of Nephi's description of medieval Europe, where oppression reigned in the guise of religion — an apostate organization that["destroy[ed] the saints of God, and [did] bring them down into captivity." (1 Ne. 13:9.) Once liberty had been firmly established in America, God began his "marvelous work" through a young man of New England ancestry and liberty-loving heritage. (Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage.) That young man was Joseph Smith.

Washington died in 1799. . . .

Six years later, to the very month of Washington's death, Joseph Smith was born. At his youthful age of fourteen, the Father and Son appeared to him in vision in the Sacred Grove. The gospel of Jesus Christ, which the peoples had themselves removed from the earth by their own apostasy some centuries before, was again restored. It was now lawful, even by human standards, for the "stone" to be cut out of the mountain without hands, for the "God of Heaven (Himself) to set up a Kingdom," which "shall stand forever." (Wilkinson, "America — 1776 and 1976," 26-27.)

Joseph Smith qualified to serve as God's instrument in the same way that Joseph Smith's predecessors had qualified to serve as God's instruments in the rise of America: by faith and prayer. Indeed, their faith and prayers had made possible those of Joseph Smith, as President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., stated:

Will not each of you ask yourself this question: What would probably have happened if Joseph Smith had been born and had attempted to carry on his work of the Restoration of the Gospel and the Holy Priesthood . . . in any other country in the world? (Stand Fast by Our Constitution, 39.)

Furthermore, what the Savior told the Nephites — that the Gentiles would be "established" and "set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things [the Book of Mormon] might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed" — makes it clear that the discovery, colonization, and founding of America were accomplished for the very purpose of creating a cradle of liberty in which God could bring forth his latter-day kingdom and the Book of Mormon, the book itself serving as a sign that "the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the [Abrahamic] covenant." (3 Ne. 21:8.)

Columbus and his men . . . were directed to these shores by the hand of Providence. . . .

The Pilgrims . . . too, I believe, came here under the inspiration of heaven. (Benson, Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 569.)

It was not by chance that the Puritans left their native land and sailed away to the shores of New England, and that others followed later. They were the advance guard of the army of the Lord, predestined to establish the God-given system of government under which we live, and to make of America, which is the land of Joseph, the gathering place of Ephraim, an asylum for the oppressed of all nations, and prepare the way for the restoration of the Gospel of Christ and the reestablishment of his Church upon earth. It was under these circumstances and others of which the Lord was the author, that the stage was set for the raising of the curtain upon the opening scene of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. (Heber J. Grant and counselors, in Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, 5:279-80.)

There is not another nation under heaven but this, in whose midst the Book of Mormon could have been brought forth. The Lord has been operating for centuries to prepare the way for the coming forth of the contents of that Book from the bowels of the earth, to be published to the world, to show to the inhabitants thereof that he still lives, and that he will, in the latter days, gather his elect from the four corners of the earth. It was the Lord who directed the discovery of this land to the nations of the old world, and its settlement, and the war for independence, and the final victory of the colonies, and the unprecedented prosperity of the American nation, up to the calling of Joseph the Prophet. The Lord has dictated and directed the whole of this, for the bringing forth, and establishing of his Kingdom in the last days. (Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 11:17.)

To establish his latter-day kingdom, God had kept America hidden until he inspired Columbus to discover it, the Puritans and others to colonize it, and Washington and others to secure its liberty. Elder Orson Hyde said that Moroni, who had been on the ship with Columbus and in the camp of Washington, was now sent to Joseph Smith to reveal the ancient record once deposited by that same Moroni:

That same angel of God . . . appeared unto Joseph Smith, and revealed to him the early history of the inhabitants of this country. (Journal of Discourses, 6:368.)

In other words, having helped set the stage, Moroni now helped to put the play in motion, a drama of vast scope and significance:

This American continent is the choicest land upon the face of the whole earth. God kept it hidden until the 15th century that it might not be overrun by the people of Europe or of the rest of the world. He kept it hidden . . . until the set time had come when he could accomplish his purpose and prepare the way for the American Republic, under which his kingdom could be established. Could it have been established in Asia, in Europe, or in Africa? No, it required the Declaration of Independence framed by men inspired of God; the Constitution of the United States framed and adopted by men whom he had raised up; it required a people who had fought for their liberty, religious and civil, and who by his divine blessing had succeeded in gaining it and in establishing a free form of government. It required such a republican government as we have, to permit this people called Latter-day Saints to be organized, to grow and increase and become a mighty power. (George Q. Cannon, in Journal of Discourses, 20:339-40.)

This great American nation the Almighty raised up by the power of his omnipotent hand, that it might be possible in the latter days for the kingdom of God to be established in the earth. If the Lord had not prepared the way by laying the foundations of this glorious nation, it would have been impossible (under the stringent laws and bigotry of the monarchical governments of the world) to have laid the foundations for the coming of his great kingdom. The Lord has done this. (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine , 409.)

Only in this foreordained land, under its God-inspired Constitution and the resulting environment of freedom, was it possible to have established the restored Church. (Benson, Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 620.)

Fulfillers of the Abrahamic Covenant

Even with religious freedom in America, from the moment that Joseph Smith told about his vision, he experienced "the most bitter persecution and reviling." (Joseph Smith — History 1:23.) Adversity had been the lot of the prophet Moroni when he completed the sacred record written particularly to America; later, adversity was the lot of America's discoverer, colonizers, and founders; and now adversity was likewise the lot of Zion's latter-day founder, Joseph Smith. All these were involved in essentially the same work orchestrated by God to fulfill his ancient covenant sworn to Abraham. Speaking of the discovery, colonizing, and founding of America, Elder Mark E. Petersen observed:

These events were preliminary steps leading up to the gospel being restored and taken to the entire house of Israel, that they might be gathered in fulfillment of the covenant that God had made with Abraham, their ancient progenitor. (Great Prologue, 3.)

The whole process of the restoration of the gospel and the events leading up to it rest upon the covenant made by the Father with Abraham. (Great Prologue, 130.)

It is no accident, then, that Joseph Smith was, as latter-day revelation expressly states (D&C 132:30-31; 110:12), a direct descendant of Abraham. In the words of Parley P. Pratt:

[From] the lineage of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, according to the flesh, . . . sprang the great Prophet and restorer in modern times. . . . In this peculiar lineage, and in no other, should all the nations be blessed. (Journal of Discourses, 1:261.)

More specifically, of course, the Book of Mormon prophesies that Joseph Smith and his associates would be direct descendants of Abraham's great-grandson Joseph. (2 Ne. 3:6-7.) How, then, does the Book of Mormon say that the gospel would be restored to the "Gentiles"? Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained:

Joseph Smith . . . was of the Tribe of [Joseph's son] Ephraim. At the same time the Prophet was of the Gentiles, meaning that he was a citizen of a Gentile Nation and also that he was not a Jew. ( Mormon Doctrine, 311.)

And what, then, of the other "Gentiles" whose inspired efforts in discovering, colonizing, and founding America set the stage for Joseph Smith? As key participants in fulfilling the Abrahamic covenant, might they also have been actual descendants of Abraham through Israel? After all, the promised blessings to the nations were to come, according to the covenant, through Abraham's posterity. That Columbus was of Jewish extraction has been theorized (and at times insisted upon) by a number of scholars, including Salvador Madariaga (Christopher Columbus, 54), Simon Wiesenthal (Sails of Hope, 93-139), Cecil Roth (Encyclopedia Judaica, 5:756-57), and Robert Fuson (Log of Christopher Columbus, 16). The most thorough treatment is the recent book by Jane Frances Amler (a descendant of Don Isaac Abravanel, Queen Isabella's Jewish treasurer, who was expelled with the other Jews just one day before Columbus set sail on his momentous voyage). Amler has carefully amassed a large body of circumstantial evidence that seems to point to Jewish ancestry for Columbus. Her conclusion, however, was prudently tentative:

Though substantial evidence points to the very real possibility that Columbus was of Jewish extraction, his Jewish roots are yet to be established with certainty. (Columbus's Jewish Roots, 247-48.)

Other scholars similarly leave the question open.

If Columbus was Jewish, though his family had long before converted to Christianity, it could account for some of the mystery surrounding his early life. Even if it might give him a bond with influential conversos in Spain, his Jewish ancestry, were that the case, might be better kept a secret in a country that was becoming increasingly intolerant of heterodoxy. . . .

If Jewish blood indeed ran in his veins, Columbus was wise to keep quiet about it, as he did concerning so much of his life before reaching Spain. . . .

[According to Taviani,] "The problem is . . . one of ancestry and not of religious faith; and it is hard to establish anything certain. Is it, after all, so important? Jews have produced so many great minds, so many geniuses, that it would not be all that strange if Jewish blood flowed through the veins of history's greatest discoverer. But there is nothing to confirm the hypothesis." (Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 62-63.)

As to the possible Abrahamic ancestry of the early American colonists, it is noteworthy that the Puritans closely identified with ancient Israel.

The basic reality in their life was the analogy with the Children of Israel. (Boorstin, The Americans, 19.)

Israel's experience as recounted in the Old Testament [was], New England colonists believed, . . . a "type" or model for their own experience as God's "New Israel." (Stout, New England Soul, 8.)

This theme became an obsession. . . . God's New World people were in fact less a New England than a New Israel; genealogy tied them to the Old World, but providence linked them to ancient Israel so thoroughly and explicitly that words in the Old Testament could be taken as if literally intended for New England. (Stout, New England Soul, 54.)

In a sermon in 1663, Puritan minister John Higginson declared,

Me thinks I look upon this present Assembly . . . [as] resembling the great assembly of the People of Israel. (Stout, New England Soul, 71.)

Speaking in 1730, Puritan minister Thomas Prince observed:

I cannot forbear observing that there never was any people on earth so parallel in their general history to that of the ancient Israelites as this of New England. . . . Excepting [the] miracles and changing names, one wou'd be ready to think the greater part of the Old Testament were written about us, or that we, tho' in a lower degree, were the particular antitypes of that primitive people. (Stout, New England Soul, 173.)

In a Thanksgiving sermon in 1799, Abiel Abbot stated:

It has been often remarked that the people of the United States come nearer to a parallel with Ancient Israel, than any other nation upon the globe. Hence OUR AMERICAN ISRAEL is a term frequently used; and common consent allows it apt and proper. (Cherry, God's New Israel, iii.)

The branch of Israel with which the Puritans most closely identified themselves was the line of Joseph, according to a speech in 1776 by Samuel Cooper:

Like Joseph, who was separated from his Brethren, we have been envied, hated, calumniated, persecuted, and sold. (Stout, New England Soul, 300-301.)

And what of their actual genealogy? Might those Puritans, or some of them, have been literal descendants of the ancient patriarchs Abraham, Jacob (Israel), and Joseph? So it would appear from remarks such as those made in 1673 by Urian Oakes, the pastor at Cambridge, Massachusetts, and soon-to-be president of Harvard College:

So, we are Abraham's Children, a people in Covenant with God. . . . You have been though an handfull of people separate from the greatest part of the Christian World (as it is prophesied of Jacobs remnant that it should be in the midst of many people.) (Stout, New England Soul, 74.)

That at least some of those Puritans were of actual Israelite and Josephite ancestry seems necessarily to be the case, because they in turn were the ancestors of Joseph Smith and the earliest members of the restored Church, who discovered by revelation that they were literal descendants of the house of Israel (see Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants, 3:124-29; and Journal of Discourses, 2:268-69; 18:112), even though they were, as designated in latter-day revelation, "identified with the Gentiles." (D&C 109:60; headnote. Concerning their Puritan ancestry, a First Presidency message issued by President Joseph F. Smith and his counselors stated:

Many of the early proselytes to our faith were descendants of the Pilgrims and[Puritans[;] Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, and other leaders among the Latter-day Saints, traced their lineage to the founders and first defenders of the nation. (Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, 4:145.)

The literal Israelite ancestry of the early American colonists as well as America's Founding Fathers was insisted on by Elder Erastus Snow:

The same spirit of revelation that sought out the Prophet Joseph from the loins of Joseph who was sold into Egypt, and that raised him up in this dispensation to receive the keys of the Priesthood and to lay the foundation of this great work in the earth, has also called the children of Abraham from among the kingdoms and countries of the earth to first hear and then embrace the everlasting Gospel; and the remnants of the seed of Ephraim who were scattered from Palestine and who colonized the shores of the Caspian Sea and thence made their way into the north of Europe, western Scandinavia and northern Germany, penetrating Scotland and England, and conquering those nations and reigning as monarchs of Great Britain, and mingling their seed with the Anglo-Saxon race, and spreading over the waters a fruitful vine, as predicted by Jacob, whose branches should run over the wall. Their blood has permeated European society, and it coursed in the veins of the early colonists of America. And when the books shall be opened and the lineage of all men is known, it will be found that they have been first and foremost in everything noble among men in the various nations in breaking off the shackles of kingcraft and priestcraft and oppression of every kind, and the foremost among men in upholding and maintaining the principles of liberty and freedom upon this continent and establishing a representative government, and thus preparing the way for the coming forth of the fullness of the everlasting Gospel. (Journal of Discourses, 23:186.)

Regardless of their actual Abrahamic descent, however, the key figures in the discovery, colonizing, and founding of America at least became the seed of Abraham. He had been promised that all those who accepted the gospel would be accounted his seed (Abr. 2:10), and so it was with those who had been instrumental in the rise of America. Having passed to the spirit world after performing their part in fulfilling the Abrahamic covenant, they accepted the gospel but stood in need of the sacred temple ordinances restored through Joseph Smith. The first latter-day temple where all those ordinances could be performed was the Nauvoo Temple, which was kept busy night and day by the Saints hurriedly representing their ancestors before having to abandon that temple and depart westward. In the West, the Endowment House at Salt Lake City served as a kind of temporary temple, but the first temple completed was in Saint George. Within a year of its dedication, Wilford Woodruff was visited within its walls by a group of distinguished spirits requesting their temple work to be done. He recorded:

The spirits of the dead gathered around me, wanting to know why we did not redeem them. Said they, "You have had the use of the Endowment House for a number of years, and yet nothing has ever been done for us. We laid the foundation of the government you now enjoy, and we never apostatized from it, but we remained true to it and were faithful to God." These were the signers of the Declaration of Independence, and they waited on me for two days and two nights. I thought it very singular, that notwithstanding so much work had been done, and yet nothing had been done for them. The thought never entered my heart, from the fact, I suppose, that heretofore our minds were reaching after our more immediate friends and relatives. I straightway went into the baptismal font and called upon brother McCallister to baptize me for the signers of the Declaration of Independence, and fifty other eminent men, making one hundred in all, including John Wesley, Columbus, and others. (Journal of Discourses, 19:229.)

Every one of those men that signed the Declaration of Independence, with General Washington, called upon me, as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Temple at St. George, two consecutive nights, and demanded at my hands that I should go forth and attend to the ordinances of the House of God for them. (Conference Report, Apr. 1898, pp. 89-90.)

In his own journal Elder Woodruff expressed his feelings about what had transpired:

It was a very interesting day. I felt thankful that we had the privilege and the power to administer for the worthy dead especially for the signers of the Declaration of Independence, that inasmuch as they had laid the foundation of our Government that we could do as much for them as they had done for us. (Kenney, ed., Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 7:369; spelling standardized.)

Having dedicated their mortal lives to the establishment of America, these men — including Columbus, some of the colonists, and the Founding Fathers — now received the reward for their labors through the ordinances that would usher them into eternal life, receiving those ordinances at the hands of mortals exercising divine authority restored to the earth in the very America that they had helped establish. By receiving those ordinances they were now in a position to be "accounted [Abraham's] seed" and to "rise up and bless [him], as their father" (Abr. 2:10) — he whose covenant they had been instrumental in fulfilling for the benefit and blessing of all nations.
