E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Chapter 8

The Glory of the Lamanites

Although the Lamanites were driven and maltreated by many of the newly arrived "Gentiles," the Abrahamic covenant assured that the Lamanites would receive from the Gentiles first the Bible and then the Book of Mormon, the latter of which would reveal their Israelite ancestry and lead them to participate in the glorious rise of Abraham's latter-day Israelite posterity.

After they [the seed of this people] have been driven and scattered by the Gentiles, behold, then will the Lord remember the covenant which he made unto Abraham and unto all the house of Israel.

And also the Lord will remember the prayers of the righteous, which have been put up unto him for them. (Morm. 5:20-21.)

The prophet Nephi spoke of the same events by first quoting Isa. 49 and then explaining:

It meaneth that the time cometh that after all the house of Israel have been scattered and confounded, that the Lord God will raise up a mighty nation among the Gentiles, yea, even upon the face of this land; and by them shall our seed be scattered.

And after our seed is scattered the Lord God will proceed to do a marvelous work among the Gentiles, which shall be of great worth unto our seed; wherefore, it is likened unto their being nourished by the Gentiles and being carried in their arms and upon their shoulders.

And it shall also be of worth unto the Gentiles; and not only unto the Gentiles but unto all the house of Israel, unto the making known of the covenants of the Father of heaven unto Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. (1 Ne. 22:7-9.)

As part of the fulfillment of the Lord's covenant with Abraham, Nephi foresaw that the Indians would receive from the Gentiles first the Bible and then other, corroborating, scripture:

And it came to pass that I beheld the remnant of the seed of my brethren, and also the book of the Lamb of God, which had proceeded forth from the mouth of the Jew, that it came forth from the Gentiles unto the remnant of the seed of my brethren.

And after it had come forth unto them I beheld other books, which came forth by the power of the Lamb, from the Gentiles unto them, unto the convincing of the Gentiles and the remnant of the seed of my brethren, and also the Jews who were scattered upon all the face of the earth, that the records of the prophets and of the twelve apostles of the Lamb are true.

And the angle spake unto me, saying: These last records, which thou hast seen among the Gentiles, shall establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved. (1 Ne. 13:38-40.)

The Indians would learn of their Israelite ancestry and be invited to join in the fulfillment of the Abrahamic covenant by participating in the glorious rise of latter-day Israel. Nephi wrote:

After the book of which I have spoken shall come forth, and be written unto the Gentiles, and sealed up again unto the Lord, there shall be many which shall believe the words which are written; and they shall carry them forth unto the remnant of our seed.

And then shall the remnant of our seed know concerning us, how that we came out from Jerusalem, and that they are descendants of the Jews.

And the gospel of Jesus Christ shall be declared among them; wherefore, they shall be restored unto the knowledge of their fathers, and also to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, which was had among their fathers.

And then shall they rejoice; for they shall know that it is a blessing unto them from the hand of God. (2 Ne. 30:3-6.)

Such events would help fulfill the prophecy of Isaiah that the resurrected Christ had quoted to the Nephites:

And then shall that which is written come to pass: Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child; for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the Lord.

Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations; spare not, lengthen thy cords and strengthen thy stakes;

For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left, and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.

Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed; neither be thou confounded, for thou shalt not be put to shame; for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more.

For thy maker, thy husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel — the God of the whole earth shall he be called.

For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God.

For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee.

In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. (3 Ne. 22:1-8; see also Isa. 54.)

Columbus and the Prophet Isaiah

With such conspicuous emphasis on Isaiah by the ancient Book of Mormon writers who foretold the rise of America and the final glory of the Lamanites, it seems significant that Isaiah was the prophet that Columbus most emphasized in his Book of Prophecies:

In the Book of Prophecies [it was] . . . Isaiah . . . whom Columbus accorded special status as a prophet in the prefatory letter. (Watts, "Prophecy and Discovery," 93.)

Columbus's own words about Isaiah in that prefatory letter were as follows:

The prophets expressed themselves in various manners in their writings. . . . One prophet says more, another says less, and yet another says it in a better manner. Isaiah is the one that is appreciated and esteemed more than all the others by Jerome, Augustine and the other theologians. They say that Isaiah is not merely a prophet, but is a gospel writer as well. He is the one who concentrated every effort upon describing future events and upon calling all peoples to the holy . . . faith. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias 109.)

Columbus went on to say in that same letter that his own achievement had been foretold by Isaiah:

The execution of the journey to the Indies . . . was simply the fulfillment of what Isaiah had prophesied. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 111.)

Prophetic Significance of the Name Christopher

Columbus found prophetic significance also in his own given name, Christopher ("Cristoforo"), as explained by Las Casas:

Divine Providence usually ordains that persons It designates to serve be given names and surnames in accordance with the task they are meant to perform, as may be seen in many places of Scripture and in the Philosopher [Aristotle] in Chapter IV of his Metaphysics, where he says: 'that names must fit the qualities and uses of things.' He was therefore named Cristobal, i.e. Christum ferens, which means bringer or bearer of Christ, and so he often signed his name; for in truth he was the first to open the gates of this Ocean sea by which he brought our Savior, Jesus Christ, to these remote lands and realms, until then unknown. (Madariaga, Christopher Columbus, 17.)

Morison explained why the name Christopher had such significance for Columbus:

At some time between August and October 1451, the exact day is unknown, Susanna Colombo gave birth to a son who was named Cristoforo. Why his parents chose this name we do not know, but in so doing they furthered the natural bent of the boy's mind. Saint Christopher was a tall, stout pagan who yearned to know Christ but could not seem to do anything about it. He dwelt on the bank of a river in Asia Minor where there was a dangerous ford, and by reason of his great stature and strength helped many a traveler to cross. One day when he was asleep in his cabin he heard a Child's voice cry out, "Christopher! Come and set me across the river!" So out he came, staff in hand, and took the Infant on his shoulders. As he waded across, the Child's weight so increased that it was all he could do to keep from stumbling and falling, but he reached the other bank safely. "Well now, my lad," said he, "thou hast put me in great danger, for thy burden waxed so great that had I borne the whole world on my back it could have weighed no more than thee!" To which the Child replied, "Marvel not, for thou hast borne upon thy back the whole world and Him who created it. I am the Child whom thou servest in doing good to mankind. Plant thy staff near yonder cabin, and tomorrow it shall put forth flowers and fruit — proof that I am indeed thy Lord and Saviour." Christopher did as he was bid, and sure enough, next morning, his staff had become a beautiful date palm.

So from that day forth Christopher has been the patron saint of all who travel by land, sea or air. In his name Christopher Columbus saw a sign that he was destined to bring Christ across the sea to men who knew Him not. Indeed, the oldest known map of the New World, dated A.D. 1500, dedicated to Columbus by his shipmate Juan de la Cosa, is ornamented by a vignette of Saint Christopher carrying the Infant Jesus on his shoulders. (Christopher Columbus, Mariner, 4-5.)

Columbus's prayer offered immediately after he set foot in the New World reflects his mission of "Christ-bearer":

They all solemnly knelt down . . . as [Columbus] spoke a prayer: "O Lord, Almighty and Everlasting God, by Thy holy Word Thou hast created the heaven, and the earth, and the sea; blessed and glorified be Thy Name, and praised be Thy Majesty, Which hath deigned to use us, Thy humble servants, that Thy holy Name may be known and proclaimed in this second part of the earth."

So Cristoforo Colombo had become Christoferens, the Bearer of Christ. (Landstrom, Columbus, 68.)

Beginning in 1493, after his successful voyage of discovery, Columbus publicly emphasized what he had long privately believed about the prophetic nature of his first name.

Nearly all of his letters and documents thereafter were signed Christoferens, a Latinization of his given name that means "Christ-bearer." Columbus had long seen in his first name his own destiny. Just as the legendary St. Christopher presumably got his name because he carried Christ over deep waters at great peril, Columbus, his son reported, "crossed over with his company that the Indian nations might become dwellers in the triumphant Church of Heaven." He thus saw himself as the Christ-bearer of the new age. (Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 224; and see West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 3.)

Indian Prophecies of the Coming of a Blessed People

If Columbus saw his mission of "carrying Christ" to the Indians as prophetic, various Indian tribes retained traditions foretelling of the foreigners who would arrive and give them spiritual assistance:

Mayas [believed that they] would recognize those blessed people with whom they were to form a future alliance. They would be the ones who could decipher the ancient script, thus signaling divine approval and shared ancestry. (Sullivan, Unfinished Conversations, 48.)

The Hopis had a similar tradition:

Our Prophecies tell of white people. They were once our brothers who went away. . . . They were supposed to come back here . . . and help us to a better life. They would complete our spiritual circle. (Wall and Arden, Wisdomkeepers, 97.)

When the New England colonists began preaching to the Indians, some of them claimed that the teaching had once been familiar to their ancestors.

[Some] Indian converts traced aspects of Christian belief and practice to aboriginal sources. . . . One Puritan minister heard that many Indians had an apprehension "That their forefathers did know God, but that after this, they fell into a great sleep, and when they did awaken they quite forgot him." An aged Indian of Cape Cod [said] . . . that his people also had known but forgotten the teachings of the Christian God. (Simmons, Spirit of the New England Tribes, 67.)

The Book of Mormon and the Lamanites

The source for the Christian teachings conveyed by the colonists to the Indians was of course the Bible, in fulfillment of Lehi's vision of that book being transmitted to the Indians by the colonists. (1 Ne. 13:38.) Meanwhile, a relatively short distance away from the colonists' settlements, near what would be Palmyra, New York, another ancient record about Christ lay hidden — a record inscribed upon gold plates and kept by the Indians' ancestral forefathers and kinsmen. When that record was finally removed from the earth by divine power and entrusted into the hands of young Joseph Smith to be translated, he was informed (while the record was temporarily taken away in July 1828) about its significance for the Indians, or "Lamanites":

This testimony shall come to the knowledge of the Lamanites, . . . who dwindled in unbelief because of the iniquity of their fathers. . . .

And for this very purpose are these plates preserved, which contain these records — that the promises of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to his people;

And that the Lamanites might come to the knowledge of their fathers, and that they might know the promises of the Lord, and that they may believe the gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith in his name, and that through their repentance they might be saved. (D&C 3:18-20.)

The same thing was said, Joseph Smith later found, in the Book of Mormon itself; and since it was only after the book was published that the Church was organized, on April 6, 1830, from the very beginning its members were aware of their responsibilities to the Indians.

The Latter-day Saints [believed they] . . . had the responsibility . . . of introducing this "covenant people" to the Book of Mormon and teaching them the ways of their ancestors, who once followed Jesus. Eventually, these Lamanites, as the Book of Mormon called them, were destined to become revitalized, and the Latter-day Saints were expected to lead in this process by carrying them "in their arms and upon their shoulders." (Arrington and Bitton, Mormon Experience, 145.)

Reaching Out to the Lamanites

Within months after the Church was organized, according to Joseph Smith,

Great desire was manifested by several of the Elders respecting the remnants of the house of Joseph, the Lamanites, residing in the west — knowing that the purposes of God were great respecting that people, and hoping that the time had come when the promises of the Almighty in regard to them were about to be accomplished, and that they would receive the Gospel, and enjoy its blessings. The desire being so great, it was agreed that we should inquire of the Lord respecting the propriety of sending some of the Elders among them, which we accordingly did. (History of the Church, 1:118.)

God answered his prophet's query and directed that several elders be sent.

In October 1830 Joseph Smith sent Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, Peter Whitmer, and Ziba Peterson, all residents of western New York, to preach to the Native Americans on the western frontier. They met with the Catteraugus nation in western New York, the Wyandots in western Ohio, and the Shawnees and Delawares in eastern Kansas. Although the Indians listened respectfully, federal agents soon ordered the missionaries out of Indian country as "disturbers of the peace." (Arrington and Bitton, Mormon Experience, 146.)

Not many months later, in a revelation to Joseph Smith in March 1831, the Saints were again reminded of the Lord's design for the Lamanites:

But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose. (D&C 49:24.)

To achieve their latter-day glory, the Lamanites must, as the Book of Mormon says, be "gathered" into the fold of Christ. (1 Ne. 22:25.) Joseph Smith could not help but contrast that joyful gathering of the Lamanites with their involuntary and cruel "gathering" being conducted by the United States government:

Much has been said and done of late by the general government in relation to the Indians (Lamanites) within the territorial limits of the United States. One of the most important points in the faith of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, through the fullness of the everlasting Gospel, is the gathering of Israel (of whom the Lamanites constitute a part) [in] that happy time when Jacob shall go up to the house of the Lord, to worship Him in spirit and in truth, to live in holiness. . . .

The Book of Mormon has made known who Israel is, upon this continent. And while we behold the government of the United States gathering the Indians, and locating them upon lands to be their own, how sweet it is to think that they may one day be gathered by the Gospel! (History of the Church, 2:357-58.)

But outsiders had a hard time understanding why the Latter-day Saints were befriending the Indians.

One of the factors causing the Mormon expulsion from Missouri in 1833 and 1839 was the fear on the part of other settlers that the Mormons might give the Indians a false sense of power and importance. The Mormons were accused of "keeping up a constant communication with the Indian tribes of our frontier, with declaring, even from the pulpit, that the Indians are a part of God's chosen people, and are destined, by heaven, to inherit this land, in common with themselves."

Even after the Mormons settled at Nauvoo, Illinois, Indian agents continued to be suspicious of the Saints. (Arrington and Bitton, Mormon Experience, 146.)

"A Great Prophet, Chief, and Friend"

The year before he was martyred, Joseph Smith was visited in Nauvoo by several chiefs of the Pottawattamie tribe, who said that the Great Spirit had directed them to him to receive his guidance. The meeting was recorded in some detail by Wilford Woodruff:

The Indian orator arose and asked the Prophet if the men who were present were all his friends. Answer — "Yes."

He then said — "We as a people have long been distressed and oppressed. We have been driven from our lands many times. We have been wasted away by wars, until there are but few of us left. The white man has hated us and shed our blood, until it has appeared as though there would soon be no Indians left. We have talked with the Great Spirit, and the Great Spirit has talked with us. We have asked the Great Spirit to save us and let us live; and the Great Spirit has told us that he had raised up a great Prophet, chief, and friend, who would do us great good and tell us what to do; and the Great Spirit has told us that you are the man (pointing to the Prophet Joseph). We have now come a great way to see you, and hear your words, and to have you to tell us what to do. Our horses have become poor traveling, and we are hungry. We will now wait and hear your word."

The Spirit of God rested upon the Lamanites, especially the orator. Joseph was much affected and shed tears. He arose and said unto them: "I have heard your words. They are true. The Great Spirit has told you the truth. I am your friend and brother, and I wish to do you good. Your fathers were once a great people. They worshiped the Great Spirit. The Great Spirit did them good. He was their friend; but they left the Great Spirit, and would not hear his words or keep them. The Great Spirit left them, and they began to kill one another, and they have been poor and afflicted until now.

"The Great Spirit has given me a book, and told me that you will soon be blessed again. The Great Spirit will soon begin to talk with you and your children. This is the book which your fathers made. I wrote upon it (showing them the Book of Mormon). This tells what you will have to do. I now want you to begin to pray to the Great Spirit. I want you to make peace with one another, and do not kill any more Indians; it is not good. Do not kill white men; it is not good; but ask the Great Spirit for what you want, and it will not be long before the Great Spirit will bless you. . . . We will give you something to eat and to take home with you."

When the Prophet's words were interpreted to the chiefs, they all said it was good. The chief asked, "How many moons would it be before the Great Spirit would bless them?" He [Joseph] told them, Not a great many.

At the close of the interview, Joseph had an ox killed for them, and they were furnished with some more horses, and they went home satisfied and contented. (Smith, History of the Church, 5:480-81.)

Ministering to the Israelite Children of the Forest

The work that Joseph Smith had begun did not cease with his death.

When expelled from Illinois in 1846, the Mormons fully expected that in their new setting they would be able to render service on behalf of the Indian. Their leaders issued this challenge:

"The sons and daughters of Zion will soon be required to devote a portion of their time in instructing the children of the forest. For they must be educated, and instructed in all the arts of civil life, as well as in the gospel. They must be clothed, fed, and instructed in the principles and practice of virtue, modesty, temperance, cleanliness, industry, mechanical arts, manners, customs, dress, music, and all other things which are calculated in their nature to refine, purify, exalt and glorify them, as the sons and daughters of the royal house of Israel. . . . The despised and degraded son of the forest, who has wandered in dejection and sorrow, and suffered reproach, shall then . . . stand forth in manly dignity. . . . His heart shall expand with knowledge . . . and his mind shall comprehend the vast creations of his God and His eternal purpose of redemption, glory, and exaltation."

Upon reaching the Great Basin, the Mormons had the unique opportunity to apply this philosophy in their association with several thousand Indians in the new Mormon territory. . . .

In establishing their settlements near these native peoples Mormon leaders tried to follow a conciliatory policy. Although they did not pay the Indians for their land after the manner of William Penn, they met in council with the chiefs of local tribes and secured their consent to settle. The Mormons promised to give the Indians whatever livestock and produce they could spare, on the occasion of their periodic visits, and the Indians agreed not to molest the settlers or their livestock. (Arrington and Bitton, Mormon Experience, 146-47.)

Despite generally amicable relations with the Indians, some conflicts inevitably arose. But Brigham Young never departed from his posture of good will to the Indians. He counseled the Saints:

I wish to impress [all] with the necessity of treating the Indians with kindness, and to refrain from harboring the revengeful, vindictive feeling that many indulge in. . . . We exhort you to feed and clothe them so far as it lies in your power. Never turn them away hungry from your door, teach them the arts of husbandry, [and] bear with them in all patience and long suffering. (Arrington and Bitton, Mormon Experience, 148.)

So spoke the Mormon leader, and his sincerity may be judged by the words of the powerful leader of the Ute tribe, Chief Wakara (Walker), who had welcomed the Mormons and had even been baptized a member of the Church and ordained an elder:

Wakara love Mormon chief; he is a good man. (Arrington and Bitton, Mormon Experience, 153.)

In their efforts to help the Indians fulfill their prophesied destiny, the Latter-day Saints established farms to teach agricultural principles to the Indians and assist them in production. They also established outpost missions to teach agriculture and the gospel to the Indians in their native tongues. Missionaries so called were instructed by Brigham Young:

Beloved Brethren. We wish you to devote your time and energies to the great duty of instructing the Lamanites [Indians] in the knowledge of the Gospel. . . . You will need to be wise servants and harmless as doves, preserving an umblemished integrity towards them in all your words and actions. . . . Teach them by precept and example. . . . Be not discouraged if the work progresses slowly, but remember that if you spend a whole life and by so doing serve one soul of the seed of Abraham, your joy will be very great; and how much greater indeed will be your joy if your ministry should result in the salvation of many souls. (Arrington and Bitton, Mormon Experience, 153.)

When the Mormon community of Tooele, Utah, experienced repeated Indian raids on its livestock, one of its citizens, Jacob Hamblin, was appointed leader of a posse to recover the lost livestock and punish the Indians. In the resulting skirmish, Hamblin's rifle repeatedly misfired, as did the guns of every other posse member attempting to shoot an Indian. Said Hamblin:

It appeared evident to me that a special providence had been over us . . . to prevent us from shedding the blood of the Indians. The Holy Spirit forcibly impressed me that it was not my calling to shed the blood of the scattered remnant of Israel, but to be a messenger of peace to them. (Arrington and Bitton, Mormon Experience, 154-55.)

Hamblin was soon called to preside over the Southern Indian Mission, and he devoted the rest of his life to helping the Indians. The same Spirit that moved him to assist Lehi's posterity was made manifest in the most sacred and solemn of the Church's collective ceremonies — the dedication of its temples. In the dedicatory prayer of the Salt Lake Temple in 1893, President Wilford Woodruff petitioned the Lord:

Remember in . . . pity the dwindling remnants of the House of Israel, descendants of Thy servant Lehi. Restore them we pray Thee, to Thine ancient favor, fulfill in their completeness the promises given to their fathers. (Lundwall, Temples of the Most High, 126.)

In the dedicatory prayer of the Hawaiian Temple in 1919, President Heber J. Grant said:

We thank Thee, that thousands and tens of thousands of the descendants of Lehi, in this favored land, have come to a knowledge of the gospel, many of whom have endured faithfully to the end of their lives. We thank Thee, our Father and our God, that those who are living and who have embraced the gospel are now to have the privilege of entering into this holy house, and laboring for the salvation of the souls of their ancestors. (Lundwall, Temples of the Most High, 146.)

And in the dedicatory prayers for the temples in Alberta, Canada, in 1923 and in Mesa, Arizona, in 1927, President Grant prayed:

We beseech Thee, O Lord, that Thou wilt stay the hand of the destroyer among the descendants of Lehi, who reside in this land, and give unto them increasing virility and more abundant health, that they may not perish as a people, but that from this time forth they may increase in numbers and in strength and in influence, that all the great and glorious promises made concerning the descendants of Lehi, may be fulfilled in them. (Lundwall, Temples of the Most High, 159 and 173.)

The answer to that prayer for the Arizona Indians was discussed some four decades later by Elder Spencer W. Kimball:

About the time some of us here were born, President Heber J. Grant said in Mesa, Arizona, at the temple dedication: "We beseech thee, Oh, Lord, that thou wouldst stay the hand of the destroyer from among the descendants of Lehi who reside in this land."

Until then the Indians were dying. It was a vanishing race. From about 1927, the Indians have changed the direction. Where there were sixty or seventy thousand Navajos then, today [in 1968] there are, I suppose, nearly twice that many. The government and other agencies have quit scattering the Indians. We are now gathering them. President Grant said: "And give unto them increasing virility and more abundance that they shall not perish as a people." They are growing in number, growing in strength. The mortality age has greatly bettered. Children are not often dying at birth. There is less hunger and thirst. There is less freezing. They are living more normal lives.

"That from this time forth," the president said, "they may increase in numbers and in strength and in influence."

That was yesterday that President Grant said this. Today is the fulfillment, that all the great and glorious promises made concerning the descendants of Lehi may be fulfilled in them. This is still coming with all the strength of a great new awakening day. (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 617-18.)

Accompanying such prayers of faith as those pronounced by President Grant were programs designed to lift the Indians. For example, in the Indian Placement Program, which began in the 1950s and lasted twenty-five years,

Approximately sixty thousand young Mormon Indians were temporarily placed during [each] school year in homes of white Mormon families, who paid the full expense of their upkeep. . . . Despite problems and objections, more than 80 percent of the young Native Americans graduated from high school. . . . To Mormon host families the presence of these young people, and the occasional visits of their parents and relatives, have resulted in the sloughing off of prejudices and the development of love, friendship, and concern. In the 1970s, with the improvement of educational facilities among the Indian nations themselves, the placement plan began to be phased out. Mormon efforts to help Indians were rechanneled into a larger stream, as educational, medical, and agricultural programs were introduced among Indian peoples in Central and South America. (Arrington and Bitton, Mormon Experience, 159-60.)

Other Church programs begun in the twentieth century included two-year proselyting and labor missions to Indian peoples, an extensive religious seminary program housed next to state and federal schools for Indians in the United States and Canada, and an Institute of American Indian Studies at Brigham Young University.

God's Plan for Blessing the Lamanites

A great champion of these efforts was Spencer W. Kimball, who deplored how his own "Gentile" nation had mistreated the Indian but who also understood that only through the establishment of America could the Indian finally be redeemed according to the Lord's design:

As the colonists came from Europe and settled along the Eastern seaboard, the great "push" continued. Mile by mile we crowded them back. . . .

I would not justify any evil that the Indians ever did, but can we not see that they were on the defensive, fighting for their liberty, for independence and to perpetuate their rights to the promised land to which they had title from the Creator?

But the laws had been broken. They had forfeited their rights because they had failed to keep the commands of God. The prophecies must be fulfilled, and the plan of God must now be consummated. It was necessary, for the ultimate good of the Indian himself, that the Gentiles must come from foreign shores to become "nursing fathers" to these benighted people; the Pilgrims and Puritans had come to settle this land; the Revolutionary War had to be fought and won so that peace and freedom and liberty could be established here, and so that the gospel could be restored, and this that the record of the ancestors of the Indians might come forth, and the gospel of Jesus Christ be made plain to them. (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 602.)

And as a fellow Israelite who was instrumental in bringing the gospel to the Lamanites, President Kimball gloried in that shared ancestry and the joyous reunion:

An elderly Navajo brother told me something that I have reflected upon many times in the years that have intervened. He said: "This gospel is something we have been trying all our lives to remember; now all at once it comes back. Our fathers used to be with your fathers in the long ago, but then we came to a division in the road with a great stone in the middle. We went one way and you went the other. We went around that big rock for a long time, but now we are back together and we will always walk together from now on."

There is great understanding in this view of the history of the Lord's dealings with his people.

Many times I have tried in my mind to span the long centuries that link us to our common fathers, this Lamanite brother and I, and my soul is stirred when I remember that in our veins flows the blood of the Lord's elect — the great patriarchs of the Old Testament, such as Adam, and Enoch, and Noah. I am humbled to know that our common father was Abraham, of whom it is said there were no greater ones and through whose seed the Lord has chosen to carry out his holy purposes on the earth. Isaac, one of the great prophets of all time, and Jacob, the father of all the house of Israel, are our ancestors. Joseph who was sold into Egypt, a man of constant virtue who was in his day a savior to his father's house, is also the father of most members of the Church today, including the descendants of Lehi, Ishmael, and Zoram.

I have thought of the parting of our ways, when our fathers began to take their separate paths around that great rock that has kept us apart these many centuries, when, through disobedience and rebellion, the words of Moses began to be fulfilled: "The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies . . . and [thou] shall be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth." . . .

Yet the Lord has not forgotten Israel, for though Israel was to be sifted among all nations, the Lord nevertheless said, "Yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth" and be lost. (Amos 9:9.) . . .

And though we have seen the beginning only, yet shall the work of bringing Israel again to Zion expand to the uttermost parts of the earth. . . .

Of immense importance to this work of gathering the scattered branches of the house of Israel is the work of carrying the blessings of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ to the Lamanites, for the Lord's work in these latter days can in no wise be complete until these children of great promise are brought back into the fold. . . .

We are witnesses to these events; we ourselves, both Lamanite and Gentile, have seen the removal of the great stone of our separation. (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 594-95.)

To these children of the prophets, God has made lavish promises. Today is the brighter day — the day of the Lamanite. (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 239.)

We have come to the day of the Lamanite, and the work is going forward. . . .

The Lamanites must rise in majesty and power. (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 619-20.)

President Ezra Taft Benson declared:

In spite of afflictions, deaths, and inequities done to the Indian people over the years, yet they remain children of promise. (This Nation Shall Endure, 160.)

In the words of a modern Indian chief, Eddie Benton-Banai of the Ojibway Tribe:

A renaissance is taking place among Native American peoples. This renaissance is not of a material nature. It is a spiritual renaissance, a retrieving and reviving of our original covenant with the Creator. (Wall and Arden, Wisdomkeepers, 50.)

Do the Indians have cause, then, to celebrate the coming of Columbus? The answer has become clear: they have great cause to celebrate the latter-day fulfillment of the Abrahamic covenant, which will lift them to their glorious destiny. That fulfillment began when the Spirit of God came down and wrought upon the man Columbus, inspiring him to set forth across the many waters.
