E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Chapter 9

Condition of Residency on the Choicest Land

The preservation of Lehi's posterity in America derives not only from God's covenant with their forefather Abraham but also from His covenant with their forefather Lehi, who, upon arriving at his promised land, told his family the promises and knowledge he had obtained from God about this precious land.

We have obtained a land of promise, a land which is choice above all other lands; a land which the Lord God hath covenanted with me should be a land for the inheritance of my seed. Yea, the Lord hath covenanted this land unto me, and to my children forever, and also all those who should be led out of other countries by the hand of the Lord. . . .

. . . And if it so be that they shall serve him according to the commandments which he hath given, it shall be a land of liberty unto them; wherefore, they shall never be brought down into captivity; if so, it shall be because of iniquity; for if iniquity shall abound cursed shall be the land for their sakes, but unto the righteous it shall be blessed forever. (2 Ne. 1:5-7.)

The same condition governing residency in this choicest of all lands had been revealed to the leaders of an earlier group, the Jaredites, whom God had led to the same land, but who had finally been annihilated because of wickedness. A highly abridged account of their history was included by the last Book of Mormon writer, Moroni, who painstakingly detailed God's decree respecting this land:

After the waters had receded from off the face of this land it became a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord; wherefore the Lord would have that all men should serve him who dwell upon the face thereof. (Ether 13:2.)

It was to this choicest of all lands that the first Jaredite colonists had been led, as Moroni recorded expressly for our benefit:

And the Lord . . . would that they should come forth even unto the land of promise, which was choice above all other lands, which the Lord God had preserved for a righteous people.

And he had sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them.

And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off.

And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God — that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done.

Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ. (Ether 2:7-12.)

The Curse on the Promised Land

Elaborating on the significance of that decree, Hugh Nibley observed:

This is the "choice land above all other lands" . . . . But God placed the promise upon it "in his wrath" (Jacob 1:7; Alma 12:35; Ether 1:33; 2:8; 15:28). Why that, of all things? Because his patience was at an end when men had defiled all the other lands in the glorious and beautiful world he had given them. He would set apart a place where he would stand for no nonsense; there men would be given such freedom as nowhere else, and could enjoy such prosperity as nowhere else.

But in return for this liberty, certain ground rules have to be observed. Perfect liberty means that you can go as far as you want, free of many of the age-old hampering restraints imposed by man; since this is a place of testing, that is the purpose of leaving everyone pretty much on his own. But when the inhabitants abuse that freedom until they "are ripened in iniquity," their presence will be no longer tolerated; "when the fulness of his wrath should come" they will be "swept off," suddenly and completely (Ether 2:8). As it was in the days of Noah, it shall be business as usual, right up until the last moment, for it is "not until the fulness of iniquity" is matched by "the fulness of his wrath," which "cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity," that they will be abruptly terminated (Ether 2:8-10). God was angry when he laid down these conditions: "These are my thoughts upon the land which I shall give you for your inheritance; for it shall be a land choice above all other lands." And these are the thoughts: "My Spirit will not always strive with man; wherefore, if ye will sin until ye are fully ripe ye shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord" (Ether 2:15). This promise is conveyed to us for our special benefit: "And this cometh to you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God — that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done" (Ether 2:11). It is Moroni's prophetic warning to stop doing what we are doing. Fullness and ripeness: when the cup is full, it can no longer be diluted; when the fruit is ripe, it can only rot — there is no point to continuing the game. . . .

"Promised land" has a nice upbeat sound that we like very much, but the great promise is worded as a curse: "Thus saith the Lord God — Cursed shall be the land, yea, this land, unto every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, unto destruction, which do wickedly, when they are fully ripe; . . . for this is the cursing and the blessing of God upon this land" (Alma 45:16). When Lehi's party had barely left Jerusalem, Nephi had a vision in which he "looked and beheld the land of promise." And what did he see? "A mist of darkness on the face of the land of promise," and horrible destruction and desolation (1 Ne. 12:4). Obviously one is not home-free when he has set foot upon the land of promise. Quite the opposite; from then on he must watch his step and control the impulse to do whatever he pleases and "have it all." For "God has sworn in his wrath" that what went on in other lands should not go on here. There are nations that were old when Nephi left Jerusalem and whose cultures and languages, customs, manners, and traditions still survive. They have all paid a high price in human suffering as they go along from folly to folly and disaster to disaster, but they are still there. It is not so in the New World, where great civilizations vanish without even leaving us their names, and where no high civilization has survived. It is significant that with all the warning and promising, only one penalty is ever mentioned, and only one means of avoiding it. "Prophets, and the priests, and the teachers, did labor diligently; . . . and . . . by so doing they kept them from being destroyed upon the face of the land; for they did prick their hearts with the word, continually stirring them up to repentance" (Jarom 1:11-12). The penalty is destruction; the deliverance, repentance. (Collected Works, 8:504-6.)

An Ancient History and Its Message for Today

Nibley's observation about the utter demise of ancient American civilizations recalls the words of Tocqueville, who marveled at the inability of American Indians to give an account of their origins:

The Indians of our time are unable to give any information relative to the history of this unknown people. Neither did those who lived three hundred years ago, when America was first discovered, leave any accounts from which even a hypothesis could be formed. Traditions, those perishable yet ever recurrent monuments of the primitive world, do not provide any light. There, however, thousands of our fellow men have lived; one cannot doubt that. When did they go there, what was their origin, their destiny, their history? When and how did they disappear? No one can possibly tell.

How strange it appears that nations have existed and afterwards so completely disappeared from the earth that the memory even of their names is effaced! Their languages are lost; their glory is vanished like a sound without an echo; though perhaps there is not one which has not left behind it some tomb in memory of its passage. (Democracy in America [I:I], 1:24-25.)

Tocqueville's conjecture about "some tomb" that might hold the key to Indian origins contained uncanny insight. The record of the ancient American civilizations that fathered the Indians had in fact been entombed in the earth anciently by Moroni, whose later guidance as an angelic being proved so instrumental in the discovery and founding of America, and in the establishment of the latter-day kingdom of God. And now in our day Moroni again becomes a key figure in guiding the destiny of America by informing us "even as one speaking out of the dust," as from a tomb, about God's decree to the residents of the choice land of America: Serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, or eventually be swept off. The Indians, of course, were allowed to remain as a special exception, receiving clemency because their errors, as the Book of Mormon repeatedly reminds us (Mosiah 1:5; 10:12; Alma 9:16), came by following the false traditions of their fathers.

Other Warnings from Lehi's Posterity

But if the wrath of God upon the Indians was delayed and diluted (unlike that against other American civilizations, which were utterly "swept off"), nevertheless the pain of God's wrath was real and awful enough — as we have already witnessed in the plaintive cries of various Indian leaders lamenting their people's heavy losses. One such cry, however, stands out as a warning to the proud white conquerers of the Indians. The words were spoken by Chief Black Hawk of the Sauk tribe to Brigadier General H. Atkinson in 1833, but they remain relevant, and urgently so, today:

I am now an obscure member of a nation, that formerly honored and respected my opinions. The path to glory is rough, and many gloomy hours obscure it. May the Great Spirit shed light on yours — and that you may never experience the humility that the power of the American government has reduced me to, is the wish of him, who, in his native forests, was once as proud and bold as yourself. (McLuhan, Touch the Earth, 143.)

An even more dire warning coming from Hopi tradition was attributed to the inspiration of the Great Spirit:

The Hopi prophecies . . . pointed to an inevitable universal conflagration — or "Purification" — unless mankind changed its destructive ways. (Wall and Arden, Wisdomkeepers, 95.)

Colonial Views of the Condition of Residency in America

Such warnings from modern Indians poignantly recall the older warning recorded in the Book of Mormon by their ancient kinsman, Moroni. And since the early American colonists did not have access to the Book of Mormon to know of the condition God had decreed for residency in this land, it is remarkable that somehow they sensed — apparently by means of the Spirit of God, which Nephi says "wrought upon" them (1 Ne. 13:13) — what that condition was.

The American wilderness was settled by God-fearing people who came to establish a "Holy Commonwealth." To merit the blessings of God, they believed they had to be virtuous. . . . They clearly believed that God expected "strict observance" of his laws if they were to enjoy his blessing in their new land. (Wardle, "Constitution As Covenant," 18.)

Indeed, they perceived their relationship with God as one of covenant.

Covenant theology as it evolved over five generations of New World preaching comprised a view of history and corporate identity that could best be labeled "providential." In this view God entered into covenants with nations, as well as with individuals, and promised that he would uphold them by his providential might if they would acknowledge no other sovereign and observe the terms of obedience contained in his Word. (Stout, New England Soul, 7.)

Accordingly, the "liberty" that the New England colonists prized so highly was perceived not as license to do as they pleased without restraints but rather as a freedom balanced by the obligation to serve God.

New England, the founders hoped, would be . . . a place of liberty — not the liberty of unrestrained freedom, but "gospel liberty" harnessed to the duties and dictates of God's Word. . . . From the start of New World settlement, "liberty" was a sacred term to the Puritans, but it was always used in an instrumental rather than an ultimate sense; it meant the necessary precondition for establishing a pure and powerful holy commonwealth. Purity, power, and liberty constituted a sacred trinity of thought and action; each depended on the other for balance and meaning. (Stout, New England Soul, 15.)

John Cotton advised the group of Puritans led by John Winthrop as they embarked for America in 1630:

Have a tender care that you look well to the plants that spring from you, that is, to your children, that they do not degenerate as the Israelites did; after which they were vexed with afflictions on every hand. How came this to pass? Jer. 2:21, I planted them a noble vine, holy, a right seed, how then art thou degenerate into a strange vine before me? Your ancestors were of a noble divine spirit, but if they suffer their children to degenerate, to take loose courses, then God will surely pluck you up. (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 80.)

The same theme was expressed almost a century and a half later by another Puritan speaker, Samuel Cooper, who delivered a sermon to commemorate George Washington's March 1776 liberation of Boston.

All who attended recognized that the moment was filled with deep historical significance. To signal that importance, Cooper employed the same text John Cotton had used 150 years earlier to remind the departing Winthrop fleet of God's Promise to his Plantation: "Moreover I will appoint a Place for my People Israel, and will plant them that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more." . . .

The point in Cotton's and Cooper's sermons was that Americans' title to their land and liberty did not come through ordinary means but through the providential leadings and promises of God. Such a promise, Cotton explained, would remain binding unless the people "wrong themselves" by turning away from God and forfeiting their blessings. (Stout, New England Soul, 300.)

The group to whom Cotton had addressed his remarks was led by John Winthrop, who later, while aboard ship shortly before landing in America, instructed his followers:

Thus stands the cause between God and us. We are entered into covenant with him for this work. We have taken out a commission, the Lord hath given us leave to draw our own articles. . . . Now if the Lord shall please to hear us, and bring us in peace to the place we desire, then hath he ratified this covenant and sealed our commission, [and] will expect a strict performance of the articles contained in it. But if we shall neglect the observation of these articles which are the ends we have propounded and, dissembling with our God, shall fall to embrace this present world and prosecute our carnal intentions, seeking great things for ourselves and our posterity, the Lord will surely break out in wrath against us, be revenged of such a perjured people, and make us know the price of the breach of such a covenant.

Now the only way to avoid this shipwrack, and to provide for our posterity, is to follow the counsel of Micah, to do justly, to love mercy, to walk humbly with our God. . . . The Lord will be our God, and delight to dwell among us as his own people, and will command a blessing upon us in all our ways, so that we shall see much more of his wisdom, power, goodness, and truth, than formerly we have been acquainted with. We shall find that the God of Israel is among us. . . . [But] if we shall deal falsely with our God in this work we have undertaken, and so cause him to withdraw his present help from us, we shall be made a story and a by-word through the world. . . . We shall shame the faces of many of God's worthy servants, and cause their prayers to be turned into curses upon us till we be consumed out of the good land whither we are agoing.

And to shut up this discourse with that exhortation of Moses, that faithful servant of the Lord, in his last farewell to Israel, Deuteronomy 30: Beloved, there is now set before us life and good, death and evil, in that we are commanded this day to love the Lord our God, and to love one another, to walk in his ways and to keep his commandments and his ordinance and his laws, and the articles of our covenant with him, that we may live and be multiplied, and that the Lord our God may bless us in the land whither we go to possess it. But if our hearts shall turn away, so that we will not obey, but shall be seduced, and worship other gods, our pleasures and profits, and serve them; it is propounded unto us this day, we shall surely perish out of the good land whither we pass over this vast sea to possess it. Therefore let us choose life, that we and our seed may live by obeying his voice and cleaving to him, for he is our life and our prosperity. (Heimert and Delbanco, eds., Puritans in America, 90-92.)

Similar warnings were sounded again and again by the early Puritan leaders and with particular solemnity on the annual occasion of election day.

Invariably, the election speakers reiterated the terms of God's national covenant with New England. They reminded the inhabitants and their leaders that they were not only bound in particular churches but were also part of a national "people of God" entrusted with a divine commission to let their light shine before the nations. New England's mission, they exulted, was glorious beyond anything that man could invent. But a sober warning was also sounded with contrapuntal regularity: . . . national covenants required the ongoing condition of obedience; irresponsibility in leaders or followers, or a gross contempt for God's Word and messengers, would lead to their destruction. (Stout, New England Soul, 30.)

In the election day sermon of 1669, for example, John Davenport couched his warning in allusions to the sacking of the ancient Jerusalem temple and its sacred artifacts:

Take heed and beware . . . lest he remove the golden Candlesticks, and the burning and shining Lights in them, as he hath already done [to] many eminent Lights; and wo to them for whom the Gospel is spurned, for their abusing it, and the messengers of it. . . . And see that your fruitfulness is good, answereth the cost and pains that God hath been at with you in his Vineyard, lest the Lord be provoked to deal with us, as he did with his ancient Vineyard. (Stout, New England Soul, 62.)

God was patient, the Puritans believed, but only to a point. As John Norton stated in 1708:

God may bear long, wait long; but not always. . . . There is a day of[God['s] Patience, a set time, with some longer, some shorter; when that time is once expired, there is no place for Repentance, either on God's part, or on Man's part. (Stout, New England Soul, 109.)

Such warnings were reiterated by generations of Puritan preachers.

The essential elements of Puritan preaching for generations [included] . . . the dire consequences that would accrue to "another generation . . . that knew not the Lord." . . . New England [had] . . . an ongoing mission in the present — to preserve the founders' covenant. That ongoing mission, moreover, was fraught with constant danger . . . of divine desertion if the covenant was forsaken by the children. (Stout, New England Soul 61.)

Thus Pastor Jonas Clarke told the youth of Lexington, Massachusetts, in 1763:

Have we not forgotten the important Errand upon which our Fathers came into this Land? It was for the sake of God, Religion, Liberty of conscience and the free Enjoyment of the Gospel in its simplicity. Now if we forget this . . . we defeat the blessed end of their coming into this Land, and provoke God. (Stout, New England Soul, 254-55.)

The Determinant of the Revolutionary War

When Britain began clamping down on colonial liberty, Puritans recognized that their cause would be God's, as long as they were faithful to him. In a sermon delivered in Hartford, Connecticut, in 1770, Judah Champion stated that

God had established New England as "an asylum of liberty civil and religious." He would not allow his sanctuary to be chained unless the people abandoned the covenant: "The most high has gloriously owned the cause of liberty, in New-England, and will continue to own it, unless we so abuse, as to sin away our privileges." (Stout, New England Soul, 274.)

In 1776 when the colonists were in the throes of the Revolutionary War, Samuel Langdon, president of Harvard College, emphasized that the political liberty for which they were fighting could be maintained only by continual obedience to God's law.

Experience proved that God did not bless a people because of their political system, even if that system was republican. Rather his blessings came because the people continued to honor the terms of the covenant and to trust in him. If that cardinal fact was ever forgotten in the press of events, then the political revolution would be fought in vain and the experiment in liberty doomed to failure. (Stout, New England Soul, 297.)

Indeed, according to the commander-in-chief of the American forces, George Washington, the outcome of the war would finally depend upon the worthiness of the American people. In a letter dated February 24, 1779, to his cousin Lund Washington, the General wrote:

If we should ultimately prove unsuccessful (of which I am under no apprehension unless it falls on us as a punishment for our want of public, and indeed private virtue) . . . (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 14:147.)

And in a letter dated November 1, 1779, to Edmund Pendleton, General Washington remarked:

Nothing but our want of public virtue can induce a continuance of the War. . . . The way is plain, the means are in our power, but it is virtue alone that can effect it. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 17:52.)

The Foundation of the New Republic: Virtue, Morality, and Religion

A belief in the necessity of virtue was shared by those who, after the successful conclusion of the war, joined together to build the new Republic. According to Professors Richard Vetterli and Gary Bryner,

The idea of virtue was central to the political thought of the Founders of the American republic. Every body of thought they encountered, every intellectual tradition they consulted, every major theory of republican government by which they were influenced emphasized the importance of personal and public virtue. It was understood by the Founders to be the precondition for republican government, the base upon which the structure of government would be built. . . .

. . . Of one thing they appear to have been certain: a citizenry lacking in virtue was not capable of sustaining a democratic republic, whatever its structure. (In Search of the Republic, 1-2.)

Even as that republic was being constructed by some of the Founders meeting in Philadelphia in the summer of 1787, their colleagues in the Second Continental Congress, meeting in New York, enacted the Northwest Ordinance to govern American territory northwest of the Ohio River. Praised by historian Richard B. Morris as the "most seminal achievement" of the Continental Congress (Forging the Union, 229), the ordinance expressly named morality as a precondition of good government.

Religion, morality, and knowledge being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind, schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged. (Kurland and Lerner, eds., The Founders' Constitution, 1:28.)

But perhaps the most telling statements were those made by the individual founders, such as George Washington. In a circular to the states on June 8, 1783, Washington emphasized that America's happiness was predicated upon compliance with divinely ordained principles:

I now make it my earnest prayer, that God would . . . incline the hearts of the Citizens to cultivate a spirit of subordination and obedience to Government, to entertain a brotherly affection and love for one another, for their fellow Citizens of the United States at large, and particularly for their brethren who have served in the Field, and finally, that he would most graciously be pleased to dispose us all, to do Justice, to love mercy, and to demean ourselves with that Charity, humility and pacific temper of mind, which were the Characteristics of the Divine Author of our blessed Religion, and without an humble imitation of whose example in these things, we can never hope to be a happy Nation. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 26:496.)

Years later as the ratification process for the new Constitution dragged on in the face of opposition, Washington again sounded the theme of the necessity of virtue. This time, however, he did so after emphasizing that America seemed to be uniquely blessed among nations. His warning has striking parallels with the Book of Mormon warnings about righteousness as a condition of residency on this the choicest of lands. Washington wrote to Benjamin Lincoln on June 29, 1788:

No one can rejoice more than I do at every step the people of this great Country take to preserve the Union, establish good order and government, and to render the Nation happy at home and respectable abroad. No Country upon Earth ever had it more in its power to attain these blessings than United America. Wondrously strange then, and much to be regretted indeed would it be, were we to neglect the means, and to depart from the road which Providence has pointed us to, so plainly. . . . I hope and trust that there is good sense and virtue enough left to recover the right path before we shall be entirely lost. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 30:11.)

For Washington, then, public and private virtue was foundational to the preservation of the nation — as he emphasized in his First Inaugural Address as president on April 30, 1789:

The foundations of our National policy will be laid in the pure and immutable principles of private morality. . . . There is no truth more thoroughly established, than that there exists in the economy and course of nature, an indissoluble union between virtue and happiness, between duty and advantage, between the genuine maxims of an honest and magnanimous policy, and the solid rewards of public prosperity and felicity. . . . We ought to be no less persuaded that the propitious smiles of Heaven, can never be expected on a nation that disregards the eternal rules of order and right, which Heaven itself has ordained. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 30:294.)

Eight years later, in his Farewell Address published on September 19, 1796, Washington again reminded the nation of the conditions necessary for happiness:

Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity, Religion and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim the tribute of Patriotism, who should labour to subvert these great Pillars of human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of Men and citizens. . . .

'Tis substantially true, that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of popular government. The rule indeed extends with more or less force to every species of free Government. . . .

Can it be, that Providence has not connected the permanent felicity of a Nation with its virtue? (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 35:229-31.)

Benjamin Franklin similarly stated,

Only a virtuous people are capable of freedom. (Smyth, Writings of Benjamin Franklin, 10:50.)

According to John Adams:

Statesmen . . . may plan and speculate for Liberty, but it is Religion and Morality alone, which can establish the Principles upon which Freedom can securely stand. . . . The only foundation of a free Constitution, is pure Virtue, and if this cannot be inspired into our People, in a greater Measure, than they have it now, They may change their Rulers, and the forms of Government, but they will not obtain a lasting Liberty. (Butterfield, Adams Family Correspondence, 2:21.)

We have no government armed with power capable of contending with human passions unbridled by morality and religion. . . . Our constitution was made only for a moral and religious people. It is wholly inadequate to the government of any other. (Howe, Political Thought of John Adams, 185.)

Indeed, according to John Adams's son John Quincy Adams, America was faced with the same choice — and consequences — spoken of so repeatedly by the early colonists. In an address delivered on April 30, 1839, to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of George Washington's inauguration (see Kammen, Machine That Would Go of Itself, 89-90), John Quincy Adams compared America's choice with that given to ancient Israel:

When the children of Israel, after forty years of wanderings in the wilderness, were about to enter upon the promised land, their leader, Moses, who was not permitted to cross the Jordan with them, just before his removal from among them, commanded that when the Lord their God should have brought them into the land, they should put the curse upon Mount Ebal, and the blessing upon Mount Gerizim. This injunction was faithfully fulfilled by his successor Joshua. Immediately after they had taken possession of the land, Joshua built an altar to the Lord, of whole stones, upon Mount Ebal. And there he wrote upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he had written in the presence of the children of Israel: and all Israel, and their elders and officers, and their judges, stood on the two sides of the ark of the covenant, borne by the priests and Levites, six tribes over against Mount Gerizim, and six over against Mount Ebal. And he read all the words of the law, the blessings and cursings, according to all that was written in the book of the law. . . .

In that scene of tremendous and awful solemnity, narrated in the Holy Scriptures, there is not a curse pronounced against the people, upon Mount Ebal, not a blessing promised them upon Mount Gerizim, which your posterity may not suffer or enjoy, from your and their adherence to, or departure from, the principles of the Declaration of Independence, practically interwoven in the Constitution of the United States. Lay up these principles, then, in your hearts, and in your souls — bind them for signs upon your hands, that they may be as frontlets between your eyes — teach them to your children, speaking of them when sitting in your houses, when walking by the way, when lying down and when rising up — write them upon the doorplates of your houses, and upon your gates — cling to them as to the issues of life — adhere to them as to the cords of your eternal salvation. So may your children's children at the next return of this day of jubilee, after a full century of experience under your national Consititution, celebrate it again in the full enjoyment of all the blessings recognized by you in the commemoration of this day, and of all the blessings promised to the children of Israel upon Mount Gerizim, as the reward of obedience to the law of God. ("The Jubilee of the Constitution," 55-56.)

The religious character of America was also emphasized by the United States Supreme Court in an 1892 decision.

This is a religious people. This is historically true. . . .

This is a religious nation. . . . 'We are a Christian people, and the morality of the country is deeply ingrafted upon Christianity. . . .'

This is a Christian nation. (Rector of the Holy Trinity Church v. United States, 143 U.S. 457, 465, 470, 471 [1892].)

America's religious roots and Christian morality were apparent to the French observer Tocqueville, as noted by professors Vetterli and Bryner:

According to de Tocqueville, the exceptional morality of the American people, comparatively speaking, was obvious. . . .

De Tocqueville repeatedly asserted that there is no possibility of a democratic republic without virtue and morality and that virtue and morality will not persist without religion. (In Search of the Republic, 250, 252.)

In Tocqueville's own words:

Although the travelers who have visited North America differ on many points, they all agree in remarking that morals are far more strict there than elsewhere. (Democracy in America [II:XI], 2:204.)

The greatest part of British America was peopled by men who . . . brought with them into the New World a form of Christianity which I cannot better describe than by styling it a democratic and republican religion. This contributed powerfully to the establishment of a republic and a democracy. . . .

In the United States . . . Christianity . . . reigns without obstacle, by universal consent. . . .

Religion in America takes no direct part in the government of society, but it must be regarded as the first of their political institutions. . . . I do not know whether all Americans have a sincere faith in their religion — for who can search the human heart? — but I am certain that they hold it to be indispensable to the maintenance of republican institutions. (Democracy in America [I:III:XVII], 1:304-6.)

Serve the God of the Land: The Condition Still in Force

It seems more than coincidence that every major group who has been "brought" to America (see 2 Ne. 1:6) and who has left a record — the Jaredites, the Nephites, and the early American colonists — landed here as believers in and followers of Christ, who is "the God of the land" and who requires that its inhabitants obey his laws or finally be swept off (Ether 2:10-12). In the words of President Benson:

The Book of Mormon declares America to be "a land choice above all other lands," but we must remember the contingency of our freedom and prosperity. It is that we worship the God of this land — even Jesus Christ — and keep His commandments, or we shall meet the same fate of civilizations that have gone before us!

This nation is God-ordained for a glorious purpose. It is ordained as an ensign of liberty to all other nations. That liberty will be maintained as we keep the commandments of God. Righteousness, as the Book of Mormon states, is the indispensable ingredient to liberty. (This Nation Shall Endure, 155.)

"Righteousness exalteth a nation" (Prov. 14:34). This is the key to understanding our heritage and this is the key to maintaining it. The foundations of America are spiritual. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 569.)

Those foundations remain urgently relevant to our day, as President Anthony W. Ivins, first counselor to President Heber J. Grant, emphasized:

I beseech you to study the word of the Lord, as it is contained in holy writ. You will then know that the present is inextricably associated with the remote past. . . . You will know that you have been given a land which is choice above all others. You will discover that the ancient prophets saw this land of America, and declared its destiny. You will know the conditions upon which our nation is to be perpetuated, or, on the other hand, because of our lack of faith in God, take its place among those mighty nations . . . which . . . have[pass[ed] into oblivion.

Where much is given much is required. This is the land of Joseph, it is the land of Zion, a land choice above all other lands. The Lord our God has decreed that whatsoever nation shall inhabit it shall be free from bondage, free from all other nations, if they will but serve the God of the land, which is Jesus Christ. These are not my words, but the words of the Lord, our God. They are binding upon us, as they have been binding upon other great nations which have occupied the American continent in times past. (Conference Report, Apr. 1930, pp. 17-18.)
