E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Chapter 10

Prophetic Warnings to Latter-day America

Given the divinely required condition of residency in America, it is alarming to read what the Book of Mormon prophets foretold about the America of our day. Central among the extensive warnings are the following, which begin by mentioning the same dangerous fault that proved the undoing of the Nephites (Moro. 8:27) — pride. That one fault opens the door to numerous others, as Nephi foretold:

And it shall come to pass, that those [the Lamanites] who have dwindled in unbelief shall be smitten by the hand of the Gentiles.

And the Gentiles are lifted up in the pride of their eyes, and have stumbled, because of the greatness of their stumbling block, that they have built up many churches; nevertheless, they put down the power and miracles of God, and preach up unto themselves their own wisdom and their own learning, that they may get gain and grind upon the face of the poor.

And there are many churches built up which cause envyings, and strifes, and malice. (2 Ne. 26:19-21.)

And they shall contend one with another; and their priests shall contend one with another, and they shall teach with their learning, and deny the Holy Ghost, which giveth utterance.

And they deny the power of God, the Holy One of Israel; and they say unto the people: Hearken unto us, and hear ye our precept; for behold there is no God today, for the Lord and the Redeemer hath done his work, and he hath given his power unto men;

Behold, hearken ye unto my precept; if they shall say there is a miracle wrought by the hand of the Lord, believe it not; for this day he is not a God of miracles; he hath done his work. (2 Ne. 28:4-6.)

In Moroni's description of the same events, he pinpointed the factor that would foster such damning pride — the love of money.

Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing.

And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there are none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts, unto the wearing of very fine apparel, unto envying, and strifes, and malice, and persecutions, and all manner of iniquities; and your churches, yea, even every one, have become polluted because of the pride of your hearts.

For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted. (Morm. 8:35-37.)

But despite such religious ostentatiousness — or perhaps because of it — many people in the latter days would not believe in the gifts of God. Said Moroni:

I speak unto you who deny the revelations of God, and say that they are done away, that there are no revelations, nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing, nor speaking with tongues, and the interpretation of tongues;

Behold I say unto you, he that denieth these things knoweth not the gospel of Christ; yea, he has not read the scriptures; if so, he does not understand them.

For do we not read that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and in him there is no variableness neither shadow of changing? . . .

O . . . despise not, and wonder not, but hearken unto the words of the Lord. . . . Doubt not, but be believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord with all your heart, and work out your own salvation with fear and trembling before him. (Morm. 9:7-9, 27.)

Compounding the corruption of latter-day America would be the sinister "secret combinations," or criminal organizations, as Nephi foretold:

And there are also secret combinations, even as in times of old, according to the combinations of the devil, for he is the founder of all these things; yea, the founder of murder, and works of darkness. (2 Ne. 26:22.)

Moroni's description of the same events contained a note of urgency occasioned by his own experience, for the same type of secret combinations had destroyed the previous great American civilizations.

[Secret combinations] have caused the destruction of this people [the Jaredites] of whom I am now speaking, and also the destruction of the people of Nephi.

And whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combinations, to get power and gain, until they shall spread over the nation, behold, they shall be destroyed; for the Lord will not suffer that the blood of his saints, which shall be shed by them, shall always cry unto him from the ground for vengeance upon them and yet he avenge them not.

Wherefore, O ye Gentiles, it is wisdom in God that these things should be shown unto you, that thereby ye may repent of your sins, and suffer not that these murderous combinations shall get above you, which are built up to get power and gain — and the work, yea, even the work of destruction come upon you, yea, even the sword of the justice of the Eternal God shall fall upon you, to your overthrow and destruction if ye shall suffer these things to be.

Wherefore, the Lord commandeth you, when ye shall see these things come among you that ye shall awake to a sense of your awful situation, because of this secret combination which shall be among you; or wo be unto it, because of the blood of them who have been slain; for they cry from the dust for vengeance upon it, and also upon those who built it up.

For it cometh to pass that whoso buildeth it up seeketh to overthrow the freedom of all lands, nations, and countries; and it bringeth to pass the destruction of all people, for it is built up by the devil, who is the father of all lies; even that same liar who beguiled our first parents, yea, even that same liar who hath caused man to commit murder from the beginning; who hath hardened the hearts of men that they have murdered the prophets, and stoned them, and cast them out from the beginning.

Wherefore, I, Moroni, am commanded to write these things that evil may be done away, and that the time may come that Satan may have no power upon the hearts of the children of men, but that they may be persuaded to do good continually, that they may come unto the fountain of all righteousness and be saved. (Ether 8:21-26.)

Such passages demonstrate that the Book of Mormon was designed to counteract the very evils it prophesied would exist in latter-day America. Indeed, according to Moroni, the very coming forth of the book would contradict the popular belief that miracles have ceased.

Out of the earth shall [the Book of Mormon] come, by the hand of the Lord, and none can stay it; and it shall come in a day when it shall be said that miracles are done away; and it shall come even as if one should speak from the dead. (Morm. 8:26.)

The book's coming forth was also a sign that God had already commenced his latter-day fulfillment of the Abrahamic covenant, as the newly resurrected Christ told the Nephites:

When these things come to pass that thy seed shall begin to know these things [in the Book of Mormon] — it shall be a sign unto them, that they may know that the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the people who are of the house of Israel. (3 Ne. 21:7.)

By providing a second and independent witness to the veracity of the Bible, the Book of Mormon constitutes convincing proof of the reality of Christ, whom America must serve in order to survive. Mormon urged future generations of Lamanites:

Repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus, and lay hold upon the gospel of Christ, which shall be set before you, not only in this record but also in the record which shall come unto the Gentiles from the Jews, which record shall come from the Gentiles unto you.

For behold, this is written for the intent that ye may believe that. (Morm. 7:8-9.)

Indeed, the Book of Mormon was written for the intent that all people may believe in the Bible and in him of whom the Bible testifies, as the record of Nephi's vision states.

And the angel spake unto me, saying: These last records, which thou hast seen among the Gentiles, shall establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, . . . and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved. (1 Ne. 13:40.)

Such corroboration constitutes, in God's own words as written by Nephi, proof not only of God's existence but also of his unchangeable concern for mankind:

And because my words shall hiss forth — many of the Gentiles shall say: A Bible! A Bible! We have got a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible. . . .

Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of my word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I remember one nation like unto another? Wherefore, I speak the same words unto one nation like unto another. And when the two nations shall run together the testimony of the two nations shall run together also.

And I do this that I may prove unto many that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever. (2 Ne. 29:3, 8-9.)

Hence, the Book of Mormon was written, as Moroni indicated on the title page,

To the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations.

Ancient Prophecies and Modern Realities

The modern relevance of Book of Mormon prophecies has been emphasized by Hugh Nibley.

It was more than forty years ago that I started teaching the Book of Mormon in Provo. Last fall, after years away from it, I returned to the Book. Was it weary, flat, stale, and unprofitable as any book would be after one hundred readings? On the contrary, it was a new book. But forget forty years. In the past year alone the world has stumbled, slipped, and slithered downward to a point where it has almost caught up with the later chapters of the Book of Mormon. (Collected Works, 8:533.)

Nibley's insight becomes apparent when we examine recent events that fulfill Book of Mormon prophecies. But should we trouble ourselves with America's troubles? Could it not suffice us simply to look past present-day problems to the future glory of Zion? Not according to President Ezra Taft Benson, who even decades ago declared:

The sad and shocking story of what has happened in America in recent years must be told. Our people must have the facts. There is safety in an informed public. There is real danger in a complacent, uninformed citizenry. This is our real danger today. (Cannon, Latter-day Prophets and the Constitution, 188.)

The Prophetic Book of Mormon and Modern Evangelists

It is appropriate, then, to examine recent events and existing conditions that seem to have been foretold by ancient Book of Mormon warnings. For example, the book foretells that latter-day America would contain many churches whose leaders would preach "that they may get gain" and would engage in "envyings and strifes, and malice." At no time in American history have these prophecies seen more literal or dramatic fulfillment than in the scandals that have rocked the world of television evangelism. In the wake of shocking disclosures about one popular and wealthy TV minister, Newsweek reported:

There was glee among the unbelievers. They called it "Gospelgate," "Heavengate" or, inevitably, "Pearlygate": an upwelling scandal that riveted the nations's attention and split the world of televised evangelism into warring camps. As the preachers hurled charges and countercharges of sexual misconduct, greed and lust for power, those outside the evangelistic subculture got unaccustomed glimpses of its soap-opera pleasures and pitfalls. Comedians had a field day with the downfall of the self-righteous. For the faithful, however, it was far worse than an embarrassment. It was quite literally the Devil's work, and the issue was who was doing it for him. (Hackett, "God and Money," 16.)

The contention among such churches, emphasized Newsweek, is all over money.

Some see it as pure money-grubbing. "This is hamburger wars. Wendy's fighting McDonald's," says Richard Gaylord Briley, a religious fund raiser who has worked for celebrity preachers. . . . "They are trying to maintain income and market shares in a declining market." . . .

The preachers . . . begin their careers wanting to establish true ministries but fall victims to their own success and a kind of Faustian bargain: to expand, they need ever more viewers, ever more air time and ever more money to buy it. In time, the money becomes an end in itself and the appeals more blatant. (Hackett, "God and Money," 20.)

Not only was all of this expressly foretold by Book of Mormon prophets but it also echoes similar wickedness that existed in the Nephite society described by the Book of Mormon. As Hugh Nibley explained:

With great insight the Book of Mormon shows us how wealth-oriented societies sought moral justification in a display of religious piety, like the Zoramites, "a wicked and a perverse people; . . . their hearts were set upon gold, and upon silver, and upon all manner of fine goods. . . . Their hearts are set upon them, and yet they cry unto thee and say — We thank thee, O God, for we are a chosen people unto thee" (Alma 31:24, 28). It would even seem that church people are especially susceptible to the Nephite disease; none reverence "precious things" more ardently than the priests. (Collected Works, 7:358.)

The Prophetic Book of Mormon and the Consequences of Pride

It is no accident, then, that the Book of Mormon has been provided to us. As Nibley declared:

It is into our hands that the Book of Mormon has been placed. . . . Plainly it is meant for us, as it reminds us many times; it is the story of what happened to the Nephites — and we are the Nephites: "It must needs be that the riches of the earth are mine to give; but beware of pride, lest ye become as the Nephites of old" (D&C 38:39). There it is in a nutshell: it is the fate of the Nephites, not of the Lamanites, Greeks, or Chinese, that concerns us; and that doom was brought on them by pride which in turn was engendered by the riches of the earth. (Collected Works, 7:354.)

Pride is the very thing about which President Benson has so emphatically warned:

This sacred volume [the Book of Mormon] was written for us — for our day. Its scriptures are to be likened unto ourselves. (See 1 Ne. 19:23.)

The Doctrine and Covenants tells us that the Book of Mormon is the "record of a fallen people." (D&C 20:9.) Why did they fall? This is one of the major messages of the Book of Mormon. Mormon gives the answer in the closing chapters of the book in these words: "Behold, the pride of this nation, or the people of the Nephites, hath proven their destruction." (Moro. 8:27.) And then, lest we miss that momentous Book of Mormon message from that fallen people, the Lord warns us in the Doctrine and Covenants, "Beware of pride, lest ye become as the Nephites of old." (D&C 38:39.). . .

In the premortal council, it was pride that felled Lucifer, "a son of the morning." (2 Ne. 24:12-15; see also D&C 76:25-27; Moses 4:3.) At the end of this world, when God cleanses the earth by fire, the proud will be burned as stubble and the meek shall inherit the earth. (See 3 Ne. 12:5, 25:1; D&C 29:9; JS 1:37; Mal. 4:1.). . .

The scriptures abound with evidences of the severe consequences of the sin of pride to individuals, groups, cities, and nations. "Pride goeth before destruction." (Prov. 16:18.) It destroyed the Nephite nation and the city of Sodom. (See Moro. 8:27; Ezek. 16:49-50.) ("Beware of Pride," 4-5.)

Pride has transformed America from a once generally religious society into a secular one, the consequences of which transformation were warned of by George Washington in his Farewell Address:

Reason and experience both forbid us to expect that National morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 35:229.)

Washington's warning has proved prophetic, for having cut herself loose from her religious moorings, America finds herself adrift in an increasingly stormy sea of immorality.

The recent shift in North America from a predominantly Protestant to a secular or humanistic culture has created . . . a new set of problems. . . .

It may take considerable learning and analysis to recognize the full extent of the secular threat to religion, but little reflection is required to recognize its negative social effects, viz., a general disintegration of religious commitment, manifesting itself in a startling increase in promiscuity, divorce, and abortion, in the widespread acceptance of pornography and homosexuality and in a growing tolerance of deviant behavior ranging from civil and religious impiety to the use of drugs. The loss of a central loyalty to family values immediately reflects the displacement of a biblical morality. (Dougherty, "What Was Religion?" 316.)

The unraveling strands of Western civilization are everywhere. Not simply at the future end of history, nor even only at the looming end of this Second Christian Millennium, but already in the immediate present, modernity is being weighed in the balances. Dismay and distress follow in the wake of the rebellious despiritualization of our once vibrant civilization. Secular hedonism has nurtured the disintegration of the family and the desanctification of human existence. Spiritual dissatisfaction underlies the ready reach for a counterfeit transcendent. The inability to cope publicly with drug use and traffic is painfully apparent. On every hand one sees moral deterioration and ethical upheaval, together with attendant manifestations of melancholy and hopelessness. Amid the deteriorating cultural configurations, moral permissiveness has spawned lives scarred and marred by illegitimacy and fornication, homosexuality and pornography. . . .

. . . Western society manifests a quantum leap of immorality and indecency unprecedented since the fall of the Roman Empire. (Henry, "Christianity and Resurgent Paganism," 88.)

Nor has the collapse of moral values been limited to the alienated or economically deprived, as noted in a 1987 cover story for Time magazine:

Large sections of the nation's ethical roofing have been sagging badly, from the White House to churches, schools, industries, medical centers, law firms and stock brokerages — pressing down on the institutions and enterprises that make up the body and blood of America.

Surveying the damage, Church Historian Martin Marty of the University of Chicago sees a "widespread sense of moral disarray." . . . Agrees Jesuit Father Joseph O'Hare, President of Fordham University: "We've had a traditional set of standards that have been challenged and found wanting or no longer fashionable. Now there don't seem to be any moral landmarks at all." (Bowen, "Looking to Its Roots," 26.)

Speaking in May 1990, one businessman noted the untimely decline of American integrity just when other peoples, particularly in Eastern Europe, were looking to America for moral guidance. He began by quoting Solidarity leader Lech Walesa:

"Americans are drifting away from spiritual values as they become richer. . . . We look to America, and we expect from you a spiritual richness to meet the aspirations of the 20th century. . . ."

It's a sad commentary on the state of our nation's ethical and spiritual values that we need a blunt lecture from a powerful figure who struggled so long behind the Iron Curtain. For Lech Walesa, human dignity and freedom were ultimate values, but here in America, these values seem to be casually and carelessly taken for granted.

Historic events in Eastern Europe remind us of the power and significance of the moral and ethical principles upon which our country was founded. . . .

America is still viewed as the land of opportunity. We're seen as the model of democracy and human dignity, and yet, I wonder if we really deserve that compliment, that vote of confidence.

Politicians cheat on their constituents. Brokers rip off their clients. S&L executives drive their institutions into the ground and leave tax-payers footing the bill. Preachers and would-be presidents cheat on their wives. Kids cheat on exams, and millions destroy themselves and others through the ravages of drugs and crime. (Capen, "Ethical Values," 685.)

One of the greatest driving forces behind such misbehavior is greed, or, to use Book of Mormon terminology, the desire to "get gain." Such a motive is, according to Newsweek, responsible for the influx of many of America's top graduates to professions that are more predatory than productive:

Dealing on Wall Street is . . . the profession of choice for the top graduates of the nation's elite schools. . . . The naked pursuit of money has gripped the imagination of today's best and brightest the way the dream of ending war and discrimination inspired an earlier generation. The motive: money, pure and simple. . . .

The growth of investment-banking activity raises a troubling question: is America dealing itself into economic decline? In an era of murderously efficient foreign competition, the tendency of the nation's best business brains to focus on financial "asset-shuffling" rather than building new, productive enterprises may be hurting America's competitiveness. (Powell, "New Dealmakers," 47-48.)

Greed has also been the driving force behind many corporate takeovers in recent years, and the problem is of such proportion as to threaten the very system. Speaking of the vast sums of money to be made by corporate raiders as well as by lawyers and investment bankers involved in takeovers, Time magazine reported:

The sums are so vast, and so apparently out of line with any foreseeable benefits that the deal might bring to American industry, that they raise deep and disturbing doubts about the direction of U.S. business at a time when many firms lag badly in foreign competition. Seldom since the age of the 19th century robber barons has corporate behavior been so open to question. . . .

American business is built on a rock of lawfulness and trust between companies and those who hold a stake in them. But when avarice grows out of proportion, cracks start to appear in the foundation. (Greenwald, "Where's the Limit?" 67, 70.)

Such a frenzied and unprincipled pursuit of wealth, together with the other problems accompanying the moral collapse in America, call to mind not only the words of the Book of Mormon prophets but also of a modern prophet, President Ezra Taft Benson:

This land is reserved only for a righteous people, and we remain here as tenants only as we remain in the favor of the Lord, for He is the landlord as far as this earth is concerned. If we are to remain under heaven's benign protection and care, we must return to those principles which have brought us our peace, liberty, and prosperity. Our problems today are essentially problems of the Spirit.

The solution is not more wealth . . . — the solution is personal and national reformation. . . . Repentance is the sovereign remedy to our problems. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 580.)

The Prophetic Book of Mormon and Modern Secret Combinations

Of all the problems threatening modern-day America, perhaps the most sinister is the existence of the "secret combinations" of which the Book of Mormon prophesied. (Morm. 8:40; Ether 8:22.) Such combinations trace their origin, said Moroni, back to Cain (Ether 8:15), who conspired with Satan to murder Abel in order to "get gain" (Moses 5:31). The remarkable thing about the portrayal in the Book of Mormon of secret combinations in America is that while the picture did not fit the reality of American society in Joseph Smith's day, it does fit today. After demonstrating the Book of Mormon's unerring accuracy in reproducing an authentic picture of the ancient world, Hugh Nibley commented:

But if such a performance was beyond the capacity of anyone living in the 1820s, what is even more fantastic is the picture painted by the Book of Mormon of another world entirely, even more removed from the imagination of anyone living in 1830, namely our own world. . . . And this is the world with which the Book of Mormon is primarily concerned. (Collected Works, 8:500.)

In Joseph Smith's day whole nations were not controlled as they are now by secret combinations to get power and gain. In his day such a thing as a general strike was unknown. Big bosses did not write smooth and flattering letters to competitors making deals and offering protection. The selling of protection by huge gangs operating in high places was unknown.

The arts of manipulating public opinion as practiced by the Gadianton society have not been discovered until our own day. This is no picture of the rustic America of the 1820s, but of the world of the Nephites and of twentieth-century America. (Collected Works, 6:398.)

And the sad history of ancient American peoples annihilated because of secret combinations is presented to us in the Book of Mormon expressly as a warning for our day:

The final warning of the Book of Mormon is that the people of the land have been destroyed because of their concern for the vain things of the world, and always their destruction has come through the same instrumentality, "secret combinations, to get power and gain" (Ether 8:22). We are warned that such combinations, built up to get power and gain, will again be the overthrow and destruction of America if they are allowed to get the upper hand (Ether 8:21-22).

And they do not gain the upper hand by any genius or skill of their own, but only with the active consent of the people who "suffer these things to be" (Ether 8:23), yielding to fair promises because they themselves love and admire power and gain (Ether 8:17). This is the message of the Book of Mormon to the Gentiles (Ether 8:23), and its message to the Church is like unto it:

"And if ye seek the riches which it is the will of the Father to give unto you, ye shall be the richest of all people, for ye shall have the riches of eternity; and it must needs be that the riches of the earth are mine to give; but beware of pride, lest ye become as the Nephites of old (D&C 38:39)." (Nibley, Collected Works, 6:395-96.)

It is pride that ultimately allows secret combinations to flourish, as President Benson warned:

Pride results in secret combinations which are built up to get power, gain, and glory of the world. (See Hel. 7:5; Ether 8:9, 16, 22-23; Moses 5:31.) This fruit of the sin of pride, namely secret combinations, brought down both the Jaredite and the Nephite civilizations and has been and will yet be the cause of the fall of many nations. (See Ether 8:18-25.) ("Beware of Pride," 6.)

Perhaps the most visible types of modern secret combinations are those engaging in "organized crime," which was the subject of Senate Bill 30 ("S.30") introduced in 1969 in the United States Congress and titled the "Organized Crime Control Act." One of the bill's sponsors, Senator John L. McClellan from Arkansas, explained the problem that had prompted the legislation:

No civilized society can long permit within its domain an everrising tide of lawlessness. Such a tide is now lashing out against our society, and there are few who do not agree that it must be stopped and turned back. . . .

The Attorney General in his testimony on S. 30 before the Senate subcommittee aptly observed that["[t]oo few Americans appreciate the dimensions of the problem of organized crime; its impact on all America, and what must be done to reduce — and ultimately to eradicate — its sinister and erosive effects."

America has had to contend with some form of organized crime since the founding of our Republic. Nevertheless, it has only been in the last half-century that these criminal groupings have begun seriously to threaten the very integrity of our nation and the well-being of such large segments of our people.

"Organized crime groups," the President's Crime Commission observed in 1967, "are known to operate in all sections of the Nation." . . .

Organized crime groups . . . have not confined their villainy to traditional endeavors, but have increasingly undertaken to subvert legitimate business and unions. . . . More important, these criminals have, in some localities, established corrupt alliances within the processes of our democratic society: with the police, prosecutors, mayors, city councils, courts, and legislatures.

All of this is, of course, disturbing. But the most serious aspect of the challenge that organized crime poses to our society is the degree to which its members have succeeded in placing themselves above the law. . . .

Finally, the Commission specifically found that a lack of public and political commitment to end the menace of organized crime was one of six major contributing causes to the failure of our society to deal with organized crime. . . .

[The Commission also found] . . . that "organized crime succeeds only insofar as the Nation permits it to succeed." ("Organized Crime Act," 56, 58-59, 66-67.)

Despite the passage of Senator McClellan's legislation, America now seems more threatened than ever by secret combinations. In 1986, respected journalist James Mills published the results of his six-year investigation into organizations that dominate drug trafficking across the globe. His book, titled The Underground Empire, paints the world of organized crime in an alarmingly larger dimension than most Americans have ever suspected.

The inhabitants of the earth spend more money on illegal drugs than they spend on food. More than they spend on housing, clothes, education, medical care, or any other product or service. The international narcotics industry is the largest growth industry in the world. Its annual revenues exceed . . . three times the value of all United States currency in circulation, more than the gross national products of all but a half dozen of the major industrialized nations. . . .

Though everyone knows narcotics is big business, its truly staggering dimensions have never been fully publicized. . . .

The international narcotics industry is, in fact, not an industry at all, but an empire. Sovereign, proud, expansionist, this Underground Empire, though frequently torn by internal struggle, never fails to present a solid front to the world at large. It has become today as ruthlessly acquisitive and exploitative as any nineteenth-century imperial kingdom, as far-reaching as the British Empire, as determinedly cohesive as the states of the American republic. Aggressive and violent by nature, the Underground Empire maintains its own armies, diplomats, intelligence services, banks, merchant fleets, and airlines. It seeks to extend its dominance by any means, from clandestine subversion to open warfare. Legitimate nations combat its agents within their own borders, but effectively ignore its power internationally. The United States government, while launching cosmetic "wars" on drugs and crime, has rarely attacked the Empire abroad, has never substantially diminished its international power, and does not today seriously challenge its growing threat to world stability. (Underground Empire, 3-4.)

Focusing on the drug empire of the Western hemisphere, Time magazine reported in 1988:

A multitentacled narcotics conspiracy . . . has grown into one of the hemisphere's most pernicious forces. Capitalizing on the seemingly insatiable appetite for drugs in the U.S., Latin America's cocaine and marijuana czars have extended the scope and volume of their operations well beyond what Southeast and West Asia's more established opium lords ever dreamed of. Greasing palms and, when necessary, using the gun, the drug barons have spawned corruption from Bolivia to the Bahamas, and in more than one country are threatening to supplant elected government as the reigning power. Warns John Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat who heads a Senate panel that is investigating the problem: "There is a whole new force in our hemisphere. The power of the narcodollar is buying countries and altering geopolitics."

In the U.S. as well as Latin America, officials insist that the drug merchants have been so successful at subverting law-and-order that they have superseded leftist insurgents as the main threat to the region's fragile governments. The tentacles of the narcotraficantes reach up to top officials and down to lowly policemen. With a wink and a nod from cooperative judges and prison officials, notorious narcotics peddlers have strolled out of jails in Colombia, Mexico and Bolivia. Customs and immigration officials in Costa Rica and the Bahamas look the other way as some of the hemisphere's most wanted men have walked from their private planes to waiting limousines. Police and military officials in Honduras and Panama have tipped off traffickers to impending raids. Efforts to slow the trade, from destroying coca crops to extraditing traffickers, are bumping against the drug barons' bloody blueprint for expansion. (Smolowe, "Drug Thugs," 28; and see Beaty and Hornik, "Torrent of Dirty Dollars"; Smith, "Plague among Us.")

In a 1989 report focusing on the center of the Western hemisphere's drug empire, Newsweek explained:

The Colombian cartels may constitute the biggest criminal conspiracy of this century — and perhaps inevitably, law-enforcement experts compare today's cocaine syndicates to the Mafia's involvement with heroin. But according to prosecutors like U.S. Attorney Andrew Maloney of Brooklyn, N.Y., the cartels' U.S. networks are 10 times larger than mob heroin rings ever were. "The drug money so dwarfs the money made by Cosa Nostra that the exact figures are inconsequential," says Ronald Goldstock of the New York State Organized Crime Task Force. So it came as no surprise last week when the FBI in Miami announced the indictment of an alleged mafioso in a cocaine-smuggling case that also involved a little-known Colombian cartel. It was the first hard evidence, the FBI said, of a direct link between the Sicilian Mafia and the Colombians — a conjunction, so to speak, of a terrible past and a future that may be even worse. (Morganthau, "Cocaine's 'Dirty 300,'" 41.)

The most powerful Colombian cartel was that headquartered at Medellin, but as Time magazine reported in July 1991, power has shifted:

They [the leaders of the Cali cartel] are among the richest families in Colombia, but to the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, they are the new kings of cocaine, patriarchs of a criminal consortium more disciplined and protected from prosecution than the Sicilian Mafia and now bigger than the Medellin cartel.

The Cali combine produces 70% of the coke reaching the U.S. today, according to the DEA, and 90% of the drug sold in Europe. The Cali godfathers have a virtual lock on the global wholesale market in the most lucrative commodity ever conceived by organized crime. The cartel is the best and brightest of the modern underworld: professional, intelligent, efficient, imaginative and nearly impenetrable. Says Robert Bonner, administrator of the DEA: "The Cali cartel is the most powerful criminal organization in the world. No drug organization rivals them today or perhaps any time in history." (Shannon, "New Kings of Coke," 29.)

Reports of the global reach of the powerful drug lords and the concentration of power largely in the hands of a single cartel strikingly call to mind Moroni's prophetic words that seem to refer to a single latter-day secret combination — that "whoso buildeth it up seeketh to overthrow the freedom of all lands, nations, and countries." (Ether 8:25; emphasis added.) All nations need beware, but especially the nation to which Moroni's warning seems particularly directed: America. And if Nephite history, as carefully abridged by Moroni's father, is intended to foreshadow and forewarn of America's problems, then we might expect our own nation to be similarly threatened by those seeking, through ruthless and clandestine means, to "obtain the sole management of the government." (Hel. 6:39.) Accordingly, as ominous as are the media depictions of powerful criminal organizations and cartels, yet those secret combinations may be merely the tip of the iceberg of the actual threat facing America. But there is a solution, as President Benson urged:

Our nation will continue to degenerate unless we read and heed the words of the God of this land, Jesus Christ, and quit building up and upholding the secret combinations which the Book of Mormon tells us proved the downfall of both previous American civilizations. (A Witness and A Warning, 6.)

The Book of Mormon warns latter-day America to "awake to a sense of your awful situation, because of this secret combination which shall be among you," and to "repent of your sins, and suffer not that these murderous combinations shall get above you." (Ether 8:23-24.)

Advice from One of the Founders

Such is the state of America today. Having been blessed, as the Nephites of old, with great prosperity, America likewise finds itself on the very course that ultimately destroyed the Nephites, which was, in Hugh Nibley's words, "pride . . . engendered by the riches of the earth." (Collected Works, 7:354.) The wise John Adams feared the effect of affluence on America. As summarized by one scholar, Adams believed that:

As a nation grew in wealth and power, . . . its moral strength declined. "The History of All Ages and Countries," Adams explained, "are uniform, that Luxury grows with Population Wealth and Prosperity." And luxury was the cancer that destroyed republican moral fibre.

"Luxury, wherever she goes," he had warned, "effaces from human nature the image of the Divinity." It spurred the wealthy classes into a rage for material possessions, the marks of social status, and the poor into jealous dissatisfaction with their own lot. Adams' final conclusions about Europe had borne this out. In France, wealth provided the instrumentalities to "inform the understanding" and "refine the taste"; yet wealth served even more to "seduce, betray, deceive, deprave, corrupt and debauch" the heart. . . ." Commerce, luxury, and avarice, he explained to Benjamin Rush later on, in 1808, destroyed every republican government. The more wealth and elegance, the less virtue; this same formula held true in all times and places. (Howe, Political Thought of John Adams, 146.)

What, then, was the solution when society found itself in moral decay? During John Adams's presidency, the nation experienced troubles with France, and war appeared imminent. In the face of such calamities, President Adams issued a proclamation that is as relevant today as the day it was issued, March 23, 1798:

As the safety and prosperity of nations ultimately and essentially depend on the protection and the blessing of Almighty God, and the national acknowledgment of this truth is not only an indispensable duty which the people owe to Him, but a duty whose natural influence is favorable to the promotion of that morality and piety without which social happiness can not exist nor the blessings of a free government be enjoyed; and as this duty, at all times incumbent, is so especially in seasons of difficulty or of danger, when existing or threatening calamities, the just judgments of God against prevalent iniquity, are a loud call to repentance and reformation; and as the United states of America are at present placed in a hazardous and afflictive situation by the unfriendly disposition, conduct, and demands of a foreign power, evinced by repeated refusals to receive our messengers of reconciliation and peace, by depredations on our commerce, and the infliction of injuries on very many of our fellow citizens while engaged in their lawful business on the seas — under these considerations it has appeared to me that the duty of imploring the mercy and benediction of Heaven on our country demands at this time a special attention from its inhabitants.

I have therefore thought fit to recommend, and I do hereby recommend, that Wednesday, the 9th day of May next, be observed throughout the United States as a day of solemn humiliation, fasting, and prayer; that the citizens of these States, abstaining on that day from their customary worldly occupations, offer their devout addresses to the Father of Mercies agreeably to those forms or methods which they have severally adopted as the most suitable and becoming; that all religious congregations do, with the deepest humility, acknowledge before God the manifold sins and transgressions with which we are justly chargeable as individuals and as a nation, beseeching Him at the same timne, of His infinite grace, through the Redeemer of the World, freely to remit all our offenses, and to incline us by His Holy Spirit to that sincere repentance and reformation which may afford us reason to hope for his inestimable favor and heavenly benediction; that it be made the subject of particular and earnest supplication that our country may be protected from all the dangers which threaten it; that our civil and religious privileges may be preserved inviolate and perpetuated to the latest generations; that our public councils and magistrates may be especially enlightened and directed at this critical period; that the American people may be united in those bonds of amity and mutual confidence and inspired with that vigor and fortitude by which they have in times past been so highly distinguished and by which they have obtained such invaluable advantages; that the health of the inhabitants of our land may be preserved, and their agriculture, commerce, fisheries, arts, and manufactures be blessed and prospered; that the principles of genuine piety and sound morality may influence the minds and govern the lives of every description of our citizens, and that the blessings of peace, freedom, and pure religion may be speedily extended to all the nations of the earth.

And finally, I recommend that on the said day the duties of humiliation and prayer be accompanied by fervent thanksgiving to the Bestower of Every Good Gift, not only for His having hitherto protected and preserved the people of these United States in the independent enjoyment of their religious and civil freedom, but also for having prospered them in a wonderful progress of population, and for conferring on them many and great favors conducive to the happiness and prosperity of a nation. (Richardson, Messages and Papers of the Presidents, 1:258-60.)

Such words by John Adams are of more than historical interest, for, as President Benson declared:

This nation will be preserved so long as we retain the same quality of faith in God that our founders manifested. Personal righteousness is essential to our liberty. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 574.)

God's Instrument to Save Latter-day America: The Book of Mormon

In our day, according to President Benson, the single most important instrument that God has designed to effect the repentance and righteousness necessary to preserve America is the Book of Mormon:

What is the essential message of the Book of Mormon that is so vital to our time? It is a witness to our generation. It prophesied the founding of this nation and how we may survive as a free country. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 576.)

I wish every American and every living soul would read the Book of Mormon. . . . It tells about the prophetic history and mission of America. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 50-51.)

We have not been using the Book of Mormon as we should. (A Witness and A Warning, 6.)

The time is long overdue for a massive flooding of the earth with the Book of Mormon for the many reasons which the Lord has given. . . .

We hardly fathom the power of the Book of Mormon, nor the divine role it must play, nor the extent to which it must be moved.

"Few men on earth," said Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "either in or out of the Church, have caught the vision of what the Book of Mormon is all about. Few are they among men who know the part it has played and will yet play in preparing the way for the coming of Him of whom it is a new witness. . . . The Book of Mormon shall so affect men that the whole earth and all its peoples will have been influenced and governed by it." . . .

Now, my good Saints, we have a great work to perform in a very short time. We must flood the earth with the Book of Mormon. (Benson, "Flooding the Earth with the Book of Mormon," 4-5.)

The metaphor of "flooding" is significant in calling to mind the key role that the Book of Mormon is designed to play in the destiny of America. God's decree concerning this land came after "the waters had receded from off the face of this land" (Ether 13:2) and now, by hearkening to the Book of Mormon, America can cleanse itself and comply with that ancient decree, thereby saving itself from destruction as catastrophic as that ancient, cleansing flood. Furthermore, President Benson's counsel is also an invitation to assist in the fulfillment of the Lord's ancient promise to "sweep the earth as with a flood" with truth that he would "send forth out of the earth" in order to bless all nations and effect a great work, particularly in America. (Moses 7:62.) That truth is the Book of Mormon . (A Witness and A Warning, vii.)
