E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Chapter 11

America — Land of Zion

Accompanying the Book of Mormon warnings to latter-day America are prophecies of another kind: No matter what else happens in or to America, it is unequivocally destined to be the site of a righteous and glorious city that in time will be joined by another city of the same name which will literally descend from heaven, as foretold in a prophecy pronounced by Ether, the final record keeper of the Jaredite civilization. Speaking of America, Ether prophesied:

It was the place of the New Jerusalem, which should come down out of heaven, and the holy sanctuary of the Lord. . . .

And . . . a New Jerusalem should be built up upon this land, unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph. (Ether 13:3, 6.)

This New Jerusalem to be built in America will, as Christ himself told the Nephites, be erected by the house of Israel — including Lehi's posterity — and all who have qualified to be numbered with them as heirs to the ancient Abrahamic covenant with Israel.

If they [the Gentiles] will repent and hearken unto my words, and harden not their hearts, I will establish my church among them, and they shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their inheritance;

And they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and also as many of the house of Israel as shall come, that they may build a city, which shall be called the New Jerusalem.

And then shall they assist my people that they may be gathered in, who are scattered upon all the face of the land, in unto the New Jerusalem.

And then shall the power of heaven come down among them; and I also will be in the midst. (3 Ne. 21:22-25.)

According to Ether, the American New Jerusalem will complement the newly built Jerusalem of old in fulfillment of the Abrahamic covenant:

Wherefore, the remnant of the house of Joseph shall be built upon this land; and it shall be a land of their inheritance; and they shall build up a holy city unto the Lord, like unto the Jerusalem of old; and they shall no more be confounded, until the end come when the earth shall pass away.

And there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; and they shall be like unto the old save the old have passed away, and all things have become new.

And then cometh the New Jerusalem; and blessed are they who dwell therein, for it is they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who are numbered among the remnant of the seed of Joseph, who were of the house of Israel.

And then also cometh the Jerusalem of old; and the inhabitants thereof, blessed are they, for they have been washed in the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who were scattered and gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the north countries, and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant which God made with their father, Abraham. (Ether 13:8-11.)

When the resurrected Christ told the Nephites about the New Jerusalem to be built in America (3 Ne. 21:23-24), he began by using a different term — Zion.

I shall gather in, from their long dispersion, my people, O house of Israel, and shall establish again among them my Zion. (3 Ne. 21:1.)

The Term Zion in the Old Testament

The same dual designation of Zion for that latter-day city occurs in the book of Moses, which foretells that the Lord will sweep the earth with truth "as with a flood" to prepare for the building of a "Holy City" to be "called Zion, a New Jerusalem." (Moses 7:62.) Zion in America? The Old Testament uses the term Zion to refer to the Jerusalem Temple Mount or sometimes, in an expanded way, to the city of Jerusalem or the land of Judah. But given the central significance in Judaism of the term Zion, its etymology curiously remains a mystery. (Encyclopedia Judaica 16:1030; Freedman, Anchor Bible Dictionary, 6:1096.) Equally striking is that the concept of Zion clearly predated its usage in ancient Israel.

The themes and motifs of the Zion theology . . . stem for the most part from pre-Israelite times. (Kraus, Theology of the Psalms , 83.)

The psalms of Zion contain a series of characteristic statements about the city of God that can be explained neither from the topography of Jerusalem nor from any mythical-eschatalogical conceptions. (Kraus, Ps. 1-59 , 462.)

Furthermore, some of the Old Testament psalmic descriptions of Zion seem to point to the Garden of Eden:

In Jerusalem [as described in the Psalms] there are streams flowing that "delight" the holy city (Ps. 46:4). Here . . . it is not a matter of a particular location but of traditions such as also appear in Gen. 2 and Ezek. 47. The paradisaical Garden of Eden is watered by streams. In this statement of glorification, Zion is the place where the subterranean archetypal waters emerge and in controlled form moisten the land and make it fruitful. ( Ps. 1-59 , 462.)

America as the Site of the Garden of Eden

Where was the Garden of Eden? Revelations to Joseph Smith indicate that it was in North America, for they disclose that the place where the aged Adam blessed his posterity is in what is now known as Daviess County, Missouri. (D&C 107:53; 116.) Furthermore, several of Joseph Smith's colleagues reported his saying that that same site had also been the place where Adam had originally offered sacrifice shortly after being driven out of the Garden of Eden, which had been located nearby. (Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 209-10; Kenney, ed., Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 7:129; and Barrett, Joseph Smith and the Restoration, 372-73.) Hence, according to George Q. Cannon:

God in his revelations has informed us that it was on this choice land [of America] where Adam was placed and the Garden of Eden laid out. (Journal of Discourses, 11:337.)

That the original site of the earthly Paradise had been located somewhere far to the west of the Middle East and Europe was suggested by several ancient traditions, including that of the Greeks, who located the Fortunate Isles in the Western Ocean. (Gaster, Myth, Legend, and Custom in the Old Testament, 1:26.) A later, and apparently independent, Irish tradition similarly held that the original site of Paradise was located westward across the ocean in a vast land: in the medieval Irish legend of Brendan, written approximately A.D. 900 about events that had reportedly occurred some three centuries earlier, Brendan was informed of a faraway land containing the site of the Garden of Eden.

A monk named Barinthus visited St Brendan at Ardfert and told of a voyage he had made himself, westward through darkness, to the Land Promised to the Saints, 'which God will grant to those who succeed us in the latter days.' A land of unknown but certainly vast extent, it contained the Earthly Paradise. (Ashe, et al., Quest for America, 29.)

So where is the Land of Promise which Brendan sought and ultimately found? If conjectures about the other islands are true — even approximately true — then the land that Brendan and his monks explored for forty days after sailing forty days to get there would have to be some part of North America. (Parker, Discovery, 63.)

The Brendan story is based, at least, on "a hard kernel of fact," for "all agree" that Brendan was not only a real person but also an "accomplished seafarer" who lived in a "time . . . of sea pilgrimages by Irish monks." (Jackson, "Who the Heck Did 'Discover' the New World?" 80-81.) Furthermore, there is credible evidence that the Brendan story was known to Columbus and had "a most profound effect upon Columbus's explorations." (Flint, Imaginative Landscape, 91; and see Taviani, Columbus, 44-45, and Christopher Columbus, 375.) Indeed, Columbus became convinced (gradually, perhaps, but finally) that the new world he had discovered contained the site of the original Garden of Eden.

There is a hint toward the end of the journal of the first voyage [February 21, 1493] that Columbus was thinking of the Terrestrial Paradise then. . . . "The Admiral says that the sacred theologians and learned philosophers were right in saying that the earthly paradise is at the end of the east, because it is a very temperate place, so these lands which he had now discovered are, he says, 'the end of the east.'" (Flint, Imaginative Landscape, 149.)

The third voyage of discovery was in many ways the most spectacular of them all. This was the voyage in which Columbus recognized that he had come upon a great and previously unknown land. . . . And this was the voyage during which Columbus touched upon, as he proclaimed to his sovereigns, the edge of Terrestrial Paradise. (Flint, Imaginative Landscape, 149; and see Sale, Conquest of Paradise, 206, and Morison, Admiral of the Ocean Sea, 556.)

Finding the location of the Terrestrial Paradise had long been one of [Columbus's] goals, and he thanked God for the privilege of its discovery. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 7.)

Many others came to follow Columbus's lead in considering the New World to have been the original site of the Garden of Eden, but probably the most monumental effort of scholarship to arrive at that conclusion was made in the seventeenth century by Antonio (de) Leon Pinelo. (See Prest, Garden of Eden, 32-34.) His work remains the most exhaustive investigation from ancient sources ever undertaken in modern times on the location of the Garden of Eden.

One of the most erudite bibliophiles of the seventeenth century was Antonio Leon Pinelo, who wrote [translated title:] The Paradise of the New World, Natural and Foreign History of the West Indies and the Isles of Terra Firma on the Oceanic Sea . . . , [in preparation for which he][devot[ed] himself to the most painstaking reading of the Old and the New Testaments, the fathers of the Church, and every book that his tireless diligence enabled him to find, till he arrived at the vehement conviction that the Garden of Eden could only be located in America. . . .

Nine hundred large-format pages did Leon Pinelo write to combat the seventeen most authorized hypotheses that placed Eden in the center of the moon, in the middle regions of the air, on top of the highest known mountain peaks, in the sky, in Libya, in India, in the world of the Hyperboreans, in the Moluccas, in Ceylon, in Samatia, in Charon, in Syria, on the Plain of Esdraelon in Palestine, in Damascus, in Canaan, on the Elysian Fields, on the Fortunate Isles. . . . For Pinelo, all this was groundless geography. . . .

Raul Porras Barranechea has rediscovered Leon Pinelo's book. He concludes: "Spurred on by a desire for erudition and documentation, Pinelo registers books and papers that refer to America; he delves into old folios of medieval geography and ancient cosmography — in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew; he initiates himself in Talmudic and Biblical science, devouring 680 Hebrew books from a rabbinical library in search of a quotation about the Garden of Eden. And to clear up any theological doubt, he submerges himself in the works of the Church Fathers, the Bible exegetes, and the doctors of scholastics." (Arciniegas, America in Europe, 45-47.)

America as the Site of an Ancient City Called Zion

If the Garden of Eden had been in America, and if, as we have seen, the concept of Zion antedated its usage in ancient Israel and pointed topographically to the Garden of Eden, could there have once been an ancient site named Zion in America? That there was an ancient antediluvian Zion somewhere on earth is disclosed by a revelation to Joseph Smith telling that Enoch built a city called Zion that was eventually transported from the earth to heavenly realms.

And the Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them.

And Enoch continued his preaching in righteousness unto the people of God. And it came to pass in his days, that he built a city that was called the City of Holiness, even ZION. . . .

. . . And lo, Zion, in process of time, was taken up into heaven. (Moses 7:18-21.)

The earthly location of Enoch's Zion is never mentioned in that text, but it could not have been far away from where Adam blessed his posterity, for Enoch and his city — as part of Adam's righteous posterity — attended the assembly blessed by Father Adam. (See D&C 107:53; Moses 7:68-69; 8:1 — Adam blessed his righteous posterity long after Enoch began building the city of Zion.) Enoch's Zion, then, had to have been in America as well, as Elder Orson Pratt expressly stated:

It was here where Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, Methusaleh and Noah dwelt. . . . It was here where Enoch preached and published glad tidings of great joy; it was on this land — the American Continent — where he gathered the people from many nations, and built up a city and called it Zion. . . . It was here that he continued his preaching to the inhabitants of the city of Zion until he made them so acquainted with the law of God, and inspired them with such faith that the earth could not contain them. (Journal of Discourses 12:338.)

That the original Zion built by Enoch was in America would explain why the concept of Zion antedated its usage by the Jews in Jerusalem, whose topography does not match some of the descriptions of Zion in the Old Testament. The existence of such allusions in the Old Testament text to an older Zion of Enoch is perfectly consistent with the thesis of one scholar who concludes that the pseudepigraphical Book of Enoch (1 Enoch) reflects ancient Israel's pre-Exilic (before the Babylonian exile) religion, most of which (but not all) was later removed from the Old Testament text by post-Exilic editors. (Barker, Older Testament.) But if traces of Enoch's Zion survived in textual allusions in the Old Testament, apparently no archeological traces of the actual city survived, for it was literally taken up to heaven — people, land, and all, according to Joseph Smith. (Kenney, ed., Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 7:129.)

The Return of the Ancient Zion to Join the Latter-day Zion

From the American continent was Enoch's Zion taken, and to America Zion shall return as "the New Jerusalem, which [will] come down out of heaven," as the prophet Ether foretold. (Ether 13:3.) But Enoch's heavenly Zion will come only when the earthly Zion has been fully established, as the Lord told his prophet Noah:

I [will] remember the everlasting covenant, which I made unto thy father Enoch; that, when men should keep all my commandments, Zion should again come on the earth, the city of Enoch which I have caught up unto myself.

And this is mine everlasting covenant, that when thy posterity shall embrace the truth, and look upward, then shall Zion look downward, and all the heavens shall shake with gladness, and the earth shall tremble with joy;

And the general assembly of the church of the first-born shall come down out of heaven, and posses the earth. (Joseph Smith Translation, Gen. 9:21-23.)

First and last, then, America is the home of Zion, as Charles W. Penrose observed:

America is the land whereon the Zion of Enoch was built, and therefore the Lord has commanded his people in the present day to gather upon that land, to build up the Latter-day Zion. ("Zion," 354).

And the two cities shall finally become one, according to Erastus Snow:

God has had His eye upon this American continent as the place where He first commenced His great work on the earth, where the greatest manifestations of His power were exhibited in the days of the fathers before the flood, when the fathers were gathered in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman and received their last instructions and blessings from Father Adam, the Patriarch of this earth, and where Enoch gathered his people and established Zion, . . . and where He has determined ultimately to establish His Zion and gather together His people, [and] . . . where He will bring again Zion that He has taken away, even the Zion of Enoch. (Journal of Discourses, 2:65.)

Hence, Enoch's Zion — or, as Ether referred to it, the heavenly New Jerusalem — will return to the very land upon which it was built, to join the city that the Lord in modern-day revelation has designated to be built in the latter days.

And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God;

And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion. (D&C 45:66-67.)

This new city that is to bear the name of the old one is also to be built according to the same principles, observed Orson Pratt:

The Latter Day Zion is to be built up according to the same pattern . . . [as that] built up by Enoch. (Journal of Discourses, 2:103; and see D&C 105:5.)

The spiritual foundation of this latter-day Zion was laid by Joseph Smith, of whom the Lord said:

Him have I inspired to move the cause of Zion in mighty power for good. (D&C 21:7.)

Emphasizing the significance of the latter-day Zion, Joseph Smith explained:

The building up of Zion is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live; and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung and written and prophesied of this our day; but they died without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory; it is left for us to see, participate in and help to roll forward the Latter-day glory. (History of the Church, 4:609-10.)

The Lamanites' Role in Building Zion

Joseph Smith's description of the role his fellow Saints were to play in building Zion — "see, participate in and help to roll forward" — recalls Christ's characterization of the role of the "Gentiles" in building the holy city of Zion in America: those who accepted his restored gospel would be privileged to be numbered among the Israelites — including Lehi's posterity — who will build the American New Jerusalem. Orson Pratt declared:

We shall have the privilege of helping them to build the New Jerusalem. The Lord says, — "They," the Gentiles, who believe in the Book of Mormon, "shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, that they may build a city, which shall be called the New Jerusalem" . . . . We have got to be helpers, we have got to be those who co-operate with the remnants of Joseph in accomplishing this great work; for the Lord will have respect unto them, because they are of the blood of Israel, and the promises of their fathers extend to them, and they will have the privilege of building that city, according to the pattern that the Lord shall give. (Journal of Discourses, 17:301.)

Addressing the Indians, President Spencer W. Kimball looked forward to the time of that joint building project:

Together you and we shall build in the spectacular city of New Jerusalem the temple to which our Redeemer will come. Your hands with ours, also those of Jacob, will place the foundation stones, raise the walls, and roof the magnificent structure. Perhaps your artistic hands will paint the temple and decorate it with a master's touch, and together we shall dedicate to our Creator Lord the most beautiful of all temples ever built to his name. (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 620.)

The significant role to be played by the Lamanites in the rise of the glorious latter-day city of Zion is not without some foreshadowing in the rise of American democracy, which as scholars have demonstrated, owes a debt to the American Indian peoples. The Europeans' perception of their way of life exerted a profound influence on European thinking, which in turn served as a fruitful source for the ideas relied upon by the American Founding Fathers.

When Americans try to trace their democratic heritage back through the writings of French and English political thinkers of the Enlightenment, they often forget that these people's thoughts were heavily shaped by the democratic traditions and the state of nature of the American Indians. The concept of the "noble savage" derived largely from writings about the American Indians, and even though the picture grew romanticized and distorted, the writers were only romanticizing and distorting something that really did exist. The Indians did live in a fairly democratic condition, they were egalitarian, and they did live in greater harmony with nature. (Weatherford, Indian Givers, 129.)

It is the description of the Indian of the New World in the early accounts, beginning with [Columbus's] Santangel Letter and running for three decades thereafter, that basically created the idea of the Noble Savage in Europe and provided for European political thought the underlying characteristics of the free commonwealth. The idea of political liberty . . . really began here; so too the idea of equality . . . ; and the idea of abundance. . . . Right from the start these were the impressions that made the New World stand for "the land of liberty" . . . ; as the decades went on, they became every bit as important and ubiquitous in Europe as potatoes and tobacco, two other borrowings from the same soil. When Europeans (particularly north Europeans) actually began to settle in that New World in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, they were taking back to it these ideas and ideals, expecting to see them flourish in the colonies they implanted there, a process that of course culminated in the revolution that for the first time asserted just these values to the world and sought to build a new nation upon them. Full circle. (Sale, Conquest of Paradise, 200.)

But the Indians' influence on America's founding was also more direct:

The modern notions of democracy based on egalitarian principles and a federated government of overlapping powers arose from the unique blend of European and Indian political ideas and institutions along the Atlantic coast between 1607 and 1776. Modern democracy as we know it today is as much the legacy of the American Indians, particularly the Iroquois and the Algonquians, as it is of the British settlers, of French political theory, or of all the failed efforts of the Greeks and Romans. (Weatherford, Indian Givers, 129-30.)

The Indian contribution to the founding of America is significant, even though not widely publicized:

It is surely one of the most closely guarded secrets of American history that the Iroquois Confederacy had a major role in helping such people as Benjamin Franklin, James Madison, and Thomas Jefferson as they attempted to confederate a new government under democratic principles.

Recent scholarship has shown that in the mid-1700s Indians were not only invited to participate in the deliberations of our "founding fathers," but that the Great Binding Law of the Iroquois Confederacy arguably became the single most important model for the 1754 Albany Plan of Union, and later the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution. (Mander, Absence of the Sacred, 230; and see Weatherford, Indian Givers, 135-45, and Johansen, Forgotten Founders.)

Such was the Lamanite contribution to the establishment of the nation that would become the site of the city of Zion. And it seems more than coincidental that the land that would later be designated by revelation as the site of the future city of Zion — in Independence, Missouri — was first explored by the Latter-day Saints only as the infant Church sent missionaries to the Lamanites. (See Smith, History of the Church 1:183.) Eventually, when the body of the Church found itself there and the revelation was given designating that site to be the city of Zion (D&C 84:34), the Saints began the project. Their efforts, however, were unsuccessful (D&C 124:51), and they moved northeast to Nauvoo and were finally forced to flee westward.

Becoming a Zion People to Fulfill America's Destiny

But still the Saints' objective was — as it should be ours — to become a Zion people in preparation for actually building the city of Zion, so that the heavenly Zion can descend. Hugh Nibley observed:

Brigham Young admonished the people who came to the [Salt Lake] Valley lest they "go into error when they expect to see that Zion here which they have seen in vision." The Zion in the vision was the real one. It must always be kept in mind, not as a present reality, but as the goal toward which all the labor of the Church is a preparation. . . .

When all the accidentals and incidentals are stripped away, what remains that is quintessentially Zion? Buildings, walls, streets, and gates — even of gold and jasper — do not make Zion; neither do throngs in shining robes. . . . What makes Zion? God has given us the perfect definition: Zion is the pure in heart — the pure in heart, not merely the pure in appearance. It is not a society or religion of forms and observances, of pious gestures and precious mannerisms: it is strictly a condition of the heart. Above all, Zion is pure, which means "not mixed with any impurities, unalloyed"; it is all Zion and nothing else. It is not achieved wherever a heart is pure or where two or three are pure, because it is all pure — it is a society, a community, and an environment into which no unclean thing can enter. "Henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean" (3 Ne. 20:36). It is not even pure people in a dirty environment, or pure people with a few impure ones among them; it the perfectly pure in a perfectly pure environment. "I . . . will contend with Zion . . . and chasten her until she overcomes and is clean before me" (D&C 90:36). . . .

"When we conclude to make a Zion," said Brigham Young, "we will make it, and this work commences in the heart of each person." Zion can come only to a place that is completely ready for it, which is to say Zion must already be there. When Zion descends to earth, it must be met by a Zion that is already here: "And they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks; . . . and there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion" (Moses 7:63-64). (Collected Works, 9:26-27, 29.)

The challenge for Latter-day Saints today, then, is to live as a Zion people in order to one day build the glorious city of Zion. According to Roy Doxey:

President Brigham Young [said]: "I live and walk in Zion every day," and . . . "thousands of others in this Church and kingdom . . . carry Zion with them." [Journal of Discourses 1:4.] . . . He who walks in Zion — in purity of heart — today shall build the city of Zion . . . tomorrow, or at the very least, bequeath to his posterity the quality of godliness that will enable them to build it. (Zion in the Last Days, 82.)

This, then, is America's destiny — to serve as the home of the glorious latter-day Zion, the distinguishing feature of which, as Nibley emphasized, is "the pure in heart." (D&C 97:21.) It has been to achieve this end, the building of Zion, that God has so conspicuously intervened to effect the rise and establishment of America. According to President J. Reuben Clark,

It is this fact and this purpose, the building of Zion on this hemisphere, which is Zion, which seem to be the dominant elements in all of God's dealings with them who possess this land. (Stand Fast by Our Constitution, 174-75.)

Foreshadowings of the Latter-day Zion

In the Irish medieval legend of Brendan, he had been led on a quest to "the Land Promised to the Saints," where he was informed that

Now he stood on the confines of Paradise, and the pilgrimage was finished. Many years hence, in days of trouble, the Land of Promise would be shown to Brendan's successors as a refuge. Later again it would be made known to all Christendom. (Ashe, et al., Quest for America, 29, 33.)

The concept of refuge located in a land reserved for the saints recalls the Lord's description of the latter-day city of Zion as "a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God." (D&C 45:66.) The legend of Brendan influenced Columbus, who was obsessed with the theme of Zion. In a letter he wrote to the Spanish sovereigns and which he included in his Book of Prophecies, he claimed to be the fulfiller of a prophecy attributed to Joachim of Fiore of the twelfth century:

Not undeservedly or without reason, I call earnestly to the attention of you, most noble sovereigns, some very important things that are to be observed, since indeed we did read that Joachim the Abbot of Southern Italy has foretold that he is to come from Spain who is to recover again the fortunes of Zion. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 239.)

This mention of Zion is more than a passing reference in the Book of Prophecies, whose major theme is arguably Zion.

Columbus described the document [his Book of Prophecies] as a notebook or handbook "of sources, statements, opinions and prophecies on the subject of the recovery of God's Holy City and Mount Zion, and on the discovery and evangelization of the islands of the Indies and of all other peoples and nations." The work revealed a man who believed he had a special relationship with God and was acting as the agent of God's scheme for history. Nothing had altered Columbus's conviction that he was a divinely called man of destiny, and in the manuscript he marshaled evidence from the prophecies of the Bible to show that his recent discoveries were only the prelude to the realization of a greater destiny. He seemed to see his role as not unlike John the Baptist's vis-a-vis Christ. He had . . . set the stage for the grandiose climax of Christian history, the salvation of all the world's peoples and their gathering at Zion on the eve of the end of time. (Wilford, Mysterious History of Columbus, 217.)

And what did Zion mean for Columbus? In the scriptures available to him — the Bible — the term Zion is applied to the city of Jerusalem in Palestine; such, then, would reasonably have been the geographical location that Columbus thought of. And what of the geography of his newly discovered lands? If the historians are correct who insist that Columbus realized on his third voyage that he had discovered a new continent, then the timing of Columbus's writing of his Book of Prophecies may be important — for it was after that third voyage. Did his knowledge that his "New World" was not Asia (the home of old Jerusalem) diminish his zeal for Zion? Not in the least. At any rate, the Book of Prophecies itself makes clear that Zion, or Jerusalem, was a concept broader in Columbus's mind than its Asiatic Old Testament designation. When in the opening section of the Book of Prophecies Columbus explains four different exegetical approaches to understand scripture at various levels of meaning, the example he uses to illustrate the four methods is Jerusalem:

The fourfold interpretation of Holy Scripture is clearly implicit in the word Jerusalem. In a historical sense, it is the earthly city to which pilgrims travel. Allegorically, it indicates the Church in the world. Tropologically, Jerusalem is the soul of every believer. Anagogically, the word means the Heavenly Jerusalem, the celestial fatherland and kingdom. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 101.)

According to Delno C. West,

Jerusalem held a special allegorical significance to Columbus. . . . To him, it was more than a place on the map, and it was the example that first came to mind for him to explain exegetical method at the beginning of the Libro de las profecias. Jerusalem to Columbus was the Jerusalem of St. Augustine, a symbol standing for an expanded future reality, a socio-moral standard, and a trend that operated through all ages of history. To think about Jerusalem was to think about history, to learn principles that have meaning for conduct of elect people of every age, to glimpse God's future plans as disclosed to prophets. The Bible refers to the holy city in all these ways and encourage thought about the jeweled and golden house of many mansions seen by John. Ultimately, Jerusalem represented the unity and peace of the whole people of God. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 71.)

As Columbus writes about the "restoration of the House of God" and later . . . the "house of Sion," his thoughts must be taken within the context of the foregoing hermeneutical principles. That is, he is speaking in both literal and figurative meanings. As noted, Jerusalem is not merely an earthly city but also, "allegorically, . . . the church in the world." Although Columbus called for a crusade, the literal regaining of the city of Jerusalem, his understanding of the prophesied "great events for the world" included a much more complete extending of the earthly kingdom of Christ. (West and Kling, Libro de las Profecias, 260.)

Indeed, it was for that kingdom that Columbus believed himself called to prepare the way:

Columbus believed that great changes would transform the world as a result of his voyages: the conversion of all peoples to Christianity, the creation of a single world empire, and the Second Coming of Christ that would end world history altogether in the Last Judgment of humanity. (Phillips and Phillips, Worlds of Christopher Columbus, 273.)

Thus Columbus — the man divinely appointed to begin the latter-day process that would culminate in the eventual building of the latter-day Zion — had a remarkable understanding of his own mission and its eventual significance. It would seem that the effect of "the Spirit of God" as it "wrought upon the man" Columbus (1 Ne. 13:12) not only empowered him with the idea of discovery and the resolve to accomplish it but also enlightened him in great measure about the significance of his mission as an essential step towards the eventual establishment of Zion. Yet another foreshadowing of America as the place for the great city of Zion was Sir Thomas More's fictional work published in 1516 which portrayed an ideal city, called "Utopia," located in America. (See More, Utopia.)

[Thomas] More, . . . shuffling Greek words, fashioned a new term without imagining that it was destined to attract forever the aspirations of the most vehement revolutionists. "Utopia" means a nonexistent place; it is a name conceived in skepticism and reflecting the irony at the heart of every idealist who is afraid that the treacheries of destiny will mock the children of his imagination. More builds a castle in the air, a structure whose foundations are very much fixed, however, on solid ground. . . . His Utopia is the work that sparks the mightiest exodus of all time. Utopians all, Europeans emigrate in a constant and massive flood, now four centuries long, to the continent of their hopes: America.

In 1516, More publishes his book, and if today we are to record the number of times that the word "Utopia" has been used ever since (in every language, by people from every nation, every continent), the most efficient computer would be unable to give us an approximate figure; its currency is universal and on the increase. . . .

the idea in itself was not new. There have been Utopias ever since the first dreamer opened his eyes upon the world. In the history of Western thought, More's Utopia is related to schemes derived from Plato. But the difference is great: If we look back, the pre-More Utopias are really built on air, poetic abstractions without consequence, mere spells induced by magic means. More, on the contrary, places his island . . . in America. (Arciniegas, America in Europe, 50-51; and see Nibley, Collected Works, 9:464-66, 500-504.)

What Thomas More envisioned in America, the Puritan colonists attempted to actualize.

The mission and meaning of New England were established from the outset of colonization when Governor John Winthrop informed the first settlers of Massachusetts Bay that they had taken out a divine "Commission" to make their New World society a godly "Citty vpon a hill" that would be a beacon for lost humanity. (Stout, New England Soul, 13.)

The name that the Puritans frequently used to describe their enterprise was "Zion" (Sion) or "Jerusalem" ("our American Jerusalem" or the "New English Jerusalem") (Stout, New England Soul, 55, 63, 123, 137, 139, 275). This usage foreshadowed that America would, as Christ had told the Nephites, indeed be the home of the New Jerusalem, called Zion. The physical layout of early Puritan settlements is noteworthy.

The meetinghouse stood at the center of the New England town, its only public building and the most significant mark the community would make on its landscape. No sooner were towns incorporated than committees were formed to survey the land and engage a builder to proceed with the task of erecting a "place of assembly" on elevated ground at a point as nearly equidistant from the surrounding homes as possible. . . . Symbolically [these structures] . . . proclaimed to all that religion was the chief business of the community and the highest priority of its people. (Stout, New England Soul, 13-14.)

Such an arrangement foreshadowed the layout of the city of Zion as revealed to Joseph Smith, who likewise placed the temple at the center. (Smith, History of the Church, 1:358.) It was thus nearly prophetic foresight, then, for the French observer Tocqueville to declare:

I think I see the destiny of America embodied in the first Puritan who landed on those shores, just as the whole human race was represented by the first man. (Democracy in America [I:XVII], 1:290.)

Tocqueville's assessment was remarkably accurate: the destiny of America was indeed embodied in the first Puritans who stepped onto American soil with the intent of building a holy city to their God and who ardently believed that they were entrusted with a divine mission that would facilitate the unfolding of great and marvelous events.

The settlers of America had a particular view of their place in world history. . . . They firmly believed that the new world was a special land of opportunity prepared and reserved by God for his special purposes, and that they had been brought by the hand of God to work his will in this chosen land.

"Particularly noteworthy was the ever present religiously oriented sense of mission which guided people of all ranks to the New World early during the period between 1607 — 1820. . . . A favoring Providence was seen as directing the destiny of His 'chosen people' in the abundant wilderness called America."

By the middle of the eighteenth century, the idea that "America had a special place, as yet not revealed, in the architecture of God's intent" was pervasive in the American colonies. The Great Awakening in the fourth decade of the eighteenth century fueled Americans' beliefs that they were on the verge of great events in which they were destined to play a major role. The sense of millennialism in the revolutionary era is evident even in the writings of the most secular political leaders of the time. But undergirding and overarching all the rest were religious statements of impending providential events. "The clergy, like many other Americans, felt the country 'to be on the eve of some great and unusual events' and their language, ecstatic but not uniquely religious, took on the millennial tone." (Wardle, "Constitution as Covenant," 19-20.)

Indeed, the Puritans viewed themselves as participants in the great and glorious events that would culminate in Christ's millennial reign.

Covenanted peoples like those of ancient Israel and New England were the hub around which sacred (i.e., real) history revolved. Such peoples might be ignored or reviled by the world and figure insignificantly in the great empires of profane history, but viewed through the sacred lens of providential history they were seen as God's special instruments entrusted with the task of preparing the way for messianic deliverance. As Israel witnessed to God's active involvement with nations in ancient times and brought forth the Christ, so New England's experience confirmed God's continuing involvement with nations that would persist until Christ's return to earth, when history itself would cease and be swallowed up in eternity. (Stout, New England Soul, 7.)

By calling upon their covenant God, New Englanders not only confirmed their special status but also brought God's millennial kingdom closer to its glorious fulfillment. (Stout, New England Soul, 237-38.)

It seemed possible . . . that in God's providence America may have been designated as "the principal Seat of that glorious kingdom, which Christ shall erect upon Earth in the latter Days." (Stout, New England Soul, 308.)

The Revolutionary War and the Declaration of Independence were seen as a prelude to prophesied events relating to Christ's kingdom and the Millennium.

Ezra Stiles, that learned Yale Hebraist, envisioned America as the new Israel. . . . "That prophecy of Daniel is now literally fulfilling . . . ," he wrote, as the War of the Revolution came to an end. (Alley, ed., Madison on Religious Liberty, 113.)

The struggle [with England] . . . was [seen as] part of a foreordained plan to establish a new order for the ages that would prevision, in civil and religious forms, the shape God's millennial kingdom would eventually assume in the fullness of time. . . .

New England's ministers . . . suggested that America was about to inaugurate a millennial destiny prophesied in Scripture. (Stout, New England Soul, 307.)

God's unfolding plan called for, according to Ezra Stiles, "a pure and glorious church" that God would establish:

God has great things in design for this vine [America] which his irresistable arm has planted. . . . He purposes to make of us a great people and a pure and glorious church. (Stout, New England Soul, 253.)

It is not without significance that in God's dealings with those who laid America's political foundations, one of his greatest miracles, the Constitution, was wrought by a powerful demonstration of one of the foundational principles of Zion. Even as the inhabitants of Enoch's Zion "were of one heart and one mind" (Moses 7:18), and even as the latter-day revelation speaking of Enoch's Zion (D&C 38:4) commands the latter-day builders of Zion likewise to "be one" (v. 27), so was accomplished the establishment of the United States government (upon the same land as Enoch's Zion for the very purpose of building the latter-day Zion) through a miraculous unity that finally settled over the deliberations of the Constitutional Convention in the summer of 1787. (See Chapter 6.) Furthermore, the perceptive George Washington sensed that the frequent and conspicuous manifestations of divine providence aiding the American cause in the war of liberation were designed to usher in a time of unique greatness, as he stated in a circular to the states on June 8, 1783:

The Citizens of America. . . . are, from this period, to be considered as the Actors on a most conspicuous Theatre, which seems to be peculiarly designated by Providence for the display of human greatness and felicity. (Fitzpatrick, ed., Writings of George Washington, 26:485-86.)

Strengthening the Family

To achieve America's divinely appointed destiny, according to Puritan preacher Ezra Stiles, America's religious origin and foundation must be taught to the rising generation.

Stiles urged ministers and parents to teach their children history — particularly the sacred history of Israel and New England. . . . History was of first importance if the children were to appreciate the value of their civil and religious liberties and the religious end to which those liberties were established:

"We should often relate to our posterity the history of the wonderful providences of God in the settlement of this Country. . . . Let our children be often taught to read the sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth verses of the twenty-sixth chapter of Deuteronomy with parallel application to the history of our ancestors. Let the great errand into America never be forgotten." (Stout, New England Soul, 253-54.)

In a thanksgiving sermon in 1766, Joseph Emerson urged:

Acquaint yourselves as far as you have opportunity, with the history of our nation and land, and rehearse the wondrous things you meet with, in the ears of your children. (Stout, New England Soul, 267.)

This emphasis on children and families was not new. The early founders of New England had recognized that its mission could be carried out only and ultimately by the children, to whom the "founders" left this counsel in 1662:

Be subject to your godly Parents: Be subject to your spiritual Fathers and Pastors, and to all their Instructions, Admonitions and Exhortations. . . . Let it not be said, that when the first and best generation in New-England were gathered to their fathers, there arose another generation after them that knew not the Lord. (Stout, New England Soul, 61.)

That counsel was followed by other sermons with similar emphasis.

Nathaniel Gookin reminded the parents that . . . [m]ore than ever before, parents must teach their children to preserve "such good things as our Fathers came into this Wilderness for." Samuel Willard pursued the same theme. . . . Willard's chief concern was that in the furor over "rights and titles" the people might forget their first priority, which was "to secure the Rights and Titles of their Children, to the visible worship of God." The children of New England, Willard went on, were still in the "same covenant of grace" as Israel and must never forget that "true faith engages the people of God in Duty. . . . When men cast off their duty about the children of the covenant, tis a woeful sign that God is about to cast off those Children." Only by setting the children's "spiritual good above all others," could New England remain a special "people of God" and continue to enjoy divine protection and mercy. (Stout, New England Soul, 113.)

Funeral sermons used death to underscore the passage of generations and the covenant's continuity. Above all, they urged the rising generation to remember their predecessors and imitate their piety. (Stout, New England Soul, 122-23.)

Frequency was perceived as the key to teaching the children of early New England:

From infancy the children heard about the covenant in sermons, catechisms, and family devotions. (Stout, New England Soul, 56.)

For the Puritans, then, the family was the foundation:

The series of covenants that joined church, town, and commonwealth into one great chain of order also included the household. . . . Ministers routinely referred to the family as a "little church" or a "little commonwealth," by which they meant a microcosm of the covenantal relationships governing church and state. (Stout, New England Soul, 22.)

This fundamental importance of the family was emphasized by John Adams:

The foundations of national Morality must be laid in private Families. (In Butterfield, Diary and Autobiography of John Adams, 4:123.)

The same truth has been repeatedly recognized by the United States Supreme Court.

The family [is] . . . the sure foundation of all that is stable and noble in our civilization; the best guaranty of that reverent morality which is the source of all beneficent progress in social and political improvement. (United States v. Bitty, 208 U.S. 393, 401 [1908], citing Murphy v. Ramsey, 114 U.S. 15, 45 [1885]; also cited in Davis v. Beason, 133 U.S. 333, 345 [1890.])

Accordingly, to build America — and, for that matter, to build Zion — one must begin at home. President Ezra Taft Benson has stated,

The family is the rock foundation, the cornerstone, of civilization. The Church will never be stronger than its families, and this nation will never rise above its homes and its families. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 493.)

And how do we strengthen families? President Benson gave the answer:

The Book of Mormon was meant for us. It was written for our day. Its scriptures are to be likened unto ourselves. (See 1 Ne. 19:23.)

With that understanding, let us consider from the Book of Mormon the responsibility fathers have to teach their sons, and the responsibility sons have to take direction from their fathers. This counsel also applies to all parents and their children. ("Flooding the Earth with the Book of Mormon," 6; and see Clark and Clark, Fathers and Sons in the Book of Mormon .)

Preserving the Constitution

For Latter-day Saints, however, the obligation to build America does not stop with building one's family; latter-day prophets have foretold that Latter-day Saints would play a key role in preserving the Constitution. According to Brigham Young:

How long will it be before the words of the prophet Joseph [Smith] will be fulfilled? He said if the Constitution of the United States were saved at all it must be done by this people. It will not be many years before these words come to pass. (Journal of Discourses, 12:204.)

Will the Constitution be destroyed? No: it will be held inviolate by this people; and, as Joseph Smith said, "The time will come when the destiny of the nation will hang upon a single thread. At that critical juncture, this people will step forth and save it from the threatened destruction." It will be so. (Journal of Discourses, 7:15; and see 2:182; 11:262-63.)

John Taylor urged:

It is for us to rally round the flag of the Union, to be loyal and patriotic, and maintain intact the Constitution; and thus we shall be found doing what Joseph Smith said should come to pass — that when the nation should trample under foot the Constitution, the Elders of Israel in this Church would be found ready to uphold and sustain it in the interest of themselves and the people of this great nation, and would stand by its principles when all others forsook it. (Petersen, Great Prologue, 77.)

Such statements are but representative of many more, as a study by Donald Q. Cannon has shown:

Joseph Smith and the other twelve prophets of this dispensation have all said that at some time in the future the Constitution would be in jeopardy, and it would be rescued by the Elders of Israel. (Latter-day Prophets and the United States Constitution, xiii.)

President Ezra Taft Benson quoted Joseph Smith's prophecy and explained that the day of its fulfillment is near. President Benson urged Church members to prepare for that day and also explained how to prepare:

We as a nation have apostatized in various degrees from different Constitutional principles as proclaimed by the inspired founders. We are fast approaching that moment prophesied by Joseph Smith when he said: "Even this nation will be on the very verge of crumbling to pieces and tumbling to the ground, and when the Constitution is upon the brink of ruin, this people will be the staff upon which the nation shall lean; and they shall bear the Constitution away from the very verge of destruction" (19 July 1840, as recorded by Martha Jane Knowlton Coray; ms. in Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City).

For centuries our forefathers suffered and sacrificed that we might be the recipients of the blessings of freedom. If they were willing to sacrifice so much to establish us as a free people, should we not be willing to do the same to maintain that freedom for ourselves and for future generations?

Only in this foreordained land, under its God-inspired Constitution and the resulting environment of freedom, was it possible to have established the restored Church. It is our responsibility to see that this freedom is perpetuated. . . .

The Lord said, "Therefore, I, the Lord, justify you, and your brethren of my church, in befriending that law which is the constitutional law of the land" (D&C 98:6).

How then can we best befriend the Constitution in this critical hour and secure the blessings of liberty and ensure the protection and guidance of our Father in Heaven?

First and foremost, we must be righteous.

John Adams said, "Our Constitution was made only for a moral and religious people. It is wholly inadequate to the government of any other" (The Works of John Adams, ed. C. F. Adams, Boston: Little, Brown Co., 1851, 4:31). If the Constitution is to have continuance, this American nation, and especially the Latter-day Saints, must be virtuous.

The Book of Mormon warns us relative to our living in this free land: "Wherefore, this land is consecrated unto him whom he shall bring. And if it so be that they shall serve him according to the commandments which he hath given, it shall be a land of liberty unto them; wherefore, they shall never be brought down into captivity; if so, it shall be because of iniquity; for if iniquity shall abound cursed shall be the land for their sakes, but unto the righteous it shall be blessed forever" (2 Ne. 1:7).

"And now," warned Moroni, "we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity" (Ether 2:9).

Two great American Christian civilizations — the Jaredites and the Nephites — were swept off this land because they did not "serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ" (Ether 2:12). What will become of our civilization?

Second, we must learn the principles of the Constitution in the tradition of the Founding Fathers.

Have we read the Federalist papers? Are we reading the Constitution and pondering it? Are we aware of its principles? Are we abiding by these principles and teaching them to others? Could we defend the Constitution? Can we recognize when a law is constitutionally unsound? Do we know what the prophets have said about the Constitution and the threats to it?

As Jefferson said, "If a nation expects to be ignorant and free . . . it expects what never was and never will be" (Letter to Colonel Charles Yancey, 6 Jan. 1816).

Third, we must become involved in civic affairs to see that we are properly represented.

The Lord said that "he holds men accountable for their acts in relation" to governments "both in making laws and administering them" (D&C 134:1). We must follow this counsel from the Lord: "Honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise whatsoever is less than these cometh of evil" (D&C 98:10).

Note the qualities that the Lord demands of those who are to represent us. They must be good, wise, and honest.

Fourth, we must make our influence felt by our vote, our letters, our teaching, and our advice.

We must become accurately informed and then let others know how we feel. The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "It is our duty to concentrate all our influence to make popular that which is sound and good, and unpopular that which is unsound. 'Tis right, politically, for a man who has influence to use it. . . . From henceforth I will maintain all the influence I can get" (History of the Church, 5:286).

I have faith that the Constitution will be saved as prophesied by Joseph Smith. It will be saved by the righteous citizens of this nation who love and cherish freedom. It will be saved by enlightened members of this Church — among others — men and women who understand and abide the principles of the Constitution. (Benson, "Divine Constitution," 6-7.)

Role of the Book of Mormon

President Benson's mention of the Book of Mormon warnings about America calls to mind other counsel he has given about flooding the earth with the Book of Mormon — which book thus serves not only as a witness to all the world of Christ, but also as a witness to America of his decrees governing residency in this choicest of all lands. And if the Book of Mormon, as President Benson has emphasized, is the instrument that God has designed to save America (see Chapter 10), that same book is designed to have a no less prominent role in the establishment of Zion in America.

In 1832, as some early missionaries returned from their fields of labor, the Lord reproved them for treating the Book of Mormon lightly. As a result of that attitude, He said, their minds had been darkened. Not only had treating this sacred book lightly brought a loss of light to themselves, it had also brought the whole Church under condemnation, even all the children of Zion. And then the Lord said, "And they shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon." (D&C 84:54-57.)

Has the fact that we have had the Book of Mormon with us for over a century and a half made it seem less significant to us today? Do we remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon? . . .

If the early Saints were rebuked for treating the Book of Mormon lightly, are we under any less condemnation if we do the same? (Benson, A Witness and a Warning, 17.)

Indeed, the Book of Mormon offers the only pattern ever known in history which, when followed, has prevented the corruption that has otherwise always followed affluence. That pattern was established in the exceedingly prosperous Nephite Zion, wherein "they had all things common among them." (4 Ne. 1:3.) The glorious conditions, depicted with only broad brush in the Book of Mormon, lasted for a century and a half. Then, explained Hugh Nibley:

The beginning of the end for the Nephites came when they changed their pattern of life: "And from that time forth they did have their goods and their substance no more common among them" (4 Ne. 1:25). (Collected Works, 6:397.)

Building Zion and America for the Benefit of the World

The lesson is obvious: only by building the latter-day Zion can we hope to reverse the conspicuous trend in America of corruption fueled by affluence and the desire for riches. To build Zion is necessarily to build America, whose ultimate purpose, after all, is to serve as the home for the building of Zion, in order to eventually be prepared to receive back the heavenly Zion after her long absence from this same land. That is the key to America's destiny, declared President Benson.

The Lord has . . . decreed that this land should be "the place of the new Jerusalem, which should come down out of heaven, and the holy sanctuary of the Lord." (Ether 13:3.) Here is our nation's destiny! (Benson, This Nation Shall Endure, 15.)

The benefits would be not for America alone but for the entire earth — as broad as the scope of the covenant to Abraham that through his seed would all nations be blessed. In preparation for the coming of the heavenly Zion, then, America serves as the headquarters from which the Lord's kingdom extends to all nations.

When this nation was established, the Church was restored and from here the message of the restored gospel has gone forth — all according to divine plan. This then becomes the Lord's base of operations in these latter days. (Benson, Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 571.)

And if all the earth is to be prepared to receive the heavenly Zion, so all the earth will be first renewed. For Zion will not come, said the prophet Ether, until "there shall be a new heaven and a new earth." (Ether 13:9-10.) It is fitting that the final destiny of America should have been sensed by its inspired latter-day discoverer:

In a letter dating from his later years, Columbus himself wrote that he had discovered the "new heaven and the new earth" prophesied in the Apocalypse: "God made me the messenger of the new heaven and the new earth of which he spoke in the Apocalypse of St. John after having spoken of it through the mouth of Isaiah; and he showed me the spot where to find it." In his mind then, the New World was identified with the end of the world. (Watts, "Prophecy and Discovery," 101-2.)
