E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Epilogue

The Great Motif

"It is not necessary," wrote Tocqueville in the introduction to his Democracy in America, "that God himself should speak in order that we may discover the unquestionable signs of his will."fn No one would have agreed with that statement more readily than those who had actually participated in the rise of America — particularly Columbus, the early colonists, George Washington, and the other Founding Fathers. All of these declared that God's invisible hand had intervened in a conspicuous way to assist their efforts. President Ezra Taft Benson observed:

As one looks back upon what we call our history, there is a telling theme that occurs again and again in this drama. It is that God governs in the affairs of this nation. As the late President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., said, "This is the great motif which runs through our whole history."fn

America in Isaiah and the Book of Mormon

That such divine intervention came pursuant to a preordained and prophesied plan was attested by Columbus himself, who insisted that his own voyage of discovery had "turned out just as our redeemer Jesus Christ had said, and as he had spoken earlier by the mouth of his holy prophets," so that "it was simply the fulfillment of what Isaiah had prophesied."fn Similarly, the New England Puritans viewed the Declaration of Independence as the fulfillment of a prophecy found in Isaiah's question "Shall a nation be born at once?" (Isa. 66:8.) fn

That Isaiah had indeed foretold the rise of latter-day America was confirmed in the publication of the Book of Mormon in 1830. After narrating his family's lengthy journey from Jerusalem to their promised land of America, Nephi preached to his family again from his favorite prophet, Isaiah. Nephi read two chapters, 48 and 49, and then explained that, among other things, "it meaneth that . . . the Lord God will raise up a mighty nation among the Gentiles, yea, even upon the face of this land." (1 Ne. 22:7.) Nephi proceeded to explain other major events in America foretold by the Isaiah passage, such as the scattering of the Lamanites and the restoration of the gospel.

Most impressive of all, though, is what the resurrected Christ himself told the Nephites about the prophetic foresight of Isaiah, whose writings would, explained the Savior, be fulfilled when the Father would establish the Gentiles as a free people in America prior to the restoration of the gospel. (3 Ne. 21-22.) Pausing to emphasize the value of Isaiah's prophecies, the Savior recommended that the Nephites "search these things" and then turned the recommendation into a commandment: "Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah."

"For surely he spake as touching all things concerning my people which are of the house of Israel; therefore it must needs be that he must speak also to the Gentiles.

"And all things that he spake have been and shall be, even according to the words which he spake." (3 Ne. 23:1-3.)

Such a comprehensive vision of the future by Isaiah could hardly have overlooked the momentous rise of latter-day America and its central role in the fulfillment of the Abrahamic covenant. Indeed, to the other passages in Isaiah referring to America we can add the one pointed out by prophets of our day such as Presidents George Albert Smith and Ezra Taft Benson, who have said that the coming forth of the Constitution had been foreseen in Isaiah's prophecy that "out of Zion shall go forth the law" (Isa. 2:3). fn

If all of this increases our appreciation for Isaiah's writings, it increases even more our appreciation for the Book of Mormon, whose "plain and precious" words were divinely designed to augment and clarify the text of the Bible as it would finally come down to us. (1 Ne. 13:34; 39-40.) Thus in referring to "the days that the prophecies of Isaiah shall be fulfilled," Nephi proceeded "with my own prophecy, according to my plainness." (2 Ne. 25:7.) If Isaiah's meaning is at times veiled because it is couched in the "manner of prophesying among the Jews," Nephi's words are "spoken plainly that ye cannot err," for, as Nephi explains, "I glory in plainness; I glory in truth," so that the record he and his descendants author is described by an angel as "plain and precious." (2 Ne. 25:1; 25:20; 33:6; 1 Ne. 13:40.) In effect, then, the Book of Mormon characters such as Nephi serve as translators and expounders of Isaiah's great prophecies. And is it mere coincidence that the three Book of Mormon characters who speak most about latter-day America — Nephi, Christ, and Moroni — are the same three characters who most emphasized the writings of Isaiah?

Clarity is indeed the key word in describing the prophecies about America contained in the Book of Mormon, a book which, in the words of President Benson, "tells about the prophetic history and mission of America."fn With great plainness does the Book of Mormon tell that God would inspire America's European discoverer, would inspire and strengthen the American colonists, and would deliver America and establish her as a free and mighty nation.

The Hand of God in Establishing America and Zion

We learn from Elder Orson Hyde that the key events in the rise of America were not only foretold by Book of Mormon prophets but were also actually helped along by one of those same prophets — Moroni, the final author, who deposited the record addressed with particularity to latter-day America. Moroni's appearances to Joseph Smith to bring forth that record are well known; less known is that, according to Elder Hyde, Moroni had prepared the way for the emergence of his record by guiding Columbus on his voyage of discovery and by aiding Washington in the Revolutionary War.fn Such events were, then, an integral part of the larger divine plan that included the coming forth of the Book of Mormon — a commonality of purpose underscored by Elder Hyde's designation of America's Founding Fathers as "the apostles of American freedom."fn The same designation of apostle had been applied to Columbus by Bartolome de Las Casas,fn as well as by Columbus's son Ferdinandfn — and not without good reason, for the essential meaning of apostle is "messenger," "envoy," "delegate," "ambassador," or "one who is sent."fn In this general sense Columbus, the early American colonists, and the Founding Fathers were all "apostles" — sent of God to perform important deeds.

And the diversity of those "apostles" in aptitude and personality matched the diversity of the deeds they were called upon to effect. As Samuel Eliot Morison notes about the circumstances faced by Columbus, "There was no psalm-singing New Model, no Spirit of '76, no Army of Liberation with drums and trumpets behind Columbus. He was a Man alone with God against human stupidity and depravity."fn Columbus and Washington were as different from each other in personality as their two missions were different in circumstance, and each was well suited to his unique and foreordained challenge — foreordainedfn by an all-wise God who knew in advance how best to optimize and use the unique gifts of his children. In the words of Elder Bruce R. McConkie, the appointments made by God in the premortal existence "designated certain individuals to perform missions which the Lord in his wisdom knew they had the talents and capacities to do."fn

But the exercise of such diverse talents among those "apostles" effecting the rise of America was performed in a common cause under the same divine guidance, a guidance of which the recipients were keenly aware. They themselves repeatedly acknowledged the visible signs of God's hand stretched forth to assist their efforts. Columbus declared in his Book of Prophecies that the Lord had illuminated his mind "with a hand that could be felt."fn The New England colonists compared themselves to God's vine "which his irresistable arm has planted . . . to make of us a great people and a pure and glorious church."fn During the Revolutionary War a New England preacher declared, "How wonderfully God did fight for us," and described events "in all which the hand of God is most visible."fn Commander-in-Chief George Washington similarly spoke about the divine assistance granted during the war to the American cause: "The hand of Providence has been so conspicuous in all this, that he must be worse than an infidel that lacks faith, and more wicked, that has not gratitude enough to acknowledge his obligations."fn Speaking of the Constitution and the convention that produced it, James Madison insisted that it would be "impossible for the man of pious reflection not to perceive in it a finger of that Almighty hand, which has been so frequently and signally extended to our relief in the critical stages of the revolution."fn It was not necessary, as Toqueville said, that God should lift the veil and let these men actually see his hand for them to discover its unquestionable effects.

The case of Joseph Smith was distinctively different. For him the veil was actually lifted to allow him to see and converse with not only the angel Moroni but also with God himself. Joseph Smith was favored to actually see what had been manifested only by its effects to Columbus, the colonists, and the Founders: the very hand of God, the person of God. Joseph Smith's experience thus dramatically recalls and begins to fulfill the Book of Mormon prophecies that the Lord would fulfill the Abrahamic covenant by["mak[ing] bare his arm." (1 Ne. 22:10-11; 3 Ne. 16:20; 20:35.) And as God had spoken before to his ancient prophets, so he now spoke to a modern one, face to face, person to person — making Joseph Smith an apostle not just in the general sense of being an envoy of the divine will but also in the fuller sense of being an ordained special witness to the divinity of Christ, (D&C 20:2), even as were Christ's Jewish and Nephite apostles.fn Appropriately, the record of those Nephite apostles was brought forth by a modern apostle in what was the beginning of God's great latter-day establishment of Zion. According to Hugh Nibley,

The Book of[Mormon['s] . . . coming forth is depicted only as the opening scene of a long and eventful drama. With it, "the work of the Father" has commenced, not ended (1 Ne. 14:17; 2 Ne. 3:13; 30:8; 3 Ne. 21:26-28; Morm. 3:17).

But it has commenced with power; not with the ruminations and counsels of men but with the intervention of angels; and not in the familiar unfolding of history, but by the exercise of special providence: "All the kindreds of the earth cannot be blessed unless he shall make bare his arm in the eyes of the nations. Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to make bare his arm in the eyes of all the nations, in bringing about his covenants and his gospel unto those who are of the house of Israel" (1 Ne. 22:10-11). fn

A Place Reserved for Righteousness

God's greater disclosure of himself to Joseph Smith than to earlier participants in the rise of latter-day America is understandable in light of the prophecies of the Book of Mormon, the emergence of which was itself a sign that "the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the [Abrahamic] covenant." (3 Ne. 21:7.) The Father's work included, then, the discovery and establishment of America in preparation for the establishment of the latter-day Zion in anticipation of the return of the heavenly Zion anciently built by Enoch. And where had Enoch built his Zion? Also in America, according to other sources. Indeed, America had been the site of the Garden of Eden and the home of the righteous antediluvian patriarchs from Adam down to Noah; only after the Flood did Noah begin life anew in a different region of the globe. Accordingly, as J. Reuben Clark, Jr., stated, America "has always been a mighty land in God's plan."fn In fact, as the Book of Mormon's last author emphasizes, America is the very choicest land on the entire planet. It is no wonder, then, that throughout history God has allowed it to be peopled only by those colonizers whom he has brought, and who, in each case for which we have a record, have been followers of Jesus Christ, whom the Book of Mormon designates as "the God of the land." (Ether 2:12.) In preparation for the great latter-day work, God concealed America from the knowledge of the rest of the world until he inspired Columbus and guided him with Moroni's angelic unseen assistance.

Having played such an important role in effecting the discovery and establishment of America and the bringing forth of latter-day Zion and the Book of Mormon, Moroni speaks to us now through that same book. More than a mere chronicle of the tragic demise of Nephite civilization, the Book of Mormon is a prophetic text "written for our day"fn by Moroni and other prophets who foresaw our day and knew that our situation would mirror their own. And indeed, modern-day America has not only prospered on the promised land as did the Nephites of old, but has also sadly become infected with the same disease that destroyed the Nephites: pride. "What we read about in the Book of Mormon," observed Hugh Nibley, "is the 'Nephite Disease' — and we have it! . . . [Their] doom was brought on them by pride which in turn was engendered by the riches of the earth."fn Such affluence was the very thing that John Adams feared could prove the downfall of America, and we see around us the kind of consequences Adams predicted would follow prosperity.fn As President Benson has pointed out, ours is the situation described by Abraham Lincoln when, during a low point during the Civil War, he proclaimed a national day of fasting:

We have been the recipients of the choicest bounties of Heaven. We have been preserved, these many years, in peace and prosperity. We have grown in numbers, wealth, and power as no other nation has ever grown; but we have forgotten God. We have forgotten the gracious hand which preserved us in peace, and multiplied and enriched and strengthened us; and we have vainly imagined, in the deceitfulness of our hearts, that all these blessings were produced by some superior wisdom and virtue of our own. Intoxicated with unbroken success, we have become too self-sufficient to feel the necessity of redeeming and preserving grace, too proud to pray to the God that made us.fn

Furthermore, it takes no great insight to see that conditions in America are becoming ever more antithetical to the principles upon which America was founded and that America's collective transgressions are offending the divine power whose assistance — as the Founders themselves repeatedly stated — was so conspicuously manifested in the establishment of America. "Today the challenge . . . is, as the Founding Fathers most commonly put it, to return to first principles."fn The importance of returning to those first principles is underscored by the fact that no fewer than thirteen current state constitutions contain statements similar to that found in the constitution of North Carolina that "a frequent recurrence to fundamental principles is absolutely necessary to preserve the blessings of liberty."fn How well we meet the challenge of returning to those fundamental principles will potentially determine the very survival of our Republic, according to President Benson: "To all who have discerning eyes, it is apparent that the republican form of government established by our noble forefathers cannot long endure once fundamental principles are abandoned."fn Sadly, America seems to be following a pattern prevalent throughout history, a pattern perceived by the Florentine thinker Niccolo Machiavelli:

Whenever a form of government changes, say from kingship to republic, one finds a memory gap between those who establish the new form and the succeeding generation. The authority of the new form is lost once "that generation that had established it was exhausted." Regimes topple because one generation does not remember what the previous one suffered and learned and transmitted in principles of law, custom, and religion. Too long a time has passed without concern for fundamental beliefs: "men begin to vary customs and transgress the laws."

The argument appears in the Discourses [by Machiavelli] in the chapter titled, "If One Wishes That a Sect of a Republic Live a Long Time, It Is Necessary to Draw It Back Often toward Its Principle." . . .

Men slide away from the fundaments of their religious and political communities and need every now and then to be reminded, as Niccolo once phrases it, "to go back toward the target." True of kingdoms and religions, this is true even of republics, where one . . . might expect that liberty is never forgotten, "where the public buildings, the places of the magistrates, the insignia of free institutions recall it."fn

As disconcerting as America's drift away from its founding principles is, it is doubly so in light of God's ancient decree regarding the condition of residency on this choicest of all lands: Serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, or be "swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come," that is, when iniquity has reached a "fulness." (Ether 2:9.) Or, in the words of Alma, "There is a curse upon all this land, that destruction shall come upon all those workers of darkness, according to the power of God, when they are fully ripe." (Alma 37:28.)

The previous American civilizations that have suffered that fate have quite literally vanished from the earth and so cannot serve as visual aids today. The visual aid we do have is striking enough, however, even though it constitutes the one partial exception to the rule. The Lamanites, or Indians, were granted a measure of clemency because their errors arose from following the false traditions of their fathers; accordingly, they were not entirely "swept off," even though they did incur the wrath of God, which was visited upon them with the arrival of the European colonists. Thus, if the awful fate that befell the Nephites seems too far removed from us to touch our sensibilities, the voices of lament from their modern kinsmen, the Indians — upon whom we as a nation inflicted so much pain and death — should serve as plaintive and poignant warnings that we occupy a land once owned by others. "With the blessings," as Hugh Nibley observed, we also "inherit the risk,"fn for unless we abide by God's decree we will suffer a fate worse than that which our nation inflicted on the Indians. According to President Benson, "This land is reserved only for a righteous people, and we remain here as tenants only as we remain in the favor of the Lord."fn

The Book of Mormon, Latter-day Zion, and America

How do we win the Lord's favor and avoid a worse fate than that suffered by the American Indians? By heeding the record that reveals to them their Abrahamic origins and glorious destiny, even as it describes for us our own dangerous condition with such alarming specificity and clarity, congruent with the book's stated purpose to "convince," as Hugh Nibley emphasized:

The Book of Mormon . . . tells us frankly on the title page that its intent is to show and convince. To convince is to overcome resistance — that is the object; and the method is to show, to demonstrate by evidence. The woman at the well hearkened to the Lord's message and urged the other villagers to do so because he told her all about herself, things that only she knew (John 4:6-30). So it is with the Book of Mormon.fn

Suddenly, we find ourselves there: scenes and circumstances that not long ago seemed as distant as Nineveh and Tyre suddenly come to life about us.fn

Such prophetic precision in describing our day by a book published in 1830 is a powerful demonstration of its authenticity and should induce readers who have not done so to seek the greater witness of the Holy Ghost, as promised by Moroni to those who read his record and seek to determine its truthfulness by sincerely asking the Father in Christ's name. (Moro. 10:4-5.) At the very least, however, the power of the circumstantial evidence of its own authenticity should induce readers of the Book of Mormon to heed its warnings issued to the America of our day. Indeed, one of those warnings speaks of the rejection of the book by many of those to whom it was written and for whom it was designed to be the greatest guide for coping with the challenges facing latter-day America. Don't reject the book, it warns its readers, because it contains God's word beyond the Bible; instead, treasure it as a corroboration of the Bible and as a second witness of the reality of a God who loves all nations and speaks to them, and who speaks with particularity to America. (2 Ne. 29.) For America to reject the Book of Mormon would be tantamount to a drowning man refusing to take hold of the rope thrown to him.

That rope is the message of repentance, which is "the main message of the Book of Mormon."fn Only through repentance can we qualify to, in the words of Christ, "be numbered among" the Lamanites, (3 Ne. 21:6, 22) whose destiny after all the degradation will be glorious as they participate — with others who have qualified to participate — in building the glorious American city of Zion in fulfillment of the Abrahamic covenant. (3 Ne. 21:23.) We "Gentiles" shall then come to the same understanding that Pilgrim governor William Bradford and his people had when they recognized the Indians as a "special instrument sent of God for their good beyond their expectation."fn

As critical as repentance is for each person who desires the privilege of being numbered among Abraham's Israelite descendants, repentance is no less critical for America collectively to survive as a nation, as John Adams declared by presidential proclamation in 1798, when he urged the imperiled nation to engage in "sincere repentance and reformation."fn A modern prophet and patriot, Ezra Taft Benson, has urged the same: "Repentance is the sovereign remedy to our problems."fn Accordingly, counseled President Benson, "our nation will continue to degenerate unless we read and heed the words of the God of this land, Jesus Christ, . . . [as contained in] the Book of Mormon."fn

The solution to saving America, then, happens also to be the door to entering Zion: repentance. Indeed, to build Zion is necessarily to build America also, for Zion's foundational principles of purity and equality are the only things that can turn the tide of pride engendered by the affluence that America has enjoyed. And it is Zion alone — the establishment on earth of a pure and unified community living the revealed religion of heaven — that can provide the antidote to the widespread disillusionment with and turning away from organized religion by so many Americans who are increasingly and justly offended by the hypocrisy of greedy "preachers" parading in "religious" garb in direct fulfillment of Book of Mormon prophecy. Such an abandonment of religion has profound consequences, for, as George Washington warned in his Farewell Address, "Religion and morality are indispensable supports" of American government.fn To reestablish and maintain those supports, God has provided the Book of Mormon with its convincing power. And convincing power is precisely what America needs:

It is . . . one thing to argue that a recovery of faith in God is necessary as a safeguard of Western freedom. It is quite another to put forward sociological and political and historical facts as the basis for a revival of faith. . . . Faith is not a matter of convenience nor even — save indirectly — a matter of sociology. It is a question of conviction and dedication and both spring from one source only — from the belief in God as a fact, as the supreme Fact of existence. Faith will not be restored in the West because people believe it to be useful. It will return only when they find that it is true.fn

The beginning point, as always, is the family. As John Adams stated, "The foundations of national morality must be laid in private Families."fn Hence, the counsel of Puritan Ezra Stiles is as relevant today as it was when pronounced more than two centuries ago: "We should often relate to our posterity the history of the wonderful providences of God in the settlement of this Country."fn Or, in the words of President Benson, "We must teach our children about the spiritual roots of this great nation."fn

In addition, President Benson has directed the Latter-day Saints to actively seek to preserve our political liberty: "Unless we continue to seek righteousness and preserve the liberties entrusted to us, we shall lose the blessings of heaven."fn And here again the Book of Mormon serves as a guide by relating timeless principles portrayed by ancient Nephite patriots who, at a great price, sought to preserve their liberty. (See, for example, Alma 46.) In our day, preserving liberty means preserving the inspired Constitution, whose survival will one day depend, as Joseph Smith and all his successors have foretold, on the inhabitants of Zion.fn

But the concern about America by the Lord's latter-day prophet-leaders evidences a broader concern for all mankind, for, as President Benson has said, echoing the sentiments of the Founders themselves, "The United States is a nation with a great mission to perform for the benefit and blessing of liberty-loving people everywhere." Not only is it "ordained as an ensign of liberty to all other nations," but also, in serving as the site and cradle of the latter-day Zion, America serves as "the Lord's base of operations in these latter-days."fn From America, as the Prophet Joseph Smith declared, "the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear."fn And what is that truth to sweep the earth? The Lord told Enoch, "Truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto . . . an Holy City . . . called Zion, a New Jerusalem." (Moses 7:62.) The truth to sweep the earth is clearly that contained in the Book of Mormon, which is "the instrument that God has designed to 'sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out His elect unto the New Jerusalem.'"fn

But the Book of Mormon is more than the instrument of gathering; it is also "a standard unto my people, which are of the house of Israel." (2 Ne. 29:2.) To lift the condemnation resting upon the children of Zion, President Benson declared, the Church must study seriously and take seriously the Book of Mormon.fn

Through the instrumentality of the Book of Mormon, then, Zion will be both gathered and built, beginning in the choicest of all lands and then eventually and finally extending over the entire planet, as Brigham Young foretold: "Zion will extend, eventually, all over this earth. There will be no nook or corner upon the earth but what will be Zion. It will all be Zion."fn Nor is the scope of the latter-day work limited to those presently living on the earth, for through sacred temple ordinances the righteous dead may also be gathered in as Abraham's children — as were Columbus, many of the colonists, and the Founding Fathers, who appeared to Elder Wilford Woodruff in one of the temples to request that their work be performed for them. Such is the promised blessing to all nations through the Abrahamic covenant, and such is the pivotal role of America in fulfilling that covenant.

Accordingly, Latter-day Saints are directed to help fortify America by direct means and also by building Zion, the raison d'etre of America. And the most powerful instrument in accomplishing these tasks is the Book of Mormon itself. Having prophesied of God's hand in the discovery and rise of America, the Book of Mormon also serves as God's powerful weapon in preserving America.

Lessons of the Past for the Challenge of Today

Even so, the mission of preserving America and building Zion through the instrumentality of the Book of Mormon seems to grow ever more formidable as the latter-day conditions prophesied in that book became realities before our very eyes. Fortunately, however, we can draw needed strength from those who effected the discovery and rise of America; for they were blessed with the guidance and power of heaven in the face of seemingly overwhelming odds and great adversity. Such was the case even with the ancient American prophet Moroni, who finished the sacred record as a solitary refugee hiding from bloodthirsty bands of soldiers. Adversity was also the lot of Columbus (who endured long years of ridicule), of the Pilgrims (half of whom died during the first harsh winter in Plymouth), and of the ill-equipped Colonial army (who fought for independence against the mighty British Empire). God has indeed taken a conspicuous and powerful hand in America's founding, but he has chosen to do it through human agents facing great adversity which was designed, as John Adams observed, to purify them "in the furnace of affliction."fn We have increasing reason to suppose that those called upon to build the latter-day Zion and help preserve America will experience similar adversity.

Appropriately, we shall succeed in our labors and challenges only by following the pattern of those whose labors we seek to preserve and build upon. In the midst of their trials and through their darkest hours, they exercised profound faith in God, persisting in their divinely appointed tasks while praying to him and relying on him to help them achieve what otherwise appeared improbable or impossible. Columbus, for example, wrote after returning from his voyage of discovery that "Eternal be God our Lord, who grants, to all those who walk in His path, victories over things that appear impossible."fn He later wrote in his Book of Prophecies that "ever since I have cried out for grace and mercy from the Lord, they have covered me completely."fn The Pilgrims embarked on their dangerous transoceanic journey believing that all prospective dangers "through the help of God, by fortitude and patience, might either be borne or overcome"; and when they finally stepped ashore in America, they "fell upon their knees and blessed the God of Heaven who had brought them over the vast and furious ocean, and delivered them from all the perils and miseries thereof."fn Benjamin Franklin reminded the delegates to the Constitutional Convention that they urgently needed the continued assistance of that Being to whom, during the War for Independence, they had in that same room offered "daily Prayers . . . for the Divine Protection. Our prayers . . . were heard; — and they were graciously answered."fn

Clearly, then, as President Benson said, "America as a nation has been built on prayer."fn And prayer is essential for us today to preserve our free nation: "We must put our trust in Him who has promised us His protection — and pray that He will intervene to preserve our freedom just as He intervened in our obtaining it in the first place."fn

If that prior intervention came at the price of great sacrifice and faith, a price that we, too, should be willing to pay:

This nation came into being only through freedom of choice, sacrifice, labor, and struggle. Brave Americans gave their lives in the settlement of this nation — and in its preservation. Let us remember our heritage and recognize that the day of courage, labor, and sacrifice is never done.fn

If they were willing to sacrifice so much to establish us as a free people, should we not be willing to do the same to maintain that freedom for ourselves and for future generations?fn

This nation will be preserved so long as we retain the same quality of faith in God that our founders manifested.fn

By following the examples of prayer, faith, and sacrifice of those who were instrumental in the discovery and rise of America — which includes doing as they did in remembering Abraham and the covenant sworn to him — we will qualify for the same divine assistance that they received, which will come as surely as God will fulfill that covenant which he guaranteed to Abraham by swearing by himself. For it is that very covenant that we are helping to fulfill as we preserve America and build Zion — a fulfillment that began in the latter days when "the Spirit of God . . . came down and wrought upon the man" Columbus, inspiring him to make his momentous voyage of discovery across "the many waters" (1 Ne. 13:12) in order to, as Columbus himself said, usher in the Lord's great latter-day kingdom in fulfillment of the ancient prophecies. But it was to another crossing of waters that Columbus referred when he left these words of encouragement, words that still ring with relevance for all who would now seek to preserve and build America and Zion:

Saint Peter stepped out upon the water, and to the extent that his faith remained firm, he walked upon it. Whoever finds so much faith as a grain of mustard seed will be obeyed by the mountains. Knock and it must be opened unto you. No one should be afraid to undertake any project in the name of our Savior, if it is a just cause and if he has the pure intention of his holy service.fn
