E. Douglas Clark, Grand Design: America from Columbus to Zion ( 1992)

Appendix

Elder Orson Hyde's statement in 1854 about Moroni's role in assisting Columbus and Washington has not received much attention, which is somewhat remarkable given the position Elder Hyde occupied at the time. From 1847 he had served as president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, a calling he faithfully magnified for nearly three decades.

The 1854 discourse mentioning Moroni was delivered in the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City during the Fourth of July celebration. Elder Hyde began by extolling the men who "had not only the moral courage to sign the Declaration of our nation's Independence, but hearts of iron and nerves of steel to defend it by force of arms against the fearful odds arrayed against them," even as they proceeded "to raise the standard of liberty, and unfurl its banner to the world as a warning to oppressors, and as the star of hope to the oppressed." Elder Hyde explained how it was that "our infant armies" were able to achieve victory "through the perils and hardships of an unequal contest."

In those early and perilous times, our men were few, and our resources limited. Poverty was among the most potent enemies we had to encounter; yet our arms were successful; and it may not be amiss to ask here, by whose power victory so often perched on our banner? It was by the agency of that same angel of God that appeared unto Joseph Smith, and revealed to him the history of the early inhabitants of this country, whose mounds, bones, and remains of towns, cities, and fortifications speak from the dust in the ears of the living with the voice of undeniable truth. This same angel presides over the destinies of America, and feels a lively interest in all our doings. He was in the camp of Washington; and, by an invisible hand, led on our fathers to conquest and victory; and all this to open and prepare the way for the Church and kingdom of God to be established on the western hemisphere, for the redemption of Israel and the salvation of the world.

This same angel was with Columbus, and gave him deep impressions, by dreams and by visions, respecting this New World. Trammelled by poverty and by an unpopular cause, yet his persevering and unyielding heart would not allow an obstacle in his way too great for him to overcome; and the angel of God helped him — was with him on the stormy deep, calmed the troubled elements, and guided his frail vessel to the desired haven. Under the guardianship of this same angel, or Prince of America, have the United States grown, increased, and flourished, like the sturdy oak by the rivers of water.fn

Partially corroborating this statement is another one made by Orson Hyde, also on the occasion of a Fourth of July celebration, this one in 1853. In a discourse delivered somewhere in Salt Lake City, Elder Hyde spoke of Columbus:

Inspired of the Almighty God of heaven, he encountered the ridicule and jeer of a faithless and unbelieving world. Bound and hampered by the chains of poverty, he possessed not the ability to prosecute the voyage of discovery so dear to his heart, and so intimately connected with his hopes of future greatness and renown. Brooking every difficulty — combating opposition, calumny, and reproach from almost every quarter, he surmounted every obstacle, obtained an outfit that was as little fitting and proper for the great enterprise as was the manger for the birthplace of the Virgin's Son. The time had arrived for the discovery to be made. Millions of spirits in the spirit world, who had not yet taken bodies, nor passed the ordeal, in earthly tenements, of a residence on this benighted globe, were waiting with anxious eye for the area of heaven-born intelligencies to be extended or opened to the gaze of mortal eye, that there might be room for them to come down and play their part, in their time and in their season, on the stage of human life. The three old crazy vessels were enough! The Spirit Angel was their guardian and their guide, and was with them on the stormy deep. Another important reason why the discovery should be made: The history and record of a fallen people, containing light from the spirit land, and truth from heaven, were buried in the soil of the Western Continent; and although engraven on golden leaves in a strange and unknown tongue, still they must come forth, being among the secret things that should be revealed.fn

Although Elder Hyde did not here expressly identify the "Spirit Angel," that it could well be Moroni is consistent with the context in which Elder Hyde said that the discovery of the ancient Nephite record (completed and buried by Moroni) was an important reason why God directed Columbus to discover America. In light of Orson Hyde's statement a year later about Moroni's assisting Columbus, the "Spirit Angel" appears to be Moroni.

But this still leaves Orson Hyde as the only witness testifying to Moroni's assisting Columbus and Washington. From whom or where did Orson Hyde obtain this information? He never says, and we can only speculate. One possibility is that he got it from Joseph Smith. Many of the Prophet's associates, sometimes many years later, retrospectively remarked about things they had learned from him — as was the case, for example, when many later alluded on various occasions to his statement about the Elders of Israel stepping forth at some future time to save the Constitution.

Orson Hyde and Revelation

Another possibility is that Elder Hyde himself obtained this knowledge about Moroni by revelation. In his ordination as an apostle by Oliver Cowdery in 1835, he had been blessed that, among other things, "his faith be made perfect, and that the blessings pronounced may be realized; that he be made mighty, and be endowed with powers from on high," and "that the angels shall uphold him."fn

Elder Hyde's ability to receive revelation, and the Prophet Joseph Smith's confidence in that ability, was dramatically demonstrated by the events relating to Orson Hyde's mission to Palestine. In about 1832, in a blessing under the hands of Joseph Smith, Orson was told that "in due time thou shalt go to Jerusalem, . . . and by thy hands shall the Most High do a great work, which shall prepare the way and greatly facilitate the gathering together of that people."fn

One night in March 1840, after Orson had retired to bed,

The vision of the Lord, like clouds of light, burst into my view. . . . The cities of London, Amsterdam, Constantinople and Jerusalem, all appeared in succession before me, and the Spirit said unto me, "Here are many of the children of Abraham whom I will gather to the land that I gave to their fathers; and here also is the field of your labors. Take, therefore, proper credentials from my people, your brethren, and also from the Governor of your state, with the seal of authority thereon, and go ye forth to the cities which have been shown you, and declare these words unto Judah, and say, "blow ye the trumpet in the land; cry, gather together, and say, assemble yourselves, and let us go into the defensed cities. Set up the standard towards Zion — retire, stay not, for I will bring evil from the north and a great destruction. The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way — he is gone forth from his place to make thy land desolate, and thy cities shall be laid waste, without an inhabitant. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished — that her inquity is pardoned, for she hath received of the Lord's hand doubly for all her sins. Let your warning voice be heard among the Gentiles as you pass; and call yet upon them in my name for aid and for assistance. With you it mattereth not whether it be little or much; but to me it belongeth to show favor unto them who show favor unto you." The vision continued open about six hours, that I did not close my eyes in sleep. In this time many things were shown unto me which I have never written; neither shall I write them until they are fulfilled in Jerusalem.fn

(Only a century later, after the terrible destruction wrought by Nazi Germany upon European Jewry, would the prophetic nature of Orson Hyde's vision announcing a coming "evil from the north and a great destruction" become fully apparent.)

In April 1840, Elder Hyde announced to a general conference of the Church that he had recently been prompted to labor abroad among the Jews. Under the direction of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the conference unanimously resolved that Elder Hyde proceed on his mission — a marked variation from the usual procedure of missionary callings being initiated by the leaders extending the calls.

As Orson and his companion proceeded on their mission, they corresponded with Joseph Smith, who responded with a letter containing powerful promises:

DEAR BRETHREN: — I am happy in being informed by your letter that your mission swells "larger and larger." It is a great and important mission. . . . Although it appears great at present, yet you have but just begun to realize the greatness, the extent and glory of the same. If there is anything calculated to interest the mind of the Saints, to awaken in them the finest sensibilities, and arouse them to enterprise and exertion, surely it is the great and precious promises made by our heavenly Father to the children of Abraham; and those engaged in seeking the outcasts of Israel, and the dispersed of Judah, cannot fail to enjoy the Spirit of the Lord and have the choicest blessings of Heaven rest upon them in copious effusions.

Brethren, you are in the pathway to eternal fame, and immortal glory; and inasmuch as you feel interested for the covenant people of the Lord, the God of their fathers shall bless you. . . . He who scattered Israel has promised to gather them; therefore inasmuch as you are to be instrumental in this great work, He will endow you with power, wisdom, might, and intelligence, and every qualification necessary; while your minds will expand wider and wider, until you can circumscribe the earth and the heavens, reach forth into eternity, and contemplate the mighty acts of Jehovah in all their variety and glory.fn

Could this promise have encompassed Orson Hyde's later understanding about Moroni's role?

During that mission Elder Hyde stood on the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem and offered up his prophetic and now-famous prayer:

O Thou, Who didst covenant with Abraham. . . .

Grant, therefore, O Lord, . . . to remove the barrenness and sterility of this land, and let springs of living water break forth to water its thirsty soil. Let the vine and olive produce in their strength, and the fig- tree bloom and flourish. Let the land become abundantly fruitful when possessed by its rightful heirs. . . . Incline them to gather in upon this land according to Thy word. Let them come like clouds and like doves to their windows. Let the large ships of the nations bring them from the distant isles; and let kings become their nursing fathers, and queens with motherly fondness wipe the tear of sorrow from their eye.

Thou, O Lord, did once move upon the heart of Cyrus to show favor unto Jerusalem and her children. Do Thou now also be pleased to inspire the hearts of kings and the powers of the earth to look with a friendly eye towards this place, and with a desire to see Thy righteous purposes executed in relation thereto. Let them know that it is Thy good pleasure to restore the kingdom unto Israel — raise up Jerusalem as its capital, and constitute her people a distinct nation and government.fn

The date of this prayer bespeaks its prophetic inspiration: October 24, 1841 — more than fifty years before Theodore Herzl published his book The Jewish State in 1896 or convened the first World Zionist conference in 1897; more than seventy-five years before the 1917 Balfour Declaration expressed Britain's intent to use its "best endeavours to facilitate" the "establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people"; and more than a century before the birth of the nation of Israel by United Nations Resolution on May 14, 1948.

Such prophetic powers working through Elder Orson Hyde were also manifest in the discourse in which he made his statement on July 4, 1854, about Moroni. After describing Moroni's role in assisting Columbus and Washington, Elder Hyde explained why America had been blessed and prospered but then foretold dark days ahead for the United States:

The peculiar respect that high Heaven has for this country, on account of the promises made to the fathers, and on account of its being the land where the mustard seed of truth was planted and destined to grow in the last days, accounts for all this good fortune to our beloved America.

But since the Prophets have been slain, the Saints persecuted, despoiled of their goods, banished from their homes, and no earthly arm to interpose for their rescue, what will be the future destiny of this highly-favoured country? Should I tell the truth as it clearly passes before my mind's eye, my friends might censure me, and I might be regarded as an enemy to my country. If I should not tell the truth, but withhold it to please men, or to avoid giving offence to any, I might be regarded, by the powers celestial, as the enemy of God. What shall I do under these circumstances? Shall I be guilty of the crime of hesitating for a moment? No. Neither time nor place to hesitate now.

Were I called upon to give evidence before a court of justice in a case to which my own father was a party litigant, the foolish might regard me as opposed to my father, if conscience, justice, and truth directed me to testify against his interest; but the wise would regard me as possessing that integrity that kindred ties could not swerve nor decoy from the truth and facts in the case. My testimony in relation to the country that gave me birth, that gave birth to my father and my father's father, is given upon the same principle, and prompted by a similar motive.

So sure and certain as the great water-courses wend their way to the ocean, and there find their level, — so sure as the passing thunder-cloud hovers around yonder Twin Peaks of the Wahsatch Mountains, and upon their grey and barren rocks pours the fury of its storm, just so sure and certain will the guardian angel of these United States fly to a remote distance from their borders, and the anger of the Almighty wax hot against them in causing them to drink from the cup of bitterness and division, and the very dregs, stirred up by the hands of foreign powers, in a manner more cruel and fierce than the enemies of the Saints in the day of their greatest distress and anguish; and all this because they laid not to heart the martyrdom of the Saints and Prophets, avenged not their blood by punishing the murderers, neither succoured nor aided the Saints after they were despoiled of their goods and homes.

Would to God that we could forget this part of our experience in the land of our fathers! But we cannot forget it. It is incorporated in our being. We shall carry it to our graves, and in the resurrection it will rise with us. Had the United States been as faithful a guardian to the Latter-day Saints as the angel of God has been to them, she would never know dissolution, nor be humbled in dishonour by the decrees of any foreign powers.

I ask no earthly being to indorse this my testimony, or to adopt it as his own sentiment. A little time will prove whether Orson Hyde alone has declared it, or whether the heavenly powers will back up this testimony in the face of all the world.

When Justice is satisfied, and the blood of martyrs atoned for, the guardian angel of America will return to his station, resume his charge, and restore the Constitution of our country to the respect and veneration of the people; for it was given by the inspiration of our God.fn

Six years after Elder Hyde's prophecy, South Carolina seceded from the Union, and the fateful firing on Fort Sumter ushered in the darkest days the United States had ever faced in that dire crisis that was both "constitutional and moral."fn

Roles of the Angel Moroni

Such, then, is the context of Elder Hyde's statement about Moroni. And what of the substance? Does it — or could it — comport with what else we know about Moroni? Orson Hyde's 1853 statement makes an important contextual connection by explaining that one reason the "Spirit Angel" guided Columbus was to open the way for the discovery of the record anciently buried by Moroni.fn

Also, in completing and sealing up the sacred Nephite record, Moroni was acting pursuant to "the keys of the record of the stick of Ephraim," keys which Moroni possessed (D&C 27:5) and which, according to Wilford Woodruff, Moroni delivered to Joseph Smith along with the record.fn The delivery of that record came in fulfillment of the prophecy in the book of Revelation that Christ's second coming would be preceded by an "angel[fly[ing] in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people."fn Indeed, the record that Moroni made known contained, among other things, his own prophetic writings addressed generally to all mankind but with certain portions directed specifically to latter-day America, which he described with great particularity and to which he disclosed the divine decree governing residency in this choicest of all lands.

It is apparently that same angel — Moroni — who, at Christ's glorious second coming to initiate the Millenium, will sound the trump, declaring

to all people, both in heaven and in earth, and that are under the earth — for every ear shall hear it, and every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, while they hear the sound of the trump, saying: Fear God, and give glory to him who sitteth upon the throne, forever and ever; for the hour of his judgment is come.fn

Such prominent roles for Moroni could easily encompass assistance to Columbus and Washington to open up the way for the coming forth of Moroni's record and the establishment of the latter-day Zion in order to persuade mankind voluntarily to fear God and give Him glory before being forced to do so by the awesome display of His power.

In summary, Orson Hyde's statement about Moroni seems corroborated in part only by one other statement — also made by Elder Hyde. During the period that he made these statements, however, he was president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and had already proven himself as one of the Lord's great latter-day instruments of revelation. Indeed, even the discourse mentioning Moroni contains a remarkable prophecy of the Civil War that began to see fulfillment within a decade. Furthermore, Orson Hyde's capacity to know such things as Moroni's role in assisting Columbus and Washington would comport with the powerful promises made to Orson by Joseph Smith and other leaders. Finally, such a role for Moroni is entirely consistent with his other known roles.

All of this evidence is admittedly circumstantial, but viewed collectively it does make a persuasive case for the inspired nature of Orson Hyde's statement that the angel Moroni presides over the destinies of America and assisted Columbus on his voyage of discovery and Washington in his leadership of the Colonial troops.

If we accept Orson Hyde's statement, we might even conjecture that God's inspiration in the Constitutional Convention may likewise have been, at least partially, through the mediation of Moroni; for Orson Hyde asserted that after the impending calamity that threatened America — what in retrospect we call the Civil War — had fully played out, then "the guardian angel of America will return to his station, resume his charge, and restore the Constitution of our country to the respect and veneration of the people; for it was given by the inspiration of God."fn Such a role for Moroni of restoring the Constitution in the wake of the Civil War, after he had already been instrumental in the discovery of America and the winning of the Revolutionary War, may possibly imply his overseeing also the creation of the Constitution.

And what of that approaching day, as predicted by all the latter-day prophets, when the Constitution will again stand in need of rescuing? If Moroni was responsible once for restoring the Constitution, it seems reasonable again to expect his assistance at that critical time.
