N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter I

THE KIRTLAND TEMPLE

DEDICATORY PRAYER

(Given by revelation to Joseph, the Seer, and repeated in the Kirtland Temple at the time of its dedication, March 27th, 1836.)

Thanks be to Thy name, O Lord God of Israel, who keepest covenant and showest mercy unto Thy servants who walk up-rightly before Thee, with all their hearts;

Thou who hast commanded Thy servants to build a house to Thy name in this place. (Kirtland.)

JOSEPH SMITH, THE PROPHET

And now Thou beholdest, O Lord, that Thy servants have done according to Thy commandment.

And now we ask Thee, Holy Father, in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of Thy bosom, in whose name alone, salvation can be administered to the children of men, we ask Thee, O Lord, to accept of this house, the workmanship of the hands of us, Thy servants, which Thous didst command us to build;

For Thou knowest that we have done this work through great tribulation; and out of our poverty we have given of our substance, to build a house to Thy name, that the Son of man might have a place to manifest Himself to His people.

And as Thou hast said in a revelation, given to us, calling us Thy friends, saying, "Call your solemn assembly, as I have commanded you;

And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently, and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books, words of wisdom, seek learning even by study, and also by faith.

Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing, and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God.

That your incomings may be in the name of the Lord, that your outgoings may be in the name of the Lord, that all your salutations may be in the name of the Lord, with uplifted hands unto the Most High.

And now, Holy Father, we ask Thee to assist us, Thy people, with Thy grace, in calling our solemn assembly, that it may be done to Thy honor, and to Thy divine acceptance.

And in a manner that we may be found worthy, in Thy sight, to secure a fulfillment of the promises which Thou hast made unto us, Thy people, in the revelations given unto us;

That Thy glory may rest down upon Thy people, and upon this Thy house, which we now dedicate to Thee, that it may be sanctified and consecrated to be holy, and that Thy holy presence may be continually in this house.

And that all the people who shall enter upon the threshold of the Lord's house, may feel Thy power, and feel constrained to acknowledge that thou hast sanctified it, and that it is Thy house, a place of Thy holiness.

And do Thou grant, Holy Father, that all those who shall worship in this house, may be taught words of wisdom out of the best books, and that they may seek learning even by study, and also by faith, as Thou hast said;

And that they may grow up in Thee, and receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost and be organized according to Thy laws, and be prepared to obtain every needful thing;

And that this house may be a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of glory and of God, even thy house;

That all the incomings of Thy people, into this house, may be in the name of the Lord;

That all the outgoings from this house may be in the name of the Lord;

And that all their salutations may be in the name of the Lord, with holy hands, uplifted to the Most High;

And that no unclean thing shall be permitted to come into Thy house to pollute it;

And when Thy people transgress, any of them, they may speedily repent, and return unto Thee, and find favor in Thy sight, and be restored to the blessings which Thou hast ordained to be poured out upon those who shall reverence Thee in Thy house.

And we ask Thee, Holy Father, that Thy servants may go forth from this house, armed with Thy power, and that Thy name may be upon them, and Thy glory be round about them, and Thine angels have charge over them;

And from this place they may bear exceedingly great and glorious tidings, in truth, unto the end of the earth, that they may know that this is Thy work, and that Thou hast put forth Thy hand, to fulfill that which Thou hast spoken by the mouths of the prophets, concerning the last days.

We ask Thee, Holy Father, to establish the people that shall worship, and honorably hold a name and standing in this thy house, to all generations and for eternity;

That no weapon formed against them shall prosper; that he who diggeth a pit for them shall fall into the same himself;

That no combination of wickedness shall have power to rise up and prevail over Thy people upon whom Thy name shall be put in this house;

And if any people shall rise against this people, that Thine anger be kindled against them,

And if they shall smite this people, Thou wilt smite them, Thou will fight for Thy people as Thou didst in the day of battle, that they may be delivered from the hands of all their enemies.

We ask Thee, Holy Father, to confound, and astonish, and bring to shame and confusion, all those who have spread lying reports abroad, over the world against Thy servant or servants, if they will not repent, when the everlasting gospel shall be proclaimed in their ears,

And that all their works may be brought to naught, and be swept away by the hail, and by the judgments which Thou wilt send upon them in Thine anger, and there may be an end to lyings and slanders against Thy people;

For Thou knowest, O Lord, that Thy servants have been innocent before Thee in bearing record of Thy name, for which they have suffered these things;

Therefore we plead before Thee a full and complete deliverance from under this yoke;

Break it off, O Lord, break if off from the necks of Thy servants, by Thy power, that we may rise up in the midst of this generation and do Thy work.

O Jehovah, have mercy upon this people, and as all men sin, forgive the transgressions of Thy people, and let them be blotted out forever.

Let the anointing of Thy ministers be sealed upon them with power from on high;

Let it be fulfilled upon them, as upon those on the day of Pentecost, let the gift of tongues be poured out upon Thy people, even cloven tongues as of fire, and the interpretation thereof,

And let Thy house be filled, as with a rushing mighty wind, with Thy glory.

Put upon Thy servants the testimony of the covenant, that when they go out and proclaim Thy word, they may seal up the law, and prepare the hearts of Thy saints for all those judgments Thou art about to send, in Thy wrath, upon the inhabitants of the earth, because of their transgressions, that Thy people may not faint in the day of trouble.

And whatsoever city Thy servants shall enter, and the people of that city receive their testimony, let Thy peace and Thy salvation be upon that city, that they may gather out of that city the righteous, that they may come forth to Zion, or to her Stakes, the places of Thine appointment, with songs of everlasting joy;

And until this be accomplished, let not Thy judgments fall upon that city.

And whatsoever city Thy servants shall enter, and the people of that city receive not the testimony of Thy servants, and Thy servants warn them to save themselves from this untoward generation, let it be upon that city according to that which thou hast spoken by the mouths of Thy Prophets;

But deliver Thou, O Jehovah, we beseech Thee, Thy servants from their hands, and cleanse them from their blood.

O Lord, we delight not in the destruction of our fellow men. Their souls are precious before Thee;

But Thy word must be fulfilled; help Thy servants to say, with Thy grace assisting them, Thy will be done, O Lord, and not ours.

We know that Thou hast spoken by the mouth of Thy prophets terrible things concerning the wicked, in the last days—that thou wilt pour out Thy judgments without measure;

Therefore, O Lord, deliver Thy people from the calamity of the wicked; enable Thy servants to seal up the law, and bind up the testimony, that they may be prepared against the day of burning.

We ask Thee, Holy Father, to remember those who have been driven (by the inhabitants of Jackson County, Missouri) from the lands of their inheritance, and break off, O Lord, this yoke of affliction that has been put upon them.

Thou knowest, O Lord, that they have been greatly oppressed and afflicted by wicked men, and our hearts flow out with sorrow, because of their grievous burdens.

O Lord, how long wilt thou suffer this people to bear this affliction, and the cries of their innocent ones to ascend up in Thine ears, and their blood come up in testimony before Thee, and not make a display of Thy testimony in their behalf?

Have mercy, O Lord, upon that wicked mob, who have driven Thy people, that they may cease to spoil; that they may repent of their sins, if repentance is to be found;

But if they will not, make bare Thine arm, O Lord, and redeem that which Thou didst appoint a Zion unto Thy people!

And if it cannot be otherwise, that the cause of Thy people may not fail before Thee, may Thine anger be kindled, and Thine indignation fall upon them, that they may be wasted away, both root and branch, from under heaven;

But inasmuch as they will repent, Thou art gracious and merciful, and wilt turn away Thy wrath, when Thou lookest upon the face of Thine anointed.

Have mercy, O Lord, upon all the nations of the earth, have mercy upon the rulers of our land, may those principles which were so honorably and nobly defended, viz., the Constitution of our land, by our fathers, be established for ever;

Remember the kings, the princes, the nobles, and the great ones of the earth, and all people, and the churches, all the poor, the needy, and afflicted ones of the earth.

That their hearts may be softened, when Thy servants shall go out from Thy house, O Jehovah, to bear testimony of Thy name, that their prejudices may give way before the truth, and Thy people may obtain favor in the sight of all.

That all the ends of the earth may know that we Thy servants have heard Thy voice, and that Thou hast sent us,

That from among all these, Thy servants the sons of Jacob may gather out the righteous to build a holy city to Thy name, as Thou hast commanded them.

We ask Thee to appoint unto Zion other Stakes, besides this one which Thou hast appointed, that the gathering of Thy people may roll on in great power and majesty, that Thy work may be cut short in righteousness.

Now these words, O Lord, we have spoken before Thee, concerning the revelations and commandments which Thou hast given unto us, who are identified with the Gentiles;

But Thou knowest that Thou hast a great love for the children of Jacob, who have been scattered upon the mountains, for a long time, in a cloudy and dark day;

We therefore ask Thee to have mercy upon the children of Jacob, that Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed,

And the yoke of bondage may begin to be broken off from the house of David.

And the children of Judah may begin to return to the lands which Thou didst give to Abraham, their father;

And cause that the remnants of Jacob, who have been cursed and smitten, because of their transgression, be converted from their wild and savage condition, to the fulness of the everlasting gospel,

That they may lay down their weapons of bloodshed, and cease their rebellions;

And may all the scattered remnants of Israel, who have been driven to the ends of the earth come to a knowledge of the truth, believe in the Messiah, and be redeemed from oppression, and rejoice before Thee.

O Lord, remember Thy servant, Joseph Smith, Junior, and all his afflictions and persecutions, how he has covenanted with Jehovah, and vowed to Thee, O mighty God of Jacob, and the commandments which Thou hast given unto him, and that he hath sincerely striven to do Thy will.

Have mercy, O Lord, upon his wife and children, that they may be exalted in Thy presence, and preserved by Thy fostering hand:

Have mercy upon all their immediate connections, that their prejudices may be broken up, and swept away as with a flood, that they may be converted and redeemed with Israel, and know that Thou art God.

Remember, O Lord, the presidents, even all the presidents of Thy Church, that Thy right hand may exalt them, with all their families, and their immediate connections, that their names may be perpetuated, and had in everlasting remembrance, from generation to generation.

Remember all Thy Church, O Lord, with all their families, and all their immediate connections, with all their sick and afflicted ones, with all the poor and meek of the earth, that the kingdom which Thou hast set up without hands, may become a great mountain, and fill the whole earth;

That Thy Church may come forth out of the wilderness of darkness, and shine forth fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners,

And be adorned as a bride for that day when Thou shalt unveil the heavens, and cause the mountains to flow down at Thy presence, and the valleys to be exalted, the rough places made smooth; that Thy glory may fill the earth,

That when the trumpet shall sound for the dead we shall be caught up in the cloud to meet Thee, that we may ever be with the Lord,

That our garments may be pure, that we may be clothed upon with robes of righteousness, with palms in our hands, and crowns of glory upon our heads, and reap eternal joy for all our sufferings.

O Lord God Almighty, hear us in these our petitions, and answer us from heaven, Thy holy habitation, where thou sittest enthroned, with glory, honor, power, majesty, might, dominion, truth, justice, judgment, mercy, and an infinity of fullness, from everlasting to everlasting.

O hear, O hear, O hear us, O Lord, and answer these petitions, and accept the dedication of this house unto Thee, the work of our hands, which we have built unto Thy name!

And also this Church, to put upon it Thy name; and help us by the power of Thy Spirit, that we may mingle our voices with those bright, shining seraphs around Thy throne, with acclamations of praise, singing, Hosanna to God and the Lamb;

And let these Thine anointed ones be clothed with salvation, and Thy saints shout aloud for joy. Amen, and Amen.

Doc. and Cov. Section 109.

Physical and Historical Description

The cornerstones of the Kirtland Temple were laid on July 23, 1833. "It was commenced in June, 1833, under the immediate direction of the Almighty, through His servant, Joseph Smith, whom He called in his boyhood, like Samuel of old, to introduce the fulness of the everlasting gospel.

At that time the Saints were few in number, and most of them very poor; and had it not been for the assurance that God had spoken, and had commanded that a house should be built to His name, of which He not only revealed the form but also designated the dimensions, an attempt towards building that Temple under the then existing circumstances, would have been by all concerned, pronounced preposterous. * * *

Its dimensions are eighty by fifty-nine feet; the walls fifty feethigh, and the tower one hundred and ten feet. The two main halls are fifty-five by sixty-five feet in the inner court. The building has four vestries in front, and five rooms in the attic, which were devoted to literature and for meetings of the various quorums of the Priesthood.

There was a peculiarity in the arrangement of the inner court which made it more than ordinarily impressive—so much so that a sense of sacred awe seemed to rest upon all who entered. Not only the Saints, but strangers also, manifested a high degree of reverential feeling. Four pulpits stood, one above another, in the center of the building, from north to south, both on the east

KIRTLAND TEMPLE Site dedicated in June, 1833. Temple dedicated on March 27, 1836, by Joseph Smith the Prophet.

KIRTLAND TEMPLE General view looking west, second floor.

and west ends. * * * In front of each of these two rows of pulpits was a sacrament table, for the administration of that sacred ordinance. In each corner of the court was an elevated pew for the singers—the choir being distributed into four compartments. In addition to the pulpit curtains were others, intersecting at right

KIRTLAND TEMPLE General view looking east, first floor.

angles, which divided the main ground-floor hall into four equal sections, giving to each one half of one set of pulpits.

From the day the ground was broken for laying the foundation of the Temple, until its dedication on the 27th of March, 1836, the work was vigorously prosecuted.

With very little capital except brain, bone, and sinew, combined with unwavering trust in God, men, women, and even children, worked with their might. While the brethren labored in their departments, the sisters were actively engaged in boarding and clothing workmen not otherwise provided for—all living as abstemiously as possible, so that every cent might be appropriated to the grand object, while their energies were stimulated by the prospect of participating in the blessings of a house built by the direction of the Most High, and accepted by Him.

Life of Joseph, the Prophet, by Edward W. Tullidge, pp. 187-189

The Kirtland Temple—An Historic American Building

(By Permission)

The Temple is 59 x 79 feet in size, contains a partly excavated basement, two full stories and an attic. The long axis of the building lies east and west with the front facing east. The exterior walls up to the cornice line are of stone, covered, except for the exposed stone foundation, stone quoins at the corners and the stone frieze of the cornice, with stuccoed plaster which contains bits of broken glass, china, etc., collected, according to tradition, by the women of the Church and used to produce a sparkle on the wall surfaces. The gables, dormers and tower are of frame construction. The original roof was covered with handmade wood shingles. The exterior trim around the door and window openings is of stone in long lengths, neatly and accurately tooled. The interior framing construction is of hewn and sawed material, following the usual heavy construction of that period. The interior trim, stairs, pews, pulpits, doors, etc., are of native wood hand-molded, carved and painted.

The first story is the apostolic floor, the second the church floor, and the attic the school and quorum floor. The first and second stories each contain two groups of nine pulpits, that at the east end being for the Aaronic order and the opposite one for the Melchizedek order. The pulpits are raised in tiers above

KIRTLAND TEMPLE General View Looking West, Second Floor

KIRTLAND TEMPLE General View Looking North, First Floor

the main floors. The seating arrangements in these two stories consist of stalls with doors, and movable pews in each stall, making possible the use of the entire auditorium from either pulpit. The second story auditorium and the schoolroom story were originally used for instruction purposes in connection with preparation for the ministry, priesthood and missionary work.

The workmanship, moldings, carvings, etc., show unusual skill in execution. Many motives are used in the various parts, varying in outline, contour and design, but blended harmoniously. This phase of the work indicates facility in adapting the design to meet varying conditions, as for instance the change in outline of moldings and in design and size of carving on the spiral stairs. It is not probable that all of the workmen engaged on the building were skilled artisans and yet the result is so harmonious as to raise the question if they may not have been inspired as were the builders of the cathedrals of old.

The Architectural Forum Master Detail Series, March, 1936, New York City

Faithfulness of Women and Men

By Heber C. Kimball

At this time the brethren were laboring night and day building the house of the Lord. Our women were engaged in spinning and knitting in order to clothe those who were laboring at the building, and the Lord only knows the scenes of poverty, tribulation, and distress which we passed through in order to accomplish this thing. My wife toiled all summer in lending her aid towards this accomplishment. She had a hundred pounds of wool, which, with the assistance of a girl, she spun in order to furnish clothing for those engaged in the building of the Temple, and although she had the privilege of keeping half the quantity of wool for herself, as a recompense for her labor, she did not reserve even so much as would make her a pair of stockings, but gave it for those who were laboring at the house of the Lord. She spun and wove and got the cloth dressed, and cut and made up into garments, and gave them to those men who labored on the Temple; almost all the sisters in Kirtland labored in knitting, sewing, spinning, etc., for the purpose of forwarding the work of the Lord, while we went up to Missouri to endeavor to reinstate our brethren on their lands, from which they had been driven. Elder Rigdon when addressing the brethren upon the importance of building this house, spake to this effect, that we should use every effort to accomplish this building by the time appointed, and if we did, the Lord would accept it at our hands, and on it depends the salvation of the church and also of the world. Looking at the sufferings and poverty of the church, he frequently used to go upon the walls of the building both by night and day and frequently wetting the walls with his tears, crying aloud to the Almighty to send means whereby we might accomplish the building. After we returned from our journey to the west, the whole church united in this undertaking and every man lent a helping hand. Those who had no teams went to work in the stone quarry and prepared the stones for drawing to the house, President Joseph Smith, Jr., being our foreman in the quarry, and the Presidency, High Priests, and Elders all alike assisting. Those who had teams assisted in drawing the stone to the house. These all laboring one day in the week, brought as many stones to the house as supplied the masons through the whole week. We continued in this manner until the walls of the house were reared. The committee who were appointed by revelation to superintend the building of the house, were Hyrum Smith, Reynolds Cahoon, and Jared Carter. These men used every exertion in their power to forward the work.

Times and Seasons, Vol. 6, pp. 367-8.

Manifestions of Divine Acceptance

Visions manifested to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and Oliver Cowdery, in the Temple at Kirtland, Ohio, April 3, 1836. The occasion was that of a Sabbath day meeting. The Prophet prefaces his record of the manifestations with these words: In the afternoon, I assisted the other presidents in distributing the Lord's Supper to the Church, receiving it from the Twelve, whose privilege it was to officiate at the sacred desk this day. After having performed this service to my brethren, I retired to the pulpit, the veils being dropped, and bowed myself with Oliver Cowdery, in solemn and silent prayer. After rising from prayer, the following vision was opened to both of us.—Personal manifestations of the Lord Jesus Christ—His acceptance of the Temple. Visitation of Moses and his commitment of the keys of the gathering.—Visitation by Elias and his conferment of authority.—Visitation of Elijah in direct fulfillment of Malachi's prediction.

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under His feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of His head was white like the pure snow; His countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and His voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

"I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father.

"Behold, your sins are forgiven you; you are clean before me; therefore, lift up your heads and rejoice.

"Let the hearts of your brethren rejoice, and let the hearts of all my people rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to my name.

"For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here; and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house.

"Yea, I will appear unto my servants, and speak unto them with mine own voice; if my people will keep my commandments and do not pollute this holy house.

"Yea, the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house.

"And the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands; and this is the beginning of the blessings which shall be poured out upon the heads of my people. Even so, Amen."

After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north.

After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the Gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed.

After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

"Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by Malachi—testifying that he (Elijah) should be sent before the great and dreadful day of the Lord comes—To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse — Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors."

Doc. & Cov., D&C 110, 14-16.

January 21, 1836: The Presidency then took the seat in their turn, according to their age, beginning at the oldest, and received their anointing and blessing under the hands of Father Smith. And in my turn, my father anointed my head, and sealed upon me the blessings of Moses, to lead Israel in the latter days, even as Moses led him in days of old; also the blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. All of the Presidency laid their hands upon me, and pronounced upon my head many prophecies and blessings, many of which I shall not notice at this time.

The heavens were opened before us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon were seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold. I saw Fathers Adam and Abraham, and my father and mother, my brother, Alvin, that has long since slept, and marveled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life before the Lord had set His hand to gather Israel the second time, and had not been baptized for the remission of sins. Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me, saying:

"All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desires of their hearts."

And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven. I saw the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb, who are now upon the earth, who hold the keys of this last ministry, in foreign lands, standing together in a circle, much fatigued, with their clothes tattered and feet swollen, with their eyes cast downward, and Jesus standing in their midst, and they did not behold Him. The Savior looked upon them and wept. ***

Also, I saw Elder Brigham Young standing in a strange land, in the far south and west, in a desert place, upon a rock in the midst of about a dozen men of color, who appeared hostile. He was preaching to them in their own tongue, and the angel of God standing above his head, with a drawn sword in his hand, protecting him, but he did not see it. And I finally saw the Twelve in the celestial kingdom of God. I also beheld the redemption of Zion, and many things which the tongue of man cannot describe in full.

Many of my brethren who received the ordinance with me saw glorious visions also. Angels ministered unto them as well as to myself, and the power of the Highest rested upon us, the house was filled with the glory of God, and we shouted Hosanna to God and the Lamb. My scribe also received his anointing with us, and saw, in a vision, the armies of heaven protecting the Saints in their return to Zion, and many things which I saw.

The Bishop of Kirtland with his Counselors, and the Bishop of Zion with his Counselors, were present with us, and received their anointings under the hands of Father Smith, and this was confirmed by the Presidency, and the glories of heaven were unfolded to them.

We then invited the High Councilors of Kirtland and Zion into our room, and President Hyrum Smith anointed the head of the President of the Councilors in Kirtland, and President David Whitmer, the head of the President of the Councilors of Zion. The President of each quorum then anointed the heads of his colleagues each in his turn, beginning at the oldest, The visions of heaven were opened to them also. Some of them saw the face of the Savior, and others were ministered unto by holy angels, and the spirit of prophecy and revelation was poured out in mighty power; and loud Hosannas, and glory to God in the highest, saluted the heavens, for we all communed with the heavenly hosts. And I saw in my vision all of the Presidency in the celestial kingdom of God and many others that were present. Our meeting was opened by singing, and prayer was offered by the head of each quorum; and closed by singing, and invoking the benediction of heaven, with uplifted hands. Retired between one and two o'clock in the morning.

History of Church, Vol. 2, pp. 380-2.

President Rigdon arose to conclude the services of the evening by invoking the blessing of heaven upon the Lord's anointed, which he did in an eloquent manner; the congregation shouted a long Hosanna; the gift of tongues fell upon us in mighty power, angels mingled their voices with ours while their presence was in our midst, and unceasing praises swelled our bosoms for the space of half-an-hour.

I then observed to the brethren, that it was time to retire. We accordingly closed our interview and returned home at about two o'clock in the morning, and the Spirit and visions of God attended me through the night.

History of Church, Vol. 2, p. 383.

March 27, 1836: Brother George A. Smith arose and began to prophesy, when a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing mighty wind, which filled the Temple, and all the congregation simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an invisible power; many began to speak in tongues and prophesy; others saw glorious visions; and I beheld the Temple was filled with angels, which fact I declared to the congregation. The people of the neighborhood came running together (hearing an unusual sound within and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were astonished at what was taking place. This continued until the meeting closed at eleven P. M.

History of Church, Vol. 2, p. 428.

An Elect Lady Testifies

My brother (President Lorenzo Snow) spent most of the winter of 1837-8 in Kirtland, where he witnessed many marvelous manifestations of the power of God; also exhibitions of the power and opposition of the adversary. During the time he became intimately acquainted with Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and with his father, the Patriarch—with the Twelve Apostles and other leading men in the Church. In his journal he speaks of the fast meetings, prayer and testimony meetings in the Temple, as follows:

There we had the gift of prophecy—the gift of tongues—the interpretation of tongues—visions and marvelous dreams were related—the singing of heavenly choirs was heard, and wonderful manifestations of the healing power, through the administration of the Elders, were witnessed. The sick were healed—the deaf made to hear, the blind to see, and the lame to walk, in very many instances. It was plainly manifest that a sacred and divine influence—a spiritual atmosphere pervaded that holy edifice. Yes, indeed, for the Son of God, in His glory, had honored it with His royal presence. His voice, like the sound of many waters, was heard saying:

"I am the first and the last, I am he who liveth, I am he that was slain, I am your advocate with the Father."* * *

No language can describe my feelings when, for the first time, I stood up in one of those pulpits to address an audience—a pulpit on the breastwork of which, only a short time before, this holy Personage stood—His hair as white as pure snow, His eyes as a flame of fire—where also Moses, Elias and Elijah came and committed the keys of their dispensations to Joseph Smith.

Public meetings were regularly held in the Temple, after its dedication, on Sundays; and on the first Thursday in each month a fast meeting, commencing at or before 10 a.m. and closing at 4 p.m.*** On the aforementioned days, Father Smith (the Prophet's father) was in the habit of entering the Temple very early in the morning, and there offering up his prayers to God, in that holy place, before the rising of the sun, after having told the Saints, publicly, that they were welcome to come as early as they pleased. The result was that many assembled before the hour of 10 a.m. and did not leave till after 4 p.m.

At one of these meetings, an insane woman came into the quarter of the house where I had convened; she came before the opening services, and her tongue ran incessantly, making so much confusion as to render it improper, if not impossible, for the presiding Elder to commence religious services. The more she was coaxed and supplicated to be silent the more impetuous she became. At length, Elder John P. Greene, who was appointed to preside in that department, requested the congregation to kneel down and all simultaneously pray to God, vocally, that the evil spirit which was actuating that woman might be found. The request was immediately complied with, and when we arose from our kneeling position Brother Greene, addressing the unfortunate woman (who was then silent), said: "Sister, you may now speak, for thou wilt not speak unless thou shalt speak by the Spirit of God." She instantly arose to her feet, and, in a sputtering, stammering manner, tried to speak, but could not, and flew out of the Temple like a dart, and we saw no more of her that day.

I will relate one more remarkable circumstance which transpired in that interesting season—a circumstance which was not confined to either section of the Temple, but was witnessed by the many who were congregated on that day; and certainly all now living who were present on that occasion will remember. It is a testimony of answer to prayer that never can be forgotten. Father Smith presided over the meeting in the northwest section of the Temple, and after the meeting was opened by singing, he was mouth in prayer, and in course of supplication he very earnestly prayed that the Spirit of God might be poured out as on the day of Pentecost—that it might come "as a rushing mighty wind." Some time after in the midst of the exercises of the forenoon, it did come; and whether Father Smith had forgotten what he had prayer for or whether, in the fervency of his heart, when praying he did not realize what he prayed for, I never ascertained, but when the sound came and filled the house, with an expression of great astonishment he raised his eyes, exclaiming, "What! Is the house on fire?" But presently he comprehended the cause of his alarm, and was filled with unspeakable joy.

Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, by Eliza R. Snow smith, pp. 11-14.

Dedicatory Services as Described by Heber C. Kimball

This building the Saints commenced in 1833, in poverty, and without means to do it. In 1834 they completed the walls, and in 1835-36 they nearly finished it. The cost was between sixty and seventy thousand dollars. A committee was appointed to gather donations; they traveled among the churches and collected a considerable amount, but not sufficient, so that in the end they found themselves between thirteen and fourteen thousand dollars in debt. This house was 80*60 feet, and 57 feet high to the eaves. It was divided into two stories, each 22 feet high, and arched overhead. Ten feet were cut off from the front by a partition, and used as an entry or outer court, which also contained the stairs. This left the main room 55*65 feet in the clear, both below and above. In each of these rooms were built two pulpits, one in each end. Each pulpit consisted of four different apartments; the fourth standing on a platform raised a suitable height above the floor; the third stood directly behind and elevated a little above the fourth; the second in rear of and elevated above the third; and in like manner the first above the second. Each of these apartments was just large enough and rightly calculated to seat three persons, and the breastwork in front of each of these three last mentioned was constituted of three semi-circulars, joining each other, and finished in good style. The fourth or lower one, was straight in front, and had an elegant table leaf attached to it, that could be raised at pleasure for the convenience of administering the sacrament, etc. These pulpits were alike in each end of the house. One was for the use of the Melchizedek or High Priesthood and the other for the Aaronic or Lesser Priesthood. The first or highest apartment was occupied by the First President over the whole Church; the second apartment by the Melchizedek High Priesthood; the third by the President of the High Priests' quorum; and the fourth by the President of the Elders and his two counselors. The highest apartment of the other pulpit was occupied by the Bishop of the Church and his two counselors; the next by the President of the Priests and his two counselors; the third by the President of the Teachers and his two counselors; and the fourth by the President of the Deacons and his two counselors.

Each of these apartments had curtains hanging from the ceilings overhead down to the top of the pulpit, which could be rolled up or dropped down at pleasure, and when dropped down would completely exclude those within the department from the sight of all others. The room itself was finished with slips and seats so calculated that by slipping the seats a little the congregation could change their faces toward either pulpit they chose; for in some cases the High Priesthood would administer, and in other cases, the Lesser Priesthood would administer. The room was also divided into four compartments by means of curtains or veils hanging from the ceiling overhead down to the floor, which could be rolled up at pleasure, so that the house could be used all in one or divided into four rooms and used for different purposes. Thus the house was constructed to suit and accommodate the different quorums of the Priesthood and worship peculiar to the Church. The first story or lower room was dedicated for divine worship alone. The second story was finished similar in form to the first, but was designed wholly for instructing the Priesthood, and was supplied with tables and seats instead of slips. In the attic five rooms were finished for the convenience of schools and for different quorums of the Church to meet in. There was no baptismal font in this temple, the ordinance of baptism for the dead not having been revealed. At the time of dedication the first story was finished, also the attic, but the second story was in an unfinished condition.

At the dedication an address was delivered by Elder Rigdon from Matthew 8th chapter, 18 to 20 verses, more particularly the 20th. He spoke two hours and a half. The tenor of his discourse went to show the toils, sufferings, privations, and hardships the brethren and sisters had to endure while building this house, and compared it with the sufferings of the Saints in the days of the Savior. After the address the voice of the assembly was taken in reference to receiving and upholding the several presidents of the different quorums in their standing. The vote was unanimous in the affirmative in every instance. A hymn was sung, and then we had an interesting address from President Joseph Smith, and closed with a dedication prayer written by the Prophet.

During the ceremonies of the dedication, an angel appeared and sat near President Joseph Smith, Sr., and Frederick G. Williams so that they had a fair view of his person. He was a very tall personage, black eyes, white hair, and stoop-shouldered; his garment was whole, extending to near his ankles; on his feet he had sandals. He was sent as a messenger to accept of the dedication. During the whole of the dedication each quorum was placed in its respective station. Everything was conducted in the best of order, and profound silence maintained.

We had been commanded to prepare ourselves for a solemn assembly. At length the time arrived for this assembly to meet; previous to which the Prophet Joseph exhorted the Elders to solemnize their minds, by casting away every evil from them, in thought, word and deed, and to let their hearts become sanctified, because they need not expect a blessing from God without being duly prepared for it, for the Holy Ghost would not dwell in unholy temples. This meeting took place soon after the house of the Lord had been dedicated.* * *

When the Prophet Joseph had finished the endowments of the First Presidency, the Twelve and the Presiding Bishops, the First Presidency proceeded to lay hands upon each one of them to seal and confirm the anointing; and at the close of each blessing the whole of the quorums responded to it with a loud shout of Hosanna! Hosanna! etc.

While these things were being attended to, the beloved disciple, John, was seen in our midst by the Prophet Joseph, Oliver Cowdery and others. After this all the quorums arose in order, together with the three Presidencies; and the Twelve then presented themselves separately and individually before the First Presidency, with hands uplifted towards heaven, and asked God whatever they felt to desire; and after each individual petition the whole of the quorums answered aloud, Amen! Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna! To God and the Lamb forever and ever, amen, and amen!

The 6th day of April being the day appointed for fasting and prayer, all the Elders, Priests, Teachers and Deacons, numbering about four hundred, met together in the House of the Lord to attend to further ordinances; none being permitted to enter but official members who had previously received their washings and anointings. Water being provided, the First Presidency, after girding themselves with towels, proceeded to wash the feet of the Twelve. After they got through, the Twelve girded themselves and washed the feet of the Seventies. They then took their seats, each quorum seating themselves in their respective places and continued in fasting and prayer, prophesying and exhortation until evening. A sufficient quantity of bread having been provided to feed this whole assembly, it was broken by the First Presidency of the Church and the Twelve, after which the congregation knelt while a benediction was pronounced upon it by the First Presidency; and afterwards the Twelve took it and administered to the congregation. Then wine, also being provided, was blessed by the First Presidency and in like manner served to the congregation by the Twelve. This order of things is similar to that which was attended to by the Savior amongst His disciples, previous to His ascension. The meeting continued on through the night; the spirit of prophecy was poured out upon the assembly, and cloven tongues of fire sat upon them, for they were seen by many of the congregation. Also angels administered to many, for they were also seen by many.

This continued for several days and was attended by a marvelous spirit of prophecy. Every man's mouth was full of prophesying, and for a number of days or weeks our time was spent in visiting from house to house, administering bread and wine and pronouncing blessings upon each other to that degree that from the external appearances one would have supposed that the last days had truly come, in which the Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon all flesh, as far as the Church was concerned, for the sons and daughters of Zion were full of prophesying. In this prophesying great blessings were pronounced upon the faithful, and also great cursings upon the ungodly, or upon those who had smitten us. During this time many great and marvelous visions were seen, one of which I will mention which Joseph the Prophet had concerning the Twelve. His anxiety was and had been very great for their welfare, when the following vision was manifested to him, as near as I can recollect:

He saw the Twelve going forth and they appeared to be in a far distant land. After some time they unexpectedly met together, apparently in great tribulation, their clothes all ragged, and their knees and feet sore. They formed into a circle and all stood with their eyes fixed upon the ground. The Savior appeared and stood in their midst and wept over them, and wanted to show himself to them, but they did not discover him. He (Joseph) saw until they had accomplished their work and arrived at the gate of the celestial city; there Father Adam stood and opened the gate to them, and as they entered he embraced them one by one and kissed them. He then led them to the throne of God, and then the Savior embraced each one of them and kissed them, and crowned each one of them in the presence of God. He saw that they all had beautiful heads of hair and all looked alike. The impression this vision left on Brother Joseph's mind was of so acute a nature that he never could refrain from weeping while rehearsing it.

Life of Heber C. Kimball, by Orson F. Whitney, pp. 100-6.

The Poverty of the Saints in Kirtland

By Daniel Tyler

At that time (1835-6) perhaps two thousand people, or even less, constituted the entire Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and they were mostly of the poorer class. A few well-to-do farmers composed the so-called wealthy portion of the Church. Those who had a little property, as a rule, clung to it, leaving those who were dependent upon their labor for their daily food to build the house of the Lord.

How often have I seen those humble, faithful, servants of the Lord, after toiling all day in the quarry, or on the building, when the walls were in course of erection, weary and faint, yet with cheerful countenances, retiring to their homes with a few pounds of corn meal that had been donated. And in the case of those who lacked a cow to give a little milk, the corn meal was sometimes, for days together, all that they and their families had to subsist on. When a little flour, butter or meat came in, they were luxuries. Sometimes a little New Orleans Molasses, not as good as our sorghum, would be donated, but oftener the hands had to seek a job elsewhere to get a gallon or so, and then return to the labor on the temple.

To show how little interest the few who had means took in building the temple, and supplying the wants of the hands, one instance only need be mentioned. I think it was father Fisher, who, by some accident, fell from the scaffold, and was disabled for performing manual labor. He could manage, by the labor of his boys, to get a little corn, but corn bread was dry food. He went to the prophet and asked him what he should do, and was told to get up a subscription paper and present to those who were best able to donate, and raise money enough to buy a cow, which would cost from ten to twelve dollars. He did as directed, and received the full sum of seventy-five cents. One person gave fifty and another twenty-five cents. This so disgusted the prophet that he preferred a charge against them before the High Council "for a lack of charity to the Church, and benevolence to the poor." One of them made a humble acknowledgment, and the other was disfellowshipped.

Juvenile Instructor, vol. 15.

Revelations Received by Joseph the Seer at Kirtland

Twenty-seven years ago on the fifth of this month (May), in the year 1834, a company started for Kirtland to redeem Zion. Brother Heber C. Kimball and my brother, Joseph, were in that camp. There had not been ordained any Twelve Apostles nor any Seventies, although there was a revelation pertaining to the Apostles and Seventies. There were High Priests but no high priests quorum. I am relating this as a little matter of history that will no doubt be interesting to those who were not there.

After we returned from Missouri, my brother, Joseph Young, and myself had been singing after preaching in a meeting and when the meeting was dismissed, Brother Joseph said: "Come go down to my house with me." We went and sang to him a long time and talked with him. He then opened the subject of the Twelve and Seventies for the first time I ever thought of it. He said: "Brethren, I am going to call out Twelve Apostles. I think we will get together by and by, and select Twelve Apostes and select a quorum of Seventies from those who have been up to Zion out of the camp boys." In 1835, the last of January, or in February, or about that time, we held our meetings from day to day, and Brother Joseph called out Twelve Apostles at that time. He had a revelation when we were singing to him. Those who were acquainted with him knew when the Spirit of revelation was upon him, for his countenance wore an expression peculiar to himself while under that influence. He preached by the Spirit of revelation and taught in his council by it and those who were acquainted with him could discover it at once, for at such times there was a peculiar clearness and transparency in his face. He followed up that revelation until he organized the Church and so along until the baptism of the dead was revealed.

Brigham Young, J. D. 9:89.

Saints Witnessing Great Manifestations, Soon Apostatized

Among the first principles that were revealed to the children of men in the last days was the gathering; the first revelations that were given to the Church were to command them to gather, and send Elders to seek out a place for the gathering of the Saints. What is the gathering for? Why was it that the Savior wished the children of Israel to gather together? It was that they might become united and provide a place wherein He could reveal unto them keys which have been hid from before the foundation of the world; that He could unfold unto them the laws of exaltation, and make them a kingdom of Priests—even the whole people, and exalt them to thrones and dominions in the celestial world.

For this purpose, in 1833, the Saints commenced to build a Temple in Kirtland, the cost of which was not less than one hundred thousand dollars. A mere handful of Saints commenced that work, but they were full of faith and energy, and willing, as they supposed, to sacrifice everything for the building up of Zion. In a few weeks some of them apostatized; the trials were too great, the troubles were too severe. I know persons who apostatized because they supposed they had reasons; for instance, a certain family, after having traveled a long journey, arrived in Kirtland, and the Prophet asked them to stop with him until they could find a place. Sister Emma, in the meantime, asked the old lady if she would have a cup of tea to refresh her after the fatigues of the journey, or a cup of coffee. This whole family apostatized because they were invited to take a cup of tea or coffee, after the Word of Wisdom was given.

Another family, about the same time, apostatized because Joseph Smith came down out of the translating room, where he had been translating by the gift and power of God, and commenced playing with his little children. Some such trials as these, you know, had to be encountered. I recollect a gentleman who came from Canada, and who always had been a Methodist, and had always been in the habit of praying to a God who had no ears and as a matter of course had to shout and halloo pretty hard to make Him hear. Father Johnson asked him to pray in their family worship in the evening, and he got on such a high key, and hallooed so loud that he alarmed the whole village. Among others, Joseph came running out, saying, "What is the matter? I thought by the noise that the heavens and the earth were coming together," and said to the man, "that he ought not to give way to such an enthusiastic spirit, and bray so much like a jackass." Because Joseph said that, the poor man put back to Canada, and apostatized; he thought he would not pray to a God who did not want to be screamed at with all one's might.

We progressed in this way while we were building the Kirtland Temple. The Saints had a great many traditions which they had borrowed from their fathers, and laid the foundations, and built that Temple with great toil and suffering, compared with what we have now to endure. They got that building so far finished as to be dedicated; this was what the Lord wanted. He wished them to provide a place wherein He could reveal to the children of men those principles that will exalt them to eternal glory, and make them Saviors on Mount Zion. Four hundred and sixteen Elders, Priests, Teachers, and Deacons met in the Kirtland Temple on the evening of its dedication. I can see faces here that were in that assembly. The Lord poured His Spirit upon us and gave us some little idea of the law of anointing, and conferred upon us some blessings. He taught us how to shout Hosanna, gave Joseph the keys of the gathering together of Israel, and revealed to us, what, why the fact of it was, He dare not trust us with the first key of the Priesthood. He told us to wash ourselves, and that almost made the women mad, and they said, as they were not admitted into the Temple while this washing was being performed, that some mischief was going on, and some of them were right huffy about it.

We were instructed to wash each other's feet, as an evidence that we had borne testimony of the truth of the Gospel to the world. We were taught to anoint each other's head with oil in the name of the Lord, as an ordinance of anointing. All these things were to be done in their time, place, and season. All this was plain and simple, yet some apostatized because there was not more of it, and others because there was too much.

On the evening after the dedication of the Temple, hundreds of the brethren received the ministering of angels, saw the light and personages of angels, and bore testimony of it. They spake in new tongues, and had a greater manifestation of the power of God than that described by Luke on the day of Pentecost. Yet a great portion of the persons who saw these manifestations, in a few years, and some of them in a few weeks, apostatized. If the Lord had on that occasion revealed one single sentiment more, or gone one step further to reveal more fully the law of redemption, I believe He would have upset the whole of us. The fact was, He dare not, on that very account, reveal to us a single principle further than He had done for He had tried, over and over again, to do it. He tried at Jerusalem; He tried away back before the flood; He tried in the days of Moses; and He had tried, from time to time, to find a people to whom He could reveal the law of salvation, and He never could fully accomplish it; and He was determined this time to be so careful, and advance the idea so slowly, to communicate them to the children of men with such great caution that, at all hazards, a few of them might be able to understand and obey. For, says the Lord, My ways are not as your ways, nor My thoughts as your thoughts; for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways than your ways, and My thoughts than your thoughts. * * *

Now if the Lord had considered it wisdom, on the day of the Kirtland endowment and great solemn assembly, to come forward and reveal to the children of men the facts that are laid down plainly in the Bible, and had told them that, without the law of sealing, no man could be exalted to a throne in the celestial kingdom, that is, without he had a woman by his side; and that no woman could be exalted to the celestial world without she was exalted with a man at her head; that the man is not without the woman, nor the woman without the man in the Lord; had He revealed this simple sentiment, up would have jumped some man, saying, "What! Got to have a woman sealed to me in order to be saved, in order to be exalted to thrones, dominions, and eternal increase?" "Yes." "I do not believe a word of it, I cannot stand that, for I never intended to get married, I do not believe in any of this nonsense." At the same time, perhaps somebody else might have had faith to receive it. Again up jumps somebody else, "Brother Joseph, I have had two wives in my lifetime, cannot I have them both in eternity?" "No." If he had said yes, perhaps we should all have apostatized at once.

Now I will illustrate this still further. The Lord did actually reveal one principle to us there, and that one principle was apparently so simple, and so foolish in their eyes, that a great many apostatized over it, because it was so contrary to their notions and views. It was this, after the people had fasted all day, they sent out and got wine and bread, and blessed them, and distributed them to the multitude, that is, to the whole assembly of the brethren, and they ate and drank, and prophesied, and bore testimony, and continued so to do until some of the High Council of Missouri stepped into the stand, and, as righteous Noah did when he awoke from his wine, commenced to curse their enemies. You never felt such a shock go through any house or company in the world as went through that. There was almost rebellion because men would get up and curse their enemies; although they could remember well that it is written that Noah cursed his own grandson, and that God recognized that curse to such an extent that, at this day, millions of his posterity are consigned to perpetual servitude.

Many men are foolish enough to think that they can thwart the power of God, and can liberate the sons of Ham from that curse before its time has expired. Some of the brethren thought that it was best to apostatize, because the spirit of cursing was with men who had been driven from Missouri by mob violence. Yet every word that they prophesied has been fulfilled. They prophesied that the bones of many of those murderers should bleach on the prairie, and that birds should pick out their eyes, and beasts devour their flesh. Men who have traversed the plains of Mexico, California, Nebraska, and Kansas, have often seen the fulfillment of that prophecy in the most marvelous manner. We have seen their names upon trees, on the heads of old trunks, and bits of boards; the names of men that I knew, and I knew just as well, in the Kirtland Temple, what would be their fate, as I know now. But that tried us, some of us were awfully tried about it. The Lord dared not then reveal anything more; He had given us all we could swallow; and persecution raged around us to such an extent that we were obliged to forsake our beautiful Temple, and flee into the state of Missouri.

By George A. Smith, J. D., Vol. 2:214-16.

The Great Apostasy

During the time my brother (Lorenzo Snow) was on this, his first mission, a great change had been going on in Kirtland, in the midst of the Saints. A spirit of speculation had crept into the hearts of some of the Twelve, and nearly, if not every quorum, was more or less infected. Most of the Saints were poor, and now prosperity was dawning upon them—the Temple was completed, and in it they had been recipients of marvelous blessings and many who had been humble and faithful to the performance of every duty—ready to go and come at every call of the Priesthood were getting haughty in their spirits, and lifted up in the pride of their hearts. As the Saints drank in the love and spirit of the world, the Spirit of the Lord withdrew from their hearts, and they were filled with pride and hatred toward those who maintained their integrity. They linked themselves together in an opposing party—pretended that they constituted the Church and claimed that the Temple belonged to them and even attempted to hold it.

Warren Parrish,fn who had been a humble, successful preacher of the Gospel, was the ringleader of this apostate party. One Sabbath morning, he, with several of his party, came into the Temple armed with pistols and bowie-knives, and seated themselves together in the Aaronic pulpits, on the east end of the

KIRTLAND TEMPLE First Floor. Looking West. On the middle pulpit of the center row, stood the Redeemer as given in the 110th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, April 3, 1836.

Temple, while Father Smith and others, as usual occupied those of the Melchizedek Priesthood on the west. Soon after the usual opening services one of the brethren on the west stand arose, and just after he commenced to speak, one on the east interrupted him. Father Smith, presiding, called to order—he told the apostate brother that he should have all the time he wanted, but he must wait his turn—as the brother on the west took the floor and commenced first to speak, he must not be interrupted. A fearful scene ensued—the apostate speaker becoming too clamorous that Father Smith called for the police to take that man out of the house, when Parrish, John Boynton, and others, drew their pistols and bowie-knives and rushed down from the stand into the congregation, J. Boynton saying he would blow out the brains of the first man who dared to lay hands on him. Many in the congregation, especially women and children, were terribly frightened—some tried to escape from the confusion by jumping out of the windows. Amid screams and shrieks, the policemen, in ejecting the belligerents, knocked down a stovepipe, which fell helter-skelter among the people; but, although bowie-knives and pistols were wrested from their owners, and thrown hither and thither to prevent disastrous results, no one was hurt, and after a short, but terrible scene to be enacted in a Temple of God, order was restored, and the services of the day proceeded as usual.

Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, by Eliza R. Snow Smith, pp. 20-21.

Five of the quorum of the Twelvefn,fn,fn,fn were in this apostasy, and some in every organized quorum became disaffected. Whenever the spirit of speculation—a grasping for the things of the world—obtained, the light of the Spirit of God departed, and impenetrable darkness ensued. Some even became so blind as to seek to depose the Prophet of God. At length the hostility of the belligerent party assumed such threatening attitude that, late in the autumn of 1837, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon had to flee for their lives; and at a moment's warning, started for Missouri. But their absence did not check the persecution waged by those apostate brethren—others became the target of their malice. Through their influence, the aged Father Smith was served with a State's warrant, but fortunately for him he was placed in the custody of Luke Johnson, who, although one of the apostates, was adverse to the bitter spirit of persecution which characterized others. Naturally of a jovial turn, he was more inclined to ridicule than hostility. Having been somewhat conversant with law usages, he volunteered his services as legal adviser for Father Smith, although his custodian. He privately told Father Smith's friends that the suit was instigated through malice—that he knew Father Smith was innocent, and he was determined to do all he could for him; and he was true to his word. * * *

Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, by Eliza R. Snow, pp. 22-24.

Apostasy and Pollution of the House of the Lord

Shortly after the completion of the house, Joseph and Martin Harris took a short tour through the eastern country. When they arrived at Palmyra, on their return, Joseph had a vision, which lasted until he besought the Lord to take it from him; for it manifested to him things which were painful to contemplate. It was taken from before his eyes for a short time, but soon returned again, and remained until the whole scene was portrayed before him.

On his arrival at home, the brethren seemed greatly pleased to see him. The next day he preached a sermon, and the following is a part of his remarks:

"Brethren, I am rejoiced to see you, and I have no doubt but that you are glad to see me. We are now nearly as happy as we can be on earth. We have accomplished more than we had any reason to expect when we began. Our beautiful house is finished, and the Lord has acknowledged it, by pouring out His Spirit upon us here, and revealing to us much of His will in regard to the work which He is about to perform. Furthermore, we have everything that is necessary for our comfort and convenience, and, judging from appearances, one would not suppose that anything could occur which would break up our friendship for each other, or disturb our tranquility. But, brethren, beware; for I tell you in the name of the Lord, that there is an evil in this very congregation, which, if not repented of, will result in setting many of you (who are here this day) so much at enmity against me, that you will have a desire to take my life, and you even would do it, if God should permit the deed. But, brethren, I now call upon you to repent, and cease all your hardness of heart, and turn from those principles of death and dishonesty which you are harboring in your bosoms, before it is eternally late, for there is yet room for repentance."

He continued to labor with them in this way, appealing to them in the most solemn manner until almost everyone in the house was in tears, and he was exhausted with speaking.

In the fall of 1836, a bank was established in Kirtland. Soon after the sermon, above mentioned, Joseph discovered that a large amount of money had been taken away by fraud, from this bank. He immediately demanded a search warrant of Esquire F. G. Williams, which was flatly refused. "I insist upon a warrant," said Joseph, "for if you will give me one, I can get the money, and if you do not, I will break you of your office." "Well, break it is, then," said Williams, "and we will strike hands upon it." "Very well," said Joseph, "from henceforth I drop you from my quorum, in the name of the Lord."

Joseph then went to Cleveland, in order to transact some business pertaining to the bank; and as he was absent the ensuing Sunday, my husband preached to the people. In speaking of the bank affair, he reflected somewhat sharply upon Warren Parrish. Although the reflection was just, Parrish was highly incensed, and made an attempt to drag him out of the stand. My husband appealed to Oliver Cowdery, who was justice of the peace, to have him brought to order; but Oliver never moved from his seat. William seeing the abuse which his father was receiving, sprang forward and caught Parrish, and carried him in his arms nearly out of the house. At this John Boynton stepped forward, and drawing a sword from his cane, presented it to William's breast, and said, "if you advance one step further, I will run you through." Before William had time to turn himself, several gathered around who threatened to handle him severely, if he should lay the weight of his finger upon Parrish again. At this juncture of affairs, I left the house, not only tertrified at the scene, but likewise sick at heart, to see that the apostasy of which Joseph had prophesied, was so near at hand."

History of the Prophet Joseph, by his Mother, Lucy Smith, pp. 211-213.

The Kirtland Temple Defiled

By E. Cecil McGavin

[By Permission]

(From Improvement Era, October, 1940.)

It was agreed by all persons interviewed that a door was made in the basement wall between two buttresses of the foundation and a gentle incline was spaded through the ornamental shrubs and flowers to provide a portal through which cattle, sheep, and swine could be driven into the basement to share its warmth, while the palatial rooms above were used to suit the fickle fancy of the villagers.

It was related by many of the oldest residents of the dwarfed village that when the inclement winter set in, when the assembly room on the ground floor was not needed for any meeting of the citizens, it, too, was transformed into a stable to shelter the livestock of the neighborhood. The low benches were removed from their wooden enclosures and used for firewood, while sheep were herded into the small pews in the sacred room where the voices of angels had been heard but a short season before.

Upon the pulpit where the Lord had stood, and where Moses, Elijah, and Elias had appeared when they restored additional keys of the kingdom of God, stores of hay and straw were piled by the crude farmers, who whistled or cursed as they did their chores in the house which had been built for God.

For a few seasons the villagers were loath to use the Temple during the winter months except as a barn for their cattle. The builders of the Temple had made no provision for heating its large high-ceilinged rooms. During the long meetings in winter in the historic building, each person had been expected to provide his own method of heating. The metal bed warmers from the various homes had been filled with hot stones and placed on the floor as a footstool. Blankets or quilts had been wrapped about the worshipers as they sat through the long services. Small canvas bags had been filled with warm sand and brought to the temple to temper the cold.

But in the summer months, after the Temple was defiled, it became the scene of the gay festivities of the hamlet. The cattle were taken from the building when spring came, and the citizens took possession of the house. The second story had been equipped originally, exactly like the ground floor — with its ornamented pulpits at each end of the room, and choir benches in the four corners, and the boxed-in benches covering the floor.

The citizens removed all the furnishings of the second floor, converting the large room into a playhouse, though the pews were reserved on the lower floor to protect their sheep at lambing time. The second story became a rendezvous for mischief-makers and pleasure-seekers. Dances, games, shows, and other types of entertainment were resorted to. When traveling troups of entertainers came to the dwindling town, the second story in the former Temple awaited their acts while wide-eyed citizens shouted their hearty approval. Partly-clad entertainers danced upon the low platform where once had stood the majestic pulpits adorned in white and gold. The Temple was opened to the animated preachers from the camp meetings and revivals. Politicians visited the historic house prior to elections and solicited the votes of the people who lived among the hills of Kirtland.

A few years later, the third story, where the School of the Prophets had formerly convened, was converted into a school. For many years these five rooms were used by the public schools of Ohio. One boy who attended school in the attic of the Temple later became president of the United States—James A. Garfield learned his three R's in that historic house.

Even the outside walls of the Temple did not escape the covetous gaze of vandals. The stone walls were covered with a strange plaster which all builders wished to duplicate, but the man who had perfected the formula had passed away. The man who had prepared the plaster for the outside walls had asked the Saints to contribute their broken glass and chinaware to be pulverized and mixed with the plaster. China closets and cupboards were almost denuded in an effort to get enough material containing the tiny particles of china and glass that glistened in the sunshine as if the walls were set with countless precious stones.

Engineers, architects, designers, all sought to learn the secret of the durable plaster which gave the building such sparkling beauty. When such admirers visited the building, they scraped from its wall large samples of the plaster that they might take it to their laboratories and learn the secret of its composition. Other souvenir collectors took long poles and broke off fragments that they might keep as a memento of their visit to the House of the Lord. Today there are only a few small patches of the original plaster upon the walls. The fragments of glass and chinaware still sparkle.

Hundreds of yards of heavy white cloth had been used for curtain material inside the Temple, lowered from rollers attached to the ceiling. These curtains had been used to divide the two large rooms into smaller ones when the various quorums of the Priesthood met in quorum capacity for deliberation. Soon after the Temple fell into profane hands, the white curtains disappeared from the hallowed house and were divided among the people as the spoils of victory. They were used to repair quilts and bed ticks, clothing, broken windows, and even to cover holes in houses and sheds.

Soon after the Saints had fled from Kirtland, the Church leaders tried to prevent such vandalism by selling or leasing the Temple to responsible parties, but all such efforts were fruitless. At the time of the exodus from Nauvoo a determined effort was made to dispose of the Temples at Nauvoo and Kirtland. While the Saints were camped at Garden Grove, we read from the Journal History of the Church:

The council decided that the trustees might sell the Temples at Nauvoo and Kirtland and all other property of the Church to help the poor Saints to move westward. The council considered that the Temple would be of no benefit to the Saints if they could not possess their private dwellings, and when the time should come that they should return and redeem their inheritances, they would secure it from unjust claims, mobs, fire, etc., more effectually than for the Church to retain it in their hands.

In 1845, President Brigham Young received a letter from one of the Saints in Kirtland from which we quote:

The apostates were doing everything they could to injure the Saints. They have broken into the House of the Lord, and taken possession of it, and were trying to take possession of the Church farm.

Journal History, October 22, 1845.

The St. Louis Luminary (February 17, 1855) published an article containing this information;

We called at Kirtland—found some tolerably good Saints considering circumstances, and many apostates. They have all become "rappers" and deny the Christ. They have taken possession of the Temple, and they are no better off than thieves and robbers.

In December, 1882, the Contributor told of Richard W. Young's then recent visit to Kirtland. Since the key to the temple could not be found, Elder Young and his companions were obliged to take turns standing on each other's shoulders and looking through the broken windows of the despoiled building. We read:

We found the interior preserved in much the same order as described by veteran Saints, and saw above on the ceiling of the main room the wires along which the curtains used to slide. The lower one of the three pulpits was strangely decorated with a few of the paraphernalia of a Protestant church, and held an open Bible. The building is in poor repair; much of the interior woodwork has been taken away for firewood, and the sashes contain more broken than undamaged panes of glass. Paint it has not seen for a generation at least.

And thus the Kirtland Temple suffered abuse for nearly half a century. In 1880, the Reorganized Church became interested in restoring it as nearly as possible to its original simplicity and beauty. They have spent a great sum of money for this purpose.

Though its present owners have no vision of Temple work and do not possess the keys which were restored in the holy house, they keep it in good preservation. They even refused a tempting offer from John D. Rockefeller, who wanted to purchase the elaborate panels and windows directly behind the pulpits in front of the building. However, he was permitted to reproduce the desired portion and place it in a magnificent cathedral he was having erected in New York City.

The Temple at Kirtland has served its purpose and has ceased to be a House of the Lord. It was but a stepping stone to greater and more complete temples wherein the sacred ordinances of the Priesthood could be administered. The courage and faith of the Saints enabled them to turn their backs upon despoiled Temples and private dwellings and face the distant West where they would build and enjoy the most sacred fruits of their labor—the Temples of God.

It must have been a source of sorrow to the Saints in the West to know how the former Temples at Kirtland and Nauvoo were being defiled. The spirit of the Pioneers is revealed in the words of President Young when he learned that the Temple at Nauvoo had been burned. Lifting his hand toward heaven and as if looking beyond the sky he exclaimed, "Good, Father, if You want it to be burned up." Later he said of the burning of the Temple:

I would rather see it burnt than to see it in the hands of devils. I was thankful to see the Temple of Nauvoo on fire. Previous to crossing the Mississippi River, we had met in the Temple and handed it over to the Lord God of Israel. I hoped to see it burned before I left but I did not. I was glad when I heard of its being destroyed by fire, and its walls having fallen in, and said, "Hell, you cannot now occupy it." When the temple is built here, I want to maintain it for those of the Priesthood; if this cannot be, I would rather not see it built, but go into the mountains and administer there in the ordinances of the Holy Priesthood, which is our privilege. I would rather do this than to build a Temple for the wicked to trample under their feet.

Journal of Discourses, VIII:203.

Cause of Failure of Kirtland Bank, By George A. Smith:

1a Some time after the finishing of the Temple, the brethren under the direction of the Prophet had established a bank in Kirtland, the paper to be redeemed by specie, and secured by real estate. The directors of that bank were members of the Church, and they were determined to sustain the credit of that money. The question has sometimes been asked, how much has that bank failed for; it did not fail for a single dollar, and yet when it failed there was perhaps a hundred thousand dollars of the bankpaper out in circulation. Warren Parrish was the teller of the bank, and a number of other men who apostatized were officers. They took out of its vault, unknown to the President or Cashier, a hundred thousand dollars, and sent their agents around among the brethren to purchase their farms, wagons, cattle, horses and everything they could get hold of. The brethren would gather up this money and put it into the bank, and those traitors would steal it and send it out to buy again, and they continued to do so until the plot was discovered and payments stopped. It was the cursed apostates—their stealing and robberies, and their infernal villainies that prevented that bank being conducted as the Prophet designed. If they had followed the counsel of Joseph, there is not a doubt that it would have been the leading bank in Ohio, probably of the nation. It was founded upon safe principles, and would have been a safe and lasting institution.

J. D., Vol. 11:11.

This attempted organization was under the direction of Warren Parrish, who had been a traveling elder in the Church and who sustained a high reputation in the Southern States as an eloquent preacher and had for some time been employed by Joseph as a clerk. He undertook to organize those elements into a church and he was told by them that all the talented men among the Elders were ready to join them. They named, for instance, Lyman Johnson, John F. Boynton, William E. McLellan, Hazen Aldrich, Sylvester Smith, Joseph Coe, Orson Johnson, W. A. Cowdery, M. F. Cowdery and others, amounting to something like thirty who had been prominent Elders in the Church. They were going to renounce the Book of Mormon and Joseph Smith and take the "Mormon" doctrines to overthrow all the religions in the world and unite all the Christian churches in one general band and they to be its great leaders. What success did this great apostasy meet with. Brother Kimball, when on a mission in 1844 (this apostasy took place in 1837-8), while crossing Fox River on the ferry, encountered Warren Parrish. He was a grave-looking man—straight-jacketed fellow, dressed in black, with a white handkerchief around his neck. Says he: "Elder Kimball, will you have the goodness not to say to the people here that I ever was a Mormon? I am a Baptist minister. I am preaching in that meetinghouse for a salary of $500 a year. If they find out I have been a Mormon it would hurt my influence very much indeed." Where was the big church he had tried to build up? He had tried pleading law, that failed; peddling bogus money, and that failed, like his big church speculation. And where was the origin of this? I recollect waking up late one evening when I was quite a young man and hearing my father and one of the brethren talk. Being a little disposed to listen, I learned that there had been considerable difficulty between Parrish and one of the brethren. That was when he was in good standing in the Church. He had been too kind with the brother's wife. Then I learned the commencement of his apostasy.

You may go to every one of these men—I care not which one; you cannot put your finger on any one of these thirty men but what you will find that the spirit of adultery or covetousness had got possession of their hearts, and when it did the Spirit of the Lord left them. They had not sense enough to repent and put away their iniquity, but suffered themselves to be overthrown with the spirit of darkness; and they have gone to hell and there they may lift up their eyes asking for some relief or benefit from those they once tried to destroy, but if they get the privilege of waiting on a servant to those who have kept the laws of heaven they will be exceedingly thankful and fortunate.

J. D., Vol. 7:115.

John Boynton, one of the Twelve, came to me and said: "If you are such a damn fool as to listen to Joseph Smith, the fallen Prophet, and go to England under these perilous circumstances, if I knew you were shipwrecked on Van Dieman's Land, I would not assist you to get you from that land." I will speak to Lyman Johnson's credit: I will give every man credit for the good he does. Lyman Johnson steps up and says: "Brother Heber, I do not feel so, I am sorry you are going and consider you are foolish; but if you are determined to go I will help you all that is in my power." And he took from his shoulders a good nice camlet cloak and put it on to mine; and that was the first cloak I ever had. This was in the month of June, 1837. I was then destitute of the comforts of life and that cloak I wore three times across the sea and Parley P. Pratt wore it four times; and in all it crossed the sea seven times. It seemed as though it would never wear out. Those circumstances were the most trying circumstances that ever I was brought into. Joseph had to flee from that land to save his body from being slain, and so had Brother Brigham and every other man who would sustain the Prophet, the apostasy was so great, and they were most hellish in their wickedness.

I went and filled the mission according to the words of the Prophet of the Living God and was gone eleven months andtwo days from Kirtland, being on that land eight months and two days, in which time there were about two thousand souls added to the Church and Kingdom of God, with the help of Elders Willard Richards, Orson Hyde and Joseph Fielding. When I came back from England there were but a few living in Kirtland. There was one little society of men that pretended to take the lead and oversight of the people and they were guided by a peep stone.—Heber C. Kimball. Journal of Discourses, Vol. 6:65.
