N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter II

THE NAUVOO TEMPLE

Physical and Historical Description

After the exterminating order of Governor Lilburn W. Boggs of Missouri which was dated October 27, 1838 (see History of the Church, Vol. 3, p. 175), the Saints were compelled to flee from that State, and made Illinois their refuge from the blood-thirsty Christian mobocats who had burned, pillaged and destroyed thousands of homes and murdered many hundreds of men, women and children. Coming to Commerce, Illinois, later named Nauvoo, in 1839, the swampy and uninhabitable regions were soon reclaimed and Nauvoo became a thriving, prosperous and beautiful commonwealth.

On January 19, 1841, the Prophet Joseph received a revelation, commanding the Saints to erect a Temple for the purpose of revealing keys and powers of the Priesthood and for the salvation of the living and the dead. This revelation was as follows:

And again, verily I say unto you, Let all my saints come from afar;

And send ye swift messengers, yea, chosen messengers and say unto them; come ye, with all your gold, and silver, and your precious stones, and with all your antiquities; and with all who have knowledge of antiquities, that will come, may come and bring the box tree, and the fir tree, and the pine tree, together with all the precious trees of the earth;

And with iron, with copper, and with brass, and with zinc, and with all your precious things of the earth, and build a house to my name, for the Most High to dwell therein;

For there is not a place found on earth that he may come and restore again that which was lost unto you, or which he hath taken away, even the fullness of the Priesthood;

For a baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that they, my saints, may be baptized for those who are dead:

For this ordinance belongeth to my house, and cannot be acceptable to me, only in the days of your poverty, wherein ye are not able to build a house unto me.

But I command you, all ye my saints, to build a house unto me; and I grant unto you a sufficient time to build a house unto me, and during this time your baptisms shall be acceptable unto me.

But behold, at the end of this appointment, your baptisms for your dead shall not be acceptable unto me; and if you do not these things at the end of the appointment, ye shall be rejected as a church, with your dead, saith the Lord your God.

For verily I say unto you, that after you have had sufficient time to build a house to me, wherein the ordinance of baptizing for the dead belongeth, and for which the same was instituted from before the foundation of the world, your baptisms for your dead cannot be acceptable unto me.

For therein are the keys of the Holy Priesthood, ordained that you may receive honor and glory.

And after this time, your baptisms for the dead, by those who are scattered abroad, are not acceptable unto me, saith the Lord;

For it is ordained that in Zion, and in her Stakes, and in Jerusalem, those places which I have appointed for refuge, shall be the places for your baptisms for your dead.

And again, verily I say unto you; How shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name?

For this cause I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before the world was;

Therefore, verily I say unto you, that your anointings, and your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices, by the sons of Levi, and for your oracles, in your most holy places, wherein you receive conversations, and your statutes and judgments, for the beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for the glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals, are ordained by the ordinance of my holy house which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name.

And verily I say unto you, Let this house be built unto my name, that I may reveal mine ordinances therein, unto my people;

For I design to reveal unto my church, things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times;

And I will show unto my servant Joseph all things pertaining to this house, and the Priesthood thereof; and the place whereon it shall be built;

And ye shall build it on the place where you have contemplated building it, for that is the spot which I have chosen for you to build it;

If ye labor with all your might, I will consecrate that spot that it shall be made holy;

And if my people will hearken unto my voice, and unto the voice of my servants whom I have appointed to lead my people, behold, verily I say unto you, they shall not be moved out of their place.

But if they will not hearken to my voice, nor unto the voice of these men whom I have appointed, they shall not be blest, because they pollute mine holy grounds, and mine holy ordinances, and charters, and my holy words which I give unto them.

And it shall come to pass, That if you build a house unto my name, and do not do the things that I say, I will not perform the oath which I make unto you, neither fulfill the promises which ye expect at my hands, saith the Lord;

For instead of blessings, ye, by your own works, bring cursings, wrath, indignation, and judgments upon your own heads, by your follies, and by all abominations, which you practice before me, saith the Lord.

Verily, verily I say unto you, That when I give a commandment to any of the sons of men, to do a work unto my name, and those sons of men go with all their might, and with all they have, to perform that work, and cease not their diligence, and their enemies come upon them, and hinder them from performing that work; behold, it behooveth me to require that work no more at the hands of those sons of men, but to accept of their offerings;

And iniquity and transgression of my holy laws and commandments, I will visit upon the heads of those who hindered my work, unto the third and fourth generation, so long as they repent not, and hate me, saith the Lord God.

Therefore for this cause have I accepted the offerings of those whom I commanded to build up a city and a house unto my name, in Jackson County, Missouri, and were hindered by their enemies, saith the Lord your God:

And I will answer judgment, wrath, and indignation, wailing, and anguish, and gnashings of teeth upon their heads, unto the third and fourth generation, so long as they repent not and hate me, saith the Lord your God.

And this I make an example unto you, for your consolation concerning all those who have been commanded to do a work, and have been hindered by the hands of their enemies, and by oppression, saith the Lord your God;

For I am the Lord your God, and will save all those of your brethren who have been pure in heart, and have been slain in the land of Missouri, saith the Lord.

And again, verily I say unto you, I command you again to build a house to my name, even in this place, that you may prove yourselves unto me that ye are faithful in all things whatsoever I command you, that I may bless you, and crown you with honor, immortality, and eternal life.

Doc. & Cov. Sec. 124:25-55.

On the eleventh anniversary of the organization of the Church, April 6, 1841, approximately 10,000 people from Nauvoo and surrounding sections were present to witness the laying of the four cornerstones of this Temple. It was an occasion marked by military display, sixteen companies of the Nauvoo Legion being assembled about the Temple foundation in a hollow square, within which were the visitors, the choir and band. The First Presidency of the Church laid the southeast cornerstone, the Prophet Joseph laying the stone in its proper place, and saying:

"This principal cornerstone in representation of the First Presidency, is now duly laid in honor of the Great God; and may the same be accompanied speedily; that the Saints may have a place to worship God, and the Son of Man have where to lay His head.:

The southwest cornerstone was placed by officers of the High Priests; the northwest cornerstone was laid by the High Council, and the northwest stone by the Bishops.

The Lord had revealed that baptisms for the dead in the Mississippi River were acceptable only in the days of their poverty when no baptismal font was available for that purpose, but as soon as the font was available in the Temple, baptisms in the river should be discontinued. At the conference of the Church held in Nauvoo, on October 2, 1841, the Prophet made this announcement: "There shall be no more baptisms for the dead, until the ordinance can be attended to in the Lord's House, and the Church will not hold another General Conference until they can meet on said house, for thus saith the Lord."

On November 8, 1841, the baptismal font was ready for dedication in the Temple, baptisms in the river having been discontinued.

On Sunday, November 21, 1841, "The council met in council at Brigham Young's house, and at four o'clock they repaired to the baptismal font in the Temple, where President Brigham Young, Elders Heber C. Kimball and John Taylor baptized about forty persons for their dead, Elders Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith confirmed them. These were the first baptisms for the dead in the font in the Lord's House. From this time forth, as long as the Saints remainded in Nauvoo, baptisms for the dead were performed in the Temple."

(Essentials in Church History by Joseph Fielding Smith, pp. 310-1.)

On October 30, 1842, the construction of the walls of the Temple had so far progressed that the first meeting was held in it. On May 24, 1845, the capstone was laid under the direction of President Brigham Young and the other members of the Twelve, the Prophet Joseph and Hyrum having been murdered in cold blood on June 27, 1844. By October 5, 1845, the construction had progressed to the extent that the autumnal conference was held within its walls. During the month of December, 1845, and the early months of 1846, many of the Saints received their blessings and endowments, and on April 30th of that year, the Temple was privately dedicated by Joseph Young, senior president of the First Seven Presidents of Seventy, now known as the First Council of the Seventy. On the following day, May 1st, the building was officially dedicated by Apostles Orson Hyde and Wilford Woodruff according to the order of the Holy Priesthood as revealed through Joseph the Prophet. The approximate cost of this magnificent structure was $1,000,000, paid for by tithing of money, labor, and from free will offerings.

After the Saints had left Nauvoo, in the severity of winter, in February and March, 1846, enroute to the Rocky Mountains, the mob took possession of Nauvoo and the Temple. The Temple was most sacred to the Saints and the mobocrats feared that if it continued to stand it would be a bond between its exiled builders and the city from which they had been so cruelly driven. On November 18, 1848, one Joseph Agnew set fire to this sacred structure, at which time all was destroyed except the walls. An attempt was made by the Icarians, a French communistic society, to rebuild the walls, but on May 27, 1850, a tornado leveled them completely, and the stones were removed to other places for building and souvenir purposes, until not one stone was left upon another. After the removal of the Saints from Nauvoo the fields and gardens reverted well nigh to the primitive wilderness and swampy conditions which the Saints had first met with in the settling of this beautiful location.

The Temple was 128 feet long by 88 feet wide and 65 feet high in the clear. The top of the spire was 165 feet above the ground and bore the figure of a flying herald sounding a trumpet. The plan of construction was that of a solid and stable fourwalled building, two and a half stories high, with a hexagonal tower at the front rising in four terraces and a dome. It was constructed of a light-gray limestone, of a hardness that permitted it to be easily tooled and adapted to ornamental finish.

On the outside were thirty pilasters, nine on each side and six at each end. At its base each pilaster presented in hewn relief the crescent moon, and ended above in a capital of cut-stone depicting the face of the sun allegorically featured, with a pair of hands holding horns. Above the capitals was a frieze or cornice in which appeared thirty star stones. Further details of construction are incorporated in the other articles in this Chapter.

The architecture of the Temple was revealed of God to Joseph as will be noted in the revelation that is herein printed. On pages 196-7 of the Documentary History of the Church, Vol. 6, is the following interesting item:

"In the afternoon, Elder William Weeks (whom I had employed as architect of the Temple), came in for instruction. I instructed him in relation to the circular windows designed to light the offices in the dead work of the arch between stories. He said that round windows in the broad side of a building were a violation of all the known rules of architecture, and contended that they should be semi-circular — the building was too low for round windows. I told him I would have the circles, if he had to make the Temple ten feet higher than it was originally calculated; that one light at the center of each circular window would be sufficient to light the whole room; that when the whole building was thus illuminated, the effect would be remarkably grand. I wish you to carry out my designs. I have seen in vision the splendid appearance of that building illuminated, and will have it built according to the pattern shown me."

The Temple Similar to Ancient Construction

(Letter written by W. W. Phelps to William Smith, dated Nauvoo, Ill. December 25, 1844.)

"The Temple is up as high as the caps of the pilasters, and it looks majestically, and especially to me, when I know that the tithing, `the mites of the poor,' thus speaks of the glory of God. All the description that is necessary to give you now, is that this splendid model of Mormon grandeur, exhibits thirty hewn stone pilasters which cost about $3,000 apiece. The base is a crescent new moon; the capitols, near fifty feet high, the sun, with a human face in bold relief, about two and a half feet broad, ornamented with rays of light and waves, surmounted by two hands holding two trumpets. It is always too much trouble to describe an unfinished building. The inside work is now going forward as fast as possible. When the whole structure is completed it will cost some five or six hundred thousand dollars; and as Captain Brown of Tobasco, near the ruins of Palenque, said: `It will look the nearest like the splendid remains of antiquity in Central America of anything I have seen, though not half as large.'

"The Temple is erected from white limestone, wrought in a superior style: is 128 by 83 feet square; near 60 feet high; two stories in the clear, and two half stories in the recesses over the arches; four tiers of windows; two gothic and two round. The two great stories will each have two pulpits, one at each end; to accommodate the Melchizedek and Aaronic priesthoods; graded into four rising seats; the first for the presidents of the elders, and his two counselors; the second for the president of the high priesthood and his two counselors, the third for the Melchizedek president and his two counselors, and the fourth for the president over the whole church (the first president) and his two counselors. The highest seat is where the scribes and Pharisees used to crowd in `to Moses' seat.' The Aaronic pulpit at the other end the same.

"The font in the basement story is for the baptism of the living, for health, for remission of sin, and for the salvation of the dead, as was the case in Solomon's temple, and all temples that God commands to be built.* * *

"The steeple of our temple will be high enough to answer for a tower—between 100 and 200 feet high."

Times and Seasons, Vol. 5, p. 759.

NAUVOO TEMPLE Cornerstones laid on April 6, 1841. Temple dedicated on May 1, 1846, by Elders Orson Hyde and Wilford Woodruff.

The Nauvoo Temple

By Orson F. Whitney

On the 19th of January, 1841, came a revelation urging upon the Saints the imperative necessity for the erection of a Temple at Nauvoo. In that revelation the Lord says: "For a baptismal there is not upon the earth, that they, my saints, may be baptized for those who are dead." (D&C 124:29.) The Temple at Kirtland, Ohio, which was built several years before the date of this revelation, had no baptismal font, the time not having then arrived for this kind of work to begin. It was in the Kirtland Temple, however, that the keys of Elijah were restored, by virtue of which the work for the dead was afterwards inaugurated.

River Baptisms: When the revelation of January 19th was given, baptisms for the dead were being performed in the Mississippi River, the Lord permitting it for a season, with the understanding that after the Saints had had sufficient time to build a Temple and place a baptismal font therein, the river baptisms should be discontinued.

The cornerstones of the Nauvoo Temple were laid on the 6th of April, 1841, and in the ensuing October the building was so far advanced that it could be used for baptismal purposes; a font having been put in the basement, and the incomplete structure boarded over.fn This signalized the discontinuance of the river baptisms.

First Baptisms in the Temple: A month later, or on the 8th of November, Brigham Young, who was then president of the Twelve Apostles, dedicated the baptismal font, and on the 21st of that month, the first baptisms for the dead were performed in the Nauvoo Temple. This labor went on there as long as the Saints remainded in Illinois, and it has been continued in all the Temples since erected by them. Improvement Era, Vol. 28:191-2.

View showing the well which supplied the baptismal font. This well was in the basement of the Nauvoo Temple. To the left, Pres. David O. McKay; to the right, Elder George D. Pyper.

First Meeting in the Temple

On Sunday, the 5th day of October (1845), through the indefatigable exertions, unceasing industry, and heaven blessed labors, in the midst of trials, tribulations, poverty, and worldly obstacles, solemnized, in some instances, by death, about five thousand Saints had the inexpressible joy and great gratification to meet for the first time in the House of the Lord in the city of Joseph. From mites and tithing, millions had risen up to the glory of God, as a Temple where the children of the last kingdom could come together and praise the Lord.

It certainly afforded a holy satisfaction to think that since the 6th day of April, 1841, when the first stone was laid, amidst the most straitened circumstances, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had witnessed their bread cast upon waters, or more properly, their obedience to the commandments of the Lord, appear in the tangible form of a Temple, entirely enclosed, windows in, with temporary floors, pulpits, and seats to accommodate so many persons, preparatory to a General Conference; no General Conference having been held for three years past, according to the declaration of our martyred Prophet:

"There shall be no more baptisms for the dead, until the ordinance can be attended to in the font of the Lord's House; and the church shall not hold another general conference, until they can meet in said house. For thus saith the Lord."

Brigham Young opened the services of the day in a dedicatory prayer, presenting the Temple, thus far completed, as a

Certificate belonging to Elder George B. Gardner, of Woodruff, Arizona.

monument to the Saints' liberality, fidelity, and faith—concluding: "Lord, we dedicate this house, and ourselves unto Thee." The day was occupied most agreeably in hearing instructions and teachings, and offering up the gratitude of honest hearts, for so great a privilege as worshipping God, within instead of without an edifice, whose beauty and workmanship will compare with any house of worship in America, and whose motto is "HOLINESS TO THE LORD." Times and Seasons, Vol. 6, pp. 1017-8.

The Capstone of the Temple Laid

After a little more than four years of hard labor, in truly troublesome times, and not, too, without the loss of the best blood in the Church, on the morning of the 24th ult., at a little past 6, a goodly number of Saints had the honor and glory to witness the capstone of the Temple laid in its place. The morning was cool, clear, and beautiful; the Saints felt glorious, the band upon the top of the walls played charmingly, and when the stone was placed there and a united Hosanna to God and the Lamb, amen and amen" shouted three times, which not only gave joy on earth, but filled the heavens with gladness!

The Twelve and other authorities of the Church were present to witness and conduct this interesting scene. Like the event when God finished His work and rested (so said President Young), as it was the seventh day of the week the Saints might do the same.

A new hymn was sung, and as the prophets have written for our instruction, so the "headstone" was brought forward with shouting—grace, grace unto it; and may the God of Israel, with His Almighty power, grant that the Saints may have peace to obtain their endowment therein. Amen.

Times and Seasons, Vol. 6, p. 926.

Manifestations of Divine Acceptance

The Lord gave a commandment that a Temple should be built to His name. It seemed almost impossible for so poor a people to build such a temple in their poverty, but the Lord never requires more of men than they can perform if they will go to with their might and trust in Him. * * * At the conference on the 6th of April, I witnessed the laying of the cornerstones of the Temple which was done according to the order of the Priesthood. An immense crowd of people were present on that occasion—all filled with joy and rejoicing.* * * The Temple progressed with the Saints that could work at it steady. The Prophet Joseph worked with his own hands, quarrying the stone for its walls when his enemies were not pursuing him. No man knows what he suffered through persecution.

Joseph Smith did more for the salvation of the human family in the short time that he lived than any other man that ever lived in the world, Jesus Christ excepted. He lived to be 39 years old and endured a continued scene of persecution and oppression from the time that the Angel of the Lord appeared to him, until the time of his death. He bore testimony to the work of the Lord through life and sealed his testimony with his own blood. I have been with the Prophet Joseph and heard his instruction weekly and sometimes daily. The last time I heard him speak in public he spoke to the Legion (Nauvoo Legion). After telling what he had passed through and what he had suffered from men because he preached the Gospel of Jesus Christ, he said: "From my boyhood up to the present time I have been hunted like a roe upon the mountains. I have never been allowed to live like other men. I have been driven, chased, stoned, whipped, robbed, mobbed, imprisoned, persecuted, accused falsely of everything bad. I have suffered till the Lord knows I have suffered enough."* * *

The teaching of the Twelve was to build the Temple and finish the work that Joseph had begun. The people were obedient to counsel and exerted themselves to do all they could do to accomplish the work. * * * Our enemies were not satisfied with what they had done, so they continued their depredations. In the small settlements in the country the mobs collected, drove our brethren from their homes, burned their houses and grain and killed some who could not get out of the way. In the fall, the mob collected in the south part of the country and in about two weeks they burned 200 houses to ashes. The inhabitants had to flee to Nauvoo to save their lives. A great amount of grain and property was destroyed, cattle and hogs were stolen and killed almost without number. Old Father Durfee was shot and killed by the mob while he was trying to save his property from the flames. Many others died from exposure after being robbed and driven into the wood. Their sufferings were so great that they could not endure it.

The Saints gathered into Nauvoo, labored and toiled to finish the Temple. Our enemies at the same time were planning to drive us from our city and from the United States. In the fall the Temple was dedicated to the Lord, thus far completed. Prayer pronounced by President B. Young. The building was finished with the exception of a little inside work which was done during the winter.

Most of the Saints, men and women, had the privilege of receiving their endowments, learning the order of the Priesthood, the fall and redemption of man, in the Temple, in the city of Joseph . Nauvoo was called by that name after the death of Joseph. I think it was in the month of January that I and my brother, Charles, received our endowments. The building was filled up in the nicest style. It was built according to the pattern that the Lord gave to Joseph. It was accepted of the Lord, and His holy angels have ministered unto many therein and now because of persecution we must leave it and in leaving it we leave a monument of our industry which was reared in our poverty. It was the finest building in all the western country.

At the west end about one hundred feet from the ground was the following inscription in large gold letters:

THE HOUSE OF THE LORD, BUILT BY THE CHURCH

OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS

COMMENCED APRIL 6TH, 1841.

HOLINESS TO THE LORD

At the east end of the House, inside, was arched the following sentence:

"THE LORD HAS BEHELD OUR SACRIFICE, COME AFTER US"

From the Diary of John Pulsipher.

Lucifer As An Employer of Mechanics

So many of the mechanics quit work from sheer necessity and went elsewhere to seek employment that the question of how and when the Temple was ever to be completed became more of a problem every day.

Charles Lambert and one of his fellow mechanics (W. W. Player), who also was an Englishman, and a man of faith, discussed this problem between themselves, and voluntarily pledged themselves to continue at work until the Temple was built whether they were paid for their services or not. It is one thing, however, for a man to deny himself and quite another to deny a dependent wife and children the comforts or necessities of life.

Charles Lambert had married during the first year of his residence in Nauvoo and undertaken the support of two brothers and a sister of his wife, who had recently been orphaned and were helpless. He felt keenly his responsibility, and wished for money as he never had done before. While feeling thus he was passing along the street in Nauvoo one day when he met a well-dressed, genteel stranger who inquired if his name was Charles Lambert. On being told that it was, he said his name was Higgins, and that his home was in Missouri. With an ingratiating smile, he said, `I have heard of your skill as a workman, and want you to go to Missouri and work for me. You are not appreciated or properly paid here. If you will quit the Temple and go and work for me you can name your own price and you will be sure of your pay. You see I have plenty of money with which to pay you.' Suiting the action to the word he thrust his hand into his pocket, and drew it out full of $10.00 and $20.00 gold pieces, which he displayed in a tempting manner, and urged him to accept his offer and not to submit any longer to the unfair treatment accorded him at the Temple. With a gesture of impatience called forth by the intimation of unfairness, Father Lambert thanked the stranger for his offer, but said he couldn't think of accepting it. He said he had no complaint to make of his treatment at the Temple, and the price others would pay for work they wished done would not influence him in the matter, as he intended to continue on at the Temple from principle. Bidding the stranger `good-day' he turned to continue his walk along the street, but almost immediately the query arose in his mind as to how the stranger knew his name, and where he got his information from about his skill as a mechanic, and turned to take a final look at the stranger, when lo! he was nowhere to be seen. He had disappeared as completely as if the ground had opened and swallowed him, and yet he had not had time by any ordinary means of locomotion to get out of sight. His opinion was, and remained so up to the day of his death, that he had been talking with no other than Satan, the prince of tempters, and though he had not yielded to his tempting offer he was vexed with himself for listening to him at all, and especially to his insinuations about the Temple management. Gems of Reminiscence, Seventeenth Book of Faith Promoting Series, pp. 173-5.

Nauvoo Tribulations

By President Brigham Young

But what of the Temple in Nauvoo? By the aid of sword in one hand, and trowel and hammer in the other, with firearms at hand, and a strong band of police, and the blessing of heaven, the Saints, through hunger, and thirst, and weariness, and watchings, and prayings, so far completed the Temple, despite the devices of the mob, that many received a small portion of their endowment, but we know of no one who received it in its fulness. And then, to save the lives of all the Saints from cruel murder, we moved westward, and being led by the all-searching eye of the Great Jehovah, we arrived at this place.

"Of our journey hither, we need say nothing, only God led us. Of the sufferings of those who were compelled to, and did, leave Nauvoo in the winter of 1846, we need say nothing. Those who experienced it know it, and those who did not, to tell them of it would be like exhibiting a beautiful painting to a blind man. Journal of Discourses, Vol. 2, p. 32.

Have You Such Faith, Latter-day Saints?

By President Brigham Young

Every time we put forth our ability to do good and build up the Kingdom of God according to the means the Lord bestows upon us, our means and ability will be doubled and trebled; yes, we shall receive ten-fold, and, as Joseph said, an hundred-fold. Have we witness of this? Yes, plenty of witnesses. I will mention one little circumstance. When we were finishing the Temple in Nauvoo, the last year of our stay there, I rented a portion of ground in what was called the church farm, which we afterwards deeded to Sister Emma. Brother George D. Grant worked for me then, and planted the corn, sowed the oats, and said this, that and the other must be attended to. They called for teams to haul for the Temple, and could not get them. Says I, put my teams on the Temple, if there is not a kernel of grain raised. I said I would trust in God for the increase, and I had as good corn as there was on the farm, though it was not touched from the time we put it in to the time of gathering. I proved the fact; I had faith.

The poor miserable apostatesfn there prophesied, and the gentiles prophesied, and all creation of wickedness seem to agree that the Temple should not be finished; and I said that it should, and the house of Israel said that it should,fn and the angels of God said—"we will help you." Many of you rememberfn my setting my foot on the capstone and addressing the people. We completed the Temple, used it a short time, and were done with it. On the 5th and 6th of February, 1846, we committed the building into the hands of the Lord, and left it; and when we heard that it was burned, we were glad of it.

The Deseret News, Vol. 2, March 13, 1861.

Who But Saints Could Endure This?

That foundation stone was laid (at Far West) and the Saints, as I said, fled into Illinois,fn and there laid the foundation of a Temple at Nauvoo, Illinois, the finest building then in the western country, and the admiration of everybody. The Saints erected it in the midst of poverty, destitution, sickness, death, and, I may say, with the sword or rifle in one hand and the trowel in the other, their enemies surrounding them on every hand. They had slain Joseph and Hyrum, and attempted to destroy others of the servants of God, and they were continually burning and destroying the houses and property of the Saints, and were determined to expel them from the State. But in the midst of these tribulations the Saints continued their labors until that Temple was roofed in, and until within its walls they could attend to the ordinances for the living and the dead.

By George Q. Cannon. Journal of Discourses, Vol. 14:320.

Great Spiritual Heights Obtainable

By Brigham Young

The Lord has led this people all the while in this way, by giving them here a little and there a little; thus He increases their wisdom, and he that receives a little and is thankful for that shall receive more and more, and more, even to the fullness of the eternal Godhead; there is no stopping place, but the weak capacity of man cannot understand it unless the Spirit of the Eternal God is in their hearts, and then they can comprehend but a little of it. In this is the glory, power, and excellency of the gospel of the Son of God to poor, weak, finite man. Look, O ye Latter-day Saints, at the nations of the earth, Christendom, look at them; but look at ourselves (although we have received a great deal, yet who are there here that have seen Jesus Christ, that have beheld angels, that have conversed with the spirits of just men made perfect, and the assembly of the church of Enoch and with God, the judge of all? Who is there here that has been caught up to the third heavens and gazed upon the order and glory of the celestial world? Don't you see, brethren, we have yet a great deal to learn, but it is not our privilege to be filled with all the fullness of Godliness? When you receive all that is for you, you will say, O, the blindness of Christendom! O, the ignorance of the world; even the Latter-day Saints that have assembled themselves together at the April conference in the year eighteen hundred and forty-five, will say, what am I?* * *

And I would say, as no man can be perfect without the woman, so no woman can be perfect without a man to lead her. I tell you the truth as it is in the bosom of eternity; and I say so to every man upon the face of the earth; if he wishes to be saved he cannot be saved without a woman by his side.

Remarks delivered in Temple, April 6, 1845. Times and Seasons, Vol. 6:954-5.

The Mormons

(A lecture delivered before the Historical Society of Pennsylvania, March 26, 1850.) By Thomas L. Kane

A few years ago, ascending the Upper Mississippi in the autumn, when its waters were low, I was compelled to travel by land past the region of the Rapids. My road lay through the half-breed tract, a fine section of lowa, which the unsettled state of its land-titles had appropriated as a sanctuary for coiners, horse thieves, and other outlaws. I had left my steamer at Keokuk, at the foot of the Lower Falls, to hire a carriage, and to contend for some fragments of a dirty meal with the swarming flies, the only scavengers of the locality. From this place to where the deep water of the river returns, my eye wearied to see everywhere sordid, vagabond and idle settlers, and a country marred without being improved, by their careless hands.

I was descending the last hillside upon my journey, when a landscape in delightful contrast broke upon my view. Half encircled by a bend of the river, a beautiful city lay glittering in the fresh morning sun, its bright new dwellings, set in cool green gardens ranging up around a stately dome-shaped hill, which was crowned by a noble marble edifice, whose high tapering spire was radiant with white and gold. The city appeared to cover several miles, and beyond it in the background, there rolled off a fair country, chequered by the careful lines of fruitful husbandry. The unmistakable marks of industry, enterprise, and educated wealth, everywhere, made the scene one of singular and most striking beauty.

It was a natural impulse to visit this inviting region. I procured a skiff, and rowing across the river, landed at the chief wharf of the city. No one met me there. I looked and saw no one. I could hear no one move; though the quiet everywhere was such that I heard the flies buzz, and the water ripples break against the shallow of the beach. I walked through the solitary streets. The town lay as in a dream, under some deadening spell of loneliness, from which I almost feared to wake it. For plainly it had not slept long. There was no grass growing up in the paved ways. Rains had not entirely washed away the prints of dusty footsteps.

Yet I went about unchecked. I went into empty workshops, ropewalks, and smithies. The spinner's wheel was idle; the carpenter had gone from his workbench and shavings, his unfinished sash and casing. Fresh bark was in the tanner's vat, and the fresh-chopped lightwood stood piled aginst the baker's oven. The blacksmith's shop was cold; but his coal heap, and ladling pool, and crooked water horn were all there, as if he had just gone off for a holiday. No work people anywhere looked to know my errand. If I went into the gardens, clinking the wicketlatch loudly after me, to pull the marigolds, heart's-ease, and lady-slippers, and draw a drink with the water-sodden well-bucket and its noisy chain; or, knocking off with my stick the tall heavy-headed dahlias and sunflowers, hunted over the beds for cucumbers and love-apples no one called out to me from any opened windows, or dog sprang forward to bark and alarm. I could have supposed the people hidden in the houses, but the doors were unfastened, and when at last I timidly entered them, I found dead ashes white upon the hearths, and had to tread a tiptoe, as if walking down the aisle of a country church to avoid rousing irreverent echoes from the naked floors.

On the outskirts of the town was the city graveyard. But there was no record of plague there, nor did it in anywise differ much from other Protestant American cemeteries. Some of the mounds were not long sodded; some of the stones were newly set, their dates recent, and their black inscriptions glossy in the mason's hardly-dried lettering ink. Beyond the graveyard, out in the fields, I saw, in one spot hard by where the fruited boughs of a young orchard had been roughly torn down, the still smouldering embers of a barbecue fire, that had been constructed of rails from the fencing round it. It was the latest sign of life there. Fields upon fields of heavy-headed yellow grain lay rotting ungathered upon the ground. No one was at hand to take in their rich harvest. As far as the eye could reach, they stretched away—they, sleeping too, in the hazy air of autumn.

Only two portions of the city seemed to suggest the import of this mysterious solitude. On the southern suburb, the houses looking out upon the country showed, by their splintered wood-work and walls battered to the foundation, that they had lately been the mark of a destructive cannonade. And in and around the splendid Temple, which had been the chief object of my admiration, armed men were barracked, surrounded by their stacks of musketry, and pieces of heavy ordnance. These challenged me to render an account of myself, and why I had had the temerity to cross the water without a written permit from a leader of their band.

Though these men were generally more or less under the influence of ardent spirits; after I had explained myself as passing stranger, they seemed anxious to gain my good opinion. They told me the story of the Dead City; that it had been a notable manufacturing and commercial mart, sheltering over 20,000 persons; that they had waged war with its inhabitants for several years, and had been finally successful only a few days before my visit, in an action fought in front of the ruined suburb; after which, they had driven them forth at the point of the sword. The defense, they said, had been obstinate, but gave way on the third day's bombardment. They boasted greatly of their prowess, especially in this battle, as they called it; but I discovered they were not of one mind as to certain of the exploits that had distinguished it; one of which as I remember, was, that they had slain a father and his son, a boy of fifteen, not long resident of the fated city, whom they admitted to have borne a character without reproach.

They also conducted me inside the massive sculptured walls of the curious Temple, in which they said the banished inhabitants were accustomed to celebrate the mystic rites of an unhallowed worship. They particularly pointed out to me certain features of the building, which, having been the peculiar objects of a former superstitious regard, they had as a matter of duty, sedulously defiled and defaced. The reputed sites of certain shrines they had thus particularly noticed, and various sheltered chambers, in one of which was a deep well, constructed they believed with a dreadful design. Beside these they led me to see a large and deep-chiseled marble vase or basin, supported upon twelve oxen, also of marble, and of the size of life, of which they told some romantic stories. They said, the deluded persons, most of whom were immigrants from a great distance, believed their Deity countenanced their reception here of a baptism of regeneration, as proxies for whomsoever they held in warm affection in the countries from which they had come. That here parents "went into the water" for their lost children, children for their parents, widows for their spouses, and young persons for their lovers. That thus the Great Vase came to be for them associated with all dear and distant memories, and was therefore the object, of all others in the building, to which they attached the greatest degree of idolatrous affection. On this account the victors had so diligently desecrated it, as to render the apartment in which it was contained too noisome to abide in.

They permitted me also to ascend into the steeple, to see where it had been lightning-struck on the Sabbath before; and to look out, East and South, on wasted farms like those I had seen near the city, extending till they were lost in the distance. Here, in the face of pure day, close to the scar of the Divine wrath left by the thunderbolt were fragments of food, cruises of liquor, and broken drinking vessels, with a bass drum and a steamboat signal bell of which I afterwards learned the use with pain.

It was after nightfall when I was ready to cross the river on my return. The wind had freshened since the sunset; and the water beating roughly into my little boat, I headed higher up the stream than the point I had left in the morning, and landed where a faint glimmering light invited me to steer.

Here among the dock and rushes, sheltered only by the darkness, without a roof between them and the sky, I came upon a crowd of several hundred human creatures whom my movements roused from uneasy slumber upon the ground. * * *

Dreadful indeed was the suffering of these forsaken beings. Cowed and cramped by cold and sunburn alternating as each weary day and night dragged on, they were almost all of them, the crippled victims of disease. They were there because they had no homes nor hospital, nor poorhouse, nor friends to offer them any. They could not satisfy the feeble cravings of their sick; they had not bread to quiet the fractious hunger-cries of their children. Mothers and babes, daughters and grandparents, all of them alike, were bivouacked in tatters, wanting even covering to comfort those whom the sick-shiver of fever was searching to the marrow.

These were Mormons famishing in Lee County, Iowa, in the fourth week of the month of September, in the year of our Lord, 1846. The city—it was Nauvoo, Illinois. The Mormons were the owners of that city and the smiling country around. And those who had stopped their ploughs, who had silenced their hammers, their axes, their shuttles and their workshop wheels; those who had put out their fires, who had eaten their food, spoiled their orchards, and trampled underfoot their thousands of acres of unharvested bread; these—were the keepers of their dwellings, the carousers in their temple—whose drunken riot insulted the ears of their dying.

I think it was as I turned from the wretched night-watch of which I have spoken, that I first listened to the sounds of revel of a party of the guard within the city. Above the distant hum of voices of many, occasionally rose distinct the loud oath-tainted exclamation, and the falsely intonated scrap of vulgar song; but lest this requiem should go unheeded, every now and then, when their boisterous orgies strove to attain a sort of ecstatic climax, a cruel spirit of insulating frolic carried some of them into the high belfry of the Temple steeple, and there with the wicked childishness of inebriety, they whooped and shrieked, and beat the drum that I had seen, and rang in charivaric unison their loud-tongued, steamboat bell.

They were, all told, not more than six hundred and forty persons who were thus lying on the river flats. But the Mormons in Nauvoo and its dependencies had been numbered the year before at over 20,000. Where were they? They had last been seen carrying in mournful trains their sick and wounded, halt and blind, to disappear behind the western horizon, pursuing the phantom of another home. Hardly anything else was known of them; and people asked with curiosity, what had been their fate—what their fortunes. Millennial Star, Vol. 13, pp. 113-116.

Fruits of Mobocracy

It was a sorry sight that met our youthful gaze the evening following the visit to the abandoned and dismantled Mormon Temple in September, 1846. Between two hundred and three hundred Mormons, men, women and children, driven out of Nauvoo the day before, were encamped in an open space a little above Montrose. Unquestioned we wandered among the tents and witnessed the sorrow that brooded over the households there assembled. Scattered about were numerous adjuncts of refined and comfortable living, elegant furniture, paintings, here and there a piano or a harp, finely upholstered sofas and chairs and many tasteful and convenient things which well-to-do persons would surround themselves with in well-ordered homes. There was a mingling of all ages, from the gray haired sire and matron to the babe in arms. And there were some sick; and an air of desolation and bereavement overshadowed all, that left its impression upon our minds as one of the most pitiful sights, short of the carnage of a battlefield, that one ever beheld. When we left the scene near midnight repose was gathering over the weird scene, broken only by prayers that were being offered in the tents—prayers for safety and deliverance—prayers for their persecutors.

By J. D. Miller, who was one of those marshalled into the militia by Governor Ford of Illinois to "protect" the Saints against the mob at Nauvoo. Contributor, Vol. 11:78.

The Twelve Impart Counsel Filled with Benevolence

Let it not be supposed that the sick and destitute are to be denied the blessings of the Lord's House; God forbid; His eye is ever over them for good. He that hath not, and cannot obtain, but saith in his heart, if I had, I would give freely, is accepted as freely as he that gives of his abundance. The Temple is to be built by tithing and consecration, and everyone is at liberty to consecrate all they find in their hearts so to do; but the tithing required, is one-tenth of all anyone possessed at the commencement of the building, and one-tenth part of all his increase from that time until the completion of the same, whether it be money, or whatever he may be blessed with. Many in this place are laboring every tenth day for the house, and this is their tithing of their income, for they have nothing else; others would labor the same, but they are sick, therefore, excusable; when they get well, let them begin; while there are others who appear to think their own business of more importance than the Lord's. Of such we would ask, who gave you your time, health, strength, and put you into business? And will you not begin quickly to return with usury that which you have received? Our God will not wait always. D. H. C., Vol. 4:473-4.

The Poverty of the Saints in Nauvoo

By Daniel Tyler

The Saints then were more numerous (in Nauvoo) than when commanded to build the Kirtland temple, but even then it was difficult for many of the people to subsist. They had been robbed of all their property, in Missouri, only two years previous, and after settling at Nauvoo (then called Commerce), with its swamps and sloughs, they had endured much sickness, such as ague, chills and fever. The swamps, however, were finally drained and the place became more healthful.

Provisions were cheap, corn being only twenty-five cents per bushel; but the trouble was to get the twenty-five cents. Wheat was about thirty to fifty cents, but where was the money? It seemed almost impossible to get either provisions or clothing. There was no grain market, even at the low prices. Thousands of bushels of corn were taken to New Orleans in flat boats, a distance of nearly two thousand miles, and sold at such a low figure, as to scarcely pay for the trouble of shipping it.

The few who had money (if there were any such), could live on "hog and hominy" without much expense; but, as a whole, the Church was very poor. Indeed, such was the condition of the people, that many aged and infirm sisters who needed a little tea, sugar or coffee, might be seen at the counter of the store, calling for one cent's worth of either or all of said articles.

A neighbor of mine speaks of seeing a farmer with a large pontoon wagon, containing forty bushels of unshelled corn, which he wanted to trade for a pair of boots, worth four dollars, but none of the merchants were buying corn, nor had any of the poor Saints four dollars to buy the load, so he had to haul it home again, a distance of twenty or thirty miles.

The poor who were in health, when they could find labor, worked for something to eat. There was, however, but little call for labor, compared with the influx of immigration. Those having a little means, of course, had to build, and some employment was thereby created for a few mechanics and laborers. The prophet counseled the brethren to do all they could in those severe times, for the poor; and the Bishops called on the merchants and others having means, to lend a helping hand. But these necessary calls came so often, that some of the merchants refused aid.

Juvenile Instructor, Vol. 15.

New Altar Dedicated in Nauvoo Temple

This afternoon the new altar was used for the first time, and four individuals and their wives were sealed. The altar is about two and one-half feet high, two and one-half feet long and about one foot wide, rising from a platform about eight or nine inches high and extending out on all sides about a foot, forming a convenient place to kneel upon. The top of the altar and the platform for kneeling upon are covered with cushions of scarlet damask cloth; the sides of the upright part or body of the altar are covered with white linen. The Twelve and the Presiding Bishops with their wives were present at the dedication of the altar this afternoon. Journal History, January 7, 1845.

The Sealing Power in the Priesthood

By Joseph the Prophet

(Sunday, January 21, 1844, Nauvoo: Preached at the southeast corner of the Temple to several thousand people, although the weather was somewhat unpleasant. My subject was the sealing of the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers.)

What shall I talk about today, I know what Brother Cahoon wants me to speak about. He wants me to speak about the coming of Elijah in the last days. I can see it in his eye. I will speak upon that subject then.

The Bible says, "I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; and he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse."

Now, the word turn here should be translated bind, or seal. But what is the object of this important mission, or how is it to be fulfilled? The keys are to be delivered, the spirit of Elijah is to come, the Gospel to be established, the Saints of God gathered, Zion built up, and the Saints to come up as saviors on Mount Zion.

But how are they to become saviors on Mount Zion? By building their Temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth and receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of glory with them, and herein is the chain that binds the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, which fulfills the mission of Elijah. And I would to God that this Temple was done now, that we might go into it, and go to work and improve our time, and make use of the seals while they are on earth.

The Saints have not too much time to save and redeem their dead, and gather together their living relatives, that they may be saved also, before the earth will be smitten, and the consumption decreed falls upon the world.

I would advise all the Saints to go with their might and gather together all their living relatives to this place, that they may be sealed and saved, that they may be prepared against the day that the destroying angel goes forth; and if the whole Church should go to with all their might to save their dead, seal their posterity, and gather their living friends, and spend none of their time in behalf of the world, they would hardly get through before night would come, when no man can work; and my only trouble at the present time is concerning ourselves, that the Saints will be divided, broken up, and scattered, before we get our salvation secure; for there are so many fools in the world for the devil to operate upon, it gives him the advantage often-times.

The question is frequently asked, "Can we not be saved without going through with all those ordinances, etc?" I would answer, No, not the fullness of salvation. Jesus said, "There are many mansions in my Father's house, and I will go and prepare a place for you." House here named should have been translated kingdom; and any person who is exalted to the highest mansion has to abide a celestial law, and the whole law too. (Excerpts.) D. H. C., Vol. 6:183-4.

The True Order of Dedicating Temples

If the strict order of the Priesthood were carried out in the building of Temples, the first stone will be laid at the southeast corner, by the First Presidency of the Church. The southwest corner should be laid next. The third, or northwest corner next; and the fourth or northeast corner the last.

The First Presidency should lay the southeast cornerstone, and dictate who are the proper persons to lay the other corner-stones.

If a Temple is built at a distance, and the First Presidency are not present, then the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles are the proper persons to dictate the order for that Temple; and in the absence of the Twelve Apostles, then the presidency of the stake will lay the southeast cornerstone. The Melchizedek Priesthood laying the cornerstones on the east side of the temple, and the Lesser Priesthood those on the west side.

Rise and Fall of Nauvoo, by B. H. Roberts, pp 95-6.

(See Addenda "C" for confession of Joseph Agnew, "Burning of Nauvoo Temple.")

Baptism for the Dead Performed in the Mississippi River

(Excerpt from Sermon delivered at the General Conference, April 6, 1891.) By Pres. Wilford Woodruff

Joseph Smith himself (many of you may recollect the time) went into the Mississippi River one Sunday night after meeting, and baptized a hundred. I baptized another hundred. The next man, a few rods from me, baptized another hundred. We were strung up and down the Mississippi, baptizing for our dead. But there was no recorder, we attended to this ordinance without waiting to have a proper record made. But the Lord told Joseph that he must have recorders present at these baptisms—men who could see with their eyes and hear with their ears, and record these things. Of course, we had to do the work over again. Nevertheless, that does not say the work was not of God.

The Deseret Weekly, Vol. 42:554, April 25, 1891.

Robert Horne Witnessed Baptisms Performed in the Mississippi River

At one time I brought with me some boxes of glass that had been given me by a brother in the Philadelphia branch for Brother Joseph. At Alton I got a man named Dan Janes to take them up to Nauvoo on his boat, which he promised to do after much questioning. Some time afterwards I saw the Elders baptizing for the dead in the Mississippi River. This was something new to me, and the beauty of this great principle dawned upon me. I had never heard of such a doctrine then. Orson Pratt was baptizing. Brother Joseph stood on the banks holding a child in his arms. He was tall and stately and looked so grand, and he seemed clothed with such majesty that I had not the impudence to speak to him and ask if he had received those boxes of glass.

Millennial Star, 55:584.

The above picture is that of two Mormon Elders (Herbert Halls and Albert J. Jex) near one of the twenty-four sun stones constructed for the Nauvoo Temple, each of which cost $300.

In a reply letter to N. B. Lundwall (dated April 11, 1960, from Quincy, Ill.), from Mr. George Irwin, President of the Historical Society of Quincy and Adams County, Mr. Irwin states:

"We cannot tell you how much the stone weighs as we have no record of this. The stone is 54" high and the top measures 72" wide and 19" deep. It slopes inward to a bottom measurement of 54" wide and 8" deep. You might be interested to know that the stone face itself is 27" high and 32" wide.

"There is another of these stones in the State Park at Nauvoo, Illinois, and we understand that there is one in the Smithsonian Institution. These are the only ones known still in existence. Our sun stone has been in our possession for some years, having come to us through a prominent resident of Nauvoo. We also have a few other pieces of stone from the Temple and a complete set of copper keys to the various Temple rooms, which came to us from men to whom they were entrusted by the Mormons."

1 The Construction of the Baptismal Font. The font was constructed of pine timber, and put together of staves tongued and grooved, oval shaped, sixteen feet long east and west, and twelve feet wide, seven feet high from the foundation, the basin four feet deep; the moulding of the cap or base was formed of beautiful carved wood in antique style, and the sides were finished with panel work. There were steps leading up and down into the basin in the north and south sides, guarded by side railings. The font stood upon twelve oxen, four on each side and two at each end, their heads, shoulders and forelegs projecting out from under the font. They were carved out of pine plank, glued together, and copied after the most beautiful five-year-old steer that could be found in the country.* * * The oxen and ornamental mouldings of the font were carved by Elder Elijah Fordham, from New York.* * * The font was inclosed by a temporary frame building, sided up with split oak clap-boards, with a roof of the same material, but was so low that the timbers of the first story of the temple were laid above it. The water was supplied from a well thirty feet deep in the east end of the basement. This font was built for the baptism for the dead until the temple could be completed, when a more durable one was to take its place. Millennial Star, Vol. XVIII:744; D.H.C., Vol. 4:446.

2 Traitors Will Return Like Prodigal Sons. While we were building the Temple, in Kirtland, we were poor, and in worse circumstances than we are now, or ever will be; for at that time we were persecuted and were under the necessity of lying upon the floor with our firelocks by our sides to sustain ourselves, as there were mobs gathering all around us to destroy us, and prevent us from building the Temple. And when they were driven, every man that was in the church, arose, and we took our firelocks, to reinstate our brethren, and in the night we laid upon the floor; we laid upon Brother Joseph's floor, and upon Sidney Rigdon's floor, so as to be ready to keep our enemies at bay; and we laid on Sidney Rigdon's floor many a night to save his life, and to save the lives of his family; and he is now exerting every effort to take away our lives; but he will see the day when he will be glad to come into the cellar kitchen and become a cook, and to black the boots and shoes of the servants of God; and it will be the case with thousands of others. They will be glad to black our boots and to lick the dust that is under our feet, and this is nothing to what will come to pass. I might stand here all day, and tell you things of the future, and you would not believe the half of it.

Remarks of Heber C. Kimball, City of Joseph, April 8, 1845.

Times and Seasons, 6:972.

3 Supplications Till Early Morning. God is favoring us day by day; and leading our enemies as a horse is led by the reins. For what purpose? In order that He may carry on His work, and erect that building. I presume that the servants of God, for the sake of having that accomplished, would go into the wilderness in this case and wear sheepskins and goatskins for their apparel; and live upon bread and water, for the sake of having that building built (the Temple) and the Nauvoo House. These are my feelings by night and by day. It is uppermost in my mind, and I know it is with my brethren. You are not aware of the feelings that they have in their bosoms on this account. They meet together and have all the time labored, in the night and in the day; in the night to offer up their prayers before God. Many times we do not go to bed until three o'clock in the morning, calling on the Father in the name of Jesus, to protect us, until that house shall be built; and to lead our enemies away, and turn everything in our favor.

Remarks by Heber C. Kimball, delivered at Nauvoo, June 1, 1845.

Times and Seasons, Vol. 6:987.

4 The Sisters Always Faithful. By the counsel of the Twelve, Mrs. Hyrum Smith and Mrs. Thompson request all those sisters who have received paper to collect the penny subscription, to forward them as soon as possible that they may be able to ascertain whether all those employed as collectors have been faithful; as it appears that there is suspicion resting upon a certain individual of having kept the money which she had collected. They would say for the satisfaction of the sisters that about one thousand dollars have been received, and most of the sisters with whom they have conversed, seemed inclined to continue paying their cent a week until the temple is finished; and money being wanted to purchase other things besides glass and nails, they invite all those who are able and feel so disposed to pay up for the present year; and as there are some poor sisters who are extremely anxious to throw in their mite who cannot possibly raise money, they would say that any kind of useful articles will be received from such.

Mary Smith and Mercy R. Thompson.

Times and Seasons, 6:847.

5 I have often thought of the shortness of the period after the death of Joseph, which was continued in building that house. He died, as you well know, or was murdered, on the 27th of June, 1844. Before 1845 had passed away the Saints were receiving their endowments in that house. The walls were completed, it was roofed, the spire finished, and the upper story so far completed that the Elders could go in and administer in the ordinances of God's house—the sealings, washings and anointings, and in the performance of those ceremonies and ordinances which were necessary for our growth, increase and perfection as a people; and when it is recollected that all this was done in a very short period over one year, it bears testimony to the zeal of the Saints and the mighty exertions they made to fulfill the word of God and the requirements He made of us as a people, that we and our dead might not be rejected. But we were not permitted to enjoy that house, we were not permitted to continue receiving blessings there; the enemies of God's kingdom were upon us, and we were compelled to abandon it and our houses, and it fell a sacrifice to the wickedness of the wicked and it was burned with fire—probably a better fate than to have it stand and be defiled by the wicked. By George Q. Cannon, J. D. 14:124.
