N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter VIII

THE ALBERTA TEMPLE

DEDICATORY PRAYER

By President Heber J. Grant (August 26, 1923)

O God, the Eternal Father, we, Thy servants and handmaidens, thank Thee, in the name of Jesus Christ, Thy well-beloved Son, with all the power of our being, that we are privileged this day to be present in this choice land to dedicate unto Thy most Holy Name, a temple of the Living God.

We thank Thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that Thou and Thy Son, Jesus Christ, did visit the boy, Joseph Smith, Jr., and that he was instructed by Thee, and by Thy Beloved Son.

We thank Thee that Thou didst send Thy servant, John the Baptist, and that he did lay his hands upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and ordain them to the Aaronic, or Lesser Priesthood.

We thank Thee for sending Thy servants Peter, James and John, Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, who ministered with the Savior in the flesh and after His crucifixion, and that they did ordain Thy servants Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, and bestow upon them the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood, by which authority and apostleship we do dedicate unto Thee, this day, this holy edifice.

We thank Thee for the integrity and the devotion of Thy servants, the Prophet and Patriarch, Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith. We thank Thee that they labored in Thy cause all the days of their lives, from the time of restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ until the day of their martyrdom, and that they were faithful even to the sealing of their testimony with their blood.

We thank Thee for Thy servants, Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, and Joseph F. Smith, who have severally stood at the head of Thy Church since the martyrdom of Thy servant Joseph Smith, and who have led and directed Thy people by the inspiration of Thy Holy Spirit, and who have sent forth representatives to proclaim the everlasting gospel in nearly every land and clime.

We thank Thee for all the faithful members of the First Presidency of the Church, and for the Apostles, in this last dispensation; and for each and all of the faithful men who have ministered as general authorities of the Church.

O God, our Eeternal Father, we pray Thee to bless the Presidency of Thy Church—Thy servants, Heber J. Grant, Charles W. Penrose, and Anthony W. Ivins. May these men, O Father, be guided by the unerring counsels of Thy Holy Spirit, day by day. May they be even as a three-fold cord that cannot be broken. May they see eye to eye in all matters for the upbuilding of the Church of Jesus Christ upon the earth.

Bless, O Father, each and all of the Apostles, the Presiding Patriarch, the First Council of the Seventy, and the Presiding Bishopric. We particularly pray for Thy choice blessings to be with President Charles W. Penrose, and Elders Reed Smoot, Orson F. Whitney, and David O. McKay, who are unable to be present on this occasion.

Bless, we beseech Thee, those who preside in all the stakes of Zion, and in all the wards and branches of the Church, and over the various quorums of the Priesthood, whether of the Melchizedek or of the Aaronic Priesthood.

Bless those who preside over the missions of the Church throughout the world, together with all Thy servants and handmaidens who have gone forth to proclaim to the peoples of the world the restoration to the earth of the plan of life and salvation.

Bless those, O Father, who have been called to preside and labor in this temple and also in other temples that have been erected to Thy Holy Name in the land of Zion and in the Hawaiian Islands. We thank Thee for all of the temples that have been erected in this last dispensation, and we pray Thy choice blessings to be and abide with all those who minister therein. We pray that the same sweet spirit which is present in all of the temples that have heretofore been ercted may abide with all those who shall labor in this holy house.

Bless those who preside and who labor in the Church schools which have been established from Canada on the north to Mexico in the south, and in the far off islands of the Pacific Ocean.

Bless, O Father in Heaven, all Thy servants and handmaidens who hold responsible positions in the various auxiliary organizations of Thy Church, whether as general, stake, ward or mission officers; in the Relief Societies, in the Sunday schools, in the Mutual Improvement associations, in the Primary association, and in the Religion Class organizations. Bless each and everyone who is laboring for the benefit of the members as well as the members themselves in these associations.

We thank Thee that Thy servant, President John Taylor, and many other residents of the Dominion of Canada, came to a knowledge of the gospel and remained steadfast to the end of their lives. We thank Thee, our Father, and our God, for those now living, who embraced the gospel in this choice land and others who have emigrated from the United States and other countries to Canada, and that they are now to have the privilege of entering into this holy house and laboring for the salvation of their ancestors.

We thank Thee, O God, for the inspiration by which Thy faithful and diligent servant, President Joseph F. Smith, was moved upon to direct the construction of a temple in this favored land; and that he had the privilege of visiting this spot of ground upon which this temple now stands, and dedicating the same for the erection of a temple to the Most High God.

We thank Thee for the long and faithful and diligent labors of Thy servant, President Charles O. Card, the pioneer in this section and after whom this city was named, and for the faithful and diligent men who have labored in the presiding offices in the stakes of Zion established here in Alberta.

We thank Thee, O God, our Eternal Father, that the land of Palestine, the land where our Savior and Redeemer ministered in the flesh where He gave to the world the plan of life and salvation, is now redeemed from the thralldom of the unbeliever, and is now under the fostering care of the great, enlightened and liberty-loving empire of Great Britain. We acknowledge Thy hand, O God, in the wonderful events which have led up to the partial redemption of the land of Judah, and we beseech Thee, O Father, that the Jews may, at no far distant date, be gathered home to the land of their fathers.

We thank Thee that Thy servants, the Prophets Joseph Smith and Brigham Young, were moved upon to send Apostles to Jerusalem to dedicate that land for the return of the Jews.

We acknowledge Thy hand, O God, our Heavenly Father, in the fact that one of the benefits of the great World War, through which the nations of the earth have recently passed, is the opportunity afforded the Jews to return to the land of their fathers.

We beseech Thee, our Father in heaven, that the victory which came to the cause of the Allies may lead to increased liberty and peace throughout all the nations of the earth.

We pray that Thy blessings may be upon kings, rulers and nobles, in all nations, that they may minister in justice and righteousness and give liberty and freedom to the peoples over whom they rule.

We thank Thee that the spirit of justice and righteousness has characterized the rulers in the British Empire, and we humbly beseech Thee that the people of this great nation and the people of the world may overcome selfishness and refrain from strife, contention, and all bitterness, and that they may grow and increase in the love of country, in loyalty and patriotism and in a determination to do what is right and just.

We beseech Thee, O God in Heaven, that the people of Canada may ever seek Thee for guidance and direction, that Thy declaration that the American continent is a land choice above all other lands, and Thy promise that it shall be protected against all foes, provided the people serve Thee, may be fulfilled, and that the people may grow in power, and strength and dominion, and, above all, in a love of Thy truth.

We thank Thee, O Father in heaven, for the splendid treatment that has been accorded by the officials in the Dominion of Canada to those of Thy people who have immigrated to this country, and we humbly pray Thee to aid Thy sons and Thy daughters who have taken upon them Thy name so to order their lives in righteousness and truth that they may retain the good will of the people this country and merit the same because of their good works.

We thank Thee, O God, that Thy Son, our Redeemer, after having been crucified and having laid down his life for the sins of the world, did open the prison doors and proclaim the gospel of repentance unto those who had been disobedient in the days of Noah, and that He subsequently came to the land of America, where he established His Church and chose disciples to guide the same.

We thank Thee for restoring again to the earth the ordinances of the gospel of Thy Son Jesus Christ, whereby men and women can be, in very deed, saviors upon Mount Zion, and where they can enter into Thy holy temples and perform the ordinances necessary for the salvation of those who have died without a knowledge of the gospel.

We thank Thee, O Father, above all things, for the gospel of Thy Son Jesus Christ, and for the Priesthood of the living God, and that we have been made partakers of the same, and have an abiding knowledge of the divinity of the work in which we are engaged.

We thank Thee for the words of Thy Son Jesus Christ to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon: "This is the gospel, the glad tidings which the voice out of the heavens bore record unto us, that he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness, that through Him all might be saved whom the Father had put into His power and made by Him, who glorifies the Father, and saves all the works of His hands."

We thank Thee, O Father, that Thou didst send Thy son Jesus Christ, to visit Thy servants Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland temple, the first temple erected by Thy people in this last dispensation. We thank Thee for the words of our Redeemer spoken in that temple: "I am the first and the last: I am He who liveth; I am He who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. Behold, your sins are forgiven you; you are clean before me; therefore, lift up your heads and rejoice. Let the hearts of your brethren rejoice, and let the hearts of all my people rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to My name. For behold, I have accepted this house, and My name shall be here; and I will manifest Myself to my people in mercy in this house."

We thank Thee, O God, that by the testimony of Thy Holy Spirit Thou hast manifested Thine acceptance of the several temples that have been erected from the days of Kirtland until this present time.

We also thank Thee for sending Thy servants, Moses and Elias, and Elijah, to the Kirtland temple, to confer upon Thy servants, Joseph and Oliver, the keys of every dispensation of the gospel of Jesus Christ from the days of Father Adam down to the present dispensation, which is the dispensation of the fulness of times.

We thank Thee that, through the visitation of Elijah, the prophecy of Thy servant Malachi—that the hearts of the fathers should be turned to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, lest the earth be smitten with a curse—has been fulfilled in our day, and that our hearts in very deed go out to our fathers; and we rejoice beyond our ability to express that we can, through the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ, become saviors of our ancestors.

We thank Thee, O God, with all our hearts for the testimony of Thy servants Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon: "And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of Him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of Him: that He lives! For we saw Him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that He is the only Begotten of the Father—that by Him, and through Him, and of Him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God."

We thank Thee, O Father, for the knowledge which we possess, that Thou dost live, and that Thy Son Jesus Christ is our Redeemer, and our Savior, and that Thy servant, Joseph Smith, Jr., was and is a prophet of the true and living God. And, O Father, may we ever be true and faithful to the gospel of Thy Son Jesus Christ, revealed through Thy servant Joseph.

We beseech Thee, O Lord, that Thou wilt stay the hand of the destroyer among the descendants of Lehi, who reside in this land, and give unto them increasing virility and more abundant health, that they may not perish as a people, but that from this time forth they may increase in numbers and in strength and in influence, that all the great and glorious promises made concerning the descendants of Lehi, may be fulfilled in them; that they may grow in vigor of body and of mind, and above all in love for Thee and Thy Son, and increase in diligence and in faithfulness in keeping the commandments which have come to them through the gospel of Jesus Christ, and that many of them may yet have the privilege of entering this holy house and receiving ordinances for themselves and their departed ancestors.

We pray Thee, O Father, to bless this land that it may be fruitful, that it may yield abundantly, and that all who dwell hereon may be prospered in righteousness.

Bless Thy people in all parts of the world. Continue to remember Thy Saints in the Valleys of the Mountains, whereunto they were led by Thy divine guidance, and where the greatest of all temples in this dispensation has been erected, and where Thou hast blessed and prospered Thy people even beyond all that could have been expected.

We especially pray Thee, O Father in Heaven, to bless the youth of Thy people in Zion and in all the world. Shield them from the adversary and from wicked and designing men. Keep the youth of Thy people, O Father, in the straight and narrow path that leads to Thee, preserve them from the pitfalls and snares that are laid for their feet. O Father, may our children grow up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord Jesus Christ. Give unto them a testimony of the divinity of this work as Thou hast given it unto us, and preserve them in purity and in the truth.

We now thank Thee, O God, our Eternal Father, for this beautiful temple and the ground upon which it stands, and we dedicate the building, with its grounds, with all its furnishings and fittings, and everything pertaining thereunto, from the foundation to the roof hereof, to Thee, our Father and our God. And we humbly pray Thee, O God, the Eternal Father, to accept of it and to sanctify it, and to consecrate it through Thy Spirit to the holy purposes for which it has been erected.

We beseech Thee to enable us so to guard this house that no unclean thing shall enter here. May Thy Spirit ever dwell in this holy house and rest upon all who shall labor as officers and workers herein, as well as upon all who shall come here to perform ordinances for the living or for the dead.

May Thy peace ever abide in this holy building, that all who come here may partake of the spirit of peace and of the sweet and heavenly influence that Thy Saints have experienced in other temples. Protect this building from the powers and elements of destruction.

May all who come upon the grounds which surround this temple, whether members of the Church of Christ or not, feel the sweet and peaceful influence of this blessed and hallowed spot.

O God, our Heavenly and Eternal Father, sanctify the words which we have spoken, and accept of the dedication of this house, and these grounds, which we have dedicated unto Thee by virtue of the Priesthood of the Living God which we hold, and we most earnestly pray that this sacred building may be a place in which Thy Son may see fit to manifest Himself and to instruct Thy servants, and in which Thou shall delight to dwell.

All this we ask and do in the authority of the Holy Priesthood and in the name of Thine Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ our Redeemer. Amen and Amen.

—Improvement Era, Vol. 26, No. 12, October, 1923, p. 1075.

Physical and Historical Description

On June 3, 1887, there arrived at Lees Creek, Alberta, now the site of the town of Cardston, a company of immigrants from Utah. The land at that time being unsurveyed, save the south boundary of the Blood Indian Reservation, they "squatted" on the open prairies on and near the present location of the town, the latter being then the homestead and pre-emption of Charles Ora Card, the leader of the Colony. This he divided into eight-acre squares and on the highest elevation within a half-mile, an eight-acre block was given to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by this loyal pioneer, who called it Tabernacle Square, and evidently intended that on it the main Church for the town and district some day should be built. Soon others settled in what was then termed "Card Ward" but which was soon changed to "Cardston," and in 1889 some two hundred to three hundred people had found here a new home. Among the settlers was an Apostle of the Church, John W. Taylor. To this little pioneer band, then living on the cattle range of the West, he made a prophetic utterance: "This land will yet become a bread-basket to the world; and in this land a Temple shall be reared to the worship of Almighty God." * * *

On July 27, 1913, in the presence of probably 1,500 members and friends, Joseph F. Smith, President of the Church, dedicated this Tabernacle Square as the Temple site.

On November 9th of the same year, a large number of people gathered to witness the breaking of ground as the beginning of the erection of this building. Daniel Kent Greene, of Glenwoodville, turned the first furrow of sod. Work was immediately commenced, and by September 19, 1915, the laying of the cornerstone ceremony was conducted by David O. McKay of the Council of Twelve Apostles. Under the draped Union Jack and amid bunting and flag decorations, an impressive service was held despite rain and sleet which was intermittently falling. Within the hollowed stone and a copper-sealed box were placed various coins, a complete set of Church books, a history of Cardston, and several photographs and autographs of importance.

The capstone laying took place on the 23rd of September, 1917, the service being in charge of President Edward J. Wood of Cardston; the dedicatory prayer being offered by Patriarch Henry L. Hinman. For this occasion a temporary auditorium was erected in the middle part of the unfinished structure. Some 1,500 to 2,000 people were in attendance and saw the stone placed in position by President Heber S. Allen of Raymond, Alberta. The edifice was completed during the summer of 1921.

This Temple was dedicated on August 26, 1923 by President Heber J. Grant. Hyrum C. Pope and Harold W. Burton were the Architects. William Baxter was the Supervisor of Construction. Extensive alterations and additions were made to the Temple in 1955. Harold W. Burton served as the Architect for this project. These alterations and additions are incorporated in this write-up (1965).

Approaching the town of Cardston from any direction, the large white straight lines of the Temple are the first things that greet and attract the eye. Impressive and unique, it occupies a distinctive place of its own in the historic field of architecture. It has the Grecian massiveness, a Peruvan touch, and is similar only to the ancient temples of the Aztecs and other aborigines of Central and South America, ruins of which have been discovered in recent years. The optic impression is that of the pyramid or the huge pile effect.

The site of the Temple is on a pronounced elevation, around which a cluster of dwellings is grouped, housing the inhabitants of the prairie town of Cardston.

The plan arrangement of the Temple proper is octagonal in shape, similar in outline to a Maltese Cross, and is 100 feet by 100 feet over its main dimensions. The Temple sets on a stylobate 165 feet by 165 feet, ten feet in height from its surrounding grade to the top of its coping. The tip to the capstone is 92 feet above the finished street grade on the west side of the Temple. Viewed from a distance and from any angle, the outline of the building gives the impression of a "great pile" of white granite inclining from the four main sides and the four lesser sides to the topmost point. The roof over the central part of the building is pryamidical in form, thirty feet square at its base and is roofed with 81 huge granite slabs which interlock together making this stone roof thoroughly waterproof. The capstone which sets at the apex of the pyramid weights 3200 pounds.

A striking feature of the Temple's exterior is a sculptured panel thirty-three feet wide and six feet in height setting at the east end of the forecourt. The sculpture depicts Jesus of Nazareth with "The Samaritan woman at the well," showing the Savior in the attitude of saying He would give the woman of "living water." This sculpture is the work of Torlief Knaphus.

The Temple Bureau of Information is at the extreme west end of the forecourt. This forecourt is 92 feet wide from north to south and 100 feet long from east to west, through which all temple patrons pass before entering the Temple Annex. This court is beautifully landscaped with lawns, flower beds and ornamental shrubbery.

The Temple proper technically faces east, the first Ordinance Room occupying the east bay of the building.

The exterior walls of the Temple and the walk of the Stylobate are faced with an off-white slightly gray granite, crystaline in structure with large quartz crystals which reflect the sun's rays. This granite was quarried and cut at Nelson, B.C., and shipped by rail to Cardston. The frame of the Temple is of structural steel including supporting columns, beams and girders. The foundations, floors, roofs and the backing of the granite faced walls are of reinforced concrete. All of the exterior walls are lined with hollow burned clay tile, which provides the necessary insulation against a rigorous climate. The building is provided with a modern air conditioning system, automatically controlled. A separate building housing the Heating and Electrical lighting plants connects with an underground tunnel with the sub-basement of the Temple.

The principal rooms in the Temple are panelled from floor to the ceiling with rare hardwoods and with painted murals framed into the panelling. The murals occur in the Creation, Garden and World Rooms and in the Temple Chapel and Baptistery. The Creation Room is finished in American rift-grained oak inlaid with ebony and boxwood. The Garden Room is in birdseye maple; the World Room in American Walnut; the Terrestrial Room in South American mahogany inlaid with ebony and boxwood. The Celestial Room is panelled from the top of a marble wainscot up to the ceiling, twenty-five feet in height, with African mahogany, inlaid with vermillion, rosewood, ebony and other rare woods. The wainscot in this room is three feet high and is of golden travis marble quarried in Utah. There are three Sealing Rooms: one panelled in American walnut, one in Circassian walnut, and one in ribbon-grained Tobascan mahogany. All of the furniture in these foregoing rooms was specially designed by the Architects and were executed in woods exactly matching the room in which the furniture occurs.

The walls, column casings, and floor of the Baptistery are of light gray Tennessee marble. The walls of the Initiatory rooms and other rooms throughout the Temple are of the same marble with ceramic tile floors. In the exact center of the Baptistery is the baptismal font, a large sculptured basin supported on the backs of twelve life-sized sculptured oxen, supposedly symbolic of the twelve tribes of Israel. The oxen appear to be emerging from reeded foilage. They are typical of the oxen used by the early Mormon pioneers, but subtlely stylized after the manner of ancient animal sculptures. The font was designed by the Architects after the description in holy writ of the font in Solomon's Temple. The sculpturing is the work of Torlief Knaphus.

President Edward J. Wood was set apart as the first President of the Temple by President Heber J. Grant on the day of its dedication.

By Harold W. Burton, Architect

Prophetic Gift Made Manifest

By Nellie T. Taylor

It was one of those rare Canadian mornings in October. The busy pioneers were in the best of spirits. Only the day before, Sunday, October 7, 1888, the Church officials had presided at the first conference held in their new meeting house—20x20 1/2—completed the previous January. A branch had been organized and named "Cardston" in honor of the man who had blazed the trail two years before and who had decided on the location. There were not enough present to make a full and complete organization, but as each person stepped forward in response to the call and was set apart under the hands of the presiding priesthood, the spirit of expansion seemed to rest upon them. They were not only willing but qualified to assume a double duty of work. The Spirit of the Lord bore testimony to that which was being done and all rejoiced under its influence.

Monday morning had been filled with council meetings, affairs of the Church and of the Dominion. At 10 a.m. when Charles O. Card guided his team up the hill to the west, explaining to his six passengers the survey of the town as he had drawn it, from stake to stake, their eyes beheld the expanse of green, the titanic mass of Rockies lined against the curtain of the sky, the grand "Old Chief" mountain whose summit has not yet been reached by man, towered before them as a bulwark of safety more assuring than an army. The coming of our fathers only a few short decades before to the "strength of the hills" must have inspired that which followed.

Turning again to the east, the white top was drawn to the summit of the elevation overlooking Lees Creek, among the wooded banks of which nestled the few homes in evidence of life and habitation. That was half a century ago.

President Francis M. Lyman, the senior Apostle, informed those present that they had been invited to come on "this morning trip that they might participate in the sacred service of dedicating that land to the habitation of the Saints." He then moved forward until impressed to stop, taking his place facing the east. He said to Apostle John W. Taylor: "You will please stand at my right, your wife Nellie next, President Charles O. Card at my left, his wife Zina Y. next, Bishop John A. Wolf and wife (Mary Hyde) facing me." Thus was a perfect circle formed by seven men and women. At this point he called upon Apostle John W. Taylor to be mouth in the dedicatory prayer. The outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord during the conference the previous day had warmed the hearts of all present but now the Spirit was of a pentecostal nature, accompanied by a divine light. Everything seemed hushed as those present listened to the inspirational words of the prayer. Then there came a pause: "I now speak by the power of prophecy and say that upon this very spot shall be erected a Temple to the name of Israel's God and nations shall come from far and near and praise His high and holy name." It was with mellowed heart and silent lips that those favored few reluctantly moved away from that hallowed spot.

It was during the administration of President Joseph F. Smith that Bishop Charles W. Nibley was dispatched to Canada to consider the advisability of erecting a Temple and of selecting the best locations. Four pictures were taken of suggested locations. While making this report, the four pictures were laid before the President who thoughtfully observed them at a distance. Then lightly touching one, he said: "I feel strongly impressed that this is the one."

The same Spirit was directing the same Priesthood in the fulfillment of the prophecy uttered many years ago.

Loved Ones Looking This Way

By Edward J. Wood, President of Alberta Temple

For several years the Northwestern States Mission Caravan have visited our Alberta Temple in two divisions. The Western division included the States of the Mission such as Washington, Oregon, Vancouver, B.C., and some parts of Idaho; the Eastern division included parts of Idaho and Montana. One division would stay a week in June; the other division would stay a week in July. They called themselves the Northwestern States Mission Caravan. Each Caravan included the Mission President and his wife (President William R. Sloan and Sister Sloan), and the Missionaries laboring in each division. Each family rode in their own car and had their own camping equipment, stopping at tourist camps enroute, and holding outdoor meetings at places where they were given a welcome. The trip usually took two or three days. They aimed to arrive in Cardston on Monday afternoon, and would hold an outdoor street meeting on the main street in Cardston, which was always attended by thousands. On Tuesday they would bring their children to the Temple to do baptismal work—some for their own baptisms and others for the dead. These good Caravan people would always bring names on their own lines to be officiated for and many were present to go through the Temple for the first time for themselves and then have their children sealed to them.

It was during one of the Caravan visits that the following incident happened: Quite an elderly lady (a member of the Caravan) was in the Temple to do the work for herself and to have the work performed for her husband, and then to be sealed to her husband and their children sealed to them. One of the Elders was acting as proxy for the dead husband and father, and two brethren who were members of the branch to which the old lady belonged were kneeling at the altar as proxy for the dead children—two sons as reported by the old lady.

The sealing room was filled with neighbors and friends who wished to do the old lady honor. As I held the sheet in my hand to seal the two sons whose birth and death, etc., were duly filled out by the old lady (their mother), I was impressed to ask her if these two sons were the only children she had, and she said: "Yes." I then proceeded to seal these sons, when I heard a voice behind me, as I thought, saying: "I am her child." I then stopped and asked again: "Are you sure you never had any other children?" She answered as before, but with some hesitation: "Yes, Brother Wood, the record is right." But I felt sure there was a feeling of doubt in the room, and as I was again about to proceed, the voice again spoke to me with greater emphasis, saying, "I am her daughter." I looked around and into the faces of all who witnessed this wonderful manifestation and then I spoke as kindly as possible to the old lady, saying, "Surely, grandmother, you had a daughter, didn't you?" She then broke into tears and asked that all be seated and said she hoped we would forgive her, as she had a little girl in her early married life, and then a lapse of several years before she had the two boys in their order, and that in her great anxiety to have her work and that of her husband and making of the sheet, to have her children sealed while on this, her first visit to a Temple, she had overlooked recording the name of the little girl. She then asked that she might meet and relate this experience in our devotional exercise the next morning and ask forgiveness of all the Caravan company. In the morning she asked to come to the stand and as she was about to speak she turned to me and asked how I knew she had another child. I then told her what I had heard in the sealing room. She stood in silence and wept for joy as the vast audience did also, as she bore testimony of the nearness of those whom we officiate for in the Temple when the sealing ordinance is being performed for them. The record was then completed and in the afternoon the three children were sealed by proxy at the altar and all witnesses were again in tears and the room seemed filled with an influence most divine.

President Heber J. Grant

President Heber J. Grant was born in Salt Lake City on November 22, 1856, being the son of Jedediah Morgan Grant and Rachel Ridgeway Ivins Grant. His father had passed through all the trying experiences in Missouri and Nauvoo, in the exodus and in the pioneering of Utah up to the time of his death which occurred when Heber was but nine days old, being only forty years of age at the time of his demise.

President Grant was set apart as President of the Church by the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles on November 22, 1918, in the Salt Lake Temple, he being sixty-two years of age at the time. At the Special General Conference of the Church held on June 1, 1919, he was sustained as President of the Church, and as Prophet, Seer and Revelator.

The Hawaiian, Canadian and Arizona Temples were dedicated by him; the Idaho Falls Temple was erected and sites for the Los Angeles and Oakland Temples were purchased by the Church during his administration. He labored early and late for the advancement of the work of the Lord, in doing Temple work himself, in exhorting the Saints both by word of mouth and by pen, to "Keep the Commandments of God," which counsel is the epitome of all instruction—the same as the Redeemer gave two thousand years ago, namely: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy mind, might and strength." During his Presidency, the number of wards increased from 839 in 1918 to 1,273 at the present time (1945), the stakes from 75 to 151 and the Missions from 22 to 39. He died on May 14, 1945.

Presidents of Alberta Temple:

Edward J. Wood, 1923-1948

Willard L. Smith, 1948-1955.

Octave W. Ursenbach, 1956—Present Incumbent.
