N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter XI

Acquisition of Property of the Swiss Temple

By Samuel E. Bringhurst, President, Swiss Temple

Favorable action on the erection of a temple of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Europe was taken by the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve on April 17, 1952. President David O. McKay was authorized to go to Switzerland to select a site.

On June 26, 1952, President and Mrs. McKay arrived at the Mission Home in Basel. We went into conference immediately. Those attending were President McKay, David Lawrence McKay, President Stayner Richards of the British Mission, President Golden Woolf of the French Mission, the writer and his first counselor, William Zimmer of the Swiss-Austrian Mission.

President McKay informed us of the decision that the first European Temple should be built in Switzerland. It was the unanimous opinion that the location should be in, or near as possible, the capital city of Bern.

Next morning, June 27, 1952, we drove to Bern and inspected several sites, deciding on one, in the southeastern part of the city. President McKay and his party left in the afternoon for Holland, authorizing me to proceed with the negotiations to acquire the selected site.

I learned that the property we were interested in had just been transferred to the City of Bern, to be used for a teacher's college. I informed President McKay by telephone. He advised that he would return to Switzerland in a few days and requested that we have some properties ready for his inspection.

He returned July 5, and approved a site which was in an estate. Investigation disclosed that there were five groups of heirs, totaling 30 in all, who were widely scattered. The main heir, a banker in Bern, said he would exchange his equity for income property and use his influence with the others. It was necessary to get the written consent from each of them.

After several months of corresponding and contacting, we had the written consent of all heirs and delivered them to the banker in Bern, who promised immediate action, but he demurred, and for several weeks we waited for word from him. It was now the beginning of October, 1952, and President McKay wished to make a definite announcement at October Conference.

All during the negotiating period we had prayed that the Lord would remove the obstacles and make possible the acquisition of the property. Finally, during a sleepless night in October the thought occurred that perhaps there was a reason for the delay, and that we should pray for a decision, and leave the matter with the Lord.

The next morning being Friday, we telephoned the district presidents, asking them to contact all missionaries and request that they fast and pray the following Monday and Tuesday, that we might receive a decision concerning the proposed temple site.

Wednesday, shortly after noon, Mr. Herman Schulthess, the real estate man through whom we were working in Bern, telephoned, stating that at 11 a.m. that day he received a call from the banker, informing him that they were withdrawing from the market the property we were seeking and that it was no longer available. He said he was so shocked and disappointed that he could not muster courage to call sooner. This answer so quickly, while a little disappointing, was a wonderful testimony to all of us. We advised Mr. Schulthess that we would go immediately to Bern and spend the balance of the week with him looking for a new site.

Before leaving, I sent an air mail letter to President McKay telling him what had happened and suggesting he call over long distance telephone upon receipt of our letter and we would have some information on a new site.

We met Mr. Schulthess in Bern and inspected a number of properties that had recently come on the market. After due investigation we reduced them to three suitable properties, and returned to Basel. The following morning Mr. Schulthess called, saying that one of the considered properties had been sold and that we could only get a two-day option on the others.

I prayed earnestly for guidance, and accompanied by Mrs. Bringhurst, drove back to decide between the remaining two properties. The one considered choice number two the day before, now seemed to be more desirable. We left again for Basel, when a short distance out, we turned around, drove back to the site, and as we walked over it, all doubt seemed to leave and we felt certain we were on the site the Lord wished for the first European temple.

It contains seven acres, prominently situated above most of the surrounding area. To the south is the beautiful Aare River, the capital city of Bern and the Alps. On the north and west is a well kept national forest. It is located in the town of Munchenbuchsee, about three miles north of Bern, only a four-minute walk from the railroad station and street car terminal in Zollikofen.

Upon my return to Basel, President McKay called on the phone. I related to him what had happened and recommended the new site. During his last visit we had shown him properties in the area, but the new site was not then available. He said he would confer with the brethren and call back in time to exercise our option, if they deemed it advisable.

Within a few hours President McKay called again, authorized the purchase, and said a check was on the way with which to consummate the transaction, and we were able to exercise our option within the time limit.

At this time we learned why the Lord did not allow us to purchase the first site. It was on a slope, with the highest part facing a narrow 20-foot street on the south, a super state highway was planned on the west, and they took 100 feet of the highest part of the site on the south for an access road, which would have necessitated placing the temple on low filled ground.

Plans for the new temple were prepared by Edward O. Anderson, temple architect.

On April 3, 1953, I was called to return to Switzerland to obtain the building permit, have a dedicated street closed that ran through the property and check available building materials. I left by plane, April 14, 1953, and at the request of President McKay, spent a few days in London assisting President A. Hamer Reiser with the acquisition of the British Temple site.

Arriving in Basel, April 22, 1953, I made a contract with Brother William Zimmer, of Bercher and Zimmer, Architects, to redraw the plans in German and supervise construction. A contract was also made with Hans Jordi, contractor of Bern, to do the construction work. The plans were completed within a week and applications were filed for the building permit and to close the street.

A 21-day advertising period was required by law, during which the plans were placed on public exhibition in the City Hall.

At the first meeting of the City Commission, after the first run of the notice in the newspaper, the leading protestant minister of the town, with three of his members, appeared and protested granting of the building permit. Mayor Walter Rauber informed us of the protests. Our investigation disclosed that none of the protestors owned property contiguous to or in the area of the temple site.

We were able to answer their objections to the entire satisfaction of the mayor and other officials, so the building permit was granted, contingent upon the permission from the federal authorities in Bern to close the street through the site. After further negotiating, permission was granted on condition that consent also be obtained from the Military Affairs Commission, because of the National Forest adjoining the temple site in the rear. This required more time and the help of several outside people. We gratefully recognized the help of the Lord in guiding our efforts and influencing those with whom we dealt.

By July 1, 1953, all permits were in our hands and the assignment given to me by the First Presidency was completed. President McKay was notified and the site dedication and ground breaking was set.

On Aug. 4, 1953 President and Mrs. McKay, Architect Anderson and President Reiser, arrived at the Basel Airport. We drove to mission headquarters in Basel and reviewed the program for the following day.

It having rained in Switzerland for more than a month, we fasted and prayed for clear skies and sunshine for Aug. 5. President McKay asked what we would do if the weather were bad, as the ceremony had to be held in the open. We assured him it would be good weather on Aug. 5.

The next morning as we left, the skies were clear and the sun shining brightly. After a most enjoyable two hour ride we arrived at the temple site. It was a glorious morning, with the majestic Alps in clear view. President McKay was elated with the site and surroundings.

After a program the group marched to the southeast corner of the temple lot for the ground breaking. President McKay removed the first shovel of dirt, the writer the second, then followed President Perschon, President Zimmer, Dr. Llewelyn McKay, President Reiser, Mayor Walter Rauber, Mr. Ernest Schneider and Mr. Albert Bodmer.

After a very enjoyable day we returned to Basel, and the rain came again during the night.

Construction was started October 1, 1953, and Elder Kurt Liggenstorfer of Thun, Switzerland, was employed as supervising architect, to assist Elder Zimmer.

The structure is reinforced concrete with an attractive terra cotta facing. The Swiss Temple is the first of a new type. It is a 2-story building, with all offices and work rooms on the first floor. The ordinance work will be done in one room on the second floor, with changes of scenery projected on a screen.

On November 1, 1954, President Stephen L Richards was appointed to lay the cornerstone. His party arrived in Basel, Nov. 12, 1954 and drove to the Temple the following morning; and at 2 p.m. he had laid the cornerstone.

The following nine missions will use the Temple: Swiss-Austrian, East German, West German, French, Holland, Danish, Swedish, Norwegian and Finnish.

Samuel E. Bringhurst was set apart as the first President of the Swiss Temple on July 30, 1955, by President David O. McKay.

Dedicatory Exercises

The Dedicatory Exercises were held in the Celestial Room on September 7, 1958. The touring Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir members were seated in a circle around this room, and in the main assembly room President McKay presided and conducted the meeting. In addition to the 600 persons with the Tabernacle Choir, hundreds of Church members, missionaries and servicemen from all parts of Europe, several hundred Church members from Utah, Idaho, California and various other parts of the world, were in Bern for the dedicatory services. Representing the Council of the Twelve were Elders Spencer W. Kimball, Ezra Taft Benson, Henry D. Moyle and Richard L. Evans. President David O. McKay gave the Dedicatory Prayer.

The Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir opened the services by singing "The Morning Breaks, the Shadows Flee."

The schedule of dedicatory services for the week was as follows: Monday morning, Swiss-Austrian Mission; afternoon, West German; Tuesday morning, East German; afternoon, East German; Wednesday morning, Netherlands; afternoon, Danish and Norwegian; Thursday morning, Swedish and Finnish; afternoon, French. Each dedicatory service was spoken in the language of those attending. President McKay gave the dedicatory prayer each time in English and a phrase-by-phrase translation was made by one of the mission officials.

Presidents of the Swiss Temple:

Samuel E. Bringhurst, 1955-1958.

Walter E. Trauffer, 1958—Present Incumbent.
