N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter XII

THE LOS ANGELES TEMPLE

By Edward O. Anderson Temple Architect

". . . in the process of time the shores of the Pacific may yet be overlooked from the temple of the Lord."

This message, which contains a note of prophecy, was part of an inspiring and encouraging epistle sent from Brigham Young and Willard Richards from the Salt Lake Valley in August 1847, to the Saints in California.

One hundred years later, as the Los Angeles Temple nears completion, the Saints on "the shores of the Pacific" have every reason for rejoicing. Their prayers have been answered. Their labors have been rewarded. Their sacrifices have borne fruit.

Situated on a prominent hill near Westwood Village, Los Angeles, California, just five miles from the ocean, the temple has already become a landmark. Because of its location and height (the spire is 257 feet above the first floor) it can be seen from such distant points as San Pedro, Catalina Island, and from ships twenty-five miles out to sea.

City officials, architects, builders, local residents, and tourists have been loud in their prase of the excellence of the structure and the striking beauty of the building and the grounds.

The prayer of the architect from the beginning has been that the same spirit that guided the builders of the temples and the Salt Lake Tabernacle in the early days of the Church be imparted to this project and that this temple might express in appearance the spiritual work to be carried on within it and at the same time be arranged so as to give comfort and ease of operation.

Title to the property which includes 24.23 acres, was obtained by the Church in March 1937, from Harold Lloyd of motion picture fame. The temple site now includes thirteen acres of the original plot. The rest of the ground is occupied

LOS ANGELES TEMPLE Site dedicated on September 22, 1951. Temple dedicated on March 11, 1956 by President David O. McKay.

by a Bureau of Information, a heating plant, the California Mission home, and the Westwood Ward Chapel.

As much time was required to build the structure on paper as was needed to build it with concrete and stone. The former board of temple architects began making sketches the same year that the property was purchased for a building which would accommodate a company of two hundred persons. Before plans were completed, the work was stopped by World War II. After the war, zoning problems caused further delays. Then, in January 1949, the Church architect was notified by the First Presidency that he had been appointed sole architect to the temple. He was instructed to prepare plans for a larger temple, one which would accommodate a company of three hundred persons, equal to the Salt Lake Temple in size, and to add an assembly room on the top floor.

Ground-breaking ceremonies were held on September 22, 1951 at midday. Exercises were directed by President David O. McKay. Appropriate remarks were made by President McKay, his counselors, Stephen L Richards and J. Reuben Clark, Jr., President Joseph Fielding Smith representing the Council of the Twelve Apostles; Presiding Bishop LeGrand Richards, and Mayor Fletcher Bowron of the City of Los Angeles.

Following the ceremony President McKay offered the prayer, dedicating the ground in the name of the Lord as a place upon which a temple should stand.

By July 7, 1952 plans and specifications had been fully prepared, a permit to build the temple had been issued by the Los Angeles building department, and construction work was ready to begin.

Soren N. Jacobsen was called by the Church to supervise the construction, and his workmanship has brought great praise from many sources.

The Saints in the temple area meanwhile had not been idle. The task of raising a million dollars seemed like a tremendous project, but the people never hesitated. On February 1, 1952, stake presidencies, high council members, patriarchs, and bishoprics, and their wives, along with representatives of the California Mission, met in the South Los Angeles Stake Center at Huntington Park to launch the campaign. Each stake president made a pledge for his stake, and throughout the area ward and stake leaders showed the way by being the first to make contributions and pledges.

People were asked to contribute what they considered to be their fair share of the total. The response was immediate and overwhelming. At April conference in 1952, stake presidents reported to the First Presidency that they had received money and pledges, not for $1,000,000, but for $1,648,613.17!

Stories of sacrifices and devotion beyond the call of duty are legion. Small children drained their savings banks and gave up their allowances so they could help build the temple. Teenagers by the thousands gave generously, often going without things they wanted and needed. Some families put off home improvements; others decided to drive the old car a few more years; still others contributed their vacation money to the cause.

By early August of 1955 the stakes and mission had given to the Church in excess of $1,300,000.00 with the promise that before the temple is dedicated they would contribute the full amount of their pledge. Stake presidents have reported that the project has been faith-promoting and testimony-building, an experience that none who has participated will forget. Peace and happiness have come to all as a result of having the opportunity to help build the house of the Lord.

It was a joyous day in August 1952 when heavy equipment moved onto the site, and excavation was begun. An idea of the size of the undertaking can be had from the following figures:

The temple is 364 feet wide and 241 feet deep and contains 190,614 square feet of floor space, or approximately four and one half acres. Some 90,258 sacks of cement were used in the project, and 16,050 cubic yards of concrete were poured. The depth of the concrete foundations is 24 feet, and the overall height of the building including the tower is 257 feet 8 1/2 inches. The tower extends 151 feet 8 1/2 inches above the roof.

The temple contains ninety rooms. Each of the ordinance rooms, which are on the second floor, has a capacity of 300 persons. The chapel in the southwest wing seats 380, while the dining room in the southeast wing will accommodate 300. The largest room in the building is the assembly room, which occupies most of the third floor. It is 257 feet long, 76 feet 7 inches wide, 34 feet high, and will seat 2,600 persons.

The electrical capacity of the temple is sufficient to light 1,000 five-room residences. There are in the building approximately 16,500 feet (nearly three and one-half miles) of fluorescent tubing, with 38 miles of cable and wire, and 52 lighting panels.

Built of reinforced concrete and structural steel, the building is fireproof and quake-resistant. The exterior is covered with 146,000 square feet of Mo-Sai stone facing of crushed quartz and white Portland cement quarried in Utah and Nevada. Each stone is eight by seven feet in size and 2 1/4 inches thick, weighing approximately 1600 pounds. The stones are fastened to the concrete wall with bolts and concrete grout. The wainscot around the exterior of the temple is of Rockville granite from Cold Springs, Minnesota. Exterior stair treads are solid granite.

The building exterior was designed to withstand the wear and tear of the elements. The quartz of the cast stone and the quartz in the granite are in harmony and each gives the same life to the wall surface in daylight; they sparkle in the sunshine, and glow in the floodlights at night. The surface is also selfcleaning.

The statue of the Angel Moroni which surmounts the tower is the creation of Millard F. Malin. The cast aluminum statue, which weighs 2100 pounds and is 15 feet 5 1/2 inches tall is covered with gold leaf. The trumpet in the hands of the angel is eight feet long. While the building itself faces southeast, the statue faces east.

The stone grilles over the windows not only add to the beauty of the building but also serve to cut down the direct rays of the sun, at the same time emitting a maximum amount of light.

All materials used have been selected to withstand wear and to cut down cost of maintenance. Eight types of marble, quarried in Vermont, Tennessee, Italy, and France, adorn the inside the building. High-grade carpets and tile are used on the floors. Vinylized fabric and mosaic tile cover many of the walls.

The baptismal font, which is supported by twelve bronze oxen modeled by Sculptor Millard F. Malin, is a fine piece of workmanship in stainless steel. A mural on the wall of the baptistry depicting the baptism of the Savior by John the Baptist in the River Jordan with the Mount of Temptation in the background was painted by Joseph Gibby of Los Angeles (formerly of Ogden, Utah).

The murals in the ordinance rooms, are brilliantly executed, and startling in their effect. Artist Harris Weberg of Ogden who has painted murals in the Idaho Falls Temple depicts the creation of the earth in the oval creation room. Edward Grigware, of Cody, Wyoming has created unbelievably beautiful scenes on the walls of the garden room. Here planting areas filled with potted flowers and plants, along with marble trim throughout, blend harmoniously with the murals.

The world room shows Adam and Eve leaving the Garden of Eden entering the lone and dreary world. The artist, Robert L. Shepherd, formerly bishop of Winder Ward in Salt Lake City, has indeed captured the stark but enchanting beauty of the deserts in his paintings. He has also done work in the Idaho Falls and Manti temples.

The terrestrial room has been planned for peace and comfort with subdued colors and furnishings. This arrangement helps to accent further the lovely brilliance of the celestial room where the walls were decorated by Alfred Lippold and his workers under the direction of Edward Grigware. As elsewhere in the temple, the furnishings for the room were fashioned by th architect, and the carpets, draperies, and upholstery material were especially designed or selected for the room, and blend into a symphony of indescribable beauty. The sealing rooms are equally lovely. The story of the landscaping of the temple grounds is intriguing, but can be told only briefly here. Long before the building itself was completed approximately four acres of lawn was put in, some twelve species of trees (several dozen individual trees in all) were transplanted, and ornamental plants and shrubs and flowers were placed. It is difficult to believe that many of the trees, some of which extend 80 feet into the air, have not been growing on the grounds for many years.

Twenty-two Specimen Olive trees line the two walks leading up to the building from Santa Monica Boulevard. This is a favorite shade and ornamental tree in Southern California and was selected because of its interesting multiple branching and because it is easily adapted to domestic use. These trees (which are 35 to 45 feet wide and 35 feet tall) were secured in the La Mirada area, thirty miles from the temple, and hauled in at night under special permits because of the great width.

About two dozen Canary Island Pine trees also adorn the grounds. Two of the largest are seventy feet tall. One of these was boxed in a nine foot box about one-half mile from the temple and left for three months to become established before it was moved to the temple grounds. The tree and soil weighed about 17 tons.

Also planted on the grounds are three varieties of palm trees, Bird of Paradise trees, fern trees, coast Redwoods, Liquid Amber trees, Coral trees and maidenhair trees, and two very rare Chinese Ginkgo trees.

Two rock gardens, a reflection pool, a rose garden (Mia Maid roses contributed by Mutual girls of the area) and two fountains, add to the beauty of the grounds. Shrubs planted in large boxes on top of the wings of the building draw much comment. More than two carloads of peat moss, and over 600 tons of fertilizer were used in preparing the grounds.

The reaction of men who have worked on the project is worthy of note. Each day's work was started with prayer, and in spite of all the activity of construction a spirit of peace seemed to permeate the grounds.

Families of at least three of the men who worked on the building have joined the Church, and a number of families of other workmen are seriously investigating. One non-member sent his son on a mission after he started working on the building. When the son returned he baptized his father into the Church.

Improvement Era, November, 1955.

Physical and Historical Description

Millard F. Malin designed and cast the oxen supporting the baptismal font, assisted by Morris Brooks and Carl Quilter. The temple font is a perfect circle, the fonts for the Swiss and London temples will be constructed in oval shape. Each of the six oxen on one side of the font differ in appearance and position, as is also the case on the other side of the font. The oxen are first modeled in clay, after which plaster casts are made and are then cast in aluminum or bronze in a foundry in New York. Types of the Ranger Spanish fighting bulls with curving horns were used instead of the modern developed beef cattle, as the former are more artistic.

With the removal of much of the scaffolding and beautiful stone work, named Mo-Sai, has added vitality and living essence to the huge monolithic structure. The installation of the Mo-Sai is complete on the wings, the four sides and two ends of the temple. Only sections at the center, now almost completed, and the tower, are yet to be covered with this sparkling veneer.

The Mo-Sai, manufactured by the Otto Buehner Company, has been cast in over 2,500 separate pieces to overlay the 126,000 square feet of surface of the Temple, enough to cover an area slightly larger than three football fields. It is to the credit of the makers that of 2,500 pieces cast, all are of the same texture and the same color.

The Mo-Sai is made of crushed and graded quartz aggregate mixed in white Portland cement. Each stone is 2 1/2 inches thick and reinforced throughout with a steel four-inch mesh. Each unit has a compressive strength of not less than 6,000 pounds per square inch. Because of the extreme hardness of the aggregate and the fine quality of cement used, the Mo-Sai stones should last for hundreds of years.

Most of the Mo-Sai blocks are six by seven feet and weigh in excess of 1,600 pounds. The delicate patterns of grille and simple decoration are likewise of Mo-Sai and are among the largest pieces of cast stone ever made. Those surrounding the front courtyard are 14 feet high, seven feet wide and weigh nearly two tons each.

To fasten the blocks to the 15,053 cubic yards of poured concrete, some 60,000 holes were formed in the walls. All the holes were matched to the blocks of stone so that bolts can hold each stone in place. These bolts are then cemented into place by pouring a thin concrete, called grout, behind each stone and into the bolt holes.

The surface of each piece has been etched with acid to expose the facets of aggregate. When sunshine strikes the stone work, it glistens and sparkles and reflects the light.

From the careful and expert skill of Stanley N. Child, masonry supervisor, every piece of stone is put into place straight and true, not varying as much as 1/100 of an inch. Not even a slight warp in a single stone is allowed to remain. When fastened into place the stones are tightened against the concrete wall making them as flat as the proverbial Kansas Prairie. A slight crack is left between each stone to allow for any expansion or contraction which might result from extremes in temperatures. A pliable plastic putty which will never harden is filled or "pointed" between the stones.

Deseret News, May 8, 1954.

The cornerstone for this, the eleventh and largest temple to be built by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was laid on Friday, December 11, 1953, with most of the General authorities of the Church in attendance, with President David O. McKay presiding. Some ten thousand members and interested friends, who gathered on the temple lot are said to have constituted the largest number of Latter-day Saints ever to come together in California on one occasion. Many distinguished guests and public officials were also present. President Stephen L. Richards laid the cornerstone.

The temple is located on a hill overlooking a vast area of Los Angeles. It is at Santa Monica Boulevard and Selby Avenue in west Los Angeles, approximately five miles from the ocean front.

The cost of the Los Angeles Temple itself was around $4,000,000.00 and with other buildings and properties connected with the Temple will bring the valuation plant to about $6,000,000.00, said President David O. McKay.

Elder Benjamin L. Bowring was named Temple president, and A Merlin Steed was chosen as President of the Los Angeles Temple Mission, with Raymond A. Summers as first counselor of that Mission.

A. Bent Petersen, second counselor in the Manti Temple presidency, was appointed recorder of the Los Angeles Temple.

The Los Angeles Temple was dedicated on March 11, 1958, by President David O. McKay.

General Authorities present at the dedication — All members of the First Presidency: David O. McKay, Stephen L. Richards, J. Reuben Clark. Presiding Patriarch: Eldred G. Smith.

All members of the Council of Twelve Apostles: Joseph Fielding Smith, Mark E. Petersen, LeGrand Richards, Harold B. Lee, Henry D. Moyle, Adam S. Bennion, Spencer W. Kimball, Delbert L. Stapley, Richard L. Evans, Ezra Taft Benson, Marion G. Romney, George Q. Morris. All Assistants to the Twelve: ElRay Christiansen, Thomas E. McKay, John Longdon, Clifford E. Young, Hugh B. Brown, Alma Sonne, Stirling W. Sill.

All members of the First Council of Seventy: Levi Edgar Young, Milton R. Hunter, Antoine R. Ivins, Bruce R. McConkie, Oscar A. Kirkham, Marion T. Hanks, S. Dilworth Young.

THOUSANDS TOUR THE LOS ANGELES TEMPLE

Before its dedication, on March 11, 1956, visitors were permitted to see the Temple for a period from December 19, 1955 to Feb. 18, 1956. During that time 662,336 persons had the privilege of making this tour. During the final week 25,000 persons entered the temple each day. This photograph shows 3,500 persons (four abreast, one-half mile long) waiting to go through the temple on the Monday morning of the last week it was open to the public. On this day 120 persons made the tour on wheel chairs.
