N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter XIII

NEW ZEALAND TEMPLE

Site Selected by Inspiration

The story of a temple to be erected by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the far off South Pacific islands began when President David O. McKay assigned President Wendell B. Mendenhall of the San Joaquin Stake to a special mission, that of investigating possible temple sites in the lands of the South Seas. President Mendenhall accepted this confidential appointment. He investigated available lands in Auckland, New Zealand, where mission headquarters are located. But the satisfaction of obtaining the proper place for the temple was not experienced as yet.

"Then one day I felt I should go to Hamilton to visit the college," (eighty miles southeast of Auckland), President Mendenhall related to the writer. "While in the car on the way, the whole thing came to me in an instant. The temple should be there by the college. The Church facilities for construction were already there, and that was the center of the population of the mission. Then, in my mind, I could see the area even before I arrived, and I could envision the hill where the temple should stand. As soon as I arrived at the college and drove over the top of the hill, my whole vision was confirmed. In my heart I felt that the Lord had especially made this hill for his temple, everything, about it was so majestic and beautiful."

Without discussing the matter of a temple site with anyone, President Mendenhall investigated the possibility of purchasing this land for an addition to the Church property but received a negative response. This was the only strip of property separating the college grounds from the extensive Church farm lands; if the property could be acquired, it would join the land together into one choice whole.

Two weeks later, President McKay arrived late one evening. Being travel weary, he retired at once, and it was not until

THE NEW ZEALAND TEMPLE Site dedicated on December 21, 1955, by Ariel S. Ballif. The Temple was dedicated on April 20, 1958, by President David O. McKay.

early the next morning that President Mendenhall greeted him while in the company of three other brethren. Consequently, there could be no mention of a site for the temple. President McKay, President Mendenhall, and the other three brethren drove out to look over the college construction and the farm lands.

"As we drove up the road, there was that noble hill," continued President Mendenhall. "We directed our travel around the back of it to the farm lands. After we stepped from the car and were looking around, President McKay called me to one side. By the way he was looking at the hill, I could tell immediately what was on his mind. I had not said a word to him. He asked, "What do you think?" I knew what his question implied, and I simply asked in return, "What do you think, President McKay?" And then in an almost prophetic tone he pronounced `This is the place to build the temple.'"

The Lord had again revealed his will unto his servant, a prophet of God.

". . . Then a week later President McKay came to this beautiful spot," President Mendenhall related, "and I bear witness to you, . . . that I saw the prophet of this Church in the spirit of vision, and when he walked away from that hill, he knew the house of the Lord was to be erected upon that particular spot."

President Mendenhall had found that the Murray family, the property owners — three brothers, their mother and a sister — were not willing to sell. But the day President McKay returned to the hill, the three brothers watched as he walked around it. Then as the brethren went to get in the car to leave the hill, one of the three approached President Mendenhall and said they did not want to sell the property, but suggested they discuss the matter after President McKay had finished his tour. As the car drove away, President McKay said in a tone of reassuring confidence, "They will sell it; they will sell it."

Accordingly, the day President McKay left, President Mendenhall and Elder George Biesinger, supervisor of Church construction in New Zealand, went to see the Murray brothers. That morning they sat upon the hill itself as they discussed the property, and by eleven o'clock the owners had agreed to see an attorney about the sale. There were two of the brothers present at the morning meeting, so they called the other brother, who was fishing, the sister from another community, and their mother, and all went into town. At three o'clock that afternoon the Murray family had definitely decided to sell the property.

"Elder Biesinger and I previously had gone over the property very thoroughly and had put a valuation on it by breaking it down into various lots and acres," President Mendenhall reported. "When we met with the attorney, we found the sellers had over-priced the property considerably. After debating the matter for about an hour, the attorney said, `Would you be willing to consider this purchase if I break the property down my way and arrive at its valuation?' We told him we would."

After working a while, he passed his figures to President Mendenhall and Elder Biesinger. As they looked at it, the figures were difficult to believe — the proposal was, to the penny, the evaluation they had computed.

By late afternoon the Church had a signed agreement from the owners to sell. A family of five all decided in a few hours against their negative decision of the week before. "And today," President Mendenhall explains, "they can't understand why they ever sold the land."

But this was not the only marvel in the acquisition of the land. The purchase naturally had to be approved by the New Zealand Land Aggregation Court. The day the local court turned it down, Mr. Corbett, the National Minister of Lands, went with President Mendenhall to look over the property. He did not know of the local denial. As he drove past the Church construction, he was impressed by the college and by the Church belief of developing the Maori people to the highest standard. Genuinely pleased, he turned to President Mendenhall and asked him to take this dictation: "Received personal assurance this day from the Minister of Lands and Maori Affairs that the New Zealand Government will not oppose the acquisition of this property."

The Spirit of the Lord had moved: The property was now owned by the Church; the temple would arise from the spot pronounced by a latter-day prophet as the place where the house of the Lord should be built.

The hill from which the temple will rise is 170 feet high and makes, in President Mendenhall's opinion, "The most beautiful temple site in the Church."

Members of the Church in New Zealand indeed deserve to be called Saints because of their ingenuous spirit, childlike faith, and consecration to the things of the Lord. Their humility was once again evidenced the day the plans to build the temple were announced. The annual hui tau, the all mission conference, was in progress with four thousand members in attendance. A telephone call was placed from Salt Lake City so the announcement could be made on that occasion. Returning to the conference with this humbling yet thrilling telephone message, Elder Biesinger related that the First Presidency desired a temple to be built and that it be completed two years from the date of ground breaking. It was to be built, as was the college, entirely through volunteer missionary labor.

The joy in the hearts of these people was exceedingly great. All four thousand of them raised their hands and solemnly, with tears of joy in their eyes, sustained the proposal. Perhaps this will be the most remembered hui tau of New Zealand. Today the members of the mission are supporting two hundred labor missionaries. What little they have, they are giving in support of their sustaining vote at that eventful conference.

As some of the pioneers in the Salt Lake Valley learned their crafts while working on the Assembly Hall before applying their skills to the building of the Salt Lake Temple, a similar story is being written in New Zealand. The unskilled native missionary volunteers have been assisting with the college construction there. When work on the college commenced in 1949, in that area there were no transportation permits or available building materials — lumber, gravel, or concrete. Today, with nothing but a purpose for a beginning, a rock quarry has been acquired, and four thousand acres of timberland furnish the lumber which is cut and then sawed in a mill now owned by the Church. While serving the Lord, men and boys have learned their trades. Today they are ". . . working in sawmills, in the rock crushers, in the lime pits, in the cement plant, in the planing mill, in the timber, and some are laying brick. You have never seen such a pioneer organization in your life, . . ." They have learned to use machinery and materials with such adeptness that they are prepared for the construction of the temple. They have indeed sought first the kingdom of God and other things are being added unto them. When the construction is completed, they will be trained for specialized occupations.

The temple was designed by Church architect, Elder Edward O. Anderson, and the blueprints were mailed from Salt Lake City, September 1, 1955. After the plans are approved by the New Zealand government and after the dedication and ground-breaking services are held, all will be in readiness for work on the temple to commence. It is expected that this edifice will be completed within two years. The construction will be a special type of concrete brick. The outward appearance will resemble the recently dedicated Swiss Temple, and the floor plan will be similar.

The New Zealand Temple will serve a Church membership of over 40,000. Thirteen thousand are from New Zealand, and the rest from the Tongan, Tahitian, Samoan, and Australian missions. The Saints there have pledged their readiness and willingness to give their money or labor or both to this house of the Lord in the South Pacific.

Last May, President Mendenhall was set apart by the First Presidency to perform a "special service pertaining particularly to the erection and completion of the college in New Zealand and of the temple that is to be erected." This service is also to include the development of the farm lands, from which the college will eventually receive some financial support. Since that time, President Mendenhall has been appointed chairman of the Church building committee, but the special New Zealand assignment stands.

While in New Zealand in January 1955, President McKay assigned Elder George Biesinger, who was supervisor of all Church construction in New Zealand, the additional task of supervising construction of the temple.

With the construction of the college, the development of the farm lands, and the acquisition of the temple site, there are three to four hundred people visiting the grounds each Sunday. This is proving to be the "Temple Hill" mission of New Zealand, for there are forty native missionary guides there to explain the Church program, the great gospel plan, and to leave their testimonies written upon the hearts of the visitors. In this sense, the people of New Zealand are flocking unto the hill of the Lord.

In every deed, this temple in the South Pacific will stand as a beacon light upon a hill, and with the spirit of the Saints there, others will be led to the blessings and power to be received therein.

Improvement Era, November, 1955

Location of Temple Site

The temple site and college property in New Zealand is located about three miles south of Hamilton, which is approximately twenty-five miles south of the New Zealand Mission headquarters in Auckland. It comprises a tract of land aggregating 1,300 acres. Approval for building the temple was given in a meeting of the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve on Thursday, February 17, 1955, after which the decision was publicly given.

The site embodies the mission Hui Tau Hall, a large joinery or workshop, faculty and administration residence, girls' dormitories, five classroom buildings, an administrative building, a large gymnasium, auditorium, swimming pool and cafeteria, five boys' dormitories, native workers' homes, and situated on this site is a beautiful lake owned by the Church and a future ball field. The buildings above mentioned have either been erected or will be erected.

Most of the land surrounding the college and temple site will be operated by the Church as a model farm. It is adjacent to a 17,000 acre tract of land owned by the New Zealand government which is under course of reclamation.

Ground-Breaking Historical Data

On December 21, 1955, ground-breaking services were held, signifying the commencement of construction of the temple, also the David O. McKay Auditorium Building and the Matthew Cowley Memorial Administration Building.

Presided over by Ariel S. Ballif, New Zealand Mission president, the exercises began at 2 p.m. on Temple Hill, which overlooks the college campus. In spite of inclement weather for several days before, the day was clear, calm and warm. The countryside from the hilltop was picturesque, with the white college buildings dotted against the landscape of low green rolling hills and evergreen shrubs.

Over 600 people, representing all the districts of the mission, and with district presidents of 15 of the 16 districts, were seated in the area on which the actual structure of the temple will be erected. The united and enthusiastic spirit of those present added to the spiritual event.

Adding a beautiful touch, the music was furnished by a well-balanced combined choir, composed mainly of the Auckland District Choir, assisted by members from nearly every district. Directed by Elder Kelly Harris, their lovely rendition of "Let the Mountains Shout for Joy" and "I Walked Today Where Jesus Walked" were inspirational and touched the hearts of all.

A prayer of dedication invoking the blessings of the Lord to attend building program and workmen in erecting the college structures and temple, that they might be speedily completed and properly used for the development of the lives of the people here, was offered by President Ballif, after which he, with Elder Mendenhall and Elder Biesinger, turned the first sod.

Construction of New Zealand Temple

The temple contains 75 rooms on three levels, the basement floor containing the baptistry, offices, dressing rooms, dining rooms, kitchen, laundry, and the baptismal font.

This font, cast in bronze in Italy, is oval in shape and is supported on the shoulders of twelve oxen. A mural of Jesus Christ being baptized by John the Baptist adorns one wall. It is the work of artist Paul P. Forster.

On the main floor are 24 rooms including the chapel, lounges, entries, foyers, and general offices. The upper floor consists of ten rooms including the lecture room, the Celestial room, four sealing rooms and rest rooms.

During a twenty-three day "open house," 112,500 persons toured the temple's interior, prior to its dedication, after which only faithful Church members may participate in the sacred ceremonies for which the temple was built.

The cornerstone for this temple was laid on December 22, 1956, by Elder Hugh B. Brown.

President David O. McKay dedicated the New Zealand Temple on April 20, 1958.

Presidents of the New Zealand Temple:

E. Albert Rosenvall, 1958-1961.

John B. Hawkes, 1961-1964.

Heber G. Jensen, 1964—Present Incumbent.

THE LONDON TEMPLE Site dedicated on August 10, 1953, by President David O. McKay. This Temple was dedicated on September 7, 1958, by President David O. McKay.
