N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter XIV

THE LONDON TEMPLE

The site for the erection of a temple in London was approved by President David O. McKay when visiting England in 1952. The exact spot where the Temple will be erected was chosen by him in association with Edward O. Anderson, architect of the Los Angeles, London and Swiss temples. This temple is in the vicinity where twenty millions of people live. The temple site was dedicated by President McKay on August 10, 1953. Nearby this property is the little hamlet of New Chapel, which is named for the Baronial Hall.

The estate purchased by the Church includes several buildings, the most important being the big mansion, referred to as "The Hall." This stately mansion will lend itself to holding services, as well as housing a temple president, caretaker and providing sleeping rooms for people coming long distances to attend the temple. This mansion with oak finish, overlooks the gardens and is a source of delight and inspiration to those who have the privilege of exploring it. It is a three-story country home of forty spacious and comfortable rooms, a small-ballroom with orchestra balcony, two large kitchens, two dining rooms, fifteen bedrooms and eight large modern bathrooms. Other buildings — garages, laundry, fuel sheds, servants' lodges, power plant, are shielded from the gardens by a row of tall evergreens. All buildings will be put to proper use; all are in good repair.

Beyond the buildings and formal gardens (which comprise about ten acres) are two hayfields, and across the highway but a part of the estate are two more hayfields. This 32-acre estate is located twenty-four miles south of London, near East Grinstead, in Surrey.

When President David O. McKay broke ground for the British Temple on Saturday, August 27, 1955, at Newchapel, Surrey, England, about twenty-five miles south of London, the dream of the British members of the Church for a house of the Lord in their homeland moved a step closer to realization.

The services were conducted under a cove of trees in the garden until it was time for President McKay to walk to the point for the southeast corner of the temple. The program included:

"The Morning Breaks," Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir; Invocation, Elder J. Spencer Cornwall, conductor of the Choir; "The Lord's Prayer," Tabernacle Choir; Address, President A. Hamer Reiser of the British Mission; Address, Elder Edward O. Anderson, Church Temple Architect; Address, Sir Thomas Bennett, supervising architect for the British Temple; Address, President David O. McKay followed by the ground breaking; "O My Father," male chorus of the Tabernacle Choir; Benediction, Elder Richard L. Evans of the Council of the Twelve.

The sun shone until the breaking of the ground, and then rain fell during the closing hymn and prayer. Later there was sunshine again as the visitors toured the temple grounds.

The story of Newchapel, the site of the London Temple, is a fascinating one. The earliest record appears to be found in William the Conqueror's Doomsday Book. The lands surrounding the temple site are inventoried there, and the documents formed the basis for the division of the land to William's loyal followers and the establishment of the feudal system.

Newchapel was an old Elizabethan farm, and the remains of the old farmhouse can be seen in the present house which stands on the estate.

Much later the property was acquired by a British inventor who undertook to develop the farm into a country estate. He sold the property to an American who made the largest investment in the property, developing the gardens and the home. Again the property was sold, this time to Mr. and Mrs. Pears of the Pears Soap Company.

During his 1952 European tour, President McKay examined several sites in Great Britain that might be suitable for a temple. Late in this exploration, he and the late Elder Stayner Richards, who was then an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve and president of the British Mission, found Newchapel but discovered that it was not for sale. President Richards completed his mission, and President Reiser assumed his duties, one of which was to find a site for the temple. About six months after President McKay and President Richards had seen the New chapel property, the owners were again approached. This time they consented to sell to the Church. It took several months to close the negotiations, but when President McKay returned to Europe in 1953, he dedicated this site for a temple.

The home on the property, although Elizabethan in style, is only about thirty years old.

A branch of the Church has been established at Newchapel, and the genealogical offices of the British Mission have been moved to a remodeled building on the grounds. President Charles Beckingham of the Newchapel Branch has been appointed caretaker of the grounds and building, and Brother Albert Stephenson has been appointed gardener. The beautiful formal gardens occupy about one-third of the property. It is a site of natural beauty the year around.

Improvement Era, November, 1955

Construction Data on the London Temple

The cornerstone of the London Temple was laid on May 11, 1957, by Elder Richard L. Evans, a member of the Council of the Twelve.

The Temple covers 13,000 square feet and incorporates 34,000 square feet of floor space in its four floors. It is faced with white Portland stone, roofed in copper and surmounted by a Portland stone tower with a spire covered in lead-coated copper, the tip of which rises 160 feet above the ground.

President David O. McKay dedicated the London Temple on September 7, 1958. At the dedication services only 600 people could be accommodated in the main temple auditorium where the speakers could be seen. An additional 1,400 were crowded into the other rooms of the building where they heard the speeches and prayer over a public address system.

Some 76,000 people had visited the temple during the public viewing held August 16 to September 3. Only 50,000 had been anticipated, and the viewing period had to be extended three days to accommodate the crowds.

At the dedication services, in addition to President McKay, there were present of the General Authorities of the Church President Joseph Fielding Smith, Elder Henry D. Moyle, Elder Richard L. Evans and Elder Hugh B. Brown of the Council of the Twelve. Elder ElRay L. Christiansen and Elder Gordon B. Hinckley represented the Assistants to the Council of the Twelve. Bishop Thorpe B. Isaacson represented the Presiding Bishopric. Mrs. Belle S. Spafford represented the Relief Society and Mrs. Emily H. Bennett represented the YWMIA presidency.

Elder Selvoy J. Boyer was set apart as the first president of this Temple on August 12, 1958, by President David O. McKay.
