N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter XV

THE ENDOWMENT HOUSE

HISTORICAL SKETCH

PRES. HEBER C. KIMBALL

When the Saints had arrived in the Great Salt Lake Valley, it was readily apparent that unless some temporary building should be constructed in which to do ordinance work for the living and the dead, pending the completion of the Salt Lake Temple, the necessary ordinances for their salvation could not be performed. It was therefore decided to construct such a building and in April of 1854 the site for this building was laid out in the northwest corner of the Temple Block in Salt Lake City. This building was being plastered in February of 1855 and was completed in April following. This two-story adobe building was known first as the Endowment Rooms and later as the Endowment House. It was dedicated on May 5, 1855, by President Heber C. Kimball, who also conducted the services for many years in this building which President Young called "The House of the Lord." On the day of its dedication eight people received their endowments and in the years that followed as many as sixty persons would receive their endowments in one day. In addition to endowment work, prayer circles were held here and outgoing missionaries received instructions and were set apart before leaving for their missions. In 1856 an addition was built on the south side of the building because of the lack of room for the increased attendance, for the work therein con- ducted. The spirit of prophecy and other gifts of the Spirit were enjoyed abundantly in this building in accordance with the statement made by President Brigham Young at the time of its dedication: "The Spirit of the Lord would be in it, for no one will be permitted to go into it to pollute it." In the spring of 1889, President Wilford Woodruff gave orders that this building be taken down, it having served for thirty-four years; the Saints being privileged to do work for the salvation of the living and dead in the St. George, Logan, and Manti Temples, besides anticipating that privilege in the Salt Lake Temple which was fast being completed at the time the Endowment House was razed.

ENDOWMENT HOUSE Site laid out in April, 1854. Building dedicated on May 5, 1855, by President Heber C. Kimball. This building was razed in the spring of 1889.

Impression Given of the Spirit Verified

By Heber C. Kimball (From Discourse given on April 4, 1866, in Salt Lake Tabemacle)

Under President Young I have presided over the giving of endowments for the last fifteen years. Last Saturday there were over twenty persons in the house to receive their endowments. They came well recommended by their bishops as being worthy, good, and faithful members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I had previously had an impression that many of the people were becoming lukewarm, and even cold, in the performance of some of their duties. After the company had gone through, I gave them a lecture, and it came to me by the Spirit of God to try, if my impression was correct or not. After instructing them that they must not lie, steal nor bear false witness, etc., I asked them how many of them prayed in their families, and it transpired that there were many who neglected their duties in this respect; yet they were all recommended by their bishops as good, faithful members of the Church of Christ.

J. D., Vol.11:210.

1 Statement by Bishop James Watson: "On the morning of the 15th day of April, 1865, my wife and I were going through the Temple block towards the Endowment House, as we had been previously requested by our Bishop to go and get our endowments. I was in a very thoughful mood and prayed silently in my own mind that the Lord would give me grace to always adhere to the truth and have my mind quickened by the Holy Ghost, so that I might always be able to decide between truth and error and to have courage to defend the principles of the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

"We overtook President H. C. Kimball and were walking leisurely along, when Willard G. Smith overtook us and said to President Kimball, `Have you heard the news? President Lincoln was assassinated last night while at the theatre in Washington. See the flags are at half-mast.' After some little conversation we entered the Endowment House. The thought of the sad death of President Lincoln weighed heavily on my mind, and made a deep impression on me. In going through the House, Brother Kimball gave me a very impressive lecture. Fixing his eyes on me, he said:

"`Do you know that you will yet be called upon to stand in front of the enemy?' Then he paused for a reply.

"After studying a few seconds, I answered, `No, sir.'

"Giving me a piercing look, he said: `Don't you believe it?" I answered, `No, sir.'

"Gazing at me intently, he said, `Don't you believe what I say?' I answered, `How can I believe when I have no evidence or knowledge of it?' `You foolish man,' he said, `If you had a knowledge of it you would not require any belief.'

"Pointing at me again, he said, `You will yet be called upon to stand in front of the enemy, while bullets will fly around as thick as hail. Yet not a hair of your head shall be hurt. Do you believe that?'

"After a little study, I answered, `No, sir.' He seemed a little perplexed at my obstinacy and asked, `Why don't you believe it?' I said, `Because I have been in a hailstorm, and I know that it is impossible to be in a hail-storm without being hit, and if the bullets are to fly around me as thick as hail, I am sure I will be hit.' He said, `Don't you think if you saw them coming you could duck them?' I said I thought I could. `But,' said he, `they come so quick you cannot do it.'

"Then fixing his eyes on me, he said: `The day will come when you will stand in the front rank in face of the enemy, but if you will live pure and keep your garments clean, not one hair of your head will be hurt. Do you believe that?'

"I said, `Brother Kimball, I believe what you say.'"

2 Statement by Elder Edward Stevenson: "I cheerfully contribute the following, concerning one of the greatest prophets of the nineteenth century—Heber C. Kimball. In 1856 a little group of friends convened in the House of the Lord were engaged in pleasant conversation on the isolated condition of the Latter-day Saints.

"`Yes,' said Brother Heber (by which name he was so familiarly known), `we think we are secure here in the chambers of the everlasting hills, where we can close those few doors of the canyons against mobs and persecutors, the wicked and the vile, who have always beset us with violence and robbery, but I want to say to you, my brethren, the time is coming when we will be mixed up in these now peaceful valleys to that extent that it will be difficult to tell the face of a Saint from the face of an enemy to the people of God. Then, brethren, look out for the great sieve, for there will be a great sifting time, and many will fall; for I say unto you there is a test, a test coming, and who will be able to stand?'

"The emphasis with which those words were spoken I shall never forget."

Life of Heber C. Kimball, by Orson F. Whitney, pp.455-7.
