N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter XVI

THE INDEPENDENCE TEMPLE SITE

Designation and Dedication of Temple Site

By Joseph the Prophet

And thus saith the Lord your God, if you will receive wisdom here is wisdom. Behold, the place which is now called Independence is the center place; and the spot for the temple is lying westward, upon a lot which is not far from the courthouse. Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 57:3. Revelation given in July, 1831.

On the third day of August, I proceeded to dedicate the spot for the Temple, a little west of Independence, and there were also present Sidney Rigdon, Edward Partridge, W. W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, Joseph Coe and Newel Knight.

The 87th Psalm was read. The scene was solemn and impressive. D. H. C., Vol. 1:199.

Verily this is the word of the Lord that the city New Jerusalem shall be built by the gathering of the saints, beginning at this place, even the place of the temple, which temple shall be reared in this generation.

For verily this generation shall not all pass away until an house shall be built unto the Lord, and a cloud shall rest upon it, which cloud shall be even the glory of the Lord, which shall fill the house. Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 84:4-5. Sept. 22, 1832.

Jackson County Courthouse, erected in 1827. The building referred to in Doc. and Cov., D&C 57:3. (Courtesy of R. W. Pope, Independence, Mo.)

Sacred Records to be Deposited in Great Temple

By Orson Pratt

The Hill Cumorah is situated in western New York, between the villages of Palmyra and Canandaigua, about four miles from the former. It is celebrated as the ancient depository of the sacred gold plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. Cumorah was the name by which the hill was designated in the days of the Prophet Moroni, who deposited the plates about four hundred and twenty years after the birth of Christ. The Prophet Mormon, the father of Moroni, had been entrusted with all the sacred records of his forefathers, engraved on metallic plates. New plates were made by Mormon, on which he wrote, from the more ancient books, an abridged history of the nation, incorporating therewith many revelations, prophecies, the Gospel, etc. These new plates were given to Moroni on which to finish the history. All the ancient plates Mormon deposited in Cumorah, about three hundred and eightyfour years after Christ. When Moroni, about thirty-six years after, made the deposit of the book entrusted to him, he was, without doubt, inspired to select a department of the hill separate from the great sacred depository of the numerous volumes hid up by his father. The particular place on the hill, where Moroni secreted the book, was revealed, by the angel, to the Prophet Joseph Smith, to whom the volume was delivered in September, A. D. 1827. But the grand depository of all the numerous records of the ancient nations of the western continent was located in another department of the hill, and its contents under the charge of holy angels, until the day should come for them to be transferred to the sacred temple of Zion.

Millennial Star, 28:417:19.

(See also "Assorted Gems of Priceless Value," pp. 295-6.)

Hill Cumorah, the depository of sacred records which will be transferred to the Great Temple when erected.

INDEPENDENCE TEMPLE SITE. BUILDING TO THE RIGHT IS THE HEDRICKITE OR CHURCH OF CHRIST CHAPEL.

This Temple Site was dedicated on August 3, 1831, by Joseph Smith the Prophet, in the presence of Sidney Rigdon, Edward Partridge, W. W. Phelps, Aliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, Joseph Coe, and Newel Knight.

Temple to be Reared in This Generation

(Excerpt from a sermon delivered by Orson Pratt on April 9, 1871.)

"The sons of Moses and the sons of Aaron shall offer an acceptable offering and sacrifice in the house of the Lord, which house shall be established in this generation upon the consecrated spot, as I have appointed; and the sons of Moses and of Aaron shall be filled with the glory of God upon Mount Zion in the Lord's house, whose sons are ye, and also many whom I have called and sent forth to build up my church; for whosoever is faithful to the obtaining of these Priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying of their calling are sanctified by the spirit unto the renewing of their bodies, that they become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham and the church and kingdom and the elect of God."

Here then we see a prediction, and we believe it. Yes! The Latter-day Saints have as firm faith and rely upon this promise as much as they rely upon the promise of forgiveness of sins when they comply with the first principles of the Gospel. We just as much expect that a city will be built, called Zion, in the place and on the land which has been appointed by the Lord our God, and that a temple will be reared on the spot that has been selected, and the cornerstone of which has been laid, in the generation when this revelation was given; we just as much expect this as we expect the sun to rise in the morning and set in the evening; or as much as we expect to see the fulfillment of any of the purposes of the Lord our God, pertaining to the works of His hands. But, says the objector, "thirty-nine years have passed away.' What of that? The generation has not passed away;fn,fn,fn,fn all the people that were living thirty-nine years ago, have not passed away; but before they do pass away this will be fulfilled."

Journal of Discourses, Vol. 14, p. 275.

1 "This generation shall not all pass away, etc. This is a promise that some living at the time when it was made, in 1832, would still be on earth in the flesh, when the house of the Lord would begin to lift its lofty spires toward the sky on that consecrated ground. A generation does not pass away in one hundred years, and every generation has a few who live over a hundred years."—Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, 1923 Edition, by Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl.

(It does not say those still living in this generation shall be Saints—Why not Lamanites, Armenians, etc.?)

2 MOSCOW, April 20 (UP)—The newspaper Socialist Agriculture said Saturday that the oldest man in the Soviet Union and probably in the world is Vaisly Nikiforovich Ivanov, who is described as 142 years old Ivanov is a Siberian peasant living at Minusinsk, near Krasnoyarsk, according to the newspaper. He was born near Minsk and migrated to Siberia when he was 90 years old. The newspaper said that he had survived six czars, six wars, four revolutions, and still claims to have a good memory. He remembers the Napoleonic invasion of Russia, the dispatch said. Ivanov now lives on a state pension. He is practically hairless and toothless, but is healthy and walks two miles a day.—Salt Lake Tribune, Sunday morning, April 21, 1940.

3 Death came to Kasper Kerkorian as to all men—but to him it came after 115 years of active life. The gnarled Armenian, who farmed his own land until 1928, died Sunday at Rancho Los Amigos. Since the death of the 115-year-old Evan Stall last year he had been the eldest among the rancho's patriarchs. Kerkorian, who, according to records, was born in Armenia in 1825, came to this country 50 years ago to continue the rural life he loved. When asked about his age in recent years, he would smile and recount that his mother lived to be 145. For 42 years Kerkorian lived in California, much of the time near Reedley. His body will be sent there for funeral services. He leaves a son, A. Kerkorian, who resides at 5626 Blackwelder St. The son is 51.—Los Angeles Times, Wednesday morning, Feb. 14, 1940.

Present Conditions of the Land Where Eden Was

By B. H. Roberts

Note: Owing to the doubtful authenticity of the stones, the picture of which was inserted on page 200 of former printings, that illustration is omitted from the present edition of this book, and the subject matter below given is inserted in its place.

Jackson County, where is to be built the Center Stake of Zion, is in 94 West Longitude, and 39 North Latitude, being nearly equally distant from the northern boundary of the United States and the Gulf of Mexico; also about midway between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. The climate is delightful, being mild three-fourths of the year, though the summers are warmer and its winters colder than are the same seasons in Salt Lake Valley.

The soil is a rich black loam, in places intermingled with sand and clay, and is from two to ten feet in depth, with a subsoil of a fine quality of clay. Both climate and soil are favorable to the production of all the fruits and vegetables of the warm temperate climate; not only the hardy cereals such as oats, barley, wheat, rye, buckwheat, corn, etc., but also tobacco, cotton, flax, sweet potatoes, and all other common vegetables, also apples, pears, apricots, persimmons, plums of many varieties, the luscious peach, the delicious grape, and a great many kinds of berries . . .

Though the supply of timber useful for lumbering purposes is nearly exhausted, you still find luxuriant growth of hickory, some black walnut, a variety of oaks, plenty of elm, cherry, honey-locust, mulberry, basswood, and box elder, huge sycamore and cottonwood in the river bottoms, also hard and soft maple. Formerly many wild animals roamed over the prairies, or lived in the woods, such as the buffalo, elk, deer, bear, wolf, beaver, and many smaller animals, together with wild turkeys, geese, quail, and a variety of singing birds. In short, it was once the hunter's paradise. Civilization, however, has driven away nearly all these animals, especially the larger ones; but they are replaced by the domestic species so useful to man, both for food and clothing, as well as rendering him valuable assistance in his labors.

The clay, of which there is unlimited quantities, makes a fine quality of brick, and at no very great distances are stone quarries which supply a good quality of lightcolored sandstone, so that substantial building material may be said to be plentiful. Such is the land of Zion as I found it — a land with resources well nigh unlimited — a land yielding an abundance of all useful products, though but indifferently cultivated by the husbandmen who possess it — a land of surpassing loveliness, though its beauties are marred rather than increased by those who inhabit it.

The land being thus bountiful in its products when it is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, the mind naturally inquires, what will it be when the curse shall be removed — when it shall be possessed by the Saints of the Most High, who will consecrate liberally of their substance for the building of Zion; and all their exertions will be to glorify God, and benefit mankind—when covetousness is subdued and virtue and righteousness shall reign in every heart—and when under the blessings of Jehovah the land shall yield in its strength? When the glory of Lebanon shall be brought to Zion, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box tree together; when for brass will be brought gold; and for iron, silver; for wood, brass; and for stones, iron; to glorify the place of God's Sanctuary! Surely when this shall come to pass, the land of Zion shall be the perfection of beauty!—Contributor, Vol 7:4.

Temple in Jackson County Described

By Orson Pratt (From Discourse delivered in Tabernacle, October 26, 1879.)

"We went there because the Lord told us to go. We settled upon the very spot where the Lord commanded us. We commenced to lay the foundation of a temple about three-quarters of a mile from Independence, Jackson County, Missouri. It was then a wilderness, with large trees on the temple block. I visited that place forty-seven years afterwards, namely, a year ago last September, and not a tree was to be found on that temple block—not so much as a stump—everything seemed to be cleared off, and one would scarcely know, unless very well acquainted with the ground, where the temple site was located. There, however, we expect to build a temple different from all other temples in some respects. It will be built much larger, cover a larger area of ground, far larger than this Tabernacle covers, and this Tabernacle will accommodate from 12,000 to 15,000 people. We expect to build a temple much larger, very much larger, according to the revelation God gave to us forty years ago in regard to that temple. But you may ask in what form will it be built? Will it be built in one large room, like this Tabernacle! No; there will be twenty-four different compartments in the Temple that will be built in Jackson County. The names of these compartments were given to us some forty-five or forty-six years ago; the names we still have, and when we build these twenty-four rooms, in a circular form and arched over the center, we shall give the names to all these different compartments just as the Lord specified through Joseph Smith. Now, our enemies do not believe one word of this. They think we are enthusiastic, they think that this is all nonsense, and I do not know but there may be some of the Latter-day Saints that begin to partake of the same spirit, owing to their assimilating themselves so much to the fashion of the world, that they have lost their strong and powerful faith in that which God has predicted by the mouth of his servants. Perhaps you may ask for what purpose these twenty-four compartments are to be built. I answer not to assemble the outside world in, nor to assemble the Saints all in one place, but these buildings will be built with a special view to the different orders, or in other words, the different quorums or councils of the two Priesthoods that God has ordained on the earth That is the object of having twenty-four rooms so that each of these different quorums whether they be High Priests or Seventies, or Elders, or Bishops, or lesser Priesthood, or Teachers, or Deacons, or Patriarchs, or Apostles, or High Councils, or whatever may be the duties that are assigned to them, they will have rooms in the Temple of the Most High God adapted, set apart, constructed, and dedicated for this special purpose. Now, I have not only told you that we shall have these rooms, but I have told you the object of these rooms in short, not in full. But will there be any other buildings, excepting those twenty-four rooms that are all joined together in a circular form and arched over the center—are there any other rooms that will be built—detached from the Temple. Yes. There will be tabernacles, there will be meeting houses for the assembling of the people on the Sabbath day. There will be various places of meeting so that the people may gather together; but the Temple will be dedicated to the Priesthood of the Most High God, and for most sacred and holy purposes. Then you see that, notwithstanding all these Temples that are now building in this Territory, and those that have been built before we came here, in Kirtland and Nauvoo, the Lord is not confined to an exact pattern in relation to these Temple buildings in the different Stakes any more than He is confined in the creation of worlds to make them all of the same size. He does not make them all of one size, nor does He set them rolling on their axis in the same plane, nor does He construct any in many respects alike; there is variation as much as there is in the human form. Take men and women. There are general outlines that are common to all, but did you ever see two faces alike among all the millions of the human family? What a great variety, and yet all are constructed in general outline alike—after the image of God. So in regard to the building of Temples. The Lord will not confine Himself to any one special method to be so many feet long, so many feet wide, and so many places for the Priesthood to stand, but He will construct His Temples in a great variety of ways, and by and by, when the more perfect order shall exist we shall construct them, through the aid of revelation, in accordance with the Temples that exist in yonder heaven. And when I speak of yonder heaven I do not refer to that kind of heaven, the sectarian world sings about, beyond the bounds of time and space. I have no reference to any heaven beyond space, but I have reference to the heaven that the Lord has sanctified and made heaven in other worlds that he has created, consisting of all kinds of materials the same as our world is, and when this world passes through its various ordeals, it, too, by and by, will pass away and die like the body of man and be resuscitated again, a new heaven and a new earth, eternal in its nature. The new worlds that are thus constructed and quickened by the fullness of the celestial glory will be the heavens where the Gods will dwell, or in other words, those that are made like unto God, when their bodies are changed in all respects like unto His glorious body, changed from materiality and cleansed from sin and redeemed, they will then be immortal and dwell in a heavenly world. Now, in this world there will be Temples, and these Temples will be constructed according to the most perfect law of the celestial kingdom, for the world in which they are built or in which they stand will be a celestial body. This last Temple that I am speaking of, or this last one to be built in Jackson County, Missouri, will be constructed after that heavenly pattern in all particulars. Why? Because it will never perish, it will exist forever. "What! Do you mean to say," says one, "that the materials of that temple will not wear?" "Do you mean to say," some of you may inquire in your hearts, "that age will have no effect upon the walls and the materials of that temple?" This is what I mean—I mean to say that not only the Temple, but all the buildings that shall be built round about that Temple, and the city that will be built round about it, which will be called the New Jerusalem, will be built of materials that never will decay. "But," says one, "that will be contrary to the laws of nature." You may cite me to some of the buildings that existed before Christ that were built out of the most durable materials that could be found, and yet when the storms of hail, rain and snow came, these buildings began to waste away until they could scarcely be recognized. Well, I do not ask you to think that this Temple and the city round about it will defy the rough hand of time and the work of the elements of our globe, and exist forever, so far as natural laws are concerned; but there is a principle higher than these natural laws. Did you never think of it—a higher principle, a higher kingdom that governs all these laws of nature, such as you and I have been accustomed to understand ever since our youth. I say there is a higher law, a controlling power over all the laws of nature, that will prevent these buildings from decaying; and I wish while dwelling upon this subject to say a little about another subject; that is, the building up of Palestine with the New Jerusalem. It will be the old Jerusalem rebuilt upon its former site. Now, will that city ever be destroyed; will it ever decay? Will the Temple to be built in Palestine ever be thrown down or ever be furrowed with hail, rain, snow and frost—will these ever have any effect upon it? No, not in the least. Why? Because God will be there. So He will be in the temple of Zion on this continent, and by His power, by His laws—which are superior to all those grosser laws of nature—He will preserve both of these cities, one on the western hemisphere, and one on the eastern hemisphere, from any decay whatever. Now, we have it recorded here in this book, in the 31st chapter of Jeremiah, that this city on the eastern continent shall not be thrown down any more forever. It seems, therefore, to be an eternal city, never to be destroyed. "But," says one, "I cannot believe that; I cannot believe but what these cities will be subject, just as much as anything else, to decay." Do you believe this good book—the Bible? If you do, you are obliged to believe that such things are possible. Do you want to know some of them? I will mention one instance. You will recollect that Moses commanded Aaron to take a pot of manna and lay it before the Lord, to be kept for their generations. Now it was a noted fact that if the children of Israel gathered more manna than would last them until after the next morning, it would decay, but on the last day before the Sabbath they gathered manna for two days, and they found that on the Sabbath day it was preserved. Who preserved it? Why did it last two days instead of one? Because God counteracted those lesser laws, or laws of nature, by His divine power, which is greater than them all and He therefore preserved for two days that which would not last longer on the other days of the week than twenty-four hours. Well, we find that the Lord ordered the manna to be placed in the tabernacle to be kept for their generations, that they might see the bread wherewith He had fed them in the wilderness when He brought them forth from the land of Egypt. Did that manna decay? No, it remained fresh and pure in the tabernacle. Why? Because God was there; His divine power was there; a miracle was wrought to counteract the general laws of nature such as we generally understand them to be, and this manna was preserved from generation to generation. Now the Being that could produce this effect upon a small quantity of substance—on a pot of manna, could He not do the same in regard to whole buildings, or is His arm so limited that He has to work in a little narrow corner and preserve a little handful of manna from spoiling through decay? I would say that the same Being that could perform this, which we might term a lesser miracle, could extend the same power to stone, wood, and to all kinds of metal and material that might enter into the construction of a Temple. Shall I limit that power to the preserving of a Temple! No. The same Being could preserve the city round about the Temple, hence it is a city that shall never be destroyed nor thrown down from that time henceforth and forever. God will be in the city. He will take care that the building materials suffer nothing from the laws of nature. He will take care that the city is illuminated by His divine power, and especially the Temple, the most sacred of all the Temples, where He will have His throne, where the Twelve Apostles will have their thrones, as the judges of the twelve tribes of Israel; He will take care that there is nothing in that Temple that shall decay in the least degree. So it will be in the New Jerusalem. Zion upon this great western hemisphere will have a city called the New Jerusalem (because it has never been built before) and God will preserve it by His divine power."

J. D. Vol. 24, pp. 24-27.

The Great Temple Seen in Vision

Diary of Joseph Lee Robinson

We had adopted the rule of attending to our family prayers at precisely six o'clock in the evening. At this time the Saints were in their deepest trouble. On a Sunday evening, after reading a portion of the scriptures as usual, we knelt down to attend to our secret prayers. After addressing the Throne of Grace and saying a few words, we commenced to pray for the Saints of Zion, when a heavenly vision opened to my view. A light, a beautiful light, was present before my eyes. It was in the shape and color of a rainbow, only the bow was turned down. It was perfect in shape and moved as a pendulum of a clock, back and forth, with prefect exactness. I gazed upon it for a length of time as it grew brigther until it was the purest and brightest light I ever had seen. Then as quick as thought, a very large building was present before my eyes. It was far enough away for me to have a good view. I gazed with wonder and astonish- ment upon a large and very beautiful house built of hewn gray stone, gray rock polished in with white joints, with large and beautiful windows and door sills and caps. It was altogether the largest, most impressing and beautiful building I had ever seen.

As soon as the house appeared this extraordinary light was out of my sight. Presently the voice of the Good Shepherd said to me: "This house you see is the temple of the Living God that shall be built in this generation by the hands of the Latter-day Saints, upon the consecrated spot in Jackson County, Missouri." Presently, after this and as quick as thought, I found myself in a room of that house. To me it was a heavenly place. In front of me, in the other end of the room, there was a stand, a large and beautiful stand with drapes and curtains. Over this stand this marvelous light that had led me to Zion was waving magnificently. Then the same voice said: "This is the Temple of the Living God that shall be built by the hands of the Latter-day Saints in this generation upon the consecrated spot in Jackson County, Missouri, and the pure in heart shall see the face of the Father and live. For the light you see is the glory of God that shall fill the house." Again, as quick as thought, I was removed to my former position where I gazed with wonder and admiration upon the wonderful house of God. While I was able to see the exterior of the house, the wonderful light was not visible, and I gazed again in admiration but when the house disappeared the light was visible again, waving in perfect motion until it gradually vanished from my sight and the vision closed.

I arose from my knees, my face wet with tears. "Glory to God in the highest," I exclaimed, "I have seen the Temple of the living God." My wife said after I started to pray I remained quiet for some length of time. I know and have testified many times that I know that whatever might befall the Saints, the Temple of the living God will be built by the Saints — the Latter-day Saints — in this generation.

The Great Temple and City to be Eternal

By Orson Pratt (Excerpts from Sermon delivered in Logan, Utah, November 1, 1879.)

Now there will be this difference between that city and the cities and Temples which are being built. The cities and temples which we are now engaged in building, we expect to decay; we expect the rock and the various building materials will in time waste away, according to natural laws. But when we build that great central city, the New Jerusalem, there will be no such thing as the word decay associated with it; it will not decay any more than the pot of manna which was gathered by the children of Israel and put into a sacred place in the ark of the covenant. It was preserved from year to year by the power of God; so will He preserve the city of New Jerusalem, the dwelling houses, the tabernacles, the Temples, etc., from the effects of storms and time. It is intended that it will be taken up to heaven, when the earth passes away. It is intended to be one of those choice and holy places where the Lord will dwell, when He shall visit from time to time, in the midst of the great latter-day Zion, after it shall be connected with the City of Enoch. That, then, is the difference.

The Lord our God will command His servants to build that Temple in the most perfect order, differing very much from the Temples that are now being built. You are engaged in building Temples after a certain order, approximating only to a celestial order; you are doing this in Salt Lake City. One already has been erected in St. George, after a pattern in part of a celestial order. But by and by, when we build a Temple that is never to be destroyed, it will be constructed, after the most perfect order of the celestial worlds. And when God shall take it up into heaven, it will be found to be just as perfect as the cities of more ancient, celestial worlds which have been made pure and holy and immortal. So it will be with other Temples. And we, in order to build a Temple, after a celestial order in the fulness of perfection, will need revelators and prophets in our midst, who will receive the word of the Lord; who will have the whole pattern thereof given by revelation, just as much as everything was given by revelation pertaining to the tabernacle erected in the wilderness by Moses. Indeed, before we can go back to inherit this land in all its fulness of perfection, God has promised that He would raise up a man like Moses. Who this man will be I do not know; it may be a person with whom we are entirely unacquainted; it may be one of our infant children; it may be some person not yet born; it may be someone of middle age. But suffice it to say, that God will raise up such a man, and He will show forth His power through him, and through the people that he will lead forth to inherit that country, as He did through our fathers in the wilderness. Did He then display His power by dividing the waters? Yes. Did the mountains and land shake under His power? Yes. Did He speak to the people by his own voice? Yes. Did He converse with Moses face to face? Yes. Did He show Him His glory? Yes. Did He unfold to him in one moment more than all our schools and academies, and universities could give us in ten thousand years? Yes. God will assuredly raise up a man, like unto Moses, and redeem His people, with an outstretched arm, as their fathers were redeemed, at the first, going before them with His own presence, and will also surround them by His angels. I expect, when that time comes, that man will understand all the particulars in regard to the Temple to be built in Jackson County. Indeed we have already a part of the plan revealed, and also the plat explaining how the city of Zion is to be laid off, which may be found commencing on page 438, Volume 14 of the Millennial Star. From what has been revealed of this Temple to be erected, we can readily perceive that it will differ from anything that we have had. It will differ in regard to the number of rooms; it will differ very much in its outward and also in its inward form; and it will differ in regard to the duties to be performed in each of its rooms to be occupied by the respective departments of priesthood. This house will be reared then, according to a certain plan, which God is to make known to His servant whom He will, in His own due time, raise up. And He will have to give more revelation on other things equally as important, for we shall need instructions how to build up Zion; how to establish the center city; how to lay off the streets; the kind of ornamental trees to adorn the sidewalks, as well as everything else by way of beautifying it, and making it a city of perfection, as David prophetically calls it.

And then God will come and visit it; it will be a place where He will have His throne, where He will sit occasionally as King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and reign over His people who will occupy the great western continent; the same as He will have His throne at Jerusalem. "Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is Mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King." And again He says: "Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined." Does the Psalmist mean that God will shine literally out of Zion? Yes, shine with light that will be seen by the righteous and the wicked also.

For fear of taking up too much of the time, I will bring my remarks to a close. I will say, however, I desire greatly that the Lord will bless the Latter-day Saints, and bless His servants that some, at least, may have the pleasure of entering into all the perfection of this glory, here in this temporal life; while the more aged, the gray, haired and gray bearded like myself, will perhaps pass away, if the Lord requires it. And that our sons may rise up after us, being filled with the power and Spirit of God, to carry out His great and righteous purposes, even to completion.

I pray God to bless the inhabitants of Logan and those of the towns round about in this valley, and throughout all our mountain regions; and that His peculiar blessings and favor may continue to attend us while we sojourn in these mountains, and go with us when Zion shall be redeemed in all its fulness. Amen.

J. D., Vol. 21:153-4.

Temple to be Built Before Second Coming

By Orson Pratt (Excerpts from Discourse delivered in Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, May 20, 1855)

A great work has to be brought about; how many years, or scores of years, it will be, I know not, but from the scenes we behold among the people, the breaking up of the nations, and the signs of the times, and the present aspects of the European war, and from the shutting up and closing up of the proclamation of the Gospel in many lands, the coming of Christ seems to be near at hand, yet Zion must be redeemed before that day, the temple must be built upon the consecrated spot, the cloud and glory of the Lord rest upon it, and the Lamanites; many of them, brought in, and they must build up the New Jerusalem! It is true, so says the Book of Mormon, "that inasmuch as the Gentiles receive the Gospel, they shall assist my people the remnant of Jacob, saith the Lord, to build the New Jerusalem." And when they have it built, then we are told that they shall assist my people who are of Jacob to be gathered in unto the New Jerusalem. Only a few thousand or hundreds of thousands, then, are to be engaged in this work, and then, after it is done, we are to assist the Lamanites to gather in; and then shall the powers of heaven be in your midst; and then is the coming of Christ.

J. D., 3-17-18.

Many of You will Assist in Building the Temple

By President Lorenzo Snow

(Remarks made at a reunion of the authorities of the Priesthood in the Weber Stake, held on June 12, 1901, in the Fifth Ward Assembly Hall.)

Many of you will be living in Jackson County and there you will be assisting in building the Temple; and if you will not have seen the Lord Jesus at that time you may expect Him very soon, to see Him, to eat and drink with Him, to shake hands with Him and to invite Him to your houses as He was invited when He was here before. I am saying things to you now which I know something of the truth of them. I feel with all my heart to say God bless you from the President down to the Counselors of the Bishops and all of you. God has blessed you with light and knowledge; and all those within the sound of my voice who have not received a perfect understanding of their prospects and what they may reach in the next life, I want you to so live and to so exercise your faith that you may go into the Temple and receive your higher blessing, and have there unfolded to your view the glorious prospects for which the Latter-day Saints have struggled and suffered and for which they have been driven and driven until they finally located here. I suppose I am talking to some who have had worry and trouble and heart burnings and persecution, and have at times been caused to think that they never expected to endure quite so much. But for everything you have suffered, for everything that has occurred to you which you thought an evil at that time, you will receive four-fold, and that suffering will have a tendency to make you better and stronger and to feel that you have been blessed. When you look back over your experiences you will then see that you have advanced far ahead and have gone up several rounds of the ladder toward exaltation and glory. Deseret News, June 15, 1901.

Are we Prepared to Build the New Jerusalem?

By President Brigham Young

Suppose the word should come, "Return and build up the centre stake of Zion," are we ready for it? No. I have often alluded to our mechanics. We have not a mechanic that would know how to lay the first stone for the foundation of the wall around the New Jerusalem, to say nothing about the Temples of our God. Are you prepared for the day of vengeance to come, when the Lord will consume the wicked by the brightness of His coming? No. Then do not be too anxious for the Lord to hasten His work. Let our anxiety be centered upon this one thing, the sanctification of our own hearts, the purifying of our own affections, the preparing of ourselves for the approach of the events that are hastening upon us. This should be our concern, this should be our study, this should be our daily prayer and not to be in a hurry to see the overthrow of the wicked. Be careful, for if they were all to be overthrown at once, how many would there be left that are called Saints? Not as many as I would have remain; not as many as you would like to have remain. We are prepared for the day that is approaching, let us then prepare ourselves for the presence of our Master—for the coming of the Son of Man.

The Deseret News, Vol. 11, No. 9, May 1, 1861.

Cornerstone of Great Temple Laid in 1831

By Orson Pratt

We will build a great city in Missouri. We will also build a great temple unto the Lord our God, in that city, and the temple block and place where it is to stand is already known. It was laid out in the year 1831, and the cornerstone laid, and we will build a temple there, and build it after the pattern that the Lord gave to his servant Joseph the Prophet, and also according to the pattern that he shall hereafter show, if the pattern is not already given in full. I will tell you another thing that will happen in our promised land, after that temple is built; there will be a cloud of glory rest upon that temple by day, the same as the cloud rested upon the tabernacle of Moses, that was carried in the wilderness. Not only that, but also a flaming fire will rest upon the temple by night, covering the whole temple; and if you go inside the temple, the glory of God will be seen there as it was anciently; for the Lord will not only be a glory and a defense on the outside of that wonderful building, but he will also be a glory and a power in the inside thereof, and it shall come to pass that every man and every woman who is pure in heart, who shall go inside of that temple, will see the Lord. Now, how great a blessing it will be to see the Lord of Hosts as we see one another in the flesh. That will take place, but not till after the temple is built. Moreover, you will not only be favored with this great privilege, but Isaiah tells us that "the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night." When you hold your meetings in the day time, you shall be sheltered by a cloud, and when you hold your meetings in the night time, instead of lighting up your lamps with common oil, or with gas, or anything of this kind, you will have no need of any artificial light, for the Lord God will be the light thereof, and his glory will be there and you will see it and you will hear his voice. Have you not read in this book called the Bible, about the Lord suddenly coming into his temple? Read the 3rd chapter of Malachi: "Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek shall come to his temple * * * And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." That same fire will rest upon the abodes of those that come into that temple, and they will be filled with fire and the Holy Ghost. They will be purged of all iniquity, and every ordinance that will be administered in that temple will be administered by holy hands, and you will understand and know the meaning thereof. The Lord will reveal these things in their day; he will reveal everything that is needful, so that the knowledge of God may rest upon you, and that there may be no darkness with you. Amen. J. D., Vol. 21:330-31.
