N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter XVII

THE FAR WEST TEMPLE SITE

Dedicatory Services of the Far West Temple Site

July 4 (1838) * * * The cornerstones of the House of the Lord, agreeable to the commandments of the Lord unto us, given April 26, 1838,fn were laid.

Joseph Smith, Junior, was president of the day; Hyrum Smith, vice-president; Sidney Rigdon, orator; Reynolds Cahoon, chief marshall; George M. Hinckle and J. Hunt, assistant marshals, and George W. Robinson, clerk.

The order of the day was splendid. The procession commenced forming at 10 o'clock a.m., in the following order: First, the infantry (militia); second, the Patriarchs of the Church; the president, vice-president, and orator; the Twelve Apostles, presidents of the stakes, and High Council; Bishop and counselors; architects, ladies and gentlemen. The calvary brought up the rear of the large procession, which marched to music, and formed a circle with the ladies in front, round the excavation. The southeast cornerstone of the Lord's House in Far West, Missouri, was then laid by the presidents of the stake assisted by twelve men. The southwest corner, by the presidents of the Elders, assisted by twelve men. The northwest corner by the Bishop, assisted by twelve men. The northeast corner by the president of the Teachers, assisted by twelve men. This house is to be one hundred and ten feet long, and eighty feet broad.

The oration was delivered by President Rigdon, at the close of which was a shout of Hosanna, and a song, composed for the occasion by Levi W. Hancock, was sung by Solomon Hancock. The most perfect order prevailed throughout the day.

Documentary History of Church, Vol. 3:41-2.

(For History of Events between July 4, 1838, and April 26, 1839, sec footnote 2.)

SOUTHWEST CORNERSTONE OF THE FAR WEST TEMPLE SITE. The site was dedicated on July 4, 1838, by Brigham Young. (To the left, Wilford C. Wood; to the right, Samuel O. Bennion)

The Far West Temple Site Re-Dedicated

Friday, April 26 (1839): Early this morning, soon after midnight, the brethren arrived at Far West, and proceeded to transact the business of their mission according to the following minutes. * * *

Elder Alpheus Cutler, the master workman of the house, then re-commenced laying the foundation of the Lord's House, agreeable to revelation, by rolling up a large stone near the southeast corner. The following of the Twelve were present: Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page and John Taylor, who proceeded to ordain Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith (who had been previously nominated by the First Presidency, accepted by the Twelve and acknowledged by the Church), to the office of Apostles and members of the quorum of the Twelve, to fill the places of those who are fallen. Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer (who had just been liberated from the Richmond prison, where they had been confined for the cause of Jesus Christ), were then ordained to the office of the Seventies.

The Twelve then offered up vocal prayer in the following order: Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith. After which we sang Adam-ondi-Ahman, and then the Twelve took their leave of the following saints, agreeable to the revelation. * * *

Elder Alpheus Cutler then placed the stone before alluded to in its regular position, after which, in consequence of the peculiar situation of the Saints, he thought it wisdom to adjourn until some future time, when the Lord shall open the way; expressing his determination then to proceed with the building; whereupon the conference adjourned.

Brigham Young, President.

John Taylor, Clerk.

Thus was fulfilled a revelation of July 8, 1838,<#:1>1a which our enemies had said could not be fulfilled, as no "Mormon" would be permitted to be in the state.fn,fn

D. H. C., Vol. 3:336-9.

The Rise and Fall of Far West

The first settlement of the Saints in the vicinity of Far West was made in October, 1836. By July following about one hundred buildings had been erected, eight of which were stores. Some non-members of the Church expressed a desire to establish saloons in the growing town, and endeavored to induce some of the brethren to sell intoxicants on commission for them, but the High Council resolved not to sustain any persons as members of the Church who would become retailers of spirituous liquors. A general conference of the Church was held at Far West in October, 1837, at which difficulties were adjusted, covenants renewed, and all things set in order. It was voted to enlarge the town plat so that it would contain four sections—two miles square. The conference voted not to support any store or shops selling spirituous liquors, tea, coffee or tobacco.

In 1836, Caldwell county, of which Far West was the county seat, was a wilderness. By the spring of 1838 the population was more than 5,000, of which more than 4,900 were Latter-day Saints, composed of sturdy pioneers, craftsmen, skilled mechanics, artisans. During the year 1838 persecution and mobocracy grew by leaps and bounds against the Saints, encouraged by the extermination order of Gov. Lilburn W. Boggs of Missouri, which was dated Oct. 27, 1838. Joseph Smith, with others, had been taken as hostages and prisoners and were compelled to listen to the filthy obscenity of those who watched them, and hear them relate their deeds of rapine and murder. The arms were taken from the citizens of Far West, and under pretext of searching for arms, the mobocrats ransacked every house, tore up the floors, upset haystacks, destroyed property, shot down cattle for mere sport, and the people, robbed of their most valuable property, were insulted and whipped. The chastity of women was defiled by force; some were strapped to benches and repeatedly ravished by brutes until they died from the effects of this treatment. Joseph Smith and others were courtmartialed to be shot, this court being composed of the traitor Hinkle and about twenty sectarian priests of various denominations, with Judge Austin A. King and Attorney Thomas Burch participating. The order of this courtmartial was that the prisoners should be shot on the public square of Far West in the morning, at 9 o'clock. fnGeneral Donophan's reply to the order of execution read: "It is cold-blooded murder. I will not obey your order. My brigade shall march for Liberty tomorrow morning at 8 o'clock; and if you execute these men, I will hold you responsible before an earthly tribunal, so help me God."

For more complete information on the burning of homes, killing and expulsion of the Saints from Far West, consult Vol. 1, Comprehensive History of the Church, by Elder B. H. Roberts; also Elder Roberts' book, Missouri Persecutions. 236 Contributor, Vol. 7; Times and Seasons, 4:247-251; D.H.C., 3:322-326.

Revelation, given through Joseph, the Seer, at Far West, Missouri, April 26, 1838, making known the will of God concerning the building up of this place, and of the Lord's House.

For thus shall my church be called in the last day, even the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Verily I say unto you all, Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations.

And that the gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her Stakes, may be for a defence, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth.

Let the city, Far West, be a holy and consecrated land unto me, and it shall be called most holy, for the ground upon which thou standest is holy;

Therefore I command you to build unto me, for the gathering together of my saints, that they may worship me;

And let there be a beginning of this work, and a foundation, and a preparatory work, this following summer;

And let the beginning be made on the 4th day of July next, and from that time forth let my people labor diligently to build an house unto my name.

And in one year from this day let them re-commence laying the foundation of my house;

Thus let them from that time forth labor diligently until it shall be finished, from the cornerstone thereof unto the top thereof, until there shall not anything remain that is not finished.

Verily I say unto you, let not my servant Joseph, neither my servant Sidney, neither my servant Hyrum, get in debt any more for the building of an house unto my name;

But let an house be built unto my name according to the pattern which I will show unto them.

And if my people build it not according to the pattern which I shall show unto their Presidency, I will not accept it at their hands;

But if my people do build it according to the pattern which I shall show unto their Presidency, even my servant Joseph and his counselors, then I will accept it at the hands of my people.

And again, verily I say unto you, it is my will that the city of Far West should be built up speedily by the gathering of my saints,

And also that other places should be appointed for Stakes in the regions round about, as they shall be manifest unto my servant Joseph from time to time;

For behold, I will be with him, and I will sanctify him before the people, for unto him have I given the keys of this kingdom and ministry. Even so. Amen.

Doc. & Cov., D&C 115:4-19.

1a Revelation, given through Joseph, the Seer, at Far West, Missouri, July 8, 1836, in answer to the question, "Show us thy will, O Lord, concerning the Twelve?"

Verily, thus saith the Lord, let a conference be held immediately, let the Twelve be organized, and let men be appointed to supply the place of those who are fallen.

Let my servant Thomas remain for a season in the land of Zion, to publish my word.

Let the residue continue to preach from that hour, and if they will do this in all lowliness of heart, in meekness and humility, and long suffering, I, the Lord, give unto them a promise that I will provide for their families, and an effectual door shall be opened for them, from henceforth;

And next spring let them depart to go over the great waters, and there promulgate my gospel, the fulness thereof, and bear record of my name.

Let them take leave of my saints in the city of Far West, on the 26th day of April next, on the building spot of my house, saith the Lord.

Let my servant John Taylor, and also my servant John E. Page, and also my servant Wilford Woodruff, and also my servant Willard Richards, be appointed to fill the places of those who have fallen, and be officially notified of their appointment.

Doc. & Cov., D&C 118.

2 Narration by George Q. Cannon: A great many have wondered how it is that the Latter-day Saints are so anxious to have temples built. We built a temple in Kirtland, and after we had built it we were compelled to leave it and flee to Missouri. We laid the foundations of two in Missouri, one in Jackson County, the other in Caldwell County. That in Caldwell was not laid until after we were driven from there. A revelation was given through Joseph Smith, I think, on the 11th day of July, 1838, that on the succeeding 26th day of April, the foundation stone of the temple should be laid in Far West; and the Twelve Apostles should take their departure from that cornerstone, and cross the ocean to preach the gospel in Europe. Now, said the mob, "There being a date fixed to this revelation, if Joseph Smith never was a false prophet before, we will make him one now." And they turned and drove the Latter-day Saints from Missouri, and made it worth a man's life to go back there if he was a Mormon. They drove every one out of Missouri, under a ban of extermination, in the winter previous to the time set for the fulfillment of this revelation. That was in the winter of 1838-9; and there were but very few left, and they were in peril of their lives all the time. Joseph, Hyrum and several of the leading Elders were in prison, and it seemed as though the words of Joseph would fall to the ground that time, at any rate. President Young was then President of the Twelve Apostles; he with others had to flee to Quincy, and he proposed to his fellow Apostles that they should go up to Missouri, to fulfill that revelation. Father Joseph Smith, father of the Prophet, thought that the Lord would take the will for the deed, and it would not be necessary. He felt as though there would be great danger in the undertaking, and that the brethren's lives would be in peril. A good many of the Elders felt the same, but the Spirit rested upon President Young and his brother Apostles, and they determined to go, and they did go, and, according to the revelation, they laid the cornerstone in the town of Far West. They laid it in the midst of their enemies; they sang their songs, ordained two of the Twelve, and if I recollect right, two of the Seventies, and then shook hands with the Saints there, bade them adieu, and took their departure for Europe, thus fulfilling the word of God given nearly a year previously through the Prophet Joseph, and which the enemies of the Kingdom of God said should never be fulfilled. J. D., 14:319-20.

3 Narration by President John Taylor: Well, the Twelve were told to go to Far West, some 200 miles distant from Quincy, Illinois, where many of the Saints were then staying. We did not have railroads then whereby we could travel as we do now. We had to go with our teams, and we had to go among a people that would kill every one of us as quick as they would rattlesnakes. We were told to go and lay the foundation stone of the Temple, and thus fulfill the revelation that had been given on the subject. Arrived at the spot, we prayed and sang hymns. We had with us a man that was appointed by revelation for that work — Alpheus Cutler, Bishop A. A. Kimball's grandfather. The stone was duly laid according to the order which was designed after which right upon the foundation stone, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith were ordained into the Quorum of the Twelve, and Norman Shearer and Darwin Chase into the Seventies. Chase apostatized, and was afterwards with the soldiers under Colonel Connor's command who had a fight with the Indians on Bear River a number of years ago, where he was mortally wounded. Many people declared that this revelation would never be fulfilled. But it was fulfilled; and we took our departure for Europe.

Now, it was not a nice thing, after being pillaged, robbed, and driven from our homes, to leave our families and proceed on a mission to Europe. But the Twelve had to do it, and they did do it. There were two that did not go—John E. Page and William Smith, and both of them apostatized. The wrench<#:5>a that the Prophet Joseph spake about was too much for them. But the rest went. They felt it was an honor to go on that mission even under such unpropitious circumstances.

a (I heard the Prophet say, in speaking to the Twelve on one occasion: "You will have all kinds of trials to pass through. And it is quite necessary for you to be tried as it was for Abraham and other men of God, and (said he) God will feel after you, and He will take hold of you and wrench your very heart strings, and if you cannot stand it you will not be fit for an inheritance in the Celestial Kingdom of God.") J. D., Vol. 24:197.
