N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter XVIII

PALESTINE DEDICATED FOR THE RETURN OF JUDAH

By Orson Hyde

O Thou! who are from everlasting to everlasting, eternally and unchangeable the same, even the God who rules in the heavens above, and controls the destinies of men on the earth, wilt Thou not condescend, through Thine infinite goodness and royal favor, to listen to the prayer of Thy servant which he this day offers up unto Thee in the name of Thy holy child Jesus, upon this land, where the Sun of Righteousness set in blood, and thine Anointed One expired.

ORSON HYDE

Be pleased, O Lord, to forgive all the follies, weaknesses, vanities, and sins of Thy servant, and strengthen him to resist all future temptations. Give him prudence and discernment that he may avoid the evil, and a heart to choose the good; give him fortitude to bear up under trying and adverse circumstances, and grace to endure all things for Thy name's sake, until the end shall come, when all the Saints shall rest in peace.

Now, O Lord! Thy servant has been obedient to the heavenly visionfn which Thou gavest him in his native land; and under the shadow of Thine outstretched arm, he has safely arrived in this place to dedicate and consecrate this land unto Thee, for the gathering together of Judah's scattered remnants, according to the predictions of the Holy Prophets—for the building up of Jerusalem again after it has been trodden down by the Gentiles so long, and for rearing a Temple in honor of Thy name. Everlasting thanks be ascribed unto Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast preserved Thy servant from the dangers of the seas, and from the plague and pestilence which have caused the land to mourn. The violence of many has also been restrained, and Thy providential care by night and by day has been exercised over Thine unworthy servant. Accept, therefore, O Lord, the tribute of a grateful heart for all past favors, and be pleased to continue Thy kindness and mercy towards a needy worm of the dust.

O Thou, Who didst covenant with Abraham, Thy friend, and Who didst renew that covenant with Isaac, and confirm the same with Jacob with an oath, that Thou wouldst not only give them this land for an everlasting inheritance, but that Thou wouldst also remember their seed forever. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have long since closed their eyes in death, and made the grave their mansion. Their children are scattered and dispersed abroad among the nations of the Gentiles like sheep that have no shepherd, and are still looking forward for the fulfillment of those promises which Thou didst make concerning them; and even this land, which once poured forth nature's richest bounty, and flowed, as it were, with milk and honey, has, to a certain extent, been smitten with barreness and sterility since it drank from murderous hands the blood of Him who never sinned.

Grant, therefore, O Lord, in the name of Thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ, to remove the barrenness and sterility of this land, and let springs of living water break forth to water its thirsty soil. Let the vine and olive produce in their strength, and the figtree bloom and flourish. Let the land become abundantly fruitful when possessed by its rightful heirs; let it again flow with plenty to feed the returning prodigals who come home with a spirit of grace and supplication upon it; let the clouds distil virtue and richness, and let the fields smile with plenty. Let the flocks and the herds greatly increase and multiply upon the mountains and the hills; and let Thy great kindness conquer and subdue the unbelief of Thy people. Do Thou take from them their stony heart, and give them a heart of flesh; and may the Sun of Thy favor dispel the cold mists of darkness which have beclouded their atmosphere. Incline them to gather in upon this land according to Thy word. Let them come like clouds and like doves to their windows. Let the large ships of the nations bring them from the distant isles; and let kings become their nursing fathers, and queens with motherly fondness wipe the tear of sorrow from their eyes.

Thou, O Lord, did once move upon the heart of Cyrus to show favor unto Jerusalem and her children. Do Thou now also be pleased to inspire the hearts of kings and the powers of the earth to look with a friendly eye towards this place, and with a desire to see Thy righteous purposes executed in relation thereto. Let them know that it is Thy good pleasure to restore the kingdom unto Israel—raise up Jerusalem as its capital, and constitute her people a distinct nation and government with David Thy servant, even a descendant from the loins of ancient David to be their king.

Let that nation or that people who shall take an active part in behalf of Abraham's children, and in the raising up of Jerusalem, find favor in Thy sight. Let not their enemies prevail against them, neither let pestilence or famine overcome them, but let the glory of Israel overshadow them, and the power of the Highest protect them; while that nation or kingdom that will not serve Thee in this glorious work must perish, according to Thy word—"Yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted."

Though Thy servant is now far from his home, and from the land bedewed with his earliest fear, yet he remembers, O Lord, his friends who are there, and family, whom for Thy sake he has left. Though poverty and privation be our earthly lot, yet ah! do Thou richly endow us with an inheritance where moth and rust do not corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal.

The hands that have fed, clothed, or shown favor unto the family of Thy servant in his absence, or that shall hereafter do so, let them not lose their reward, but let a special blessing rest upon them, and in Thy kingdom let them have an inheritance when Thou shalt come to be glorified in this society.

Do Thou also look with favor upon all those through whose liberality I have been enabled to come to this land; and in the day when Thou shalt reward all people according to their works; let these also not be passed by or forgotten, but in time let them be in readiness to enjoy the glory of those mansions which Jesus has gone to prepare. Particularly do Thou bless the stranger in Philadelphia,fn whom I never saw, but who sent me gold, with a request that I should pray for him in Jerusalem. Now, O Lord, let blessings come upon him from an unexpected quarter, and let his basket be filled, and his storehouse abound with plenty, and let not the good things of the earth be his only portion, but let him be found among those to whom it shall be said: "Thou hast been faithful over a few things, and I will make thee ruler over many."

O my Father in heaven! I now ask Thee in the name of Jesus to remember Zion, with all her Stakes, and with all her assemblies. She has been grievously afflicted and smitten; she has mourned; she has wept; her enemies have triumphed, and have said, "Ah, where is thy God?" Her Priests and Prophets have groaned in chains and fetters within the gloomy walls of prisons, while many were slain, and now sleep in the arms of death. How long, O Lord, shall iniquity triumph, and sin go unpunished?

Do Thou arise in the majesty of Thy strength, and make bare Thine arm in behalf of Thy people. Redress their wrongs, and turn their sorrow into joy. Pour the spirit of light and knowledge, grace and wisdom, into the hearts of her Prophets, and clothe her Priests with salvation. Let light and knowledge march forth through the empire of darkness, and may the honest in heart flow to their standard, and join in the march to go forth to meet the Bridegroom.

Let a peculiar blessing rest upon the Presidency of Thy Church, for at them are the arrows of the enemy directed. Be Thou to them a sun and a shield, their strong tower and hiding-places; and in the time of distress or danger be Thou near to deliver. Also the quorum of the Twelve, do Thou be pleased to stand by them for Thou knowest the obstacles which they have to encounter, the temptations to which they are exposed, and the privations which they must suffer. Give us (the Twelve) therefore, strength according to our day, and help us to bear a faithful testimony of Jesus and His Gospel, to finish with fidelity and honor the work which Thou hast given us to do, and then give us a place in Thy glorious kingdom. And let this blessing rest upon every faithful officer and member in Thy Church. And all the glory and honor will we ascribe unto God and the Lamb forever and ever. Amen.

On the top of Mount Olives I erected a pile of stones as a witness according to ancient custom. On what was anciently called Mount Zion (Moriah?) where the Temple stood, I erected another, and used the rod according to the prediction upon my head.—D. H. C. Vol. 4, pp. 456-9.

* In the early part of March last (1840), I retired to my bed one evening as usual, and while contemplating and inquiring out, in my own mind, the field of my ministerial labors for the then coming season, the vision of the Lord, like clouds of light, burst upon my view. The cities of London, Amsterdam, Constantinople, and Jerusalem all appeared in succession before me; and the Spirit said unto me, "Here are many of the children of Abraham whom I will gather to the land that I gave to their fathers, and here also is the field of your labors.

"A strict observance of the movements of the Jews, and a careful examination of their faith relative to their expected Messiah—the setting up of His kingdom among them, and the overthrow of the present kingdoms and governments of the Gentiles, will serve to open the eyes of many of the uncircumcised, when faithfully laid before them, that the great day of the Lord comes not upon them unawares as a thief.

"Take, therefore, proper credentials from My People, your brethren, and also from the Governor of your State, with the seal of authority thereon, and go ye forth to the cities which have been shown unto you, and declare these words unto Judah, and say:

"Blow ye the trumpet in the land; cry, gather together; and say, assemble yourselves, and let us go into the defended cities. Let the standard be reared towards Zion. Retire! stay not; for I will bring evil from the north and a great destruction. The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way, he is gone forth from his place to make thy land desolate, and thy cities shall be laid waste without inhabitant. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare is accomplished—that her iniquity is pardoned, for she has received at the Lord's hand double for all her sins. Let your warning voice be heard among the Gentiles as you pass, and call ye upon them in my name for aid and for assistance. With you it mattereth not whether it be little or much; but to me it belongeth to show favor unto them who show favor unto you. Murmur not, therefore, neither be ye sorrowful that the people are slow to hear your petition; but do as has been told you. All things shall work together for your good if you are humble and keep My commandments; for it must needs be that all men be left without excuse, that a righteous retribution may be awarded to all."

—Historical Sketch of Orson Hyde, by Jos. S. Hyde, p. 5.

"The vision continued open about six hours, that I did not close my eyes in sleep. In this time many things were shown unto me which I have never written; neither shall I write them until they are fulfilled in Jerusalem."

—Course of Study for Deacons, 1913, p. 89.

** The footnotes on pages 301-2 of Nephi L. Morris' excellent contribution: "Prophecies of Joseph Smith and Their Fulfillment," are here quoted in full:

Orson Hyde and his companion, John E. Page, departed upon their mission to the Holy Land. This latter had sufficient means to take him to his destination. The former, however, traveled literally "without purse or scrip" as was the practice for the most part among the missionaries of the Church in those days. At Philadelphia, while addressing a gathering of people in the capacity of a preacher of the Gospel, and a missionary on the way to his appointed field of labor, it would appear that he announced the conditions under which he was performing this mission. At the close of the meeting a stranger handed him a purse of gold, with but one request, which was that the Elder remember him in the prayer when he stood upon the Mount of Olives.

In the dedicatory prayer, Orson Hyde remembered the stranger who gave him the gold in Philadelphia: "Do Thou, O Lord, bless him in his basket and his store. May he never lack for the necessities of life, and also Lord, bless him with the riches of eternity."

In Septembr, 1924, the author, in a discourse delivered in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, spoke of the mission of Orson Hyde to the Holy Land, and of the part which he played in dedicating the land of Palestine to the re-gathering of the Jews unto the land of their fathers. Allusion was made to the stranger in Philadelphia who rendered financial aid to Elder Hyde by handing him a purse of gold. The annals of the Church did not contain a single reference to this stranger, except as contained in this narrative. To the surprise of the author, and the enlightenment of the Church upon this interesting but rather obscure incident, the author received a few days afer the discourse was delivered, a letter from a gentleman named John F. Beck, who disclosed the very interesting fact that he was a son of the man who befriended Orson Hyde with monetary aid while on his way to Palestine. The following letter is self-explanatory and is of sufficient interest to warrant its permanent preservation in printed form:

November 22nd, 1924.

My father, Joseph Ellison Beck, born 1810, was the man who sent the purse of gold to Elder Orson Hyde, with which to bear his expenses on his mission to Palestine. He did not have much to say about it, but all our family knew very well that he did that generous deed. He was a humble farmer of moderate means, living in New Jersey where there was a small branch of the Church. Father was no preacher, but he always had prayers in his family, and always paid his tithing. Our family came to Utah in 1850 and after residing in the Ninth Ward, Salt Lake City, eighteen months, we settled in Spanish Fork where we continued to live until father died at the age of ninetythree, having enjoyed good health until within three days of his death. He had fourteen children. They all lived in peace together, and all the children, eight sons and six daughters, grew up and married. I do not know of an apostate among any of father's posterity. He always had plenty for his family and loaned breadstuffs to scores who were in want. He did not become rich, but always had money laid aside for a time of need. I have heard the prayer of Elder Hyde offered up in his behalf, and am a witness that every feature of it was wonderfully fulfilled. (Signed) John F. Beck.
