N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter XIX

ANCIENT RECORDS BRING FORTH LIGHT

Historical Sketch of the Mummies and the Papyrus Found With Them

(For a detailed account, see History of the Church, Vol. 2, pages 236, 238, 286, 349-50; also Josiah Quincy's book, Figures of the Past, page 367.)

In 1828, Antonio Sebolo, the celebrated French traveler, received permission from Mehomet Ali then Viceroy of Egypt, under the protection of Chevalier Drevetti, the French Consul, to explore the catacombs in the vicinity of the ancient city of Thebes. With the aid of 433 Egyptian or Turkish soldiers, and after laboring four months, he entered the catacomb on June 7, 1831, and obtained eleven mummies from among about one hundred that had been embalmed after the first order, there also being two or three hundred that were embalmed after the second and third orders which were in a bad state of decay, as were all of the first order except the eleven he took from the catacomb. On his way from Alexandria to Paris, he put in at Trieste and after ten days' illness, expired (1832). By his will he left the mummies to his nephew, Michael H. Chandler who lived in Philadelphia, but who he thought was in Dublin, to which latter city they were shipped, and upon arriving at Dublin they were reshipped to New York City. Mr. Chandler paid the duty on them and upon opening the coffins for the first time, he discovered that in connection with "two of the bodies was something rolled up with the same kind of linen and saturated with the same bitumen. Two or three other small pieces of papyrus with astronomical calculations, epitaphs, etc., were found with others of the mummies." He was told while yet in the custom house (1833), by a stranger, that there was no man in New York City who could translate his rolls but was referred by the same person to Mr. Joseph Smith who, continued he, "possessed some kind of power or gifts by which he had previously translated similar characters." Mr. Chandler took his collection to Philadelphia and other cities and thence to Kirtland, at which place he met Joseph Smith, the Prophet, for the first time. Before arriving at Kirtland he apparently had disposed of all the mummies except four. The Prophet Joseph made the following notations in his diary respecting this matter:

"On the 3rd of July (1835), Michael H. Chandler came to Kirtland to exhibit some Egyptian mummies. There were four human figures, together with some two or more rolls of papyrus covered with hieroglyphic figures and devices. As Mr. Chandler had been told I could translate them, he brought me some of the characters, and I gave him the interpretation.

"Sunday, July 5: Soon after this, some of the Saints at Kirtland purchased the mummies and papyrus, a description of which will appear hereafter, and with W. W. Phelps and Oliver

Facsimile of Egyptian Plate

EXPLANATION OF CUT SHOWN ON PAGE 242

Fig. 1. Kolob, signifying the first creation, nearest to the celestial, or the residence of God. First in government, the last pertaining to the measurement of time. The measurement according to celestial time, which celestial time signifies one day to a cubit. One day in Kolob is equal to a thousand years, according to the measurement of this earth, which is called by the Egyptians Jah-oh-eh.

Fig. 2. Stands next to Kolob, called by the Egyptians Obliblish, which is the next grand governing creation, near to the celestial or the place where God resides; holding the key of power also, pertaining to other planets; as revealed from God to Abraham, as he offered sacrifice upon an altar, which he had built unto the Lord.

Fig. 3. Is made to represent God, sitting upon his throne, clothed with power and authority; with a crown of eternal light upon his head; representing, also, the grand Key-Words of the Holy Priesthood, as revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden, as also to Seth, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and all to whom the priesthood was revealed.

Fig. 4. Answers to the Hebrew word raukeeyang, signifying expanse or the firmament of the heavens; also a numerical figure, in Egyptian, signifying one thousand; answering to the measuring of the time of Obliblish, which is equal with Kolob in its revolution and in its measuring of time.

Fig. 5. Is called in Egyptian Enish-go-on-dosh. This is one of the governing planets also, and is said by the Egyptians to be the Sun, and to borrow its light from Kolob through the medium of Kae-evanrash, which is the grand Key, or, in other words, the governing power, which governs fifteen other fixed planets or stars, as also Floeese or the Moon, the Earth and the Sun in their annual revolutions. This planet receives its power through the medium of Kli-flos-is-es-, or Hah-ko-kau-beam, the Stars represented by Num. 22 and 23, receiving light from the revolutions of Kolob.

Fig. 6. Represents the earth in its four quarters.

Fig. 7. Represents God sitting upon His throne revealing through the heavens, the grand Key-Words of the priesthood; as, also, the sign of the Holy Ghost unto Abraham, in the form of a dove.

Fig. 8. Contains writing that cannot be revealed unto the world; but is to be had in the Holy Temple of God.

Fig. 9. Ought not to be revealed at the present time.

Fig. 10. Also.

Fig. 11. Also. If the world can find out these numbers, so let it be. Amen.

Figs. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 20, will be given in the own due time of the Lord.

The above translation is given as far as we have any right to give, at the present time.

Cowdery as scribes, I commenced the translation of some of the characters or hieroglyphics, and much to our joy found that one of the rolls contained the writings of Abraham, another the writings of Joseph of Egypt, etc., a more full account of which will appear in its place as I proceed to examine or unfold them. Truly we can say, the Lord is beginning to reveal the abundance of peace and truth.

"July 20, 1835: The remainder of this month I was continually engaged in translating an alphabet to the Book of Abraham, and arranging a grammar of the Egyptian language as practiced by the ancients.

"October 1, 1835: This afternoon I labored on the Egyptian alphabet, in company with Brothers Oliver Cowdery and W. W. Phelps, and during the research, the principles of astronomy as understood by Father Abraham and the ancients, unfolded to our understanding, the particulars of which will appear hereafter.

"December 31, 1835: * * * The record of Abraham and Joseph, found with the mummies, is beautifully written on papyrus, with black, and a small part red ink or paint, in perfect preservation. The characters are such as you find upon the coffins of mummies—hieroglyphics, etc., which many characters of letters like the present (though probably not quite so square) form the Hebrew without points."

The Prophet Joseph translated only a portion of the hieroglyphics found on the papyrus as before related, which portion is now called the Book of Abraham, incorporated in the book called the Pearl of Great Price. This Book of Abraham was first published in the Times and Seasons, Vol. 3, in Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1842.

Lucy Smith, the mother of the Prophet, exhibited these mummies and papyrus, charging the small sum of twenty-five cents. (See Josiah Quincy's book entitled: "Figures of the Past," page 387.) Elder B. H. Roberts told the compiler of this book, that after the death of Lucy Smith, the mummies and papyrus were held in the custody of William Smith, the brother of the Prophet. Later on, to settle some difficulties between William Smith and Isaac Sheen (who later became the Editor of "True Saints Herald," the organ of the Reorganized Church of Latter-day Saints) William Smith transferred the ownership of these to Isaac Sheen. Isaac Sheen in turn transferred them to the Chicago Museum which burned to the ground in the Chicago fire of 1871.

Josiah Quincy visited the Prophet Joseph in Nauvoo but a few months prior to the martyrdom, and in his book entitled Figures of the Past (pages 385-7), the following interesting item is given (by permission):

"And now come with me," said the Prophet, "and I will show you the curiosities." So saying, he led the way to a lower room, where sat a venerable and respectable-looking lady. "This is my mother, gentlemen. The curiosities we shall see belong to her. They were purchased with her own money, at a cost of six thousand dollars," and then, with deep feeling, were added the words, "And that woman was turned out upon the prairie in the dead of night by a mob." There were some pine presses fixed against the wall of the room. These receptacles Smith opened, and disclosed four human bodies, shrunken and black with age. "These are mummies," said the exhibitor. "I want you to look at that little runt of a fellow over there. He was a great man in his day. Why, that was Pharaoh Necho, King of Egypt!" Some parchments inscribed with hieroglyphics were then offered us. They were preserved under glass and handled with great respect. "That is the handwriting of Abraham, the Father of the Faithful," said the prophet. "This is the autograph of Moses, and these lines were written by his brother Aaron. Here we have the earliest account of the Creation, from which Moses composed the First Book of Genesis." The parchment last referred to showed a rude drawing of a man and woman, and a serpent walking upon a pair of legs. I ventured to doubt the propriety of providing the reptile in question with this unusual means of locomotion. "Why, that's as plain as a pikestaff," was the rejoinder. "Before the Fall snakes always went about on legs, just like chickens. They were deprived of them in punishment for their agency in the ruin of man." We were further assured that the prophet was the only mortal who could translate these mysterious writings, and that his power was given by direct inspiration."

In a letter written by W. W. Phelps (who, it will be noted, assisted the Prophet as a scribe in translating the hieroglyphics) to William Smith, dated Nauvoo, Illinois, December 25, 1844, and published in the Times and Seasons, Vol. 5, pp. 757-761, the following item occurs:

"Eternity, agreeably to the records found in the catacombs of Egypt, has been going on in this system (not this world) almost two thousand five hundred and fifty-five millions of years."

It will be noted that none of the writings of Joseph of Egypt were translated. Nothing is known concerning "an alphabet to the Book of Abraham ;" nothing is known concerning a "grammar of the Egyptian language as practiced by the ancients;" and but a small part is known of "the principles of astronomy as understood by Father Abraham and the ancients," and that small part is given in the Book of Abraham. What wonderful information was hidden in those records and not translated! And such carelessness exhibited in not preserving these priceless jewels! Do you suppose that the Lord would permit these wonderful records to be destroyed in that Chicago fire? The compiler says, No. And again, who was that "stranger" that gave Mr. Chandler the information before mentioned? Is it not significant that this "stranger" appeared on the scene at about the right time? These are queries and thoughts that may not be totally groundless.

Again, what wonderful mysteries are hidden in those portions of the Facsimile Cut reproduced in this chapter which are designated as Explanations to Figures 7 to 20! What wonderful depth of knowledge was revealed to the Prophet Joseph in 1835 when he first came in contact with these hieroglyphics, as he translated them; and this was long before he joined the Masonic order.fn

Other Items of Interest

"Father Crosby also related that among other writings found on the mummies were the books of Moses, Enoch, and Abraham; also the book of Jacob which gave an account of the Ten Lost Tribes, their journeyings, present location, their return and manner of their coming to Zion."

"Everlasting covenant was made between three personages

("Sayings of the Prophet Joseph," as gathered by the compiler of this book when visiting St. George, Utah, in 1936.)

before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to Abraham's record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness, or Testator." Compendium, 1884 Ed., page 289.

Additional Information

Note: While employed in the U.S. Forest Service (1910-16) in Bozeman, Montana, a news item from Clyde Park, Montana, appeared in the Bozeman Daily Chronicle, under date of January 3, 1915, which stated that a Mrs. Sylvia Whitmar had just celebrated her one hundredth natal anniversary. It stated she knew Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet, etc. The compiler of this book wrote her under date of January 8, 1915, asking for detailed information as to this acquaintance. Under date of January 18, 1913, her granddaughter, Miss Evalina Gurule, made reply as dictated by Mrs. Whitmar, and among the things mentioned she wrote:

"The three mummies that he (Joseph Smith) found, the two men had dark hair, the woman had yellow hair, and were very good looking people. They were preserved in some kind of liquid. These people lived some ages ago."

This item is of interest in showing that one of the three mummies was a woman. For an excellent detailed account of the mummies, the papyrus found with them, and the Book of Abraham, consult the 1938-39 Adult Department M.I.A. Manual, entitled "Ancient Records Testify in Papyrus and Stone," by Dr. Sidney B. Sperry.

Robert Horne Saw Papyrus and Mummies

"Oh, here is the Pearl of Great Price," said Brother Horne, picking up that book. "I've seen these records with my own eyes," referring to the Book of Abraham, "and handled them with these hands. Mother Lucy (Joseph's Mother) showed them to me. You know Joseph had purchased four mummies. They were one of the Egyptian Pharaohs, his wife, sister and daughter. I took hold of the breastbone of one of them. The records which I saw were some kind of parchment or papyrus, and it contained writing in red and black. Mother Lucy told me that one was the writings of Abraham and the other the writngs of Joseph, who was sold in Egypt."

Millennial Star, 55:584

1 Orson Pratt's Account of the Mummies and Papyrus: These are not the only revelations given through this great modern Prophet. The Lord brought to light sacred records from the Catacombs of Egypt. After several hundred men had wrought and toiled for many months in digging down one of these vast structures, they entered into its interior; they found a great number of mummies—the bodies of persons that had been preserved since the catacomb was built, and some eleven of these mummies, well preserved, were taken out by these men, and they finally fell into the hands of a person named M. H. Chandler. They were sent from Egypt to Ireland, where it was supposed he resided, but learning that he resided in America, they were sent to him. After receiving the mummies, he began to take off some of the ancient covering or wrapping, and to his astonishment he found upon the breast of one of these mummies a record written upon ancient papyrus in plain characters, written both in black and red inks, or stains, or colors. And the mummies and the records were exhibited by Mr. Chandler in New York, Philadelphia, and many of the Eastern States of our Union; and thousands of people saw them, and among them many learned men; and these characters were presented to them, and not infrequently was Mr. Chandler referred to "Jo" Smith as they used to term him, who, they said, pretended to have translated some records that he found in the western part of New York, and that if Mr. Chandler would go and see him perhaps he would translate those ancient characters. Many of these references were made with the intention of ridiculing Mr. Smith; but it so happened that in traveling through the country, he visited Kirtland, Ohio, where the Prophet Joseph Smith resided, bringing the mummies and the ancient papyrus writings with him. Mr. Chandler had also obtained from learned men the best translation he could of some few characters, which, however, was not a translation, but more in the shape of their ideas with regard to it, their acquaintance with the language not being sufficient to enable them to translate it literally. After some conversation with the Prophet Joseph, Mr. Chandler presented to him the ancient characters, asking him if he could translate them. The Prophet took them and repaired to his room and inquired of the Lord concerning them. The Lord told him they were sacred records, containing the inspired writings of Abraham when he was in Egypt, and also of Joseph while he was in Egypt; and they had been deposited, with those mummies, which had been exhumed. And he also inquired of the Lord concerning some few characters which Mr. Chandler gave him by way of a test, to see if he could translate them. The Prophet Joseph translated these characters and returned them, with the translation, to Mr. Chandler; and who, in comparing it with the translation of the same few characters by learned men, that he had before obtained, found the two to agree. The Prophet Joseph having learned the value of these ancient writings, was very anxious to obtain them, and expressed himself wishful to purchase them. But Mr. Chandler told him that he would not sell the writings, unless he could sell the mummies, for it would detract from the curiosity of his exhibition. Mr. Smith inquired of him the price, which was a considerable sum, and finally purchased the mummies and the writings, all of which he retained in his possession for many years; and they were seen by all the Church that saw proper to visit the house of the Prophet Joseph and also by hundreds of strangers. The Prophet translated the part of these writings which, as I have said, is contained in the Pearl of Great Price, and known as the Book of Abraham. Journal of Discourses, Vol. 20:64-5.

JOSEPH THE PROPHET'S STORE ON WATER STREET, IN WHICH ON MAY 4, 1842, THE PROPHET FIRST INTRODUCED THE ENDOWMENTS FOR THE LIVING AND THE DEAD. Here also the Relief Society was organized by him on March 17, 1842. To the right may be seen the Mississippi River.
