N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter XX

THE BEGINNING OF CEREMONIAL ENDOWMENTS IN THIS DISPENSATION

Revealing of Endowments

Wednesday, May 4, 1842: I spent the day in the upper part of the store, that is in my private office (so called because in that room I keep my sacred writings, translate ancient records, and receive revelations) and in my general business office, or lodge room (that is where the Masonic fraternity meet occasionally, for want of a better place) in council with General James Adams, of Springfield, Patriarch Hyrum Smith, Bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller, and President Brigham Young, and Elders Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards, instructing them in the principles and order of the Priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments and the communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of the Melchisedek Priesthood, setting forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days, and all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church of the First Born, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim in the eternal worlds. In this council was instituted the ancient order of things for the first time in these last days. And the communications I made to this council were of things spiritual, and to be received only by the spiritual minded; and there was nothing made known to these men but what will be made known to all the Saints of the last days, so soon as they are prepared to receive, and a proper place is prepared to communicate them, even to the weakest of the Saints; therefore, let the Saints be diligent in building the Temple, and all houses which they have been, or shall hereafter be, commanded of God to build; and wait their time with patience in all meekness, faith, perseverance unto the end, knowing assuredly that all things referred to in this council are always governed by the principle of revelation.

Thursday, May 5. General Adams started for Springfield, and the remainder of the council of yesterday continued their meeting at the same place, and myself and Brother Hyrum received in turn from the others, the same that I had communicated to them the day previous.fn,fn,fn,fn,fn

Documentary History of Church, Vol. 5, pp. 1-3.

Endowments Same Now as in Nauvoo

By Bathsheba W. Smith:

I was a resident of Nauvoo, State of Illinois, from 1840 to 1846, I was married to George A. Smith July 25, 1841, Elder Don Carlos Smith performing the ceremony. Near the close of the year 1843, or in the beginning of the year 1844, I received the ordinance of anointing in a room in Sister Emma Smith's house in Nauvoo, and the same day, in company with my husband, I received my endowment in the upper room over the Prophet Joseph Smith's store. The endowments were given under the direction of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who afterwards gave us lectures or instructions in regard to the endowment ceremonies. There has been no change, to my certain knowledge, in these ceremonies. They are the same today as they were then. A short time after I received my anointing, I was sealed to my husband, George A. Smith, for time and eternity, by President Brigham Young, in the latter's house, according to the plan taught, to my knowledge, by the Prophet Joseph Smith. When I was married in 1841, I was married for time, and not for eternity.

Blood Atonement and the Origin of Plural Marriage. Discussion between R. C. Evans and Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, p. 87.

1 The Prophet Joseph Gives the Endowment to the Twelve: Before I went east on the 4th of April, last, we were in council with Brother Joseph almost every day for weeks. Says Brother Joseph, in one of those councils, "There is something going to happen; I don't know what it is, but the Lord bids me to hasten, and give you your endowment before the temple is finished." He conducted us through every ordinance of the holy priesthood, and when he had gone through with all the ordinances he rejoiced very much and said, "Now if they kill me you have got all the keys, and all the ordinances, and you can confer them upon others, and the hosts of Satan will not be able to tear down the kingdom as fast as you will be able to build it up; and now," said he, "on your shoulders will rest the responsibility of leading this people for the Lord is going to let me rest awhile." Now why did he say to the Twelve "on your shoulders will this responsibility rest"?—why did he not mention Brother Hyrum? The Spirit knew that Hyrum would be taken with him, and hence he did not mention his name; Elder Rigdon's name was not mentioned, although he was there all the time, but he did not attend our councils.

Trial of Sidney Rigdon, by Orson Hyde, Millennial Star, Vol. 5:104. (Dec. 1844.)

2 By Wilford Woodruff: Has the Prophet Joseph found Elder Rigdon in his councils, when he organized the quorum of the Twelve a few months before his death, to prepare them for the endowment? And when they received their endowment, and actually received the keys of the Kingdom of God, and oracles of God, keys of revelation, and the pattern of heavenly things: and thus addressing the Twelve, exclaimed: "Upon your shoulders the kingdom rests, and you must round up your shoulders and bear it, for I have had to do it until now. But now the responsibility rests upon you. It mattereth not what becomes of me." But I say, has this been the case with Elder Rigdon in any wise?

Trial of Sidney Rigdon, Millennial Star, Vol. 5:109. (Dec. 1844.)

3 Pattern of Endowments Revealed from Heaven: This great and good man was led, before his death, to call the Twelve together from time to time and to instruct them in all things pertaining to the kingdom, ordinances and government of God. He often observed that he was laying the foundation, but it would remain for the Twelve to complete the building. Said he, "I know not why; but for some reason I am constrained to hasten my preparations, and to confer upon the Twelve all the ordinances, keys, covenants, endowments, and sealing ordinances of the priesthood, and so set before them a pattern in all things pertaining to the sanctuary and the endowment therein."

Having done this, he rejoiced exceedingly; "for," said he, "the Lord is about to lay the burden on your shoulders and let me rest awhile; and if they kill me," continued he, "the Kingdom of God will roll on, as I have now finished the work which was laid upon me, by committing to you all things for the building up of the kingdom according to the heavenly vision, and the pattern shown me from heaven." With many conversations like this, he comforted the minds of the Twelve, and prepared them for what was soon to follow.

He proceeded to confer on Elder Young, the President of the Twelve, the keys of the sealing power, as conferred in the last days by the spirit and power of Elijah, in order to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth should be smitten with a curse.

This last key of the priesthood is the most sacred of all, and pertains exclusively to the first presidency of the church, without whose sanction, and approval or authority, no sealing blessing shall be administered pertaining to things of the resurrection and the life to come.

After giving them a very short charge to do all things according to the pattern, he quietly surrendered his liberty and his life into the hands of his blood-thirsty enemies, and all this to save the people for whom he had so long labored from threatened vengeance.

By Parley P. Pratt, Millennial Star, Vol. 5:151.

4 Endowments Given in Nauvoo by Joseph the Prophet: Joseph Smith, before his death, was much exercised about the completion of the Temple in Nauvoo, and the administering of ordinances therein. In his anxiety and for fear he should not live to see the Temple completed, he prepared a place over what was known as the brickstore—-which many of you who lived in Nauvoo will recollect—where to a chosen few he administered those ordinances that we now have today associated with Endowments, so that if anything should happen to him—which he evidently contemplated—he would feel that he had then fulfilled his mission, that he had conferred upon others all the keys given to him by the manifestations of the power of God.

By President John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 25:183.

5 Second Anointing Also Given by the Prophet. In the evening the best and indeed the crowning feature of the whole excursion was enjoyed. President Snow announced that the evening would be occupied by the Temple workers as a Testimony meeting, and it was so done. Most of the brethren workers bore strong and grateful testimonies, not only of their delight and joy in the work of the Temple, but testified also of their happiness and of their gratitude to the Saints in Box Elder Stake, who had made it possible for them to enjoy such a rare treat.

Three of the sisters, Sister Zina D. Young, who is the President of the sisters in the Temple, with Sister Bathsheba W. Smith and Minnie J. Snow, her two counselors, spoke briefly of their joy in the work. Aunt Bathsheba mentioned the fact that she had received her blessings in Nauvoo under the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith, she being now the only living woman who has received these blessings.

President Woodruff spoke afterwards on the same subject, and bore testimony to the receiving of the same blessings in the same manner, he being the only living man at present who has thus received his endowments. This, then, should be recorded in the mind, and in the private journal of everyone, that President Woodruff and Sister Bathsheba W. Smith were endowed and received their blessings of sealing and anointings under the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith. There were many more who likewise had this great privilege, but they are all dead, leaving only these two living witnesses. * * *

We are having many men come to us with pretended revelations, Josephites and Strangites and other men. One man came to me and said he had revelations to lead this Church; I am willing to leave all these things in the hands of God. Where has the power of God been since the death of Joseph? With this people. They say, these apostates, that Brigham Young organized the endowments and originated the principle of plural marriage. They're liars, every one of them, and truth is not in them in so far as this matter is concerned. There's Sister Bathsheba Smith; she and I both had our endowments under the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I had my second anointing and sealings under his hands. There is not a single principle in this Church that he did not lay the foundation for. He called the Twelve together the last time he spoke to us, and his face shone like amber. And upon our shoulders he rolled the burden of the Kingdom, and he gave us all the keys and powers and gifts to carry on this great and mighty work. He told us that he had received every key, every power and every gift for the salvation of the living and the dead, and he said: "Upon the Twelve I seal these gifts and powers and keys from henceforth and forever. No matter what may come to me. And I lay this work upon your shoulders. Take it and bear it off, and if you don't you'll be damned," I don't feel justified in contending with these apostates and such men. There is too much work to be done. And these things are true, and if such men don't find it out here, they will hereafter.

There is an anxiety in the spirit world concerning this people. The angels of God are with us, and they will assist us in this work. God bless you and all this people. I felt that I had finished my work when that Temple was finished; and doctors said I could not live. But my life was spared because this people were putting up petitions in my behalf continually before God. I feel to bless you, my brethren and sisters. May He help us all to do our duty, and be prepared for the great events coming upon this earth. Amen.

(Report written by Susa Young Gates of the Temple Workers' Excursion, Young Woman's Journal, August, 1894, Vol. 5, No. 11.)
