N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

Chapter XXI

EFFICACY AND SACREDNESS OF TEMPLE ORDINANCES

Significance of the Endowment

By President Brigham Young (Sermon delivered in the Tabernacle, April 6, 1853.)

"Soon after, the Church, through our beloved Prophet Joseph, was commanded to build a Temple to the Most High in Kirtland, Ohio, and this was the next House of the Lord we hear of on the earth, since the days of Solomon's Temple. Joseph not only received revelation and commandment to build a temple, but he received a pattern also, as did Moses for the Tabernacle, and Solomon for his Temple; for without a pattern, he could not know what was wanting, having never seen one, and not having experienced its use.

"Without revelation, Joseph could not know what was wanting, any more than any other man, and, without commandment, the Church were too few in numbers, too weak in faith, and too poor in purse, to attempt such a mighty enterprise. But by means of all these stimulants, a mere handful of men, living on air, and a little hominy and milk, and often salt or no salt when milk could not be had; the great Prophet Joseph, in the stone quarry, quarrying rock with his own hands; and the few men in the Church, following his example of obedience and diligence wherever most needed; with laborers on the walls, holding the sword in one hand to protect themselves from the mob, while they placed the stone and moved the trowel with the other, the Kirtland Temple, the second House of the Lord that we have any published record of on the earth, was so far completed as to be dedicated. And those first Elders who helped to build it, received a portion of their first endowments, or we might say more clearly, some of the first, or introductory, or initiatory ordinances preparatory to an endowment.

"The preparatory ordinances there administered, though accompanied by the ministration of angels, and the presence of the Lord Jesus, were but a faint similitude of the ordinances of the House of the Lord in their fullness; yet many, through the instigation of the devil, thought they had received all, and knew as much as God; they have apostatized, and gone to hell. But be assured, brethren, there are but few, very few of the Elders of Israel, now on earth, who know the meaning of the word endowment. To know, they must experience; and to experience, a Temple must be built.

"Let me give you the definition in brief. Your endowment is to receive all those ordinances in the House of the Lord, which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels who stand as sentinels, being enabled to give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the Holy Priesthood, and gain your eternal exaltation in spite of earth and hell.

"Who has received and understands such an endowment in this assembly? You need not answer. Your voices would be few and far between, yet the keys to these endowments are among you, and thousands have received them, so that the devil, with all his aids, need not suppose he can again destroy the Holy Priesthood from the earth, by killing a few, for he cannot do it. God has set His hand, for the last time, to redeem His people, the honest in heart, and Lucifer cannot hinder Him.

"Before these endowments could be given at Kirtland, the Saints had to flee before mobocracy. And, by toil and daily labor, they found places in Missouri, where they laid the cornerstones of Temples, in Zion and her stakes, and then had to retreat to Illinois, to save the lives of those who could get away alive from Missouri, where fell the Apostle David W. Patten, with many like associates, and where they were imprisoned in loathsome dungeons, and fed on human flesh, Joseph and Hyrum, and many others. But before this had transpired, the Temple at Kirtland had fallen into the hands of wicked men, and by them been polluted, like the Temple at Jerusalem, and consequently it was disowned by the Father and the Son.

J. D., Vol. 2, pp. 31-2.

Latter-day Saints, What Does This Mean to You?

Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon thee.

Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white; for they are worthy.

He that shall overcome, shall thus be clothed in white garments, and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, and I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels. Rev. 3:3-5.

I counsel thee to buy of me gold fire tried, that thou mayest be made rich; and mayest be clothed in white garments, and that the shame of thy nakedness may not appear; and anoint thy eyes with eyesalve, that thou mayest see. Rev. 3:18.

Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. Rev. 16:15.

And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints. Rev. 19:8.

Good Advice for the Present Day

By President Joseph F. Smith

We entered into covenants with the Lord that we will keep ourselves pure and unspotted from the world. We have agreed before God, angels and witnesses, in sacred places, that we will not commit adultery, will not lie, that we will not steal or bear false witness against our neighbor, or take advantage of the weak, that we will help and sustain our fellow men in the right, and take such a course as will prove most effectual in helping the weak to overcome their weaknesses and bring themselves into subjection to the requirements of heaven. We cannot neglect, slight, or depart from the spirit, meaning, intent and purpose, of these covenants and agreements, that we have entered into with our Father in heaven, without shearing ourselves of our glory, strength, right and title to His blessings, and to the gifts and manifestations of His Spirit.

The Lord has given unto us garments of the holy priesthood, and you know what that means. And yet there are those of us who mutilate them, in order that we may follow the foolish, vain and (permit me to say) indecent practices of the world. In order that such people may imitate the fashions, they will not hesitate to mutilate that which should be held by them the most sacred of all things in the world, next to their own virtue, next to their own purity of life. They should hold these things that God has given unto them sacred, unchanged and unaltered from the very pattern in which God gave them. Let us have the moral courage to stand against the opinions of fashion, and especially where fashion compels us to break a covenant and so commit a grievous sin.

The Improvement, Era, Vol. 9:813.

What is Meant by Keys, Power and Calling of Elijah?

On April 3, 1836, one week after the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, the ancient Prophet Elijah appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, thereby fulfilling the prediction made by Malachi. He bestowed upon the Prophet Joseph and upon Oliver the same keys and blessings which he had bestowed upon the heads of Peter, James, and John, on the Mount of Transfiguration. What were these powers held by Elijah? Answer:

By Elder Joseph Fielding Smith: The keys that Elijah held were the keys of the everlasting priesthood, the keys of the sealing power, which the Lord gave unto him, and that included a ministry of sealing for the living as well as the dead—and it is not confined to the living and it is not confined to the dead, but includes them both.

Elijah was the last of the old prophets who held the fulness of the priesthood, the sealing power of the priesthood; and being the last of the prophets, it was his place to come—but in order that the binding power should come which is recognized in the heavens, and by which we pass by the angels and the Gods to exaltation, had to come from Elijah, who held that power upon the face of the earth, for the Lord had given it to him, and so he came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on the 3rd day of April, and bestowed upon them the keys of this priesthood.

By the Prophet Joseph Smith: Now for Elijah. The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that he have power to hold the keys of the revelation, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and to receive, obtain, perform, all the ordinances pertaining to the kingdom of God.

The Improvement Era, November, 1955.

Adjustment of sealings during Millennium: Children who are legally adopted may, under proper circumstances, be sealed into the families who adopted them. It is not possible, however, to rob the dead of their children, if they are entitled to them, even if they are adopted by others.

If a man or a woman who has been sealed in the temple for time and eternity should sin and lose the right to receive the exaltation in the celestial kingdom, he or she could not retard the progress of the injured companion who had been faithful. Everyone will be judged according to his works, and there would be no justice in condemning the innocent for the sins of the guilty.

We may be sure that the Lord is not going to permit any ordinance which we perform incorrectly, through our lack of understanding, to be left binding forever without correction. During the millennium there will be a great deal of adjusting where we, for lack of proper knowledge, have performed sealings ignorantly, but according to our best judgment.

Doctrines of Salvation, pp. 177-178.

Millennium: Great Era of Salvation for the Dead: Some people may think that it is impossible for us to do this work for the dead because we have not the names of people who lived in ancient times. We have not the records, we do not know how to reach them from anything we have in this life, and there have been millions of people who no doubt were honest, and did the best they knew, but died without a knewledge of the gospel, whose names it is impossible for us to obtain. How are they going to be saved?

It is our duty to go to the temple and take our records and work for the dead of our own lineage as far back as we can go, but what about these others? I will tell you. The great work of the millennium, of one thousand years, will be for the salvation of these souls.

Now let us keep it clearly in our minds that we do not enter into exaltation until after the resurrection. We do not enter into exaltation in the spirit world. We have privileges there, of course, based upon faithfulness and obedience to the gospel, but during the millennium—and that is the great purpose of the millennium—we will go into the temples.

Those who will be living here will be in daily communication with those who have passed through the resurrection, and they will come with this information, this knowledge that we do not have and will give it to those who are in mortality, saying, "Now go into the temples and do this work; when you get this done, we will bring you other names." And in that way every soul who is entitled to a place in the celestial kingdom of God will be ferreted out, and not one soul shall be overlooked.

The Lord has not overlooked these things. He has seen the end from the beginning. Every name is recorded. Bless your soul, when the Lord says that a sparrow cannot fall without the notice of the Father, do you think he will overlook the people who lived upon this earth, who have tried to the best of their ability to live righteously, but never had the privilege of receiving the gospel? He will give unto them these privileges of salvation and the right, through their obedience of the gospel which shall come unto them, of receiving exaltation in his kingdom.

To think anything less than this would be an evil thought. God is just. He is merciful, and while mercy cannot rob justice, yet in the wisdom of our Father in heaven every soul shall receive blessings according to his merits and according to the mercies of our Heavenly Father, and he will do for the people the best he can."

Doctrines of Salvation, 2:166-168.

Sacred Ordinances for the Dead

Sealing power continues family in eternity: The doctrine of salvation for the dead, of temple work, holds out to us the glorious prospect of the continuance of the family relation. Through it we learn that family ties are not to be broken, that husbands and wives will eternally have a claim upon each other and upon their children to the latest generation. However, in order to receive privileges, the sealing ordinances in the temple of our God must be obtained.

All contracts, bonds, obligations and agreements made by men shall come to an end, but the obligations and agreements entered into in the house of the Lord if faithfully kept, will last forever. This doctrine gives us a clearer concept of the purposes of the Lord toward his children. It shows his abundant and unlimited mercy and love to all who obey him, aye, even to those who are rebellious, for in his goodness he will grant great blessings even unto them. Doctrines of Salvation, Vol. 2, p. 173.

No blessing will be denied the faithful: Those who have been faithful members of the Church and could not reach a temple while living will have the work done for them after they are dead.

We have the assurance that the Lord will reward every soul according to his or her works. He will judge each of us by the intent of the heart. If any worthy person is denied in this life the blessings which so readily come to others, and yet lives faithfully and to the best of his or her ability in striving to keep the commandments of the Lord, then nothing will be lost to him. Such a person will be given all the blessings that can be given. The Lord will make up to him the fulness after this life is ended and the full life has come. The Lord will not overlook a single soul who is worthy, but will grant to him all that can be given which those, apparently more fortunate, received in this life. Ibid., p. 177.

No Match-making for the dead: We never make matches for the dead in the temples. The Lord will bless all who are worthy of the blessings, and they will lose nothing. The work of the millennium will be largely work for the dead who did not have an opportunity when living to obtain the blessings; but who would have accepted the blessings if they had lived. Justice demands this. We need not worry, therefore, because young men or young women die without being married. All who are worthy will be blessed just the same as if they had lived and obtained the blessings. Where, however, a couple is engaged and the woman dies, she may be sealed to her intended husband. Ibid., p. 177.

By President Joseph Fielding Smith

The Power to Receive Revelation and to Be Sealed to God

Who believes Joseph Smith to be a prophet? These my brethren and sisters who are now sitting before me. They entertain no doubts on this subject. They may sometimes be tempted and tried, and neglect their prayers, until they hardly know whether "Mormonism" is true or untrue. The cares of the world, we know very well, flood in upon them; but let me tell you one thing—and I want you to seriously remember it—if you are in darkness, and have not the spirit of prayer, still do not neglect your prayers in your families in the morning. You, fathers and husbands, get down upon your knees, and when the cares of this world intrude themselves upon your devotions, let them wait while you remain on your knees and finish your prayer. Brother Daniel D. Hunt's blessings over a dinner in Missouri, when he and Benjamin Clapp first met, is a very good prayer for us all. It was: "O Lord, save us from error." If you can say no more than this very short but comprehensive prayer, go down upon your knees and say it. When you have labored faithfully for years you will learn this simple fact—that if your hearts are right, and you still continue to be obedient, continue to serve God, continue to pray, the spirit of revelation will be in you like a well of water springing up to everlasting life. Let no person give up prayer because he has not the spirit of prayer, neither let any earthly circumstance hurry you while in the performance of this important duty. By bowing down before the Lord to ask Him to bless you, you will simply find this result—God will multiply blessings on you temporally and spiritually. Let a merchant, a farmer, a mechanic, any person in business, live his religion faithfully, and he need never lose one minute's sleep by thinking about his business; he need not worry in the least, but trust in God, go to sleep and rest. I say to this people—pray, and if you cannot do anything else, read a prayer aloud that your family may hear it, until you get a worshipping spirit, and are full of the riches of eternity, then you will be prepared at any time to lay hands on the sick, or to officiate in any of the ordinances of this religion. I do not recollect that I have seen five minutes since I was baptized that I have not been ready to preach a funeral sermon, lay hands on the sick, or to pray in private or in public. I will tell you the secret of this. In all your business transactions, words, and communications, if you commit an overt act, repent of that immediately, and call upon God to deliver you from evil and give you the light of His spirit. Never do a thing that your conscience, and the light within you, tells you is wrong. Never do a wrong, but do all the good you possibly can. Never do a thing to mar the peaceable influence of the Holy Spirit in you; then whatever you are engaged in—whether in business, in the dance, or in the pulpit, you are ready to officiate at any time in any of the ordinances of the House of God. If I commit an overt act, the Lord knows the integrity of my heart, and, through sincere repentance, He forgives me. Before Joseph's death he had a revelation concerning myself and others, which signified that we had passed the ordeal, and that we should never apostatize from the faith of the holy gospel; "and," said Joseph, "if there is any danger of your doing this, the Lord will take you to Himself forthwith, for you cannot stray from the truth." When men and women have traveled to a certain point in their labors in this life, God sets a seal upon them that they never can forsake their God in His kingdom; for, rather than they should do this, He will at once take them to Himself. Probably this is so with many of the elders who are taken from us, and over whom many ignorantly mourn. I say, to God give thanks, for who knows but that had they lived there might have been trials to pass through which they could not overcome. It is all right, blessed be the name of the Lord."

Brigham Young, J. D., Vol. 12:102-3.

The Efficacy of the Sealing Ordinance

The men who were in his bosom, shared his confidence, and professed to be his warmest and best friends, were the men to treacherously shed his blood. Why? Because He had revealed one additional principle of the law of redemption, that is, that the man is not without the woman, nor the woman without the man, in the Lord; that if a man went to the eternal world without obeying the law of sealing, he would remain forever alone, forever a servant, and could never have any increase; that if a woman entered the celestial world without having complied with the law of sealing as, entrusted by the Savior to His Apostles, she would remain forever alone, and without any increase; and if either man or woman should reject the principles of that law, they would forever lament and mourn that they might have been exalted to an eternal increase, and an everlasting dominion, but they would not have it. By George A. Smith, J. D., Vol. 2:217-18.

Instructions to Adam and to Saints

By Heber C. Kimball

Father Adam was instructed to multiply and replenish the earth to make it beautiful and glorious, to make it, in short, like unto the garden from which the seeds were brought to plant the Garden of Eden. I might say much more on this subject, but I will ask, has it not been imitated before you in your holy endowments that you might understand how things were in the beginning of creation and cultivation of this earth? God the Father made Adam the Lord of this creation in the beginning, and if we are the Lords of this creation under Adam, ought we not to take a course to imitate our Father in Heaven? Is not all this exhibited to us in our endowments? The earth made glorious and beautiful to look upon, representing everything which the Lord caused to be prepared and placed to adorn the earth. The Prophet Joseph frequently spoke of these things in the revelations which he gave, but the people generally did not understand them, but to those who did they were cheering, they had a tendency to gladden the heart and enlighten the mind. By faith and works we shall subdue the earth and make it glorious. We can plant vineyards and eat the fruit thereof; we possess this power within ourselves. J. D., Vol. 10:235.

Revelation Necessary to Know Endowments

To many of the Latter-day Saints the endowment has been of great significance. The instructions imparted, both by beautiful paintings and by word of mouth, are most ennobling and uplifting. To the impure these endowments mean nothing. From the Creation Room to the Celestial Room, the instructions imparted, the obligations taken and the responsibilities assumed are of the highest character. The progressive course of instruction gives the events of the creation, the fall of Adam and Eve through disobedience, their expulsion from Eden, their condition in a dreary world after their banishment, the plan of redemption offered them, the restoration of the Gospel with all of its keys, powers and blessings, and the final exaltation that comes to those who live in strict obedience to the Gospel. Sacred obligations and covenants are taken which require one to be virtuous, charitable, benevolent, tolerant and pure, and require the living of the highest ideals embodied in the law of God.

To acquire the meaning of these symbolic rituals, one must be in tune with the Almighty. No person having impure thoughts or motives can ever receive the meaning of the symbols given in the endowment. The instructions given by the Prophet Joseph are full of meaning and should be read and re-read:

"The communications I made to this council (See Chapter XVI) were things spiritual, and to be received ONLY BY THE SPIRITUALLY MINDED; and there was nothing made known to these men but what WILL BE MADE KNOWN TO ALL SAINTS OF THE LAST DAYS, AS SOON AS THEY ARE PREPARED TO RECEIVE, and a proper place is prepared to communicate them, even to the weakest of the Saints; therefore, let the Saints be diligent in building the Temple and all houses which they have been, or shall hereafter be, commanded of God to build; and wait their time with patience in all meekness, faith, perseverance unto the end, KNOWING ASSUREDLY THAT ALL THESE THINGS REFERRED TO IN THIS COUNCIL ARE ALWAYS GOVERNED BY THE PRINCIPLE OF REVELATION." The reader is also referred to Explanations Nos. 7 and 20 of the Facsimile of Egyptian Plate in Chapter XV—Ancient Records Bring Forth Light.

What is Meant by the Fullness of the Priesthood?

By the Prophet Joseph Smith: "If a man gets the fulness of the Priesthood of God, he has to get it in the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it, and that was by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord."

Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 17

By Pres. Joseph Fielding Smith: If you want salvation in the fullest, that is exaltation in the kingdom of God, so that you may become his sons and his daughters, you have got to go to the temple of the Lord and receive these holy ordinances which belong to that house, which cannot be had elsewhere. No man shall receive fulness in eternity of exaltation alone; no one shall receive that blessing alone; but man and wife when they receive the sealing power in the temple of the Lord, shall pass on to exaltation and shall continue and be like the Lord and that is the destiny of man, that is what the Lord desires for his children.

Ibid., pp. 19-20.

If we want to receive the fulness of the priesthood of God then we must receive the fulness of the ordinances of the house of the Lord and keep his commandments. This idea that we can put off our salvation because of some weakness of the flesh until the end and then our children will go and do the work for us in the temple of the Lord when we are dead will get us nowhere. Salvation for the dead is for those who die without a knowledge of the gospel so far as celestial glory is concerned and those who have rejected the truth and who fought the truth, who would not have it, are not destined to receive celestial glory.

Ibid., p. 17.

The Fullness of the Priesthood

By Daniel Tyler

The Lord informed the prophet that the temples were the places to receive "the fullness of the priesthood." He said, "for a baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that my Saints may be baptized for those who are dead; for this ordinance belongeth to my house." (a temple) "and cannot be acceptable to me, only in the days of your poverty, wherein ye are not able to build a house unto me."

These additional powers include all of the keys that belong to the holy priesthood on the earth, or were ever revealed to man in any dispensation, and which admit men and women within the veil. They enable them to pass by the angels and the gods, until they get into the presence of the Father and the Son. They make of them kings and priests, queens and priestesses to God, to rule and reign as such over their posterity and those who may be given them by adoption, in the great jubilee of rest which is near at hand. It gives them the right to the tree of life and the "seal of the living God in their foreheads," spoken of by John the revelator. No marvel, then, that the Lord requires sacred places for such great and glorious things — "the fullness of the holy priesthood" to be restored.

Juvenile Instructor, vol. 15.
