N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

ADDENDA

The Key to Successful Temple Work

Another interesting feature of the conference (August 16, 1841. See Millennial Star, Vol. 18:630) was the report made by the Prophet, of the Church property in his charge as Trustee-in-Trust for the Church. He also took occasion to report the amount of his own earthly possessions, of which the following is a copy:

"Old Charley, a horse given to him several years before in Kirtland; two pet deers; two old turkeys and four young ones; an old cow given to him by a brother in Missouri; old Major, a dog; his wife, children, and a little household furniture."fn

The greatest benefactor to the human race, the Redeemer of the world, stated of his possessions: "The foxes have holes and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man hath nowhere to lay His head."

Other great characters, such as Adam, Abraham, Enoch, Alma, Moses, John The Baptist, the Apostles of the eastern, western, and those contemporary with the Prophet Joseph, and many other great spiritual leaders, have had but meagre worldly possessions, but their works and names will live forever. Alma, the great Nephite Prophet, when going through the land preaching the gospel, being spit upon, imprisoned, persecuted, "wading through much tribulation," came to the door of a home and said: "Will you give a humble servant of God something to eat?" (Alma 8:10-19.) Physical wealth and spiritual wealth are not twin companions. As a rule, spirituality decreases as wealth increases. The lust for the things of the world at the present time, for stocks and bonds, for bank accounts, for mortgages, for the empty praise of the world, is the reason why a larger degree of spirituality is not enjoyed among those professing to be Saints.

"We ought to care no more for the silver and the gold, and the property that is so much sought for by the wicked world, than for the soil, or the gravel upon which we tread: `For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world, and the world passeth away, and the lust thereof; but he that doeth the will of God abideth forever.' `If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.' ***Ye merchants, and lawyers, and doctors and speculators, be careful that you secure to yourselves eternal life in the kingdom of God in preference to doing anything else. That perfect union, which must ultimately be enjoyed by the Latter-day Saints, can only be brought about by every man and woman living so as to keep their minds pure and unspotted like a piece of clean white paper, being constantly free from the love of the world, that the spirit of revelation, may easily indite upon the heart whatever is the mind and the will of the Lord. We cannot be truly the members of Christ's mystical body without living in this way, that the Spirit may indite as easily upon the heart the things of God, as these brethren, our reporters, can write with ink on paper. In this way you have the witness within yourself, `and need that no man teach you only as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.'"

Brigham Young, J. D., 11:19.

Benevolence and Justice of God

By Brigham Young

The punishment of God is God-like. It endures forever, because there never will be a time when people ought not to be damned, and there must always be a hell to send them to. How long the damned remain in hell, I know not, nor what degree of suffering they endure. If we could by any means compute how much wickedness they are guilty of, it might be possible to ascertain the amount of suffering they will receive. They will receive according as their deeds have been while in the body. God's punishment is eternal, but that does not prove that a wicked person will remain eternally in a state of punishment.

All the doctrines of life and salvation are as plain to the understanding as the geographical lines of a correctly executed map. This doctrine, revealed in these latter times, is worthy of the attention of all men. It gives the positive situation in which they will stand before the Heavens when they have finished their earthly career. Generation after generation is constantly coming and passing away. They all possess more or less intelligence, which forms the foundation within them for the reception of an eternal increase of intelligence. The endowments that human beings have received from their Great Creator are to them inestimable blessings. How wonderful and how excellent they are! What priceless blessings and exquisite enjoyments they secure to man, if by truth and righteousness they are made honorable in the sight of God. By the means of his wonderful and God-like endowments, man can drink at the fountain of eternal wisdom and bask in everlasting felicity.

But hundreds of millions of human beings have been born, lived out their short earthly span, and passed away, ignorant alike of themselves and of the plan of salvation provided for them. It gives great consolation, however, to know that this glorious plan, devised by Heaven, follows them into the next existence, offering for their acceptance eternal life and exaltation to thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers in the presence of their Father and God, through Jesus Christ his Son. How glorious—how ample is the Gospel plan in its saving properties and merciful designs. This one revelation, containing this principle, is worth world on worlds to mankind. It is worth forsaking fathers, mothers, sisters and brothers, wives and children, houses and lands, for the knowledge it reveals; and this is but one item in the great plan of human redemption.***

Can you tell me how much better "Mormonism" is than other religions and isms of the present day? More or less truth may be found in them all, both in civilized and barbarous nations. How has it transpired that the logical truth is thus so widely disseminated? It is because God was once known on the earth among his children of mankind, as we know one another. Adam was as conversant with his Father who placed him upon this earth as we are conversant with our earthly parents. The Father frequently came to visit his son Adam, and talked and walked with him; and the children of Adam were more or less acquainted with their Grandfather, and their children were more or less acquainted with their Great-Grandfather; and things that pertain to God and to heaven were as familiar among mankind, in the first ages of their existence on the earth, as these mountains are to our mountain boys, as our gardens are to our wives and children, or as the road to the Western Ocean is to the experienced traveler. From this source mankind have received their religious traditions.

I will tell you in a few words what I understand "Mormonism" to be. Our religion is called "Mormonism" because the ancient records revealed to Joseph Smith were entitled the Book of Mormon, according to the instructions given to him by the Lord; but I will call it the plan of salvation devised in the heavens for the redemption of mankind from sin, and their restoration to the presence of God. It is contained in the New Testament, Book of Mormon, Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and in all the revelations that God has hitherto given, and will give in the future.

It embraces every fact there is in the heavens and in the heaven of heavens—every fact there is upon the surface of the earth, in the bowels of the earth, and in the starry heavens; in fine, it embraces all truth there is in all the eternities of the Gods. How, then, can we deny it? We cannot. Were we arraigned face to face with the terrors of death, and called upon to deny our religion or die, we might speak a lie and say "Mormonism" is untrue, and might continue the same testimony all the time we were in hell; but that would make no difference with the truth. The devils and damned spirits in hell cannot deny the truth of "Mormonism" and speak the truth. I wish all those who profess to believe it did as much as the devils in hell do.

"Mormonism" embraces all truth that is revealed and that is unrevealed, whether religious, political, scientific, or philosophical. No matter how many deny their God and their religion, God is the same, His holy religion is the same, and all the truth is the same. There is no plan, no device, no possible way in which we can get rid of "Mormonism," only by taking the downward road which leads to hell, until spiritually and temporally the whole organized being is dissolved and the particles thereof have returned again to native elements. We read in the Scriptures of the second death not having power over certain ones. The first death is the separation of the spirit from the body; the second death is, as I stated, the dissolution of the organized particles which compose the spirit, and their return to their native element. The wicked spirit will have to endure the wrath of the Almighty, until it has paid the uttermost farthing where the "worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched." Every debt that has been contracted by it must be cancelled. J. D., Vol. 9:147-9.

A Truism Eternities Old

By Brigham Young

The Latter-day Saints who turn their attention to money-making soon become cold in their feeling toward the ordinances of the house of God. They neglect their prayers, become unwilling to pay any donations; the law of Tithing gets too great a task for them; and they finally forsake their God, and the providences of heaven seem to be shut out from them—all in consequence of this lust after the things of this world, which will certainly perish in handling, and in their use they will fade away and go from us.

How vain it is in man to allow himself to think that he can make himself happy with the pleasures of this world. There is no lasting pleasure here, unless it is in God.* * *

When men leave the kingdom of God, their lives are filled with bitterness, their thoughts are full of fearfulness, and they are sorrowful, day by day. They may tell you they are happy; but when you probe them, and find out the innermost recesses of the heart, it is a cup of gall; they are not happy. They may seek, to the uttermost parts of the earth, for happiness, but they find it not. Where is happiness, real happiness? Nowhere but in God. By possessing the spirit of our holy religion, we are happy in the morning; we are happy at noon; we are happy in the evening; for the spirit of love and union is with us, and we rejoice in the spirit because it is of God, and we rejoice in God, for He is the giver of every good thing. Each and every Latter-day Saint, who has experienced the love of God in his heart, after having received the remission of his sins, through baptism, and the laying on of hands, realizes that he is filled with joy, and happiness, and consolation. He may be in pain, in error, in poverty, or in prison, if necessity demands, still, he is joyful. This is our experience, and each and every Latter-day Saint can bear witness to it. J. D., Vol. 18:213-4

Why the Redeemer Sweat Blood

I ask, is there a reason for men and women being exposed more constantly and more powerfully to the power of the enemy by having visions than by not having them? There is and it is simply this—God never bestows upon His people, or upon an individual, superior blessings without a severe trial to prove them, to prove that individual or that people, to see whether they will keep their covenants with Him and keep in remembrance what He has shown them. Then the greater the vision, the greater the display of the power of the enemy. And when such individuals are off their guard they are left to themselves as Jesus was. For this express purpose the Father withdrew His spirit from His Son, at the time He was to be crucified. Jesus had been with His Father, talked with Him, dwelt in His bosom, and knew all about heaven, about making the earth, about the transgression of men, and what would redeem the people, and that He was the character who was to redeem the sons of earth, and the earth itself from all sin that had come upon it. The light, knowledge, power and glory with which He was clothed were far above or exceeded that of all others who had been upon the earth after the fall, consequently at the very moment, at the hour when the crises came for Him to offer up His life, the Father withdrew Himself, withdrew His spirit, and cast a veil over Him. That is what made Him sweat blood. If He had had the power of God upon Him, He would not have sweat blood; but all was withdrawn from Him, and a veil was cast over Him. And He then plead with the Father not to forsake Him. "No," says the Father, "You must have your trials as well as others."

So when individuals are blessed with visions, revelations and great manifestations, look out, then the devil is nigh you and you will be tempted in proportion to the vision, revelation or manifestation you have received. Hence thousands when they are off their guard give way to the severe temptations which come upon them and behold they are gone. Brigham Young, J. D., Vol. 3:205-6.

Death-Bed Repentance and Immediate Exaltation a Heresy

By Pres. Joseph F. Smith

We have a few people amongst us who are so wrapped up in and devoted to some of their kindred who have been guilty of every species of abomination and wickedness in the world, that, the moment they are dead they will come and ask us for permission to go into the house of God to perform the ordinances of the Gospel for their redemption. I do not blame them for their affection for their dead, nor do I blame them for the desire in their heart to do something for their salvation, but I do not admire their wisdom, nor can I agree with their conception of right and justice. You cannot take a murderer, a suicide, an adulterer, a liar, or one who was or is thoroughly abominable in his life here, and simply by the performance of an ordinance of the Gospel, cleanse him from sin and usher him into the presence of God. God has not instituted a plan of that kind, and it cannot be done He said you shall repent of your sins. The wicked will have to repent of their wickedness. Those who die without the knowledge of the Gospel will have to come to the knowledge of it, and those who sin against light will have to pay the uttermost farthing for their transgression and their departure from the Gospel, before they can ever get back to it. Do not forget that. Do not forget it, you Elders in Israel, nor you, mothers in Israel either, and, when you seek to save either the living or the dead, bear it in mind that you can only do it on the principle of their repentance, and acceptance of the plan of life. That is the only way in which you can succeed.

General Conference Report, Oct. 4, 1907, pp. 6-7.

Angelic Beings Sanctified Through Suffering

By Brigham Young

With regard to the obedience of heavenly beings, to which reference has been made today: they live pure and holy, and they have attained unto this power through suffering. Many of them have drunk of the bitter cup even to the dregs. They have learned that righteousness will prevail, that truth is the foundation of their very existence. They have learned that their Father and God never commits an evil, that He never proposes an evil, and that whatever He dictates is for their good. When an angel is appointed to perform a duty, to go to the earth to preach the Gospel, or to do anything for the advancement of his Father's kingdom in any part of the great domain of heaven, the vision of that angel is opened to see and understand the magnitude of the work that is expected of him to perform, and the grand results which will grow out of it. That is the reason why the angels are of one heart and of one mind, in their faithfulness and obedience to the requirements of their Father and God. They can desire and ask for nothing that will make them happy, good and great that is withheld from them; and life eternal is theirs. Why, then, should they not be of one heart and of one mind? They see alike, understand alike, and know alike, and all things are before them, and, as far as their knowledge and experience extend, they see the propriety of all the works of God, and the harmony and beauty thereof. J. D., Vol. 11:15.

Building of Temples Gives Increased Power and Protection

I fully believe that when that temple (Salt Lake Temple) is once finished there will be a power and manifestation of the goodness of God unto this people such as they have never before experienced. Every work of this kind that we have accomplished has been attended with increased and wonderful results unto us as a people—an increase of power and of God's blessings upon us. It was so in Kirtland and at Nauvoo; at both places the Elders had an increase of power, and the Saints, since the completion of, and the administration of ordinances in those buildings, have had a power they never possessed previously. * * *

Whence, I ask, my brethren and sisters, has this power come? Whence has it been derived? I attribute it to the blessings and the power and the authority and the keys which God gave unto His Saints, and which he commenced to give in the Temple at Nauvoo. The Elders of Israel there received keys, endowments and authority which they have not failed to exercise in times of extremity and danger; and clouds have been shattered and storms blown over, and peace and guidance, and all the blessings which have been desired have been bestowed upon the people, according to the faith that has been exercised. Others may attribute these things to other causes; but I attribute them to this, and I feel to give God the glory; and I trace these deliverances to the power that the Elders received in that temple and previously. I fully believe also, as I have said, that when this and other temples are completed, there will be an increase of power bestowed upon the people of God, and that they will, thereby, be better fitted to go forth and cope with the powers of darkness and with the evils that exist in the world and to establish the Zion of God never more to be thrown down.

George Q. Cannon, J. D., Vol. 14:125-6.

Temples to Be Erected In Zion and Jerusalem

For it is ordained that in Zion and in her stakes, and in Jerusalem, those places which I have appointed for refuge, shall be the places for your baptisms for your dead.

And again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name?

For, for this cause I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before the world was.

Therefore, verily, I say unto you, that your anointings, and your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices by the sons of Levi,fn and for your oracles in your most holy places wherein you receive conversations, and your statues and judgments for the beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for the glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals, are ordained by the ordinance of my holy house, which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name.

D. & C., D&C 124:36-39.

The Path to Joy or Sorrow

By Brigham Young

No blessing that is sealed upon us will do us any good unless we live for it. Whereas, if we are faithful, there is nothing which is calculated to please the eye, to gladden the heart, to cheer and comfort the body and spirit of man, everything in the heavens, with the fulness of the earth, its pleasures and enjoyments, with perfect health, without pain, with appetites made pure, all this, and more that has not yet entered into the heart of man to conceive, the Lord has in store for His children. This earth, when it shall be made pure and holy, and sanctified and glorified and brought back into the presence of the Father and the Son, from whence it came at the time of the fall, will become celestial, and be the glorified habitation of the faithful of this portion of the great family of our Heavenly Father.

Abraham was faithful to the true God. He overthrew the idols of his father and obtained the Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek, which is after the order of the Son of God, and a promise that of the increase of his seed there should be no end. When you obtain the Holy Priesthood, which is after the order of Melchizedek, sealed upon you and the promise that your seed shall be numerous as the stars in the firmament, or as the sands upon the seashore, and of your increase there shall be no end, you have got the promise of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the blessings that were conferred upon them.

How many of the youth of our land are entitled to all the blessings of the kingdom of Heaven, without first receiving the law of adoption? When a man and woman have received their endowments and sealings, and then had children born to them afterwards, those children are legal heirs to the kingdom and to all its blessings and promises, and they are the only ones that are on this earth. There is not a young man in our community who would not be willing to travel from here to England to be married right, if he understood things as they are; there is not a young woman in our community, who loves the gospel and wishes its blessings, that would be married in any other way; they would live unmarried until they could be married as they should be, if they lived until they were as old as Sarah before she had Isaac born to her. Many of our brethren have married off their children without taking this into consideration, and thinking it a matter of little importance. I wish we all understood this in the light in which heaven understands it.

J. D., Vol. 11:117-18.

The Purpose of Marriage and the Destiny of Man

By Parley P. Pratt

The object of the union of the sexes is the propagation of their species, or procreation; also for mutual affection, and the cultivation of those eternal principles of never ending charity and benevolence, which are inspired by the Eternal Spirit; also for mutual comfort and assistance in this world of toil and sorrow, and for mutual duties towards their offspring.

"Marriage and its duties are therefore not a mere matter of choice or of convenience, or of pleasure to the parties, but to marry and multiply is a positive command of Almighty God, binding on all persons of both sexes who are circumstanced and conditioned to fulfill the same. To marry, propagate our species, do our duty to them, and to educate them in the light of truth, are among the chief objects of our existence on the earth. To neglect these duties is to fail to answer the end of our creation, and is a very great sin.

"While to pervert our natures, and to prostitute ourselves and our strength to mere pleasures, or to unlawful communion of the sexes, is alike subversive of health, of pure, holy and lasting affection, of moral and social order, and of the laws of God and nature.

"If we except murder, there is scarcely a more damning sin on the earth than the prostitution of female virtue or chastity at the shrine of pleasure or brutal lust, or that promiscuous and lawless intercourse which chills and corrodes the heart, perverts and destroys the pure affections, cankers and destroys, as it were, the well springs, the fountains or issues of life.

"A man who obeys the ordinances of God, and is without blemish or deformity, who has sound health and mature age, and enjoys liberty and access to the elements of life, is designed to be the head of a woman, a father, and a guide of the weaker sex and of those of tender age, to mansions of eternal life and salvation.

"A woman under similar circumstances is designed to be the glory of some man in the Lord, to be led and governed by him as her head in all things, even as Christ is the head of the man, to honor, obey, love, serve, comfort and help him in all things, to be a happy wife, and, if blessed with offspring, a faithful and affectionate mother, devoting her life to the joys, care and duties of her domestic sphere. * * *

"O candidates for celestial glory! Would your joys be full in the countless years of eternity without forming the connections, the relationship, the kindred ties which concentrate in the domestic circle, and branch forth, and bud and blossom, and bear the fruits of eternal increase?

"Would that eternal emotion of charity and benevolence which swells your bosoms be satisfied to enjoy `in single blessedness,' without an increase of posterity, those exhaustless stores of never-ending riches and enjoyments? Or, would you, like your Heavenly Father, prompted by eternal benevolence and charity, wish to fill countless millions of worlds with your begotten sons and daughters, and to bring them through all the gradations of progressive being, to inherit immortal bodies and eternal mansions in your several dominions?

"If such be your aspirations, remember that this present probation is the world of preparation for joys eternal. This is the place where family organization is first formed for eternity, and where the kindred sympathies, relationships and affections take root, spring forth, shoot upward, bud, blossom and bear fruit to ripen and mature in eternal ages.

"Here, in the holy temples and sanctuaries of our God, must the everlasting covenants be revealed, ratified, sealed, bound, and recorded in the holy records, and guarded and preserved in the archives of God's Kingdom, by those who hold the keys of eternal apostleship, who have power to bind on earth that which shall be bound in heaven, and to record on earth that which shall be recorded in the archives of heaven, in the Lamb's book of life.

"Here, in the holy sanctuary, must be revealed, ordained and anointed the kings and queens of eternity.

"All vows, covenants, contracts, marriages, or unions, not formed by revelation, and sealed for time and all eternity, and recorded in the holy archives of earth and heaven, by the ministration of the holy and eternal Priesthood, will be dissolved by death, and will not be recognized by the eternal authorities, after the parties have entered through the vail into the eternal world.

"This is heaven's eternal law, as revealed to the ancients of all ages, who held the keys of eternal Priesthood, after the order of the Son of God, and as restored with the Priesthood to the Saints of this age."

Key to Theology, pp. 151-6, Ed. 1883.

The Path to Exaltation

I say, all the revelations of God teach simply this—son, daughter, you are the workmanship of mine hands: walk and live before me in righteousness, let your conversations be chaste; let your daily deportment be according to my law; let your dealings one with another be in justice and equity; let my character be sacred in your mouth and do not profane my holy name and trample upon mine authority; do not despise any of my sayings for I will not be disgraced. I wish to send one of my servants to visit you. What for? That you may see and know as others have—that you may see as you are seen—that you may understand those principles pertaining more particularly to the kingdom you are in. You have descended below all things. I have, in my wisdom, reduced you; I have caused that you should drink of the dregs of the bitter cup. I have placed you in the depths of ignorandce and have surrounded you with weakness, to prove you. I have subjected you to all misery that can be endured. I have caused you to come upon this earth where misery and darkness and every species of unbelief and wickedness reign to prove you, that you may understand and know the good from evil and be capable of judging between these with a righteous judgment. I have caused all this to be done; and now, son and daughter, the inhabitants of the whole earth that have lived from the days of Adam until now, the first and the last—the grand aim of all that I, the Lord, have revealed is to instruct you to live so that I can come and visit you, or send my angels, that they can enter into your habitations, walk and converse with you and they not be disgraced. By so doing you shall be made partakers of all knowledge and wisdom, power and glory that the sanctified or glorified beings enjoy. And this is, first of all, what the Lord wishes of the people. Brigham Young, J. D., Vol. 6:284-5.

Recorded in the Lamb's Book of Life

You have heard a great deal about having your names written in the Lamb's Book of Life. When we were Christians, according to the common acceptance of the word, we used to preach a great deal about getting our names written in that Book. I will tell you how it is. The names of every son and daughter of Adam are already written in the Lamb's Book of Life. Is there ever a time when they will be taken out of it? Yes, when they become sons of Perdition and not till then. Every person has the privilege of retaining it there for ever and ever. If they neglect that privilege, then their names will be erased and not till then. All the names of the human family are written there, and the Lord will hold them there until they come to the knowledge of the truth, that they can rebel against Him, and can sin against the Holy Ghost; then they will be thrust down to hell, and their names be blotted out from the Lamb's Book of Life.

Brigham Young, J. D., Vol. 6:297.

The Winding-Up Scene

"Why does not your God do thus and so? Why does He delay? Why does he permit the enemy to hold possession of the dominion of the Savior?"—with many other inquiries that rest in the minds of the people. Perhaps some of you have satisfactorily answered these questions to yourselves, and perhaps you have heard them satisfactorily answered in your minds and understanding by the Elders of Israel. There is a reason for all this. I have not time this afternoon, and do not wish to confine myself, to say all that my mind would be lead to say on the subject. I can say at once, if Jesus had taken the kingdom in the days when He was upon the earth, He would have spoiled the whole plan—He would have ruined the object for which He came into the world. If He had established His kingdom directly after the flood and reigned triumphantly on the earth, the earth could never have answered the ends of its creation; the inhabitants of the earth could not have been accountable. If He had to take possession of the earth at this present time, He would ruin His own scheme—thwart His own plans. It may be a mystery; it is with the many, why the Lord permits this and that, and dictates thus and so. This is for want of intelligence in the intelligent beings that are upon the earth. If they understood the object of the creation of this earth and the inhabitants upon it, these matters would be an easy and pleasing theme to their understandings; they would become natural principles to them, easy to be understood. They would comprehend the design of the Almighty in the formation of these intelligent beings, in the direction of them, the object of the creation of the earth and the final issue in the end, when all that has been designed of this earth and all consigned to this earth have come upon it; and the work is completed—the winding-up scene has come, when Jesus shall have finished His work pertaining to man and his agency—you will then see that the kingdom will be taken possession of, and that very quickly.

Every mortal being must stand up as an intelligent, organized capacity, and choose or refuse the good, and thus act for himself. All must have that opportunity, no matter if all go into the depths of wickedness. Whether they sustain the kingdom of God and promote the gospel of salvation or not, the earth must remain in the hands of man, liable to be acted upon continually by a superior power and authority. Man's independence must be held inviolate, it must be reserved to each and every individual, all must have the privilege of acting upon it. Until the last spirit that has been designed to come here and take a tabernacle has come upon the earth, the winding-up scene cannot come. I have not time to say what I would like to upon this subject, but will leave it to your own reflection.

Marvel not that the kingdom of God is not in its fulness. Marvel not that you see every man and woman subject to the passions that belong to fallen nature. There never was a prophet on the earth but what was subject to passions as we are. Every son and daughter of Adam that has come into this world, has been subject to sin, and prone to wander. They must have their times and seasons; and when the day has come in which all things are to be gathered in one, the Lord will gather those things. When the day comes in which Jesus will take possession of the earth—He will take possession of it when the time comes that Satan will be ejected from the inheritance of the children—of the legal heirs—you will find that ejectment will be served, and will be effectual. It will be effectual upon every tenant or occupant upon the premises of the Almighty, and they will be forthwith removed. But the time is not yet come—the work is not yet finished. Be patient; be co-workers with our Savior and Master until this work is accomplished, and we shall be blessed in our deeds. Brigham Young, The Deseret News, Vol. 11, No. 6, p. 41, April 10, 1861.
