N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

The Heart Throbs of Many Fathers and Mothers

A PRAYER:

O Father, help me understand, And know the reason why The boy that Thou didst give to me, So early had to die; Why one whose life had been so pure, Who never knew deceit, Should droop and wither like a flower Crushed under ruthless feet. O Father, help me understand Thy purposes Divine, In letting death, with ruthless hand, Tear his dear heart from mine. O let me see the veil beyond, Where dwells his spirit pure And know he's happy where he's gone; O let me feel secure. Forgive the surging doubts that rise Within my aching heart, And take the dimness from mine eyes, Let darkness all depart. Let light and knowledge come to me From heaven, Thy home on high, O help me put my trust in Thee: O Father, tell me, why. Perhaps I sin in asking this, More faith should show in Thee; But, O, I miss his loving kiss, He was so dear to me. Just let me know that I sometime Shall find him once again, And clasp again his form in mine: I ask in Jesus' name.

THE ANSWER:

Grieve not, my son, for time shall be When death shall be no more. Thy loved one I'll return to thee, To cherish evermore. 'Twas in the plan that man should die, And slumber in the grave, But rise again, as even I, For this my life I gave. For mortal life is but a part Of God's eternity, In which the souls of men embark To find felicity. What men call death is but a step From low to higher plane, And all who in the dust have slept, Through me shall live again. Then grieve not for the one that's gone, Nor let your heart despair; For God in wisdom called your son, To work for Him up there; The prison gates to open wide For those who died in sin, And through repentance them to guide Again to worship Him. Let this then be your answer, why, And let your heart rejoice, For unto God they do not die, Who answer to His voice; But walk with Him in realms of love, Where all the righteous be. Be comforted, for there above, Thy boy will welcome thee. —REY L. PRATT

Was Temple Work Done in the Days of the Old Prophets?

By Joseph Fielding Smith

QUESTION: "Was temple work done in the days of the old prophets? Did they have the sealing powers or was all of this work left for the Church in this dispensation? If they had it, was it done in temples?"

ANSWER: The detailed history of the performance of the saving ordinances of the gospel as practised in ancient times was never recorded in any detail, because such ordinances are sacred and not for the world. There are, however, in the Old Testament references to covenants and obligations under which the members of the Church in those days were placed, although the meaning is generally obscure. For example in Ex. 40:12-15, Num. 25:11-13, and Jer. 31:31-33, we have reference to sacred covenants.

The fact that Adam and Noah, long after they were dead, appeared to Daniel as Michael and Gabriel (Dan. 10:13, 21; 8:16) and to Zacharias and Mary, (Luke 1:11 19; and 1:26-31) is evidence that they had received the fulness of blessings that entitled them to stand in the presence of God. Likewise the appearance of Moses and Elias on the mount of transfiguration with our Redeemer and his apostles, Peter, James, and John, is evidence that they also had obtained the fulness of the blessings of exaltation. Moreover, the fact that Elijah was the last of the ancient prophets to hold the keys of the sealing power before the coming of our Savior in his ministry, is evidence that this power was exercised in the interest of Israel in ancient times. Because of the fact that Elijah held this sealing authority, the Lord inspired Malachi to prophesy of Elijah's coming in the last days to restore these keys of authority in the following words:

"Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

"And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse." (Mal. 4:5-6.)

We know that this prophecy was fulfilled, for on the third day of April, 1836, Elijah came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple and conferred upon them this sealing authority. Since that day the hearts of the children have turned to their fathers, and without doubt the hearts of the fathers have turned to their children and this influence is felt throughout the world causing the children to search the records of their dead. This fact is so definitely apparent that it cannot be denied. Today we have the privilege of going into our temples and there sealing children to parents and parents to each other that we all may, as Paul declared, bow our knees ". . . unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

"Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, . . . " (Eph. 3:14-15.)

That ordinances for Israel might be performed, the Lord commanded Moses to build a portable tabernacle — at times called the temple — in the wilderness in which sacred ordinances could be performed. The purpose of this building, in which Samuel officiated, has been declared in our day in these words: "For, for this cause I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before the world was." (D&C 124:38.)

There is a sufficient reason why the ordinance of baptism is not more clearly revealed in the Old Testament, and it is that in the repeated copying of the ancient records and their repeated translations, scribes and translators took from the record the plain and precious parts because they were contrary to their beliefs or comprehension. The Book of Mormon makes this clear; and in the writings of Moses, as they are given to us, we have them restored; and we know that baptism was taught to Adam, and he taught it to his children. There are some references in the Old Testament to washings, which could well mean baptisms, and the evidence of the font in the temple of Solomon is a mute witness that baptisms must have been practised in it; these are spoken of as washings. The Book of Mormon makes the fact very clear that baptism was practised among the Jews, and in the writings of Moses which have been restored, we learn that baptism was taught to Adam, and he was commanded to teach it to his children.

Improvement Era, November, 1955.

Temples for which Dedicatory Prayers were offered by President David O. McKay.

Swiss Temple . . . . : See Improvement Era — November 1955: Deseret News-Sept. 12, 1955.

Los Angeles Temple: . . . . See Improvement Era — April 1956: Deseret News-March 31, 1956.

New Zealand Temple: . . . . : Deseret News-May 10, 1958.

London Temple . . . . : See Improvement Era — October 1958: Deseret News-Sept. 8, 1958.

Oakland Temple . . . . : See Improvement Era — January 1965: Deseret News-Nov. 21, 1964.

The Blind Shall Enjoy Reading the Book "Temples of the Most High"

On February 19, 1964, an "Application For Permission to Record on Magnetic Tape", the Book "Temples of The Most High", for the benefit of the blind, was received from the Chief of the Division for the Blind, Library of Congress. This permission was gladly and gratuitously given. The hearts of many thousands will thus be made glad, which will also gladden the heart of the Compiler of this Book.

* Rise and Fall of Nauvoo, by B. H. Roberts, p. 111.

1 It is very prevalent opinion that the sacrifices which were offered were entirely consumed. This was not the case; if you read Leviticus, second chapter, second and third verses, you will observe that the priests took a part as a memorial and offered it up before the Lord, while the remainder was kept for the maintenance of the priests; so that the offerings and sacrifices are not all consumed upon the altar—but the blood is sprinkled, and the fat and certain other portions are consumed.

These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications and blessings. This ever did and ever will exist when the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by the holy Priesthood be brought to pass? It is not to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been spoken of by the Prophets; but those things which existed prior to Moses' day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued.

It may be asked by some, what necessity for sacrifice, since the Great Sacrifice was offered? In answer to which, if repentance, baptism, and faith existed prior to the days of Christ, what necessity for them since that time? The Priesthood has descended in a regular line from father to son, through their succeeding generations. Joseph the Prophet, D. H. C., Vol. 4, p. 211-2.

See also: Mediation and Atonement by John Taylor, pp. 119-123. Liahona, June 1, 1926, by Chas. W. Penrose.
