N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

ADDENDA C

The Burning of the Nauvoo Temple

By Robert Aveson

The following article, under the heading "Burning of the Nauvoo Temple," was taken from the Fort Madison (Iowa) Democrat many years ago. I herewith reproduce it from my scrapbook.

George H. Rudsill, now of Bowling Green, Florida, but once a Ft. Madison boy, tells of the destruction of the Nauvoo Temple, which occurred fifty years ago, in the following words:

"Well, to the burning of the Temple. I will give it in Mr. J. B. Agnew's own words, as near as I can recollect, which was just before his death in the fall of 1870. After telling me his story he asked me as a friend not to let it be known until after his death of all parties concerned, as they had pledged themselves to secrecy in the matter. This I told him I would do, and now that these parties are all dead, it will be no harm to let it be known, and it will satisfy many an old settler's curiosity.

"Mr. Agnew was in failing health at the time he came to me. He told me that he was going to die soon, which I thought was true. I asked him if he had repented of his wrongdoings and he smiled and said: `Yes, all but one thing.' I asked what that was and he said it was the burning of the Nauvoo Temple. Says I: Did you do that? And he said: `Yes, I did it with my own hands. Sit down and I will tell you about it,' which is as follows, as near as I can give it in his own words:

"`The reason why I burned it was that there was a continual report in circulation that the Mormons were coming back to Nauvoo and we were afraid they might take it into their heads to do so, and as we had had all the trouble with them we wanted, Judge Sharp of Carthage, Hyrum McCauley of Appanooce, and myself of Pontoosue, determined the destruction of their Temple and by so doing they would not be able ever again to try and come back.

"`So on the afternoon of the night that the Temple was burned, in order to make arrangements we three met on the prairie five miles south of Fort Madison, in Illinois, the judge coming from Carthage, the squire from Appanooce, and I from Pentoosue, and we met about where the Mormon Church stood, five miles south of Appanooce, and there we pledged ourselves to destroy the Temple if it cost us our lives. So we journeyed toward it on horseback, and on the way tried to perfect some plan to work on. After a while we decided to get the steward to show us through the Temple, and then watch our chance to get in our work. So we hid our horses in the bushes in a secluded place a mile from town and walked in. We looked about town until 4 o'clock in the afternoon, and in the meantime had prepared a bundle of kindling by taking a corn sack and cutting arm holes in it so I could put it on like a coat under my coat. I then stuck in as many tarred rags on sticks as I could carry without being noticed. I then put it on and secured some matches from a store to light my pipe and we were ready. We had but little trouble to find the steward and after laboring with him some time he at last consented to show us through the Temple. We claimed to be strangers in the country and were going away that night and it would be our last chance perhaps of ever having an opportunity to visit the Temple. So on these conditions he would oblige us, provided we would hurry, which we agreed to do, as it was getting late and it would be dark before we could get through. So after a good deal of delay the key was at last inserted, it not seeming to fit, but at last the door swung open. We went in with a rush and kept a going, the man being left behind working with the door. He called out for us to stop but we kept on going and I noticed that he left the door with the key in it.

"`I stepped back in a side room, and the other two kept on. The man ran on after them, and after he had passed me, I went back to the door and unlocked it and put the key in my pocket and then ran after them. By this time the man had discovered that I was missing, but when I came up to them and explained that I had stopped to look at the crucifixion, he seemed to be satisfied but looked suspicious at me, and from that time on he kept close to my side and would not allow us to stop but walked us right on around and out. It was getting dusk and we had no chance for me to light my fire and I saw that it was telling on my companions—that they were bitterly disappointed when we were compelled to walk out. I told them to come on in haste, that we were late and would miss our boat that we were going on. So they came along and we stopped behind a house, where I told them what I had done, which made them two of the happiest fellows I ever saw. We had to watch but a few minutes until we saw the steward start away on a run, and we knew he was going for a key or some one, and that this was our chance, so leaving the judge and squire on guard, I ran back to the Temple.

"`I started for the top which I soon gained and found a good place to start my fire where it would get a good start before it would shed any light and be seen from the outside. After seeing it start to success I began to retrace my steps with joy and a light heart, for I was sure that the Temple was as good as burned, with a chance for me to burn with it, for I had lost my way and did not know which way to turn to get out, although I had been through the Temple a number of times before. I had thought if I would succeed at last in getting out, that I would be sure to get caught by the steward, for he would soon be back and in all probability would have help with him, for I was certain that he would lay the missing key to us. You can imagine my feeling, being left in the burning Temple, and in case I did escape the fire I was sure of an arrest. I ran first one way, then the other, in hopes of gaining some passage that I would know so as to find my way out, but all to no purpose. I was getting worse lost all the time, and I could not tell one direction from another, for it was as dark as an Egyptian night. At last I came to the stairway going up and I took it with the hope that it would lead me back to where I had started the fire and I could then take a new start. After going up two pairs of stairs and through many halls I came to a square turn and a light shone way down the passage in the opposite direction from what I wanted to go, but I thought it best to go and see what it was or who it was, and I soon discovered that it was my fire which was burning at a fearful rate, sending its fiery tongue clear across the hall.

"`I drew as near as I could and I happened to see Squire McCauley's bandana handkerchief lying on the floor a short distance from the fire on the opposite side of me. So I knew that my way led through the fire as that room was the end of our trip. Now what was I to do? I knew no other way out but through the fire. I became horror stricken. Was I to be burned up by my own hands? O God, what shall I do? Not knowing as it were what I did, I threw my coat over my head and made a dive through that hell of fire, striking my full length on the floor and I rolled over and over until I got out of the reach of the fire. When I got to my feet I took off my coat and extinguished the fire that caught in the lining, after which I put it on again. With difficulty I tried to run, for I seriously hurt my arm and one of my legs from my fall on the floor, but was so excited at the time that I did not realize the pain until afterwards. With the assistance of a few matches I had, that I now thought of, I kept striking them along the way, and at last reached the door that I had been going through and found it standing open. The squire had come and thrown it open in hopes I might be able to see a star from without.

"`They were satisfied that something had happened on account of my delay. You can imagine our feelings when I stepped through the door. I pulled the door to and locked it and ran away in an easterly direction, the judge and squire following. I was sore, lame and burned and almost choked, not being able to speak and when I came to a well about one hundred yards away, I drank and threw the key in the well. I then told the boys to scatter and go to the horses, which they did. They got there long before I did for I was almost beyond going at all. After reaching the horses I told them the job was done and for them to go in different directions and get home as soon as possible and avoid meeting anyone. They objected to leaving me as they were afraid I was hurt internally, which I was fearful was the case, I had inhaled the fire and thought my time had come. I told them to go, that I would pull through all right. So the squire took the river road up the river to Appanooce ten miles distant; the judge took the road to Carthage, about sixteen miles distant to the south; while I took the prairie road in the direction of Pontoosue, twelve miles distant.

"`After going about one-half mile, I looked toward Nauvoo and I saw a flickering light and the next minute the flames burst through the roof and lit up the country for miles as light as day. I put my horse into a dead run in the direction of the Missouri timber, which I gained in time without being seen, as the people on the road were all in bed, but I had no sooner jumped my horse over a fence into a field and secreted myself behind some bushes, when along came seven horsemen on their way to the fire, which had by this time been discovered twenty miles around. After they had passed I again tried to mount my horse, but found it impossible and found my leg had swollen so that I could not walk. I was in a fix, sure enough. What to do I did not know, but I had to do something, so I got down on my hands and knees and crawled on toward a cluster of trees, leading my horse. When I arrived at the timber I fortunately found a large tree which had been cut down, leaving a high stump; crawling upon this stump I managed to get on the back of my horse, and went back, jumping my horse over the fence back into the road.

"`I was suffering so terribly that I could but just cling to my saddle. I turned my horse in he direction of Squire McCauley's cabin, where I arrived just before daybreak, and found that the squire had got home nearly two hours before. He was surprised to be called out by me, but after giving him to understand my condition, he cried like a child. He took me in and hid me away for a week, where he and his wife cared for me, as they would for one of their own, until I was able to go about without suspicion. The judge got home the night following the night the Temple was burned, having to ride in the woods on Rock Creek all day, which was on the south side of Rock Creek township.'

"So after nearly fifty years the true history of the burning of the great Mormon Temple is made known. The narrator of this story, as told by Mr. Agnew, was a small boy at the time of the burning of the Temple, living with his mother just west of Ft. Madison, Iowa, and he recollects seeing the light from the burning building on that memorable night. Over twenty years after the destruction of the Temple I became intimately acquainted with all the parties connected with this narrative."—George H. Rudsill, Bowling Green, Florida.

(A few years after the burning of the Temple, Elders George A. Smith and Erastus Snow visited Nauvoo, and from Lewis A. Bidamon, landlord of the Nauvoo Mansion, were told that the inhabitants of several of the surrounding settlements—previous to the burning of the sacred edifice—were jealous of Nauvoo, and fearing it would continue to retain its superior influence as a town, and the Mormons be induced to return, they contributed a purse of $500 which they gave to this man Joseph Agnew to perform the diabolical act, and that he was the wretch who set fire to the building. Mr. Bidamon told the brethren that the burning of the Temple did certainly have the effect of diminishing the importance of Nauvoo, for his hotel did not have one-fourth the custom after the burning as it had before the destruction of that magnificent structure.)
