N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

ADDENDA D—The Oakland Temple

Historical Data on the Oakland Temple

The events connected with the selection and acquisition of a site for the erection of a temple in Oakland, California, are, like other temples having similar experiences, very inspiring, and indicate that God inspired those who chose these locations for the temples concerned.

By permission of W. Aird Macdonald, I quote from the May 1964 issue of the Improvement Era respecting the interesting events connected with the acquisition of the site for the Oakland temple, this article having been prepared by Harold W. Burton, Church Supervising Architect, and Elder Macdonald. This write-up also records the history of events leading up to and including the dedication of the Temple.

Forty years ago this summer, in 1924, the late President George Albert Smith, then a member of the Council of the Twelve, was in San Francisco attending regional Boy Scout meetings. As the president of the little Oakland Branch of the California Mission, I [Aird Macdonald] was invited to meet him at the Fairmont Hotel, high atop Nob Hill. We sat on the roof terrace facing the East Bay, discussing affairs concerning the little church organization across the bay.

From the Fairmont terrace we had a wonderful panorama of the great San Francisco Bay, nesting at our feet. The setting sun seemed to set the whole eastern shore afire, until the Oakland hills were ablaze with golden light. As we admired the beauty and majesty of the scene, President Smith suddenly grew silent, ceased talking, and for several minutes gazed intently toward the East Bay hills.

"Brother Macdonald, I can almost see in vision a white temple of the Lord high upon those hills," he exclaimed rapturously, "an ensign to all the world travelers as they sail through the Golden Gate into this wonderful harbor." Then he studied the vista for a few moments as if to make sure of the scene before him. "Yes, sir, a great white temple of the Lord," he confided with calm assurance, "will grace those hills, a glorious ensign to the nations to welcome our Father's children as they visit this great city."

A few years later, President David O. McKay, then one of the Twelve, visited Oakland at one of our first stake conferences, and asked to see the place where Brother Smith had envisioned a temple. I accompanied him to the hill, a point high above the Dimond district off Mountain Boulevard, the present site of the Oakland Temple. Following President McKay's visit, negotiations for the purchase of the property countined for several years, until the Church finally acquired the hill where Brother Smith saw the vision of a temple that summer evening in 1924.

The vision of a "White Temple" on the East Bay hills persisted and became the dream of the local church colony. After the visit of President McKay, efforts to buy the site continued over a period of fourteen years. But many circumstances developed to block the ownership of the hilltop by the Church. One private owner refused to sell his essential parcel. It was not until after his death that a settlement among his heirs finally made the property available. Once the site was pre-empted by the school board for an elementary school building. When plans changed, the property fell into the hands of a real estate housing promoter, whose plans were approved by city, county and state officials, but because of the Korean War he was not able to proceed with the project.

Later, Brother A. B. Graham (a realtor) received word that the site was for sale. On November 16, 1942, a letter signed by President Heber J. Grant and President David O. McKay (then the second counselor in the First Presidency) was received by President Eugene Hilton who was then President of the Oakland Stake, which stated that they had concluded to purchase this site for a temple, and enclosed a check for $100.00 as assurance of good faith. On January 28, 1943, the balance due on the purchase price was sent, which then amounted to a little over $18,000.00 as the total cost of the site which thereafter was called "Temple Hill." Other parcels of land were later added in order to enlarge the site.

On Monday, January 23, 1961, President David O. McKay flew to San Francisco to a pre-arranged meeting at the Hilton Hotel near the San Francisco airport. Stake presidencies to the area from Fresno on the south to Klamath on the north and Reno on the east, were present. At that time there were nineteen stakes in the area. Now, three years later, there are twenty-five. President McKay announced that the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve had approved a temple for Oakland. Harold W. Burton, supervising architect of the Church building committee, had been appointed architect for the temple, the fifteenth to be erected by the Church in this dispensation.

The stake presidencies were overjoyed with this announcement and pledged to President McKay that they would raise not less than five hundred thousand dollars toward the construction of the temple. One stake president recalls making a mental calculation that the pledge would mean more than five dollars per capita for the 92,000 church members of the area. (Later, Pres. O. Leslie Stone reported that $635,000.00 had been subscribed.)

At this meeting a temple committee was named with President O. Leslie Stone of the Oakland-Berkeley Stake as chairman, President David B. Haight of the Palo Alto Stake, vice chairman, Presidents Dallas A. Tueller of the Fresno Stake and Carroll William Smith of Klamath (Oregon) Stake as members. Paul F. Warnick of the Oakland-Berkeley Stake was named executive secretary of the committee, and Sister Nell Smith was appointed publicity chairman.

President McKay returned to Oakland, Saturday, May 26, 1962, when he officially broke ground for the structure, at which time he also dedicated the site. All members of the First Presidency and many of the General Authorities were present. Approximately seven thousand were in attendance at this service. Construction on the building started the following Monday morning.

President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve laid the cornerstone on Saturday, May 25, 1963. The Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir (then on a concert tour in California) sang at the services, which were attended by an estimated seven thousand.

The temple was designed by Harold W. Burton and was erected by the Leon M. Wheatley Co., Inc., and the Jacobsen Construction Co., Inc., as a joint venture. Superintendent of construction was Robert C. Loden. Arthur Price was resident architect supervisor during the construction of the temple.

The First Presidency, on January 4, 1964, announced the appointment of Elder Delbert F. Wright as president of the Oakland Temple, with Sister Wright as temple matron.

The temple was dedicated by President David O. McKay on Tuesday morning, Nov. 17, 1964. The dedicatory prayer was repeated at each of the following sessions. Two sessions were held each day for three days, November 17, 18, and 19. President McKay also addressed each of the six sessions. He was assisted in conducting the dedicatory services by his counselors, President Hugh B. Brown and President N. Eldon Tanner. They also spoke as did all members of the Council of the Twelve in attendance and others of the General Authorities.

The Temple was opened for ordinance work on Tuesday, January 5, 1965. A staff of 250 ordinance workers were trained to perform the necessary functions essential in this sacred structure.

Physical Description of the Temple

by HAROLD W. BURTON, Suprevising Architect and W AIRD MACDONALD

The Oakland Temple differs from the older type of temple in that there will be but two ordinance rooms. The ceremonies that are performed in four rooms in other temples are consolidated into each of these two rooms. The ceremonies in these two ordinance rooms will be alternated at one hour and fifteen minute intervals. The celestial room will be common to both ordinance rooms, which will make it possible for one group of temple workers to officiate in both rooms.

The celestial room in the Oakland Temple, located directly under the central tower and spire, is thirty-eight feet square. The room has a thirty-five foot high ceiling. The walls are covered in giallo sienna, a beautiful golden-toned marble imported from Italy. The wall panels are of light-colored South American wood, known as Prima Vera. This Prima Vera wood has a golden glaze which harmonizes perfectly with the beautiful Italian marble. The floor is carpeted with a deep pile velvet carpet in a golden hue that harmonizes with the marble and wood paneling.

Beneath the celestial room is the baptistry in the exact center of the building, in the lowest part of the temple. The floor of the baptistry is marble, the sixteen supporting columns that carry the weight of the central tower and spire is covered with a travertine marble which is quarried in Utah. It is crystalline formation with onyx and other crystals, which gives it a rich bronze-like effect.

The font itself is supported on the backs of twelve life-sized oxen covered with pure gold leaf. The oxen have the appearance of emerging from reeded foliage, which is polychromed in natural foliage colors. The oxen are typical of those used by the early Mormon pioneers in crossing the plains.

There are ten sealing rooms in the building, two of which have a seating capacity of sixty, four with a seating of twenty-two each, and four seating sixteen each. The sealing rooms are carpeted wall to wall. All four walls are paneled with silk-covered panels and mirrors. These mirrors give the symbolic effect of eternity because of the repeated reflections on all sides of the rooms.

The ground floor of the temple is devoted to the initiatory ceremonies. The west wing contains the Bureau of Information and a reception room for temple patrons. The temple chapel and the other administrative offices are in the east wing.

The exterior of the building from the base to the top of the central tower is faced with sierra white granite, which is quarried at Raymond, California, approximately 175 miles from the temple site.

The temple proper sits on the stylobate 210 feet from east to west and 190 feet from north to south. It faces two and one-half degrees west off true north. The central tower rises 170 feet from ground level to the tip of the finial or spire. There are four lesser spires directly over the four corner towers. These spires reach heavenward ninety-six feet. The towers are perforated and are covered in a blue glass mosaic and gold leaf. They present a very striking effect in the sun light and at night will be illuminated from the interior of the spires, transmitting rays of lacy light which stream through the perforations. The temple will present a stirring sight, especially at night, for viewers from miles away.

A feature of the exterior of the temple is two sculptured panels, thirty-five feet wide and thirteen feet, one inch high. The sculptured figures in these panels, one on the north facade and one on the south facade, are heroic in size.

The panel on the approach, or north side of the building, depicts Jesus of Nazareth in Palestine; the one on the south facade shows Jesus appearing to the Nephites in the Land Bountiful. These panels grow out of the face of the building and are executed in the same granite as the rest of the building, and thereby have the appearance of being an integral part of the temple.

From the stylobate projecting northward are two wings, thirty-feet by 149 feet, enclosing a fore-court 80 feet wide and 116 feet long. There is a reflecting pool in the center of the fore-court thirty-six feet wide and ninety-seven feet long. This is fed by a waterfall coming from the top of the stylobate down the face of the building into a catch basin, overflowing into the reflecting pool. The stylobate is beautifully landscaped with exotic plantings. From this point, the visitor gets a breath-taking panoramic view of the entire bay area. The fore-court is landscaped with a variety of citrus trees typical of California.

The cost of this temple was $3 1/2 million.

Public Interest in the Temple

More than 347,000 visitors went through the Oakland Temple during the four weeks in October it was opened for public viewing. This was an average of 16,000 per day. The largest number came on the first Saturday, October 10, when there were 24,000 visitors.

Excellent weather prevailed except for the last two or three days at the close of the month. Despite the rain more than 17,000 visitors went through the building on the final Saturday.

In raincoats and sheltered by umbrellas, people stood in line for nearly two hours at times to enter the beautiful structure.

The reporter of the Oakland Tribune, Bill Rose, stated in the October 15th issue: "`Fantastically beautiful, exquisite, inspiring, overwhelming and gorgeous' were a few of the superlatives used by some of the 12,000 persons who viewed the Oakland Mormon Temple last night."

Grand View of Nearby Cities

The Oakland Temple commands a sweeping view of the entire bay area. The Golden Gate is directly to the west. The city of San Francisco lies some eighteen miles distant. Seen also from the temple grounds are the cities of Piedmont, Berkeley and Richmond to the north; San Jose and Palo Alto to the south; and San Leandro and Hayward to the east.

References

For detailed accounts of the construction and dedication of the Oakland Temple, consult the following:

Special Dedication Section of the Deseret News for Nov. 21, 1964.

Church News for October 24, October 31, November 7, and November 28, 1964.

The Improvement Era for May 1964 and January 1965.

A book, all in colors, was sold which described the Temple in detail.

OAKLAND TEMPLE

OAKLAND TEMPLE
