N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

ADDENDA E.

Additional Information Pertaining to The Construction of Temples Listed In This Book; Also Data on Alterations and Additions to Temples Concerned.

Appreciation and gratitude is expressed to Harold W. Burton, Edward O. Anderson, Arthur Price, and Emil B. Fetzer, Architects, and to W. Aird Macdonald and ElRay L. Christiansen for their generous assistance rendered and interest manifested in the recording in this Book, the information embodied in this Addenda E, which will be of value in years to come. Detailed information may be had for each Temple in the Chapters preceding this Addenda.

KIRTLAND TEMPLE.

The Kirtland Temple was dedicated on March 27, 1836.

"On June 6, 1833, a conference of High Priests assembled in Kirtland and instructed the building committee (Hyrum Smith, Jared Carter and Reynolds Cahoon) to proceed immediately to obtain stone, brick, lumber and other materials for the building, which they did, and on July 23, 1833 (the same day on which the Saints in Missouri made a treaty with the mob, and agreed to leave Jackson Conuty) the corner stones of the Lord's House, or the Kirtland Temple, were laid after the order of the Holy Priesthood.

"At that time," writes Sister Eliza R. Snow, "the Saints were few in number and most of them very poor; and, had it not been for the assurance that God had spoken, and had commanded that a house should be built to his name, of which he not only revealed the form, but also designated the dimensions, an attempt towards building that Temple, under the then existing circumstances, would have been, by all concerned, pronounced preposterous.

"Although many sections of the world abounded with mosques, churches, synagogues and cathedrals, built professedly for worship, this was the first instance, for the lapse of many centuries, of God having given a pattern, from the heavens, and manifested by direct revelation how the edifice should be constructed, in order that he might accept and acknowledge it as his own. This knowledge inspired the Saints to almost superhuman efforts, while through faith and union they acquired strength."

"One striking feature of the (dedicatory) ceremonies, was the grand shout of hosanna, which was given by the whole assembly, in standing position, with uplifted hands. The form of the shout is as follows: `Hosanna — hosanna — hosanna — to God and the Lamb — amen — amen, and amen.' The foregoing was deliberately and emphatically pronounced, and three times repeated, and with such power as seemed almost sufficient to raise the roof from the building.

"A singular incident in connection with this shout may be discredited by some, but it is verily true. A notice had been circulated that children in arms would not be admitted at the dedication of the Temple. A sister who had come a long distance with her babe, six weeks old, having, on her arrival, heard of the above requisition, went to the Patriarch Joseph Smith, sen., in great distress, saying that she knew no one with whom she could leave her infant; and to be deprived of the privilege of attending the dedication seemed more than she could endure. The ever generous and kind-hearted father volunteered to take the responsibility on himself, and told her to take her child, at the same time giving the mother a promise that her babe should make no disturbance; and the promise was verified. But when the congregation shouted hosanna, that babe joined in the shout. As marvelous as that incident may appear to many, it is not more so than other occurrences on that occasion.

"The ceremonies of that dedication may be rehearsed, but no mortal language can describe the heavenly manifestations of that memorable day. Angels appeared to some, while a sense of divine presence was realized by all present, and each heart was filled with `joy inexpressible and full of glory.'"

(The reader is here referred to 3 Ne. 26:16, now quoted:

"Behold, it came to pass on the morrow that the multitude gathered themselves together, and they both saw and heard these children; yea, even babes did open their mouths and utter marvelous things; and the things which they did utter were forbidden that there should not any man write them.")

Besides being devoted to general meetings for worship and the celebration of the Lord's Supper every first day of the week, the Temple was occupied by crowded assemblies on the first Thursday in each month, that day being observed strictly, by the Latter-day Saints, as a day of fasting and prayer. These, called fast-meetings, were hallowed and interesting beyond the power of language to describe. Many, many were the pentecostal seasons of the outpouring of the spirit of God on those days, manifesting the gifts of the Gospel and the power of healing, prophesying, speaking in tongues, the interpretation of tongues, etc.

"I have there," continues Sister Snow, "seen the lame man, on being administered to, throw aside his crutches and walk home perfectly healed; and not only were the lame made to walk, but the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, and evil spirits to depart."

Historical Record, By Andrew Jensen, 5:74-80

Architect's rendering of Nauvoo Temple by William Weeks
