N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High ( 1941)

NAUVOO TEMPLE

The Nauvoo Temple was officially dedicated on May 1, 1846 by Orson Hyde and Wilford Woodruff. The word of the Lord concerning the building of this Temple and the ordinances to be performed therein, was given in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith on January 19, 1841. In this revelation the Lord said:

"And I will show unto my servant Joseph ALL THINGS pertaining to this house, and the priesthood thereof and the place whereon it shall be built."

The Lord, therefore, was the Architect and Designer of this Temple; the Prophet Joseph Smith was the Supervising Architect; and William Weeks was the Contractor, which statement the following item will verify:

"In the afternoon, Elder William Weeks (whom I had employed as architect of the Temple), came in for instruction. I instructed him in relation to the circular windows designed to light the offices in the dead work on the arch between stories. He said that round windows in the broad side of a building were a violation of all known rules of architecture, and contended that they should be semi-circular — the building was too low for round windows. I told him I would have the circles, if he had to make the Temple ten feet higher than it was originally caculated; that one light at the center of each circular window would be sufficient to light the whole room; that when the whole building was thus illuminated, the effect would be remarkably grand. I wish you to carry out my designs. I HAVE SEEN IN VISION THE SPLENDID APPEARANCE OF THAT BUILDING ILLUMINATED, AND WILL HAVE IT BUILT ACCORDING TO THE PATTERN SHOWN ME."

"The matter of building a Temple was laid before the general conference held at Commerce, Oct. 6, 1840, when the Church voted to commence the work immediately. On this day also the conference appointed Alpheus Cutler, Elias Highbee and Reynolds Cahoon as a committee of three to carry the business into operation and to oversee the work. During the conference, which lasted three days, the Prophet Joseph explained to the Saints the law of tithing and the plan upon which the building of the Temple was to be conducted.

"In February, 1841, Elder Alpheus Cutler, assisted by Elder Reynolds Cahoon and others, laid out the foundation of the Temple. On the 18th of that month the brethren began to dig the cellar. As it was the wish of President Smith that the corner stones of the Temple should be laid on the 6th day of April next, the corners for the foundation were first excavated; and about the 1st day of March the cellar walls were commenced. On April 6, 1841, the corner stones were laid. (See Historical Record, 8:858-860, for detailed account of this event.)

"Elders Cahoon and Cutler hired the laborers, superintended the work and kept an oversight of the entire business."

"On Sept. 25, 1841, Elders Alpheus Cutler and Peter Haws started for the pine country to obtain lumber for the Temple and Nauvoo House. They took with them Tarlton Lewis, Jabes Durfee, Hardin Wilson, Wm. L. Cutler, Horace Owens, Octavius Pauket, Blakely B. Anderson, James M. Flack, Nathaniel Child, Brother Child's wife and daughter, and Peter W. Conover. These brethren spent the winter in the pine forests, and toiled diligently in their appointed work. They suffered some because of the cold in that northern region, but they made good progress. By the following July, they had succeeded in making up and bringing to Nauvoo a large raft of first-rate pine lumber. Ibid p. 860.

"In the revelation given Jan. 19, 1841, the Lord stated:

"`For a baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that they, my Saints, may be baptized for those who are dead.' etc., etc. "In the summer and fall of the year 1841, in conformity with the foregoing item of law, the brethren entered into measures to build a baptismal font in the cellar floor near the east end of the Temple. President Smith approved and accepted a draft for the font, made by Brother Wm. Weeks; and on August 18, 1841, Elder Weeks began to labor on the construction of the font with his own hands.*** August 11th Brother Weeks began carving the oxen, twelve in number, upon which the font was to stand. After carving for six days, he consigned this branch to Brother Elijah Fordham, the principal carver, who continued until they were finished. On Nov. 8, 1841, at 5 o'clock in the evening, the font was dedicated by Joseph Smith." This font was constructed of pine timber and was built for the baptisms for the dead until the Temple "shall be finished when a more durable one will supply its place." Ibid p. 862.

The following is from the pen of William Clayton:

"After the dedication of the font Reuben McBride was the first person baptized, under the direction of the President, Brother Samuel Rolfe, who was seriously afflicted with a felon upon one of his hands, was present. President Smith instructed him to wash in the font and told him that the hand would be healed. The doctors had told him that he could not recover before spring, and had advised him to have his hand cut. He dipped his hand in the font, and within a week he was perfectly healed."

"After this time baptisms were continued in the font, and many Saints realized great blessings — both spiritually and bodily." Ibid p. 862.

"From the beginning Albert P. Rockwood, assisted by Charles Drury, was in charge of the crews working in the quarries." Times and Seasons, Apr. 15, 1841).

William W. Player was an expert stone layer, and as soon as he arrived from England in the spring of 1842, he superintended the rock work on the Temple. He came from England for the express purpose of doing this work. Ibid p. 862.

"After the excitement incident to the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, the work on the Temple ceased for two weeks, all the hands having to watch and stand on guard night and day. The work was suspended about June 20, 1844. On the second Sabbath after the murder (July 7th) the subject of the Temple was brought into consideration, and the Church voted to commence work again and finish the building as speedily as possible.

"Consequently, on July 8, 1844, the laborers resumed their work, although the committee had not so much as a bushel of meal, nor a pound of flour, nor a pound of meat to feed the hands with; but the Saints seemed determined to go to work and trust in God for the means. On July 5th a large raft of pine lumber, containing 87,732 feet, was landed at Nauvoo for the Temple. Shortly after another raft, containing 67,952 feet of lumber, was received and hauled to the Temple." For more detailed history of this Temple, see Historical Record, volume (8); Documentary History of the Church, vol. 4:229, 326-331, 443-444, 7:456-457.

This priceless architectural drawing of the Nauvoo Temple by William Weeks, architect of the Nauvoo Temple, was loaned to the compiler of this book by Edward O. Anderson, Church Architect. This is probably the first time the original drawing of the Nauvoo Temple has ever been printed.

ST. GEORGE TEMPLE

Truman O. Angel, Church architect, drew the plans for the building; Miles P. Romney was general superintendent of construction; Edward Lloyd Parry had charge of the stone cutting and laying; William Carter of the device for pounding to solidity the foundation bottoms; George Jarvis had charge of all scaffold making and hoisting devices at the quarries and at the temple; William Burt had charge of the plastering; David Milne supervised the painting and decorating; Albert Foremaster and Et Wiltbank supervised the production and delivery of lime; Robert Gardner superintended the getting out of the lumber at Mt. Trumbull and Pine Valley; and Arch McNeil was overseer at the quarries. The mule teams of James Andrus, Edward M. Brown, Thomas Judd and Daniel D. McArthur hauled much of the stone, the larger pieces being slung under the wagons. Benjamin and Frederick Blake were the noted drivers of large ox teams that brought in the lumber from Mt. Trumbull. This Temple was dedicated on April 6, 1877, by Elder Daniel H. Wells.

ALTERATION PROGRAM FOR ST. GEORGE TEMPLE

By Edward O. Anderson, Architect

In 1947, the Church approved an extensive renovation program on the exterior of this Temple. As noted in the pervious narrations, the exterior walls are surfaced with a red stone Ashler, which in turn was covered with a limeplaster finish. Over the years this plaster finish failed, especially on horizontal and sloping surfaces.

In 1947, the Church authorized the removal of all this lime plaster on the exterior of the building down to the red sandstone, and then apply a new cement plaster, under the direction of Howard J. McKean, Contractor, Don Carlos Young, Architect, and Edward O. Anderson, Church Supervising Architect. The California Granolux Co. applied a cement plaster with air gun to the surface, all of which had been reinforced with heavy steel welded mesh, attached to reinforcing bars anchored to the stone. A Brother Kuntz, plaster Contractor from California, applied a finish coat of white cement and white silica sand plaster. This finish plaster failed on horizontal and sloped surfaces, but recently has been corrected by using epoxy adheasive to the stone and sealing the plaster with silicone transparent damp proofing.

In 1956, Edward O. Anderson, Architect, Lloyd Leon Jennings, Contractor, David O. Woodbury, Supervisor, and Clair Stirling, carried out an extensive Annex Addition to the Temple which was a much needed addition.

On the Main Floor:

In the Basement: Reading rooms and storage rooms.

During the excavation of the basement, spring water stood in the bottom of the excavation. On further examination it was found this water could be drained off into the original water drain around the Temple. This made it possible to complete a basement under the entire Annex. Later this space has been finished and is now used as a Childrens' Room.

This Annex Addition was finished under the direction of Harold W. Burton, Supervising Architect for the Church Building Department.

In 1964 adequate rooms were prepared in the Bureau of Information Building, and is now used by the area Genealogical organization for research and recording.

These improvements were recommended by Harold S. Snow, President of the St. George Temple from 1937 to 1963, and by Rudger C. Atkin who succeeded President Snow.

LOGAN TEMPLE

This Temple was dedicated on May 17, 1884, by President John Taylor. Truman O. Angell was the Architect; Charles O. Card was the Superintendent of Construction.

ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS

In 1945 the Celestial room, two of the sealing rooms and the main hallway and certain areas were completely redecorated by the Otto Wolfe Company at a cost of $10,395.00.

In 1946 the Temple was closed from August 9 to December 1 in order to correct a structural fault which developed because of the settling of the inner walls of the temple. At the time of the fire in 1917, the great wooden beams and arches were soaked with water which ran down the footings. Over the years dry rot occurred and the walls settled. To correct this condition, eleven tons of steel beams were placed alongside the original beams. It was also necessary to put new ceilings in the Creation and Garden Rooms.

In 1947 all the old foundation planting of shrubbery and trees were removed. A flood-lighting system for the entire exterior was installed, at which time appropriate ceremonies were had.

In 1948 the rock masonry of the entire building, from top to bottom, was pointed up and every crack filled. Cement footings were-poured under the entire building to prevent caving-in of the gravel where trenches for passageways exist. The old furnace was relined with fire brick and a new stoker installed. A new floor was placed in the Groom's room and also redecorated. A new electrical switch board replaced the old control box. The metal fence around the Temple was painted; and the front Assembly Room and main hallway were redecorated.

In the year 1949, Lorenzo S. Young was appointed as Architect for the alterations and additions to this Temple. He was assisted by Arnold H. Ehlers, Architect, under the direction of Edward O. Anderson, Supervising Architect.

During the year 1949-1950, nearly a third of a million dollars was spent in providing extensive improvements. Only a few of the many are here noted: a well equipped laundry; enlarged meeting room with new ventilation system; Baptismal room was tiled and redecorated; the ceiling lowered with adequate lighting; new lighting and ventilating system throughout the Temple; a new public address system for ceremonies; new veils with new lighting; an elevator for all four floors; store rooms for food and supplies in basement of Annex and fruit and vegetable cellars were built. Radiation was installed in the large Assembly Room upstairs; acoustical tile placed on the ceilings and the walls replastered and painted white, again making the room beautiful and useful; a new dining room and cefeteria, with new fixtures and equipment.

In carrying on these improvements, 600 tons of rock were hauled out of the mountains, 3300 tons of gravel and 150 tons of rock were taken out of the basement and building; 600 foot sewer 10 to 14 feet deep constructed; 45,000 bricks used in new chimney and 250 tons of cement was used.

These improvements were recommended and constructed during the period in which President ElRay L. Christiansen was president of this Temple — (1943-1952).

In 1952 the Bride's Room was enlarged and redecorated with new carpets, drapes, furniture, mirrors, pictures, and lamps. A new floor was installed in the large Assembly Room, and all small upper rooms painted and acoustical tile placed on all ceilings. A new telephone system was installed, with connections to each department. This portion of the work was accomplished during the administration of President A. George Raymond.

MANTI TEMPLE

The Manti Temple was dedicated on May 21, 1888 by Elder Lorenzo Snow. W. H. Folsom was the Architect and Superintendent of Construction; Edward L. Parry was master mason, and William Asper was designer of stairways and interior decorator.

ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS

By Edward O. Anderson, Architect

During the early 1940's, Don Carlos Young, Jr., Architect, and Howard J. McKean, Contractor, conducted alterations and additions to this Temple, especially to the finishing of the large Assembly Room on the upper floor and rooms in the west and east towers.

During 1956 and 1957, alterations and additions were made to the Annex. This work was done by Edward O. Anderson, Architect, Oakland Construction Co., Contractors, and Clarence W. Silver, Electrical Contractor, under the direction of Howard J. McKean, Chairman of the Church Building Committee.

President Robert D. Young (1933-1943) and President Lewis R. Anderson (1943-1959) were Presidents of the Temple during this period of construction.

SALT LAKE TEMPLE

The Salt Lake Temple was dedicated on April 6, 1893 by President Wilford Woodruff. Truman O. Angell was the Architect. Cyrus Dallin designed the figure of the angel Moroni on the capstone of the east center tower.

Truman O. Angell was sent to Europe by the First Presidency of the Church, to study design and construction of important buildings, and obtain information on the inverted arch-type of construction for stone foundations. This type of work was performed on the River Thames, and was used in the design of the Salt Lake Temple footings.

ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS

By Edward O. Anderson, Architect

(The need for added facilities and improvements were envisioned and recommended by the Temple President, ElRay L. Christiansen (1954-1962) and his councilors who collaborated with the Architects over a period of four years before the final plans were approved by the First Presidency — David O. McKay, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and Henry D. Moyle. The alterations were completed during the presidency of Willard R. Smith (1962-1964) and Howard S. McDonald (1964- ).

The Salt Lake Temple Alterations and additions extending from the year 1958 to the present time (1965) have been extensive. The work was divided into two parts: First, alterations and additions to the Temple itself; and, second, the addition of a Temple Sealing Room Annex, and a Chapel and Office Annex.

After a careful examination of the Temple, it was found the electrical system was in a bad state of repair and in many places presented a fire hazard; the heating system (especially the piping) was rusted; and the ventilating system was inadequate. Some of the second floor wood girders were damaged by dry rot. The wood floors and joists around the Baptismal font and under wash rooms, were very badly rotted.

On account of the location of the Temple, and because of increased patronage, all facilities of the Temple and the Annex were overtaxed. This was especially true in the lack of sufficient lockers, initiatory ordinance rooms and Sealing Rooms.

In 1958, Harold W. Burton, Church Supervising Architect, and Arthur Price, Architect, started studies of the many problems connected with the proposed work. These studies culminated in a complete set of preliminary drawings indicating plan arrangements, and the architectural design of the additions to the Temple that were to be in harmony with the architectural style of the Temple. These preliminary drawings were approved by the First Presidency. Later, Edward O. Anderson, Architect, was commissioned to complete working drawings and specifications in accordance with the preliminary designs prepared under the directions of the Supervising Architect.

After these documents were completed they were presented by the Church Building Committee (Howard Barker in charge), for bidding and on July 27, 1962, contracts were entered into with Jensen Construction Co., Arthur M. Jensen representing the General Contractor, Higham-Hilton, Raymond F. Hilton, and Harding H. Higham, representing the Mechanical Contractor. Under the General Contract, Claire L. Neves, Engineer, and Harman B. Jensen supervised this work. The Wasatch Electrical Co., Richard Bertoch representing the Electrical Contractor. Western Automatic Sprinkling Co., David E. Dahn, representing Automatic Fire Control, Contractor, and Elevator Supply Co., J. Eugene Russon, Manager, Electrical Contractor.

SUB-CONTRACTORS: Henry L. Ashton and Sons, Stone work; Lee Falmo and Norman Faldmo, Plastering Contract; Pons and Davis, sheet metal work; Clarence Godwin, painting.

At the time the above work was started, Wendell B. Mendenhal, Chairman of the Church Building Committee, was very helpful in coordinating this work.

After work was commenced on the Temple's interior, the repair work became more extensive to protect the foundations, and reinforced concrete retaining walls were installed, both on the interior and exterior of the Temple. As noted in the written history of the Temple and in many articles written on the same, it was found that footings under exterior walls were 16' 0" wide, and up to a height of about 7' 0" were tapered (sloped) to a width of 9' 0" and were of a hard tough silica stone. Above this was started the historical 9' 0" thick cut granite foundations.

All existing electrical cables, wiring, insulations, etc., were removed. All plumbing and heating pipe (except cast iron pipe) were removed. The inadequate and faulty ventilating system was removed. Many plaster ceilings were removed to make way for a forced air ventilating metal duct system, with the ceiling replaced at a lower level in their original design. Two new air conditioning units were installed in special rooms in the sub-basement, furnishing cool or warm air to each room. Each room in turn is provided with a thermostat to control the room temperature automatically. All plumbing with its steel piping and fixtures are new. All electrical conduits, panel boards wiring, wiring boxes and some lighting fixtures are new. Almost all original electrical fixtures were taken down, rewired, refinished and were rehung at the finish of the building.

The Baptismal Font with its twelve oxen were removed, blasted, cleaned and repaired, and then refinished with a coat of molten bronze applied with heated pressure torch. New marble floors and stairs with bronze railings were installed. A new filtered chlorinated water system was attached to the bowl of the font.

The whole of the interior of the Temple was first vacuumed, cleaned from sub-basement to attic, and where necessary, washed, and then given the required first class paint finish. The work was so extensive it required the painting force of four painting contractors:

Wheat Bros. Painting and Decorating Co., Alfred A. Lippold Painting and Decorating Co., H. J. Bloomquist Painting and Decorating Co., Otto Wolffe, Jr., Painting and Decorating Co.

A great deal of defective plaster along with the mural paintings were removed from ordinance rooms No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3. After being replastered, Ival C. Thompson, Artist, restored and repainted these walls.

For some time the Temple has been over-crowded in Sealing Rooms. After due consideration, the First Presidency authorized the Sealing Room Annex to the north side of the Temple. A proper function of the Temple required this Addition. The design of this necesarily became a challenge. Native Utah Cottonwood granite from the same quarries as the original temple granite was quarried, cut and installed by Wilford Hansen Stone Company.

The Chapel and Office Annex, with outer and inner foyers and halls are above ground level. These are faced on the exterior with a granite facing similar to the Sealing Room Annex.

The entire area under the above annexes and lawn and garden areas, is excavated and is occupied with Temple annex facilities. It is an area of about 120,000 square feet. Under this is a sub-basement.

IDAHO FALLS TEMPLE

ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS By Emil B. Fetzer, Architect

In 1962 under the direction of Brother Harold W. Burton, Church Architect, Fetzer & Fetzer, Architects of Salt Lake City, Utah, prepared drawings for additions and alterations to the Idaho Falls Temple. Temple President William L. Killpack consulted with the Architects on the planning work. This work was done to facilitate the temple work and make it more convenient for the Temple Patrons and for the Temple Workers. The Dressing and Washing Rooms were enlarged and air-conditioned and Lounges and Locker Rooms for the Men and Women Temple Workers were provided and comfortably furnished. The Additions were constructed on the west side of the building and were built of the same material and in the same design as the original building so that it is not apparent from the exterior of the building that the additions constructed at a later date than the original building.

The Construction was done under the direction of Brother Lyle Peterson, Contractor of Rigby, Idaho, and supervised by Fetzer & Fetzer, Architects.

INDEPENDENCE TEMPLE SITE

This site was dedicated on August 3, 1831, by Joseph Smith the Prophet.

"And thus saith the Lord your God; if you will receive wisdom here is wisdom. Behold, the place which is now called Independence is the center place, and the spot for the temple is lying westward, upon a lot which is not far from the courthouse. (D&C 57:3.)

"Verily this is the word of the Lord that the city Jew Jerusalem shall be built by the gathering of the saints, beginning at this place, even the place of the temple, which temple shall be reared in this dispensation.

"For verily this generation shall not all pass away until an house shall be built unto the Lord, and a cloud shall rest upon it, which cloud shall be even the glory of the Lord, which shall fill the house." (D&C 84:4-5.)

FAR WEST TEMPLE SITE

This site was dedicated on July 4, 1838, by Brigham Young. It was re-dedicated on April 26, 1839. At that time Alpheus Cutler placed a stone near the Southeast corner of the site. The word of the Lord was: "And let a house be built unto my name according to the pattern which I will show unto them. And if my people build it not according to the pattern which I shall show unto their presidency, I will not accept it at their hands.

"But if my people do build it according to the pattern which I shall show unto their Presidency, even my servant Joseph and his counselors, then I will accept it at the hands of my people." (D&C 115:14-16.)

If mobocracy and persecution had not interferred in the construction of this Temple, the Lord would have been the designer of the same.

TEMPLE SITE AT ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN

"After hearing of the mobbing, burning and robbing in Gallatin, Daviess County, and the region round about, the brethren went directly to Adam-ondi-Ahman, which is on the west fork of Grand River. Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Brigham Young, myself, Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor amongst the number. When we arrived there we found the Prophet Joseph, Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon, with hundreds of others of the Saints preparing to defend themselves from the mob, who were threatening the destruction of our people. Men, women, and children were fleeing to that place for safety from every direction; their houses and property were burned and they had to flee half naked, crying, and frightened nigh unto death, to save their lives.

"While there we laid out a city on a high elevated piece of land, and set the stakes for the four corners of a temple block, which was dedicated, Brigham Young being mouth. There were from three to five hundred men present on the occasion, under arms. This elevated spot was probably from two hundred and fifty to five hundred feet above the level of Grand River, so that one could look east, west, north, or south, as far as the eye could reach; it was one of the most beautiful places I ever beheld.

Life of Heber C. Kimball, by Orson F. Whitney," pp. 221-222.

For "Alterations and Additions" to the Hawaiian Temple, see pages 152-153.

For "Alterations and Additions" to the Alberta Temple, see pages 162-164.
