Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE LAND OF THE NILE

As Charles Dickens might have said, it was the best of times and the worst of times in Egypt when Joseph, one of the twelve sons of Jacob, was sold into bondage.

And as he might have said further, it was a time of light and of darkness, of hope and yet of despair.

Egypt at that time was a land of confusion, of political upheaval, of scheming and intrigue and conquest. It was a time of prosperity for the rich minority and yet of extreme poverty for the masses. Although there was no caste system such as existed in India, for example, there was a wide, wide gulf between the very poor and the very rich.

Egypt has been a land of mystery for centuries. It was so in the time of Joseph. It was afflicted with many uncertainties, too. Its economy was determined by its dependence upon the great Nile River, which was as fickle as the desert winds. If good rains came in the direction of Ethiopia, Egypt had good crops; if not, famine became the companion of countless peasants. If the rains were too heavy, floods resulted. If they were too light, the hot winds from the desert seemed to consume what little growth there was. Rain was almost unknown in the valleys of that 4,000-mile river.

Egypt's history is obscure for the period when Joseph was there, and with good reason. The country had been conquered by a people known as the Hyksos, or shepherd kings. This was near 1700 B.C. The invasion was marked by violence and brutality. The wave of resentment that arose from the native populace was unbounded. Hatred of those invaders was universal.

When the Egyptians finally threw off this yoke and again governed themselves, they wanted to erase all memory of their cruel masters of two hundred years or more. Why should the memory of oppression be preserved?

Although the Hyksos erected both buildings and monuments, their names on most of them were effaced after they were driven out.

These foreign rulers were Semites who had come down through Asia Minor and Palestine to find a new home in fruitful Egypt. They came when conquest was easy and the weak local government could raise little organized resistance.

For a hundred years previously, small groups of those people had drifted into Egypt, infiltrating a little here and a little there. The main body invaded the country only about thirty years prior to Joseph's arrival.

They were despised by the Egyptians for two reasons. One, of course, was that they were cruel conquerors and absolute monarchs. The other was because the Egyptians looked down upon them as being an inferior race. Their business was raising sheep, and no class of people was considered by the Egyptians as being quite so base as the herders of sheep and goats.

Most Semites were shepherds. It was their way of life, as it was with the family of Jacob and Joseph, for they too were shepherds.

The invaders seized the throne in a chaotic period that saw the end of the Egyptian Middle Kingdom. Then at the beginning of the Eighteenth Dynasty (about 1580 B.C.) Pharaoh Ahmes expelled them from Egypt and drove them back toward Palestine and Asia Minor.

Josephus in his Antiquities of the Jews identifies these invaders as people related to the Jewish patriarchs. Other historians take violent exception to that and say that although they were Semites, there is no warrant either in or out of the Bible to equate the Hyksos with the Hebrews.

Some of their rulers bore distinctly Semitic names, however. For example, one was Shesha, believed to be another form of Sheshai mentioned in Judg. 1:10.

The Encyclopaedia Judaica says the following about them:

The Hyksos are not mentioned explicitly in the Bible, but some scholars who associate the migrations of the Hyksos with those of the Patriarchs (especially of the time of Joseph), and their expulsion from Egypt with the Exodus, have detected allusions to them. Thus, Gen. 46:34 states: "For all shepherds are abhorrent to Egyptians" and, as mentioned, the Hyksos were called "king-shepherds" by Josephus.

Similarly, Avaris, the capital of the Hyksos, is Zoan, of which it is said: "Hebron was founded seven years before Zoan of Egypt" (Num. 13:22). Zoan, i.e., Avaris, was built in 1725-1575 B.C.E., and it is assumed that the reference is to the building of these places by the Hyksos after their first conquests.

There are two instances where the history of the Hyksos is connected with Palestine. The first is during the beginning of their penetration into Egypt, since their domination over Lower Egypt must have been preceded by control over Palestine. The second is during the decline of the Hyksos, when they were expelled from Egypt by the rulers of the 18th Dynasty northward toward southern Palestine.

It is not surprising, therefore, to find signs which distinguish the culture characteristic of the rule of the Hyksos in Egypt also in Palestine. The fortification system of the Hyksos capital, Avaris, including the glacis and the ditch, appears in most contemporary tells of Palestine: Sharuhen (Tell el-Far'ah) Megiddo, Jericho, Tell el-'Ajjul, Hazor, Lachish, Tell Beit Mirsim. Similarly, ceramics of the "Tell-el-Yahudiyya" type appear in the strata of the tells which date to that period. (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1971, 8:1142.)

The New Catholic Encyclopedia (3:283) has this to say about the Hyksos:

Contrary to the view left by Manetho and the earlier Theban propagandists, the Hyksos do not appear to have been godless outlanders who scorned Egypt and its culture. On the contrary, they considered themselves the legitimate rulers of Egypt, adopting not only the formal protocols of the Egyptian pharaohs and thus honoring the sun god*Ra (Re) by calling themselves the "Son of Re," but also adopting Egyptian proper names and writing these in Egyptian hieroglyphs.

Undoubtedly, in their initial ascent to power, they fought harshly and brutally against the Egyptians, but once their overlordship was firmly secured, their rule was tacitly accepted.

They certainly burdened the populace of the subjected areas of the Delta and Upper Egypt with heavy taxation and collected tribute from their vassals in the south, but they also embarked on a program of temple construction and stimulated activity in art, literature, and crafts. Indeed, some of the best copies extant of major Egyptian literary and technical texts date from the Hyksos period. In the field of scarab production alone, their output was fantastic.

It is important for Latter-day Saints to have background pertaining to the Hyksos, for their presence in Egypt at this particular time had great and providential significance with respect to Joseph and the stay of Jacob's family in that land.

It is to be remembered that the Hyksos were Semites who had come from the area of Palestine and Asia Minor. They were shepherds.

Joseph and Jacob and their entire family had come from Palestine. They too were Semites and shepherds.

Had Joseph been sold into Egypt during the reign of the native Egyptian pharaohs, he never would have been heard of, for he was a shepherd, a Semite, and a slave, all disdained by the Egyptians. He would have been given no quarter or status of any kind under a native king. But since the Hyksos were both Semites and shepherds, it is likely that they regarded Joseph as a fellow countryman held prisoner by antagonistic Egyptians who had a common hatred for all of their kind.

It was altogether providential that the Hyksos came to Egypt when they did. Truly they were instruments in the hands of God in helping to open the way to develop Israel from a single family into a great nation of Twelve Tribes.

Divine promises had been given to Jacob and Joseph. To achieve a fulfillment of these predictions, a place of refuge and prosperity was required where Israel could grow and become great. Canaan, the land that later became known as Palestine, was not that place just then. But Egypt was. To fulfill their destiny, Israel needed their Egyptian haven under the rule of a friendly pharaoh, and this the Lord provided by establishing the Hyksos there.

The contrast between the treatment of the Israelites by the Hyksos and their treatment by the native pharaohs is clearly seen in that the Hyksos became "nursing fathers and mothers" to them, while the "Pharaoh who knew not Joseph" enslaved them.

So did God bring the Hyksos to Egypt? Did he use them as instruments for the accomplishment of his purposes with Israel?

The Hyksos rule lasted for some two hundred years, allowing ample time for Israel to become well established there. It was only after the expulsion of these foreign rulers that the local monarchs made slaves of the Israelites.
