Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

UP FROM OBSCURITY

Joseph of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, is a prime example of a man raised up by the Lord to correlate and tie together the divine purposes of two widely separated periods of time, one ancient and the other strictly modern.

Like Abraham, he was one of those preexistent spirits who was foreordained before he was born to occupy a strategic position anciently, but who would likewise greatly influence events of the latter days.

He began his life in the depths of obscurity like so many of the prophets of God, but was catapulted suddenly into a position of world prominence, for both ancient and modern times.

He ascended from an Egyptian jail to become the governor of the land, second only to Pharaoh. It was a position of international importance, because he was made administrator of the only food supply available in the entire Middle East during a seven-year famine.

He became a prophet who was instrumental in bringing ancient Israel into Egypt, where the tribes could develop into a great nation required for their ultimate destiny.

And now his modern descendants—the Latter-day Saints —as members of the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, Joseph's sons, preside in the last dispensation of the gospel, in preparation for the second coming of the Christ.

Who could have had a more obscure beginning than did Joseph?

He was a humble shepherd boy, the son of a shepherd. His family lived in the Holy Land or Canaan, a tiny land that had promise in the days of Abraham but that, in Joseph's time, had become so undesirable that the family had to move out for their very survival.

Canaan certainly had little significance in the world of that day. For travelers it was merely a place to pass through. For the residents during a time of prolonged famine, it was a place to leave.

There was no organized nation in Canaan during this period. The Canaanites lived in independent city-states or on scattered farms, with no central government.

Much of the land was still wilderness, as is evident by the fact that Jacob thought Joseph had been slain by some wild beast. Much of it was still wilderness in the days of Samson, for he slew wild animals where he lived.

At this time, God's people, Israel, consisted only of the family of Jacob and his sons. When they migrated into Egypt, they were seventy in number.

So Joseph belonged to an obscure corner of civilization and to a little-known family whose living depended on the care of a small band of sheep.

He was sold as a slave into a foreign land and was then condemned as a prisoner in an Egyptian jail, where he remained for two years, forgotten for the most part.

Was any man of destiny ever eclipsed by greater obscurity?

But suddenly the hand of God moved in. Heaven gave Pharaoh a dream that defied interpretation by his wise men and magicians. Although he did not realize it, the king was shown by heavenly vision what the next fourteen years of his country's history would be.

When the magicians failed to solve the riddle of this dream, a former fellow prisoner with Joseph, now a butler in the king's palace, remembered a dream he himself had had while in prison, and recalled the young Hebrew who interpreted it. When the butler told Pharaoh about that circumstance, Joseph was immediately sent for. He was scrubbed and dressed for the occasion, to make a suitable appearance in the royal court, and then stood before Pharaoh. Under divine inspiration he interpreted the king's dream.

At once this humble Hebrew prisoner was made governor of all Egypt. Into his hands was placed the complete direction of the food supply for eleven million people through a period of feast and famine that lasted fourteen years. The country was almost wholly dependent for its economy upon its agriculture, and Joseph now had it all in his hands.

Did anyone stop to question Joseph's ability to accomplish such a weighty task? Certainly the king did not. He had faith in the same inspiration that had provided the interpretation of the dream and concluded that it would be forthcoming again to direct Joseph in the storage and distribution of food.

How could Joseph do it except by inspiration? He had had no schooling either in Palestine or Egypt to prepare him for such an undertaking. But God was at the helm. Through Joseph and the famine, God would bring Israel down into Egypt to allow them to develop as he wished them to.

Joseph was thirty years old when he was called before Pharaoh. He had been seventeen when he came into Egypt, and had spent two years in prison; then he evidently served Potiphar as his slave for eleven years before being placed in jail.

Only by act of God could Joseph do what the king expected of him. But the divine hand was not lacking. It was right in the midst of things.

By inspiration Joseph was given the key to the king's problem.

By inspiration Pharaoh accepted him completely, clothed him in courtiers' robes, and gave him chariots to ride in and authority over the whole kingdom.

By inspiration the king was persuaded that Joseph could manage the food supply, build up reserves during the good years, and dispense them wisely in the lean years.

These were all acts of God. But why should the Lord do this? Did he have some special motive in mind? Indeed he did!

Years before he had promised Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob that their posterity would become great and would bless the world. The Lord planned to fulfill that promise through the twelve sons of Jacob, and to begin by bringing them to Egypt to allow them opportunity for the necessary growth and development that He had in mind.

So Joseph was brought to Egypt by the Lord's design as the first step in bringing his father's family there, thus opening the door for the ultimate development of the family into the Twelve Tribes of Israel.

And develop they did. By the time Moses led them out of the land, four centuries later, it is estimated that they numbered nearly three million persons, with a quarter of a million men able to bear arms.

The problem of organizing an agricultural movement that would store up surplus food for seven years and then dispense it through seven more years when there would be no crops seems beyond normal comprehension. How could Joseph understand this process of providing for eleven million people through such a period of crisis when he had had no training in economics or agriculture to prepare him for it?

There can be but one answer: inspiration!

Just as Joseph Smith in our day was educated by angels and the ministration of the Holy Spirit, just as John the Baptist was taught similarly for his mission in preceding the Lord's mortal advent, just as Nephi of old was guided by divine power, so was Joseph in Egypt. God prepared him for his mission and made it possible for him to accomplish it. His service to Pharaoh was a miracle!

But Joseph's instruction from heaven went far beyond his preparation for feeding the starving Egyptians. He became a great prophet while in Egypt, according to Lehi in the Book of Mormon. (2 Ne. 3.) Receiving aid to solve the Egyptian problem was but the beginning of his prophetic career.

Lehi says that Joseph became a mighty seer in ancient Egypt. He was given many revelations, including a view of the destiny of his modern descendants—meaning the Latter-day Saints.

He saw that in his own bloodline the mighty prophet of latter days would be born, that his name would be Joseph also, as would be that of his father.

This modern seer, Joseph Smith, Jr., would direct the present-day descendants of Joseph of Egypt through the tribes of his sons Ephraim and Manasseh, in the conduct of the final gospel dispensation on earth.

The influence of Joseph of old would thus reach into the fulfillment of the dream of Daniel, who saw the stone cut from the mountains without hands as God restored his kingdom on earth. Eventually it will fill the whole world, for the Lord has spoken it.
