Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

JOSEPH'S MODERN MISSION

Joseph was the temporal savior of Egypt during the seven-year famine that he himself had predicted. As governor of that ancient and mysterious country he controlled the entire economy.

He was truly a man of divine destiny. He was raised up for the task that he accomplished and was guided in each step of the vast undertaking.

But although he was one of the greatest personalities of the Old Testament, through his modern descendants he is now having an even greater influence on the world than he did then.

To those millions who faced starvation he was the means of keeping body and soul together. Their actual survival was in his hands.

But his significance to the world of today completely eclipses all that he did in ancient times. If we will but recognize it, Joseph, through his modern descendants, the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, is the central figure of world events pertaining to the restoration and spread of the work of the Lord in our day.

It is through the tribe of Joseph that the entire preparation for the second coming of Jesus is now being accomplished. In a very real sense we are living in what might be called a dispensation of Joseph. It is the dispensation of the fulness of times, of course, but it is being dispensed through Joseph's sons, Ephraim and Manasseh.

The Latter-day Saints are the modern tribe of Joseph now standing in their proper place by birthright, at the head of God's latter-day work. Joseph was given the birthright in Israel when his brother Reuben sinned. (1 Chr. 5:1.) That placed him in the position of directing the ecclesiastical affairs of the Lord in the "hour of his judgment." (Rev. 14:6-7.)

There have been repeated dispensations in the past, such as those of Adam and Noah, Enoch, Abraham, and Moses. Each was related to a particular prophet with specific objectives. But now they are all rolled into one gigantic administration called the dispensation of the fulness of times, and the tribe of Joseph stands at the head.

The modern descendants of the tribes of Manasseh and Ephraim (Joseph's sons) are the first of all Israel to be gathered out of the nations. They are gentiles by nationality, since they are gathered from the gentile nations. But they are of Joseph by descent—by bloodline—and they are leading God's work of today.

Joseph's descendants had been scattered worldwide over the centuries, as were the Jews. The Jews did not begin to gather to Palestine until about 1920. Ephraim has been gathering since April 6, 1830, when the Church was organized. And the Ten Tribes are still lost.

Joseph alone is at the helm of this dispensation. Eventually even the Jews and the Lost Tribes will have to receive their blessings at the hands of Joseph—the Latter-day Saints. (D&C 133:32.)

The restoration of the gospel was provided to precede the second coming of the Lord. It came through the Prophet Joseph Smith. He "was a pure Ephraimite," said Brigham Young. (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 493.) And every president of the Church succeeding him has been of Ephraim.

The vast majority of Latter-day Saints are told in their patriarchal blessings that they are of Joseph, through either Ephraim or Manasseh. This is further evidence that the Lord in our day has honored the birthright given anciently to Joseph, and has placed him at the head of this last great dispensation of the gospel.

As the latter-day work began to unfold, each of the leading prophets of ancient times came to Joseph Smith and committed to him the keys of his ministry so that all power would be held by the priesthood leaders chosen of the Lord to direct the work today.

Moses came to Joseph Smith and committed to him the keys of the gathering of Israel. Elias of Abraham's day delivered the keys of that time. Elijah brought his keys, turning the hearts of children and parents toward each other. Adam bestowed the keys of the First Presidency.

The Prophet Joseph further wrote: "And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca county, and at sundry times, and in divers places through all the travels and tribulations of this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints! And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!" (D&C 128:21.)

All the keys and powers of every previous dispensation were thus bestowed upon Joseph Smith. This came pursuant to the declaration of the apostle Peter when he said there would be a restitution of all things whatsoever God had spoken by the mouths of all his holy prophets from the beginning of the world. (Acts 3:21.)

All these powers were transmitted to the Twelve Apostles by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and through them have been handed down to our day, so that the divine administration through the descendants of Joseph goes on in perpetuity.

And why was this done? Because Joseph of old was given the birthright, or the ecclesiastical presidency, in Israel. Judah was given the throne to rule as the temporal monarch, but Joseph was given the priestly powers to direct the Lord's modern work.

The descendants of Joseph are participating on a grand scale. Through Ephraim come many of the Caucasian peoples, including families from Europe, North America, and from such southern lands as Australia and South Africa.

Descendants of Manasseh are coming into the Church by the tens of thousands in both Latin and North America and the Polynesian islands. The Church has become worldwide in scope. It is the modern work of Joseph, who had his personal ministry in ancient Egypt, but who, vicariously through his modern descendants, is bringing the world its greatest present-day blessings.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the modern kingdom of God, and Joseph is its administrator.
