Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE BIRTH OF JOSEPH

Joseph, the eleventh son of Jacob who was later known as Israel, was not born in Canaan, the land that God had promised to Abraham and his descendants. Instead, he was born in what was known scripturally as Syria, as were all of his ten older brothers. Only Benjamin, the twelfth son, had his birth in the promised land.

Joseph actually lived in Canaan for only a small part of his long and colorful life. He obviously came with his family from Syria when he was but a child. At seventeen he was sold into bondage and was carried to Egypt, where he remained for the rest of his life. At 30, he was made governor. He died at the age of 110. Hence he lived in Egypt for 93 years.

How did it happen that he was not born in the promised land to which the Lord had purposely sent Abraham, and where both Isaac and Jacob had made their homes?

It will be remembered that Abraham was born in Ur of the Chaldees. He was the son of Terah, who once had been faithful to the Lord but later apostatized and went into idolatry.

Images and heathen worship surrounded Abraham as he grew up, and finally the Lord commanded him to leave Chaldea and go to the promised land of Canaan. Terah had three sons—Abraham, Nahor, and Haran. Prior to Abraham's departure from Ur, a severe famine swept over the land. Abraham's brother Haran died as a result. Haran had one son named Lot, whom Abraham took into his own family.

When the Lord commanded Abraham to leave Ur, Nahor refused to follow him. However, Terah, his father, and Lot, his nephew, did accompany him. Abraham took his wife Sarah, who became known for her beauty throughout the Middle East. Two kings sought to marry her, including the Pharaoh of Egypt.

Abraham, Sarah, Terah, and Lot went northward toward Canaan via Mesopotamia, leaving Nahor behind in Ur. Tiring of their journey by the time they reached northern Mesopotamia, or what is now Syria, they stopped and made a home in an area that they named after Abraham's dead brother, Haran.

They remained there until the famine subsided, and then Abraham, Sarah, and Lot moved south into Canaan. Terah remained in Haran for the rest of his life and died there at the age of 205.

Subsequently Nahor, Abraham's brother, must also have moved to Haran with his father. There must have been some means of communication between Abraham and Nahor, for when Abraham's son Isaac was old enough to marry, Abraham sent to Nahor in Syria in the hope that one of the daughters of his family could become the wife of Isaac. The result was that Rebecca, a granddaughter of Nahor, went to Isaac's home and married him.

Isaac and Rebecca had a son whom they named Jacob. When in turn it came time for Jacob to marry, the family again sought a bride of their own bloodline. Jacob himself went to Syria, where Nahor's family lived, hoping to find a wife there.

Nahor had a son named Bethuel, who was the father of Rebecca. He in turn had a son named Laban, who was a brother of Rebecca. Laban had a beautiful daughter named Rachel.

When Jacob saw Rachel, he fell in love with her at once and desired her for his bride. But her father, Laban, known as Laban the Syrian, was a schemer. He consented to the marriage only if Jacob would work for him, herding his sheep and cattle, for seven years. Jacob agreed, and he remained there for that period of time.

The women of that day always covered their faces with veils. After the seven years of service, the wedding was performed, but the following morning Jacob discovered that the veiled woman he had married was Rachel's older sister, Leah. When Jacob complained at this deception, Laban said that it was contrary to the custom of his country for a younger girl to marry before an older sister.

But Jacob still wanted Rachel. Laban demanded another seven years' labor for Rachel, to which Jacob agreed with the understanding that he could marry Rachel immediately after the fulfillment of Leah's marriage week. This was arranged.

Altogether Jacob remained in Syria for twenty years, fourteen for the two young women and six more for the cattle he obtained from Laban. During that time he also married the two maids of his wives, and by all four women he now had eleven sons.

Joseph was the eleventh son of Jacob and the firstborn of Rachel, who was barren for the early part of her married life.

At the end of the twenty years, Jacob decided to return to Canaan, taking his family and possessions with him. Laban had deceived Jacob a number of times and continued to alter the terms of his agreement. Jacob was directed of the Lord to take no more of it and to return to the promised land.

It was during this twenty-year period in Syria that Joseph was born there. It is not known how old he was when the family moved to Canaan.

As Jacob increased in age, the eleven sons took over his sheep business. The family eventually lived for a time near what is now Bethlehem. It was there that Rachel had her second son, Benjamin. She died in travail and was buried "in the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem." (Gen. 35:19.) Jacob set up a pillar in her honor. It became a landmark in Israel for many generations.

The Family Intermarriages
