Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

JOSEPH THE DREAMER

Jacob's family was not a harmonious one. Neither was it noted for the righteousness of the sons of the venerated patriarch.

Reuben committed adultery with his father's concubine. Judah patronized at least one harlot who sat by the wayside, and sired an illegitimate child. Several of the brothers had murder in their hearts and would willingly have slain Joseph.

The boys in the family were a jealous lot, and they particularly vented their hatred upon young Joseph, because they knew he was the favorite son of their father and was faithful.

Jacob had good reason to so regard Rachel's son. He was a righteous boy, a believer in God, one who served the Lord. He held chastity high as a standard of behavior, quite in contrast to his brothers. Jacob, of course, appreciated this, as would any father. And Rachel, Joseph's mother, was Jacob's first-chosen wife.

Joseph was born to Jacob in his old age, and for this reason also the patriarch took particular interest in him. Benjamin came even later than Joseph. He too was especially beloved of Jacob. And he too was Rachel's son. Little is said of Benjamin in sacred writ, except that his family became strong warriors at the time of Joshua during the conquest of Canaan.

Joseph was obviously disgusted with the sinful acts of his older brothers, and did not hesitate to report them to their father. This further enraged the ten.

As a sign of his great affection for Joseph, Jacob made a beautiful coat of many colors for him. The other sons regarded this as a further sign of favoritism on the part of their father, resulting in more enmity. When the brothers saw the coat and knew "that their father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him." (Gen. 37:4.)

The Lord prepared Joseph for his later role in Egypt by giving him inspired dreams that indicated to some extent the family relationships of the future.

Joseph dreamed one day that the eleven brothers were in the field binding sheaves of grain. In his dream he saw that his own sheaf stood erect and the sheaves of all his brothers "stood round about, and made obeisance to [his] sheaf."

When the brothers heard of it they immediately saw the point and were more angry than ever. They demanded of Joseph: "Shalt thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us?"

Little did they know what would transpire but a few years later.

Joseph had still another dream of prophetic significance. He said to his father and his brothers: "I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me." This not only infuriated the brothers, but deeply disturbed Jacob as well. He upbraided his young son and said: "What is this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?" (Gen. 37:6-11.)

Evidently Jacob felt there was some significance in the dream, for the record says, "his father observed the saying." And, of course, he would see its fulfillment subsequently as the brothers came to Egypt for food and as the family itself moved there.
