Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

JOSEPH IS SOLD

Joseph's brothers went to feed their father's flocks near Shechem.

"And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem? come, and I will send thee unto them. And he said to him, Here am I.

"And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.

"And a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in the field: and the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?

"And he said, I seek my brethren: tell me, I pray thee, where they feed their flocks.

"And the man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan."

When the brothers saw Joseph approaching, they conspired against him and actually plotted his murder. Some of them said, "Behold, this dreamer cometh. Come now, therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit." They decided that after their crime they would go back to their father and tell him that "some evil beast hath devoured him." Then they added, "And we shall see what will become of his dreams."

Reuben was not present while the others devised their evil plan. When he heard of it he refused to take part in a murder, saying, "Let us not kill him. . . . Shed no blood, but cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him."

He evidently gave the impression to his brothers that they could more easily leave the boy in the pit to starve to death than to slay him with some weapon. Apparently they agreed to this. It was Reuben's plan, however, to allow them to put Joseph in a pit and leave him there only temporarily; then he would return and rescue him and send him home to his father.

"And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stript Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours that was on him; And they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty, there was no water in it." (Gen. 37:13-24.)

As the boys then sat down to eat a meal, a caravan came by. It was a company of Ishmaelites and Midianites on their way from Gilead to Egypt. They were merchants carrying spices of various kinds, balm, and myrrh, an expensive perfume, the kind the three wise men later brought to the infant Jesus on the first Christmas.

Judah saw in the caravan an opportunity not only to dispose of Joseph, but to make some money as well. So he said, "What profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood? Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother and our flesh." (Gen. 37:26-27.)

He evidently had second thoughts about killing Joseph, and joined Reuben in refusing to slay him. The other brothers agreed to Judah's plan. They lifted Joseph out of the pit and sold him to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver.

The scripture indicates that Joseph was dreadfully frightened. (Gen. 42:21.) Apparently Reuben was not a party to selling Joseph into slavery. He seems to have left the others earlier with the intention of returning alone to the pit and rescuing Joseph. When he did return, he found the pit empty and Joseph gone, "and he rent his clothes. And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not; and I, whither shall I go?" It seems that he would have searched for him, but by this time the caravan was on its way.

Now the scheming brothers, obviously in no way repentant, killed a young goat and drenched Joseph's coat in the blood. They then brought the garment to their father, held it up, and said, "This we have found: know now whether it be thy son's coat or no."

Jacob immediately recognized it and said, "It is my son's coat; an evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces."

Apparently the area in which they herded sheep was a wilderness where predatory animals still lived, a fact that probably helped to persuade their aged father to believe their false tale. How could he see through such a conspiracy?

"And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days."

Jacob's daughters joined their father in mourning for Joseph. Then, to compound their wickedness, the deceitful brothers pretended to comfort their father, but he refused to be comforted.

"I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning," the old man said, and "thus his father wept for him." (Gen. 37:29-35.) He was still in mourning some twenty years later when he finally learned that Joseph was still alive and was the governor of Egypt. Only then was his grief assuaged.

The scheming brothers did not have the character or the courage to tell their broken-hearted father the truth. They preferred to see him mourn through the years.
