Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE BUTLER AND THE BAKER

The chief butler and the baker in the king's palace offended Pharaoh, and he placed them both in the prison where Joseph was. Since Joseph, by good conduct, had been made assistant to the captain of the guard, these two new prisoners were placed under his care. The scripture says that they continued in confinement for "a season."

One morning Joseph came into their cell and found them both looking downcast. He asked them, "Wherefore look ye so sadly to day?"

"And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations belong to God? tell me them, I pray you.

"And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me; And in the vine were three branches: and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes: And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand: and I took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.

"And Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of it: The three branches are three days: Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place: and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former manner when thou wast his butler."

Joseph then appealed to the butler to keep him in remembrance when he was restored to his position in the palace. He said: "But think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house: For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon."

Prisoners apparently were simply left in prison without any predetermined length of sentence. Their release seemed to rest on the whim of the king. That was why Joseph made this request of the butler.

When the baker learned of the interpretation of the butler's dream, he told Joseph of his own dream and asked for an interpretation. He said: "I also was in my dream, and, behold, I had three white baskets on my head:

"And in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head."

The interpretation was a sad one for the baker. He was told that his dream indicated that in three days he would be hanged.

When the third day came, Pharaoh gave a feast for all of his servants, "and he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand." Then Pharaoh ordered that the baker should be hanged.

Joseph, in telling the butler that he would be restored to his position in the palace, had asked that when he was working there, he would remember him. It seems that Joseph felt that if the butler reported to the king the injustice of his imprisonment, some steps might be taken to have him released.

"Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgat him." (Gen. 40.)
