Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

JOSEPH MARRIES ASENATH

One of the gifts of Pharaoh to Joseph in appreciation for the interpretation of his dreams was that of a young maiden in marriage, Asenath, the daughter of Potipherah, one of the priests of On.

The city of On was an ancient one even then, situated in lower Egypt on the east side of the river Nile about twenty miles north of the important city of Memphis. It was the seat of a cult of sun worshippers who conducted a training school there for their priests. The Greeks called the city Heliopolis.

Some raise the question: Was this priest of On, whose name was Potipherah, of Egyptian blood or was he a Semite like the king?

It should be remembered that Pharaoh and all of his chief aides were Semites who had come from the north in the area of Palestine and Mesopotamia, the region in which Abraham had lived.

The Hyksos were rulers in an absolute sense. They did not trust the Egyptians, but took over all the processes of running the country. This did not exclude religion. They did make an effort to fraternize with the Egyptian people to a limited extent, seeking to build confidence toward the Hyksos. They even adopted the Egyptian religion, and the chief priests under this effort were Semites like themselves. They fully accepted the Egyptian form of sun worship.

Joseph, of course, was not an idolator. He had been taught well about the God of Israel who had spoken to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Joseph was a firm believer.

In this he stood alone, for only within his own family was he taught belief in the God of Abraham. Egypt was completely idolatrous, and although he lived for years in the midst of this influence, Joseph was never blinded by it. He had experienced miracle after miracle in his own life, and he knew whence those miracles came. He realized that it was only through the blessings of the Lord that he advanced so rapidly in Egypt.

Did he recall the dreams he himself had had as a boy in Palestine indicating that some great calling would come to him, even to the point of his own family making obeisance to him?

Inasmuch as Asenath was offered to him in marriage and he accepted her, the question arises, did he marry out of the proper bloodline? Did he marry a native Egyptian, this daughter of Potipherah? Was Potipherah an Egyptian by descent? If he married an Egyptian of the forbidden blood, would his children be barred from holding the priesthood?

Great were the promises of the Lord to the descendants of both Jacob and Joseph. The Lord had been most careful in the marriages of both Isaac and Jacob. Would he not be equally careful in the marriage of Joseph? Through his descendants important things were to take place, especially in the latter days, events that would be in the hands of men who must and would hold the Holy Priesthood.

Would not Joseph be inspired concerning his marriage as he was in other things? Passing down the divine promises to us of modern Israel would require a marriage free from any restricted bloodline.

Asenath's father, as the scripture indicates, was a priest in the city of On, and no doubt a sun worshipper, since, as a priest, he would conduct that sort of worship. But in officiating in this manner, he would do so in total ignorance of the true God. He was not as yet a believer in Joseph's religion, for at this point he and Joseph had never met. Joseph would have had no opportunity to teach him about the true God, who was unknown to the idolators.

So Potipherah was not as yet a believer in Joseph's religion. But neither was anyone else who lived in Egypt at that time. Joseph alone was a believer in the true God. All Egypt was idolatrous.

Potipherah was obviously a Semite and not of Egyptian blood at all. That is the point here. His blood had not been mixed with the Egyptians, and his daughter, Asenath, was therefore herself a Semite without any restriction on her bloodline. Therefore, no barrier would be raised against the marriage from this standpoint, and we who are descended from her have no limitations upon us because of her.

Joseph and Asenath were married and had two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim, both of whom were numbered with the tribes of Israel as full heirs to the promise, which is another evidence of Asenath's Semite ancestry.

With few exceptions the Latter-day Saints are descendants of these two sons and through them are heirs to the promises of Abraham. But especially are we heirs to the very significant patriarchal blessings bestowed upon Ephraim and Manasseh by their grandfather, Jacob.

These blessings are now coming to fruition as the dispensation of the fulness of times unfolds through the inspiration of the Lord, and by the administration of modern prophets who are sons of Ephraim.
