Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE TASK BEGINS

The seven years of plenty in Egypt began with great promise. The earth brought forth in abundance. Joseph gathered corn "as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left numbering; for it was without number."

He laid up food in the cities and on the farms. Archaeologists tell us that there are still some ancient buildings found in Egypt that resemble the grain elevators of western Canada and the United States. It is believed that those structures could have been built by Joseph.

The fact that he did build storehouses is evident because when the famine began "Joseph opened all the storehouses." So he had them.

The scripture says: "And he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same."

But inevitably the era of plenty came to an end and the famine began. It was extensive. In one verse the scripture says "the famine was over all the face of the earth," meaning the known world to the Egyptians, and in another verse, "the dearth was in all lands." But the record adds, "In all the land of Egypt there was bread."

The people in surrounding nations had no advance warning of the famine such as Joseph gave to Egypt. Pharaoh's dreams were God-given and provided both time and opportunity for Joseph to hedge up against the threatened starvation.

The supplies that people kept in their own homes apparently were meager, and "when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do. . . .

"Joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt. And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; because that the famine was so sore in all lands." (Gen. 41:48-56.)

Famine was not unusual in the Middle East. It will be remembered that famine afflicted Abraham's family in Ur, and his own brother died as a result. When Abraham and his company reached Haran, in northern Mesopotamia, again there was famine, and Abraham delayed his journey into Canaan until it was alleviated.

Egypt was completely dependent upon the Nile River for its irrigation. Rainfall was hardly known there. The annual flooding of the river brought fresh soil and ample water to the farms along its route. But when the rains were slack in the direction of Ethiopia, where much of the headwater of the Nile had its source, the river did not flood to its normal height, and drouth came to Egypt.

The hot winds from the desert often swept in and burned the crops, adding to the threat of famine. When there was a combination of light rains in Ethiopia and hot winds from the desert, tragedy stalked the land.

The seven years of plenty followed by the seven-year famine came precisely as the Lord had revealed it through Joseph. It was a potent testimony to the divine inspiration that accompanied the young man and gave further proof of his prophetic calling.
