Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

JACOB SENDS FOR FOOD

Since the famine "was over all the face of the earth," as the scripture said, no doubt speaking of the world known to them at that time, it reached into the Holy Land as well.

Jacob and his family began to feel the pinch. "Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?"

Was it in discouragement, or mere indifference to their plight, that they looked one upon the other? Jacob seemed to upbraid them for doing nothing about their predicament. They had never been of great comfort to Jacob anyway.

The old patriarch continued: "Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither, and buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die."

There was some question as to whether the ten brothers would leave Benjamin at home with his father, or whether all eleven should make the journey. But Jacob remembered his missing son Joseph, and he feared lest some tragedy befall Benjamin also. So "Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren . . . lest peradventure mischief befall him."

Were the brothers not yet trustworthy in Jacob's eyes?

Since Joseph was the governor of the land, and Pharaoh had directed that all purchases of grain be made through him, Joseph's Brothers came to him. Of course, they did not know him. As they came before Joseph, they "bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth," just as Joseph's boyhood dream had indicated.

"And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them, Whence come ye? And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.

"And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.

"And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.

"And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come. We are all one man's sons; we are true men, thy servants are no spies.

"And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.

"And they said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and, behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.

"And Joseph said unto them, That is it that I spake unto you, saying, Ye are spies."

Joseph was anxious to learn about his parents, and especially about his younger brother Benjamin. Without disclosing his own identity, he planned a way by which Benjamin could be brought to Egypt so that Joseph could see him. So Joseph said: "Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither. Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you: or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies."

With strong protestations the ten brothers insisted that they were not spies, but merely innocent men come to Egypt to buy food for their hungry families. Joseph, however, was firm, and placed them in jail for three days to think it over.

"And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live; for I fear God: If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn for the famine of your houses: But bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die."

The brothers were dismayed. They knew how their father felt about Benjamin, and they did not feel that they could make any promises to the Egyptian governor. And yet they had to bring food home to Jacob.

Now they remembered selling Joseph into Egypt. Not knowing that it was Joseph who was the governor, and not realizing that he could understand their Canaanite language, they discussed their plight among themselves.

They recalled the anguish they saw in Joseph's face on that fateful day when they sold him into bondage, and now it haunted them. "And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.

"And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore, behold, also his blood is required.

"And they knew not that Joseph understood them; for he spake unto them by an interpreter."

Joseph could understand every word as they talked. Overcome with emotion, he left them for the moment and wept. Then he returned and talked further with them, and demanded that Simeon be left as security to guarantee their return with Benjamin. He bound Simeon and kept him prisoner, and arranged for the others to obtain their corn and return home.

"Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them provision for the way: and thus did he unto them. And they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.

"And as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack's mouth. And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored; and, lo, it is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid, saying one to another, What is this that God hath done unto us?"

When they reached Canaan they told their father of the entire experience, saying: "The man, who is the lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the country.

"And we said unto him, We are true men; we are no spies: We be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.

"And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye are true men; leave one of your brethren here with me, and take food for the famine of your households, and be gone: And bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall I know that ye are no spies, but that ye are true men: so will I deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffick in the land."

When they emptied their sacks of grain they found that "every man's bundle of money was in his sack: and when both they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid."

Jacob could not reconcile himself to sending Benjamin down to Egypt when the brothers planned their next trip for food.

"And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away: all these things are against me.

"And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.

"And he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave." (Gen. 42.)
