Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE SECOND JOURNEY

The famine grew worse and the family of Jacob needed more sustenance from Egypt.

"When they had eaten up the corn which they had brought out of Egypt, their father said unto them, Go again, buy us a little food.

"And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you. If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food."

Jacob demanded of his sons why they had told the governor that they had a younger brother. "Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?"

Joseph, knowing who they were, and anxious to learn of his family, had asked some very pointed questions. Having a particular fondness for his youngest brother, Benjamin, he had asked especially about him.

The ten now replied to Jacob and said, "The man asked us straitly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? have ye another brother? and we told him according to the tenor of these words: could we certainly know that he would say, Bring your brother down?"

Judah was certain that they would not be welcome in Egypt unless Benjamin accompanied them so that "the man" could see him. He felt that there was no point in even returning without Benjamin. So he said to his father: "Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go; that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones. I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever."

Jacob at last gave in to their argument and said:

"If it must be so now, do this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and myrrh, nuts, and almonds:

"And take double money in your hand; and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight:

"Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man:

"And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved."

They then made ready to leave, taking Benjamin with them and also double the money for the grain, for Jacob desired that they pay for the first as well as for what they would now obtain although the Egyptians themselves had put the money back in their bags.

Benjamin was Rachel's only other son. Since Joseph and he were full brothers, they had a warm kinship for each other and Joseph yearned to see him. When the caravan of eleven brothers reached Egypt and Joseph saw that Benjamin was with them, he gave instructions to the "ruler of his house" to take the group to Joseph's own house, and prepare a banquet for them. "These men shall dine with me at noon," he said.

The brothers were frightened at this invitation and said, "Because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses."

Fearing what might happen to them, they spoke to the steward in Joseph's home and said, "O sir, we came indeed down at the first time to buy food: And it came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight: and we have brought it again in our hand. And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food: we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.

"And he said, Peace be to you, fear not: your God, and the God of your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: I had your money. And he brought Simeon out unto them."

The steward then took the brothers into the house, gave them water for bathing, and provided also feed for their donkeys. The brothers were told they would have lunch with the governor at noon, and they made themselves ready.

When Joseph came, all eleven bowed low before him, even "to the earth," the scripture says.

Then Joseph began to ask further about the family back in Canaan: "Is your father well, the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet alive?

"And they answered, Thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.

"And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother's son, and said, Is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thee, my son.

"And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber, and wept there. And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, Set on bread."

Egyptians and Hebrews were not allowed to sit at the same table, so the brothers sat at one table by themselves. Apparently some Egyptians were present also, for they were placed at another table, and Joseph sat by himself.

The brothers marveled when they realized that their places at the table were arranged according to their ages, from the eldest to the youngest. How could these Egyptians know?

"And he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of theirs. . . . and they were merry with him." (Gen. 43.)

Joseph took pleasure in this feast as he mingled with his brothers, but his heart especially leaned toward his only full brother, Benjamin, the child at whose birth their mother had died. Joseph at no time revealed his own identity. That would come later. But he was determined to test still further the ten older ones. This he would do next day as they left for home.
