Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE SILVER CUP

When his brothers were ready to leave for home, Joseph commanded "the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man's money in his sack's mouth. And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest, and his corn money. And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken."

At daybreak, the brothers began their journey back to Canaan. Hardly had they left when Joseph spoke to his steward and said, "Up, follow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?"

The steward pursued the caravan with its heavy load of grain, and spoke to the brothers as Joseph had directed. In astonishment they replied:

"Wherefore saith my lord these words? God forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing: Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought again unto thee out of the land of Canaan: how then should we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold? With whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord's bondmen."

When they spoke of the possessor of the silver cup as being fit for death, they did not know what they were saying. They obviously spoke in this manner because of the certainty they felt that they were all innocent. They had been schemers themselves in the past, even to the crime they committed against Joseph when he was the boy with a brightly colored coat. They suspected no such scheme in this new episode, however.

The steward, knowing the entire matter, still carried out the test planned by Joseph and said, "Now also let it be according unto your words: he with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless."

They all unloaded their donkeys, placed the sacks of grain on the ground, opened each one, and began their search for the silver cup. The steward started with the eldest brother "and left at the youngest: and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack."

Then the brothers rent their clothes in grief. They reloaded the sacks, and the entire caravan returned to the city.

"And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house; for he was yet there: and they fell before him on the ground.

"And Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that ye have done? wot ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?

"And Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we are my lord's servants, both we, and he also with whom the cup is found.

"And he said, God forbid that I should do so: but the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father."

But Judah, feeling the responsibility of the promise he made to his father guaranteeing the safe return of Benjamin, made a special appeal to Joseph. This was important in the test that Joseph was making, for now he could begin to see some trace of character at least in Judah. It was Judah who had suggested to the brothers when they kidnapped Joseph that they sell him into bondage to the merchants who were going to Egypt.

Joseph evidently knew that. But now Judah, showing the manhood that was in him, made a special plea for Benjamin. He approached Joseph, apparently apart from the others, and said:

"Oh my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou art even as Pharaoh.

"My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother?

"And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.

"And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him.

"And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father: for if he should leave his father, his father would die.

"And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.

"And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord. And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.

"And we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down: for we may not see the man's face, except our youngest brother be with us.

"And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife bare me two sons: And the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since: And if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

"Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the lad be not with us; seeing that his life is bound up in the lad's life; It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with us, that he will die: and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.

"For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father for ever. Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren. For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me? lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my father." (Gen. 44.)

It was a great appeal. It showed strength of character in Judah, and a sincere love and loyalty for his father. Rather than to further offend aged Jacob, he offered himself as a ransom for Benjamin.
