Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE RECONCILIATION

Judah's great plea in behalf of Benjamin and his manifest loyalty to his aged father, Jacob, who was anxiously waiting for the return of his sons from Egypt, were more than Joseph could stand. The test had brought the facts to the surface and was successful.

So emotionally affected was the great governor of Egypt by this turn in events that he ordered everyone to leave the room.

"Cause every man to go out from me," he ordered his steward. This apparently meant the Egyptians, the servants, and the steward himself, but not Joseph's brothers, for they remained with him. He was now ready to tell them who he was, and he wanted no outside witnesses.

"And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren," the scriptures say.

So emotionally overcome was Joseph that he wept aloud "and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard." Apparently Joseph's home was near the palace, or those in Pharaoh's court could not have heard his crying.

"And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his presence.

"And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt. Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life. For these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet there are five years, in the which there shall neither be earing nor harvest."

Now that he was a mature man, Joseph knew that he had labored under divine inspiration for the seven years of plenty and two years of the famine, and that it was the Almighty who had sent him to Egypt. Hence he freely told his brothers not to grieve any more "that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life."

This important statement he repeated: "And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance. So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt."

After Joseph's emotional experience with his brethren, and fully satisfying them that he was indeed their young brother whom they had sold into bondage, he was anxious that they return and tell the good news to their father: Joseph is alive and well! He is the governor of Egypt! It is from him that we received our corn!

So Joseph said:

"Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me, tarry not:

"And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast:

"And there will I nourish thee; for yet there are five years of famine; lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.

"And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you. And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.

"And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck. Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and after that his brethren talked with him." (Gen. 45:1-15.)
