Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE RETURN HOME

The great experience of Joseph with his brothers was important news to all Egypt, for he had preserved their lives during the famine.

So the scripture says: "And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's brethren are come: and it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants."

In fact, Pharaoh was so pleased that he said to Joseph: "Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye; lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan; And take your father and your households, and come unto me: and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.

"Now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come. Also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of Egypt is yours."

The ten brothers now received treatment that they had never expected. They had thought, when they were first taken to Joseph's house, that they were to be punished by the Lord for selling Joseph into slavery, and they expected trouble.

They had seen Simeon placed in prison as a ransom for their return, and had passed through the ordeal of possibly losing Benjamin as well. But now the circumstances were completely reversed. Joseph in his pity and generosity, and Pharaoh in appreciation for all Joseph had done, gave the brothers all the courtesies of the king's court.

As the brothers were leaving for home, Joseph expressed his concern for a safe trip, saying, "See that ye fall not out by the way."

On returning to Canaan, they went directly to Jacob with the startling good news: "Joseph is yet alive, and he is governor over all the land of Egypt. And Jacob's heart fainted, for he believed them not."

But they continued to relate their unusual experience with Joseph in Egypt. "They told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived:

"And Israel said, It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: I will go and see him before I die." (Gen. 45:16-28.)
