Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE MIGRATION

The Lord made clear to Jacob that the reason He was moving the family into Egypt was to "make of thee a great nation." (Gen. 46:3.) That was the whole point in this entire drama of Joseph and his family.

When Joseph invited his father to come down, the invitation having been carried by his brethren, Jacob seemed very uncertain about it. Canaan was his ancestral home. It had been given of the Lord to Abraham and Isaac by special promise, which had been extended also to Jacob, to whom the Lord had said: "Thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 28:14; 26:2)

But the little family had no way of developing to such a point while they lived in Canaan. They needed Egypt, and the Lord provided it.

En route southward, Jacob went to Beersheba, in the southern end of Palestine, and offered sacrifice to the Lord. He sought divine guidance.

"And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I.

"And he said, I am God, the God of thy father: fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation: I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely bring thee up again: and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes."

This made it all abundantly clear to the aged patriarch. "Fear not to go down into Egypt, for I will there make of thee a great nation."

The entire drama of Joseph's experience was now given great significance by the Lord. It is meaningful to us of today also. The Lord knew what he was about. And when the time came for the exodus, he raised up Moses to be his leader, and then, with the strength they had gained from four hundred years in Egypt, the Israelites moved on to Canaan.

With this divine direction, "Jacob rose up from Beersheba: and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.

"And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with him: His sons, and his sons' sons with him, his daughters, and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with him into Egypt."

The scripture gives the names of the family members and then concludes: "All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were threescore and six; And the sons of Joseph, which were born him in Egypt, were two souls: all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were threescore and ten."

Judah was sent in advance of the main party to arrange with Joseph for their home in Goshen, which was one of the very fertile parts of the country.

It was a tender meeting between Joseph and his father, who had mourned for his son all those years. Joseph was highly emotional. He had longed deeply for his father and his family.

"And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.

"And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, because thou art yet alive.

"And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father's house, I will go up, and shew Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my father's house, which were in the land of Canaan, are come unto me; And the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have.

"And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, What is your occupation? That ye shall say, Thy servants' trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until now, both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians." (Gen. 46.)

Joseph said this because he knew that the Egyptians had no respect for shepherds, and that the Pharaoh himself was not an Egyptian. He was born a Hyksos and a shepherd. Joseph felt that the king should know all the facts in case his Egyptian subjects raised objections to the Israelites because of their hatred of shepherds. He was sure the king would understand. Being a shepherd himself, he certainly would sympathize with other shepherds.
