Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

PHARAOH WELCOMES JACOB

Joseph took his father and his brothers to Pharaoh's court and presented them there to the king. Almost immediately the king asked what their occupation was, and they told him frankly that they were shepherds.

They further said, "For to sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen."

This did not deter Pharaoh in the least. So grateful was he for all that Joseph had done for him personally and for his country during the years of abundance, and now for his care in distributing food during these first two years of the famine, that he sincerely welcomed Jacob and his family.

"And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee: The land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any men of activity among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.

"And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh."

Pharaoh was interested in Jacob, and early in their conversation he asked his age.

"And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.

"And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh."

Joseph now gave his father and his brothers possession of the land in Goshen, "the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded. And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his father's household, with bread, according to their families."

With no resentment in his heart for the fact that he had been sold into bondage by his brothers, Joseph exhibited the greatest of generosity toward them all.

The famine continued and Joseph daily sold corn to the people, who now were entirely dependent upon him. He gathered all the money he had received from these sales and took it to Pharaoh.

When the people ran out of money they again came to Joseph and said, "Give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth."

Then Pharaoh, through Joseph, demanded their cattle in payment of the corn, since they had no money.

"And they brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for that year."

But when the next year was past, and they had neither money nor cattle to buy food, they again came to Joseph and said, "We will not hide it from my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:

"Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live, and not die, that the land be not desolate."

Pharaoh evidently wanted to hold possession of the lands of the people as well as their cattle. Whether this was a means of actually placing his people under royal servitude is not clear. It could have been a means of exercising close control over a nation in crisis and making this rule even more absolute.

Joseph, as his servant, carried out the king's policy. "And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh's."

He then moved the people from their rural lands into the cities, "from one end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof. Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands."

When the famine ended, the people were put back on their land and Joseph provided seed for them to plant their crops. "Lo," he said, "here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land."

But Pharaoh laid a heavy burden of taxation upon them. They were told:

"And it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for your little ones.

"And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants.

"And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth part; except the land of the priests only, which became not Pharaoh's."

The people, however, were so happy just to be alive and to have survived the famine that they gladly said they would be Pharaoh's servants. (Gen. 47.)
