Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

JACOB'S BLESSINGS

Jacob knew that he was rapidly approaching the end of his life. He was now 146 years old. Before passing on, he wished to give blessings both to his twelve sons and to his favorite grandsons, Ephraim and Manasseh.

"And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days. Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto Israel your father."

Very significant blessings were given to Judah, Joseph, and the two grandsons, Ephraim and Manasseh, but the blessings bestowed on the other ten seem more like curses than blessings.

These ten sons became the progenitors of the lost tribes, who had been so rebellious while they lived in Canaan. It is not surprising that nothing outstanding was promised to them, nor need we wonder that later they were obliterated from the world, that the Lord had effectively hidden them from the sight and sound of all other people.

This must have been a most severe, though deserved, punishment for them. As we read Jeremiah and other prophets, it becomes clear that the scattering of all Israel was an expression of divine condemnation. The hiding away of the Ten Tribes seems most severe of all.

These ten sons were evil men, and they fully deserved the punishment they received. They had constantly rebelled against their father over the years. Some had become adulterers. Reuben had even defiled his own father's bed.

Furthermore, at least once they had murder in their hearts and unashamedly had plotted to slay their young brother, Joseph; they even devised a "cover up" with a set of lies to be told to their aging father on their return home. They gave up their murderous intent only when it appeared that they could sell the young man into bondage and thus make a profit on the transaction.

Sending him to Egypt conveniently disposed of him too, which had been their original idea anyway. So two things were accomplished by selling him: they made some money on the side, and at the same time they rid themselves of what they regarded as a pestiferous younger brother. And they no longer needed to listen to any more of his dreams. This made unnecessary the drenching of their hands in Joseph's blood, which seemed to relieve their minds, if that was any credit to them.

In any case, once their brother was on his way to Egypt, they steadfastly carried out their cruel scheme to deceive their father regarding Joseph's disappearance. They had deliberately planned that deception. Pretending that Joseph had been attacked by a wild animal, they killed a goat and poured the blood on their brother's brightly colored coat. Then with the baldest of hypocrisy they took the coat to Jacob and innocently asked if by some chance he recognized it, which of course the old man did.

The descendants of these men became the rebellious ten tribes whom the Lord led away. They are still kept from the knowledge of mankind. However, the Lord seems to be preparing them for their return prior to the Millennium.

It may be that they required the same kind of thing that the twelve tribes under Moses needed, to bring about a repentance. The Lord kept them in the wilderness for forty years until all the old rebellious generation had died off. It may have taken many generations in the lost condition of the ten tribes to bring about repentance.

"Durance vile," as Shakespeare expressed it, is sometimes the only force that will truly humble some people to the point of true repentance. The endless patience of the Lord with his recalcitrant children is beyond mortal comprehension. His kindness is indeed infinite.

As Jacob blessed his sons, he began with the eldest and went down the line according to age. Reuben originally had possessed the birthright, inasmuch as he was the firstborn, but he lost it by defiling his father's bed. Jacob must have had this in mind when he placed his hands on Reuben's head and spoke of him as his father's hopeful "beginning strength," that is, his firstborn son. But then he added: "Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch."

Judah was given the throne in Israel and was promised that through him a line of kings would be born. "The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be," said the aged patriarch. (Gen. 49:1-10.)

So most of the kings of Israel descended through Judah. The two greatest in their long history, of course, were David and Solomon.

However, there were some exceptions. For example, King Saul, the first king given to Israel under the direction of the prophet Samuel, was of Benjamin. (1 Sam. 9:1-2.) The tribes of Benjamin and Judah were closely mixed, though. They intermarried, and under the divided kingdoms, when there was a separate kingdom of Judah, Benjamin was a part of it.

The greatest promise in Judah's royal line was that the King of kings, Jesus Christ, the Messiah, would be born of his lineage. The Lord spoke of himself as the Son of David.
