Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

A FINAL KING DAVID

The scriptures speak of another King David on the throne at Jerusalem. This seems most likely to refer to the Christ, who will reign on earth 1,000 years.

The blessing of Jacob to Judah has given rise to claims made through the British Israel organization that the present British line of royalty descends directly from David of old. This organization holds that the kings and queens of England are preserving the royal promises of Israel. It claims that members of the British royal family are true descendants of King David in the line of Judah, that their throne is the throne of promise, and that they will remain on it until the Lord comes.

Those who make these claims are not acquainted with the partriarchal blessings of our British Saints, virtually all of which declare the British to be of Ephraim, and not of Judah at all.

This organization has published a genealogical chart trying to prove their contention, but the chart is very incomplete and is punctuated with many gaps, sometimes centuries in length.

When the Prince of Wales of some years ago was to succeed his father, King George V, there was much speculation as to whether he would assume the title of King David, since he had a half dozen names and one of them actually was David.

The British Israel advocates at that time thought the end of the world was near, and that the then-Prince of Wales, who they hoped would take the name of David when he was crowned, would actually be the long heralded King David of latter days.

But then, to their dismay, on being crowned king he took the name of Edward VIII, and not David at all. Then, to go from bad to worse, he resigned his throne rather than to give up "the woman I love," who was the divorced Mrs. Wallis Simpson, an American. He subsequently assumed an entirely different title, as the Duke of Windsor, and went into exile for the rest of his life.

Of course, the end of the world did not come, the millennial reign was not ushered in, and the British monarch was not named David, nor was his successor, George VI, nor was his successor in turn, who is now Queen Elizabeth II. Her son, the current Prince of Wales, is named Charles.

We should be assured, however, that when the biblical King David of latter days comes to the throne at the beginning of the Millennium, it will not be a political matter.

Isaiah spoke of Christ being on the throne of his father David: "Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this." (Isa. 9:7.)

A great promise was made through Jeremiah if the people would be faithful. That prophet said: "Then shall there enter into the gates of this city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and this city shall remain for ever." (Jer. 17:25.)

Jeremiah spoke much of the gathering of Israel in the last days, and made reference to the final King David. (Jer. 33:15-17.)

He spoke similarly at another time and said:

"Thus speaketh the Lord God of Israel, saying, Write thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee in a book. For, lo, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, saith the Lord: and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it. And these are the words that the Lord spake concerning Israel and concerning Judah." (Jer. 30:2-4.)

In Ezekiel we read this: "And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd. And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a prince among them; I the Lord have spoken it." (Ezek. 34:23-24. Italics added.)

"And David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them. And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children for ever: and my servant David shall be their prince for ever." (Ezek. 37:24-25. Italics added.)

Most of the blessings of Judah are yet future. There will be a great conversion among the Jews, but apparently not until the coming of the Savior.

The scattering imposed by the Lord on Israel is well illustrated in Judah. Members of this tribe may be found in all parts of the world. We know them simply as "the Jews," although they are a mixture of both Judah and Benjamin today as they were in ancient times.

There are about 16 million Jews in the world. Of that number about six million are in the United States and five million in Russia. There are more Jews in New York City than in Jerusalem. Other large centers of Jews include Chicago and Los Angeles.

The Jews are broken into factions so far as their religion goes. There are orthodox Jews and various shades of unorthodox. There is no religious unity among them. That is one of the problems affecting them now in the Israeli nation.

The creation of the state of Israel in Palestine is one of the great signs of the fulfillment of Bible prophecy indicating that truly we do live in the latter days.
