Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

JOSEPH'S BLESSINGS

Of all the blessings Jacob gave to his family, those bestowed upon the heads of Joseph, Ephraim, and Manasseh eclipse the rest.

On the head of Joseph he pronounced the following:

"Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall:

"The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:

"But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)

"Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:

"The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren." (Gen. 49:22-26.)

The blessings given to Ephraim and Manasseh are an extension of the blessing given to Joseph, and they relate directly to the Latter-day Saints today.

When Joseph brought Manasseh and Ephraim to Jacob to receive blessings, the old man was sick and blind. As Joseph and his sons entered his room, Jacob was in bed but he sat up to talk with them.

"And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me, And said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession." (Gen. 48:3-4.)

Jacob spoke of both Reuben and Simeon and their relationship in the tribes and of the places to be taken by Joseph's sons. In his inspired translation of the Bible, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote thus:

"And now, of thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt, before I came unto thee into Egypt; behold, they are mine, and the God of my fathers shall bless them; even as Reuben and Simeon they shall be blessed, for they are mine; wherefore they shall be called after my name. (Therefore they were called Israel.)

"And thy issue which thou begettest after them, shall be thine, and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance, in the tribes; therefore they were called the tribes of Manasseh and of Ephraim.

"And Jacob said unto Joseph when the God of my fathers appeared unto me in Luz, in the land of Canaan; he sware unto me, that he would give unto me, and unto my seed, the land for an everlasting possession.

"Therefore, O my son, he hath blessed me in raising thee up to be a servant unto me, in saving my house from death;

"In delivering my people, thy brethren, from famine which was sore in the land; wherefore the God of thy fathers shall bless thee, and the fruit of thy loins, that they shall be blessed above thy brethren, and above thy father's house;

"For thou hast prevailed, and thy father's house hath bowed down unto thee, even as it was shown unto thee, before thou wast sold into Egypt by the hands of thy brethren; wherefore thy brethren shall bow down unto thee, from generation to generation, unto the fruit of thy loins for ever;

"For thou shalt be a light unto my people, to deliver them in the days of their captivity, from bondage; and to bring salvation unto them, when they are altogether bowed down under sin." (Joseph Smith Translation, Gen. 48:5-11.)

When Jacob, now quite blind, was conscious of the two little boys being there with Joseph, he asked, "Whose [sons] are these?"

"And Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God hath given me in this place. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them.

"Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see. And he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced them.

"And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face: and, lo, God hath shewed me also thy seed.

"And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth." (Gen. 48:9-12.)

Manasseh was the older of the two, so Joseph put him toward Jacob's right hand, thinking to receive the better blessing for him as the firstborn. Ephraim was brought toward Jacob's left hand on the assumption that he would receive a lesser blessing.

In those days much depended on age seniority in a family. Rights to property and other benefits were usually accorded to children on a basis of their respective ages.

When Jacob began to bless the boys he crossed his arms and put his right hand on the head of Ephraim and his left upon Manasseh's.

"And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand, to remove it from Ephraim's head unto Manasseh's head.

"And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this is the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.

"And his father refused, and said, I know it, my son, I know it: he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations.

"And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh: and he set Ephraim before Manasseh.

"And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shall be with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.

"Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow." (Gen. 48:17-22. Italics added.)

So Ephraim and Manasseh actually were adopted by their grandfather, since he said, "Let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac." (Verse 16.) For this reason, these boys each became head of a tribe of Israel. But Ephraim was set before Manasseh.

This was further confirmed when Jeremiah wrote, "I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn." (Jer. 31:9.)

Ephraim was now given the birthright in Israel. That is what qualifies him to stand at the head of this present dispensation of the fulness of times, when the gospel is being preached to all nations in preparation for the second coming of the Lord.

The Main Bodies of Israel
