Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

JOSEPH AS A PROPHET

The prophet Lehi of the Book of Mormon gave us a great insight into Joseph who was sold into Egypt.

It is recalled that Nephi and his brothers obtained the brass plates of Laban when they returned to Jerusalem. Their father, Lehi, was ecstatic at what he read in those scriptures. Of this Nephi wrote:

"And after they had given thanks unto the God of Israel, my father, Lehi, took the records which were engraven upon the plates of brass, and he did search them from the beginning.

"And he beheld that they did contain the five books of Moses, which gave an account of the creation of the world, and also of Adam and Eve, who were our first parents;

"And also a record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah;

"And also the prophecies of the holy prophets, from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah; and also many prophecies which have been spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah.

"And it came to pass that my father, Lehi, also found upon the plates of brass a genealogy of his fathers; wherefore he knew that he was a descendant of Joseph; yea, even that Joseph who was the son of Jacob, who was sold into Egypt, and who was preserved by the hand of the Lord, that he might preserve his father, Jacob, and all his household from perishing with famine.

"And they were also led out of captivity and out of the land of Egypt, by the same God who had preserved them.

"And thus my father, Lehi, did discover the genealogy of his fathers. And Laban also was a descendant of Joseph, wherefore he and his fathers had kept the records." (1 Ne. 5:10-16.)

Note that the brass plates were in Laban's possession because he was a descendant of Joseph, "wherefore he and his fathers had kept the records."

Lehi then made some interesting predictions about those plates. They are especially vital to the Latter-day Saints, since we are intimately involved in the fulfillment of the predictions.

Nephi says of his father, "Wherefore, he said that these plates of brass should never perish; neither should they be dimmed any more by time. And he prophesied many things concerning his seed." (Verse 19.)

When Lehi blessed his young son Joseph, who was born in the wilderness, the aged prophet gave us some invaluable information about Joseph of Egypt and our own relationship to him as Latter-day Saints. Said he to his son Joseph:

"For behold, thou art the fruit of my loins; and I am a descendant of Joseph who was carried captive into Egypt. And great were the covenants of the Lord which he made unto Joseph.

"Wherefore, Joseph truly saw our day. And he obtained a promise of the Lord, that out of the fruit of his loins the Lord God would raise up a righteous branch unto the house of Israel; not the Messiah, but a branch which was to be broken off, nevertheless, to be remembered in the covenants of the Lord that the Messiah should be made manifest unto them in the latter days, in the spirit of power, unto the bringing of them out of darkness unto light—yea, out of hidden darkness and out of captivity unto freedom.

"For Joseph truly testified, saying: A seer shall the Lord my God raise up, who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my loins.

"Yea, Joseph truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers.

"And I will give unto him a commandment that he shall do none other work, save the work which I shall command him. And I will make him great in mine eyes; for he shall do my work.

"And he shall be great like unto Moses, whom I have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Israel.

"And Moses will I raise up, to deliver thy people out of the land of Egypt.

"But a seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins—and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them.

"Wherefore, the fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah, shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter days, and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord.

"And out of weakness he shall be made strong, in that day when my work shall commence among all my people, unto the restoring thee, O house of Israel, saith the Lord.

"And thus prophesied Joseph, saying: Behold, that seer will the Lord bless; and they that seek to destroy him shall be confounded; for this promise, which I have obtained of the Lord, of the fruit of my loins, shall be fulfilled. Behold, I am sure of the fulfilling of this promise;

"And his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation.

"Yea, thus prophesied Joseph: I am sure of this thing, even as I am sure of the promise of Moses; for the Lord hath said unto me, I will preserve thy seed forever." (2 Ne. 3:4-16.)

This is a remarkable statement given under the power of prophecy. Note just a few of the truths set forth:

Joseph of Egypt was a prophet.

He obtained a promise from the Lord that out of his posterity God would raise up a righteous branch of the house of Israel.

The Messiah should be made manifest to them in the latter days, bringing them out of darkness into the light, "yea, out of hidden darkness and out of captivity unto freedom."

Joseph prophesied that the Lord in the latter days would raise up, from the fruit of his loins, a prophet who would do a mighty work in bringing Joseph's later descendants to a knowledge of the convenants that the Lord had made with "the fathers."

He gave a clear prediction of the work of Joseph Smith in these words: "A seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins."

This is remarkable and fits directly into the work of the Prophet Joseph Smith. This modern prophet would be blessed "not to the bringing forth my word only saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word."

And this is being accomplished today through our missionaries, with special reference to people of Lamanite blood.

Then Joseph predicted what Ezekiel had in mind: that both Judah and Joseph would write scriptures to be used jointly in confounding false doctrine "and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter day, and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord." (Ezekiel 37:19-28.) The Book of Mormon and the Bible would go hand in hand.

He predicted that the modern prophet would be called Joseph after Joseph in Egypt, but also that his father would have that same name. And it was so. That prophet was Joseph Smith, Jr., who was named after his father, Joseph Smith, Sr.

Could it be that Joseph of old even saw the work of Oliver Cowdery? The scripture from the ancient Nephite prophet Lehi to his son Joseph says:

"And the Lord said unto me also: I will raise up unto the fruit of thy loins; and I will make for him a spokesman. And I, behold, I will give unto him that he shall write the writing of the fruit of thy loins, unto the fruit of thy loins; and the spokesman of thy loins shall declare it.

"And the words which he shall write shall be the words which are expedient in my wisdom should go forth unto the fruit of thy loins. And it shall be as if the fruit of thy loins had cried unto them from the dust; for I know their faith." (2 Ne. 3:18-19.)

Was Oliver not a spokesman for Joseph Smith, and did he not transcribe for him in the translation of the Book of Mormon?

These words are well worth repeating:

"And they shall cry from the dust; yea, even repentance unto their brethren, even after many generations have gone by them. And it shall come to pass that their cry shall go, even according to the simpleness of their words.

"Because of their faith their words shall proceed forth out of my mouth unto their brethren who are the fruit of thy loins; and the weakness of their words will I make strong in their faith, unto the remembering of my covenant which I made unto thy fathers." (Verses 20-21.)
