Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE DISPERSION PREDICTED

All the tribes of Israel were scattered abroad, uprooted from their homeland, and placed among strangers and enemies. This came as punishment for their constant rebellion against God in turning to idol worship, and for their increasing moral transgressions.

As Moses led them toward the promised land he said this to them:

"Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you this day:

"And a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not known." (Deut. 11:26-28.)

He warned them that if they did not remain steadfast, they would literally be sifted among the nations of the world. And this is what happened. Headstrong as they were, they would not follow divine leadership. They wanted to be like other nations about them, with kings and idolatry and lax standards.

There were two major invasions of the promised land by other nations. In the first, the ten tribes were taken to Assyria and then were lost to the world. In the second, the remaining tribes, still living in the area of Jerusalem, were carried off to Babylon. After seventy years, however, they were allowed to return to their homeland, where they rebuilt the temple, reinforced the walls around the city, and resumed their former manner of life.

Joseph's scattering was in various stages. In some manner that we do not know, his blood was spread among all the nations. We know this because we who are of Ephraim are now being gathered from all nations. This is evidence that at some time our forefathers were sifted abroad.

Then there was the migration of Lehi and his family, which formed one major element in this scattering. And then there was the movement of millions of people, following the age of discovery, to colonial America. Many were of Ephraim, being drained from the European nations. But it was a distinct movement.

Many of the Jews drifted away from Palestine years before the birth of Christ, going to various parts of the Grecian and Roman dominions. It was there that Paul found them when he made his momentous journeys as an apostle of the Lord.

Evidence of this dispersion is seen in the congregation that listened to Peter on the day of Pentecost. These Jews had come from many nations to observe the holy day. They thought the saints, who were speaking in tongues under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, were drunken and hence were babbling senselessly.

The scripture then reads:

"Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language.

"And they were all amazed and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all these which speak Galileans?

"And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?

"Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia.

"Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes.

"Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God." (Acts 2:6-11.)

Peter assured them that the saints were not drunken, but were speaking under inspiration. He then preached the gospel to them. But the point we make here is that these Jews had migrated to the various locations mentioned in the scripture and now had returned to Jerusalem only to attend the festivities of the Passover.

The worst dispersion of the Jews took place following the Roman conquest in A. D. 70. They are still widely scattered in our day, but they have begun a gathering to Palestine on a small scale.

There are about 16 million Jews in the world at large. Six million are in the United States and five million in Russia. Less than three million live in rehabilitated Palestine, now known as the nation of Israel.

The settlement of Palestine followed World War I under the joint sponsorship of the United States and Great Britain. The notable Balfour treaty brought this about after the land had been won from the Turks in 1917 by General Allenby and his British army.

The Jews have created a near miracle in Palestine as they have literally snatched the land from the desert. They have made it blossom as the rose. However, its population does not increase to any great extent. Many emigrants still go there, but nearly as many are leaving, not having found the new homeland to their liking. Dissatisfied, they have made their homes in other countries of Europe and many have settled in the United States.

Those who remain in Palestine—and many will, regardless of wars and hardships—are destined to be preserved as a distinct nation, for the Lord has decreed that they will be there when he comes in his glorious second advent. It will be in a time of dreadful war, and he will rescue them.

Jerusalem then will be under siege by an enemy from the north who has come down to seek a spoil. When the Lord comes, he will descend on the Mount of Olives, which will "cleave in twain." The valley thus formed will be seen by the besieged Jews who will rush into it for refuge.

And there they will meet the Lord their Messiah!

"And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount, and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake.

"And the Lord shall utter his voice, and all the ends of the earth shall hear it; and the nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see their folly.

"And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed; and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.

"And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

"Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

"And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king." (D&C 45:48-53. See also Ezek. 38 and 39 and Zech. 12 to 14.)

That will be the time of their conversion. It may be that some missionary work will be done elsewhere before then, since they are still so widely scattered, but at Jerusalem will come this miraculous conversion by the appearance of the Lord himself.

Eventually the Jews will be gathered to Palestine, as will the Ten Tribes, while Joseph will have his inheritance in America.
