Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE LOST TRIBES

What of the Ten Tribes?

It is well remembered that the Assyrians took them into captivity. Some of the ancient apocryphal scriptures relate that the Ten Tribes escaped from Assyria and went north. Then they became lost. Their whereabouts are unknown. The Lord said he has hidden them away and so they are. We cannot identify them nor locate them.

The time will yet come when all will be gathered by the Lord—the Ten Tribes, the tribe of Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh), and the Jews of today.

Respecting the lost Ten Tribes, Dr. James E. Talmage of the Council of the Twelve wrote:

In the division of the Israelites after the death of Solomon ten tribes established themselves as an independent kingdom. This, the kingdom of Israel, was terminated as far as history is concerned by the Assyrian captivity, 721 B. C. The people were led into Assyria and later disappeared so completely that they have been called the Lost Tribes. They seem to have departed from Assyria and while we lack definite information as to their final destination, and present location, there is abundant evidence that their journey was toward the north. The Lord's word through Jeremiah promises that the people shall be brought back "from the land of the north," and a similar declaration has been made through divine revelation in the present dispensation.

In the writings of Esdras or Ezra, which, however, are not included among the canonical books of the Bible but are known as apocryphal, we find references to the north-bound migration of the Ten Tribes, which they undertook in accordance with a plan to escape the heathen by going to "a farther country where never man dwelt, that they might there keep their statutes which they never kept in their own land." The same writer informs us that they journeyed a year and a half into the north country, but he gives us evidence that many remained in the land of their captivity.

The resurrected Christ, while ministering among the Nephites on this hemisphere, specifically mentioned `the other tribes of the house of Israel, whom the Father hath led away out of the land;' and again He referred to them as "other sheep which are not of this land, neither of the land of Jerusalem; neither in any parts of that land around about whither I have been to minister." Christ announced a commandment of the Father that He should reveal Himself to them. The present location of the Lost Tribes has not been revealed. (Articles of Faith, pp. 325-26.)

Dr. Talmage referred to other information on these tribes in a footnote on this subject:

Esdras, whose books, as stated in the text, are classed among the Apocrypha, describes a vision, in the course of which the ten tribes are noticed in this way: "Those are the tribes which were carried away captives out of their own land in the time of Oseas (Hosea) the king, whom Shalmanezer, the king of the Assyrians, took captive, and crossed them beyond the river; so were they brought into another land.

"But they took counsel to themselves, that they would leave the multitude of the heathen, and go forth unto a further country where never man dwelt, that they there might keep their statutes, which they never kept in their own land. And they entered in at the narrow passage of the river Euphrates.

"For the Most High then showed them signs, and stayed the springs of the flood till they were passed over. For through the country there was a great journey, even of a year and a half, and the same region is called Arsareth (or Ararah). Then dwelt they there until the latter time, and when they come forth again, the Most high shall hold still the springs of the river again, that they may go through."

Concerning the journeyings of the tribes toward the north, Elder George Reynolds, in his little work Are We of Israel? says:

"They determined to go to a country `where never man dwelt,' that they might be free from all contaminating influences. That country could only be found in the north. Southern Asia was already the seat of a comparatively ancient civilization; Egypt flourished in northern Africa; and southern Europe was rapidly filling with the future rulers of the world. They had therefore no choice but to turn their faces northward.

"The first portion of their journey was not however north; according to the account of Esdras, they appear to have at first moved in the direction of their old home; and it is possible that they originally started with the intention of returning thereto; or probably, in order to deceive the Assyrians, they started as if to return to Canaan, and when they crossed the Euphrates and were out of danger from the hosts of Medes and Persians, then they turned their journeying feet toward the polar star.

"Esdras states that they entered in at the narrow passage of the river Euphrates, the Lord staying the springs of the flood until they were passed over. The point on the river Euphrates at which they crossed would necessarily be in its upper portion, as lower down would be too far south for their purpose.

"The upper course of the Euphrates lies among lofty mountains; near the village of Pastash it plunges through a gorge formed by precipices more than a thousand feet in height, and so narrow that it is bridged at the top; it shortly afterward enters the plain of Mesopotamia. How accurately this portion of the river answers to the description of Esdras of the `Narrows' where the Israelites crossed!" (Articles of Faith, pp. 512-13.)

So the Ten Tribes are lost. We do not have any indication in the revelations as to their whereabouts. But of their eventual return we have this in the Doctrine and Covenants:

"And they who are in the north countries shall come in remembrance before the Lord; and their prophets shall hear his voice, and shall no longer stay themselves; and they shall smite the rocks, and the ice shall flow down at their presence.

"And an highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep.

"Their enemies shall become a prey unto them,

"And in the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water; and the parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land.

"And they shall bring forth their rich treasures unto the children of Ephraim, my servants.

"And the boundaries of the everlasting hills shall tremble at their presence.

"And there shall they fall down and be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim.

"And they shall be filled with songs of everlasting joy.

"Behold, this is the blessing of the everlasting God upon the tribes of Israel, and the richer blessing upon the head of Ephraim and his fellows." (D&C 133:26-34.)

The Book of Mormon gives many references to the lost tribes, some from the words of the Lord personally.

When the prophet Nephi told of the various groups of Israel, he spoke of them writing a record and said: "And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews." (2 Ne. 29:13.)

Here it seems that the tribes are separate and will write the word of God as it was given to them.

While the Savior was among the Nephites, he said:

"Ye are my disciples; and ye are a light unto this people, who are a remnant of the house of Joseph.

"And behold, this is the land of your inheritance; and the Father hath given it unto you.

"And not at any time hath the Father given me commandment that I should tell it unto your brethren at Jerusalem.

"Neither at any time hath the Father given me commandment that I should tell unto them concerning the other tribes of the house of Israel, whom the Father hath led away out of the land.

"This much did the Father command me, that I should tell unto them:

"That other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

"And now, because of stiffneckedness and unbelief they understood not my word; therefore I was commanded to say no more of the Father concerning this thing unto them.

"But, verily, I say unto you that the Father hath commanded me, and I tell it unto you, that ye were separated from among them because of their iniquity; therefore it is because of their iniquity that they know not of you.

"And verily, I say unto you again that the other tribes hath the Father separated from them; and it is because of their iniquity that they know not of them.

"And verily I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

"And they understood me not, for they supposed it had been the Gentiles; for they understood not that the Gentiles should be converted through their preaching.

"And they understood me not that I said they shall hear my voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at any time hear my voice—that I should not manifest myself unto them save it were by the Holy Ghost.

"But behold, ye have both heard my voice, and seen me; and ye are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Father hath given me." (3 Ne. 15:12-24.)

He made this mention also:

"And I command you that ye shall write these sayings after I am gone, that if it so be that my people at Jerusalem, they who have seen me and been with me in my ministry, do not ask the Father in my name, that they may receive a knowledge of you by the Holy Ghost, and also of the other tribes whom they know not of, that these sayings which ye shall write shall be kept and shall be manifested unto the Gentiles, that through the fulness of the Gentiles, the remnant of their seed, who shall be scattered forth upon the face of the earth because of their unbelief, may be brought in, or may be brought to a knowledge of me, their Redeemer." (3 Ne. 16:4.)

And then he said: "But now I go unto the Father, and also to show myself unto the lost tribes of Israel, for they are not lost unto the Father, for he knoweth whither he hath taken them." (3 Ne. 17:4.)

This passage from the Savior is very important: "And then shall the work of the Father commence at that day, even when this gospel shall be preached among the remnant of this people. Verily I say unto you, at that day shall the work of the Father commence among all the dispersed of my people, yea, even the tribes which have been lost, which the Father hath led away out of Jerusalem." (3 Ne. 21:26.)

And he concluded with this:

"And it shall come to pass, when the Lord seeth fit in his wisdom that they shall minister unto all the scattered tribes of Israel, and unto all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, and shall bring out of them unto Jesus many souls, that their desire may be fulfilled, and also because of the convincing power of God which is in them." (3 Ne. 28:29.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith said, in his day, that John the Revelator was at that time among the Ten Tribes preparing them for their return.
