Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

JOSEPH'S AMERICAN SAGA

The movement of Joseph's descendants "over the wall," whereby they left the promised land far behind, is one of the most spectacular and comprehensive chapters in all world history.

What can compare with the rise and fall of the nations that came from the families of Lehi and his sons as they populated two American continents and the islands of the South Pacific? Probably only the Jaredites, who also came to America.

Where is there a parallel to the ministry of Christ in America among those people as he established his church and opened an era of peace and prosperity that lasted for two hundred years? Nowhere in recorded scripture.

To a descendant of Ephraim, is there anywhere even a close analogy to the rise of the United States of America— a nation of Joseph—and the restoration of the gospel on this land?

Those epochal movements arose directly out of the Lord's dealings with Joseph and his descendants. They are in fulfillment of prophecy. They shaped many of the world's great events and are still doing so, particularly as the United States sustains its position of world leadership.

All of these events are part of the history of Ephraim and Manasseh.

We do not know the method by which the Lord scattered the blood of Joseph in all the world, even as he had sifted the Jews. The fact that his blood was spread abroad, however, is well attested by the patriarchal blessings being given to the Latter-day Saints. These blessings declare the Saints to be almost entirely of Joseph, and more especially of Ephraim. They are the people now being gathered in from "all the nations."

Those members of Joseph's progeny who came to America as Lehi's family are easily identified as a separate group. Their journey was specific and limited, and yet it developed into one of the greatest movements known to man.

Joseph's descendants who established the United States of America were a different group. They came from northern Europe for the most part, and hence must have had their origin in those who were widely scattered abroad.

In coming to America these people—the early American colonists and our founding fathers—were given a special task that was foreseen in prophecy, and they fulfilled it admirably. Theirs was a separate movement also, not associated with other developments in Israel. But many of them were of Joseph.

Both Lehi's people and those who became our founding fathers of the United States most certainly came to the "utmost bounds of the everlasting hills." Of this there can be no question.

Even though the American colonists for a time were limited to the coastal areas east of the Allegheny Mountains, they did not allow those mountains to hem them in. They looked west, even to the Pacific Ocean, and sent explorers there to claim the land.

The descendants of Lehi, in expanding throughout America, lived in and on and about the greatest chain of mountains on earth, reaching from Alaska to Central America as the Rockies and from Panama to Cape Horn as the Andes. There are higher mountains elsewhere, it is true, but none so long, none so wide, none with more varied fauna and flora, and none with greater deserts or deeper snows.

It was these mountains, the two chains of North and South America, to which the people of Joseph came. They literally extended themselves to the "utmost" in those everlasting hills.

Lehi's migration to America brought Joseph's seed to all parts of the hemisphere. They are found in Alaska and the Arctic, even out on the Aleutian chain.

They are in the Antarctic and along the straits of Magellan. They are in Ecuador, Bolivia, Venezuela, and Paraguay—in fact, in much of South America.

They may be found in the United States and Canada. They abound in Mexico and Central America.

There has been some intermixing with other peoples who have come to America, and the early colonists may not have been of Joseph. Eskimos undoubtedly married some of the Mongols who came over the Aleutians. The Spaniards intermarried with Indians in Central and South America. But the dominant blood of Joseph flows in their veins, and those who join the Church will receive all his promised blessings.

How did they get to these many and varied places? How did this part of the scattering movement begin? And where?
