Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE FAMILY OF LEHI

The journeys of Lehi's family began six hundred years before Christ, when Palestine was about to be invaded by the armies of Babylon.

In that city several prophets of God ministered, warning the people to repent as the only means of forestalling the invasion. But the people disregarded and abused the prophets. Jeremiah was there. For his labors he was cast into a dungeon.

One of Jeremiah's contemporaries was named Lehi, a righteous man who received both visions and the spoken word from God. He had four sons at this time, Laman, Lemuel, Nephi, and Sam. The first two were rebellious. The latter were righteous young men who loved the Lord and obeyed their father in all of his instructions.

As Lehi attempted to warn the Jews of their peril, they became angry and threatened his life. The Lord then commanded him to take his family out of Jerusalem and flee to the wilderness for safety. They would thus escape the impending Babylonian conquest.

Lehi and his family were of the tribe of Manasseh. (Alma 10:3; 1 Ne. 5:14.) Manasseh, of course, was one of the sons of Joseph.

When they were in their wilderness refuge, the Lord commanded Lehi that he should send back to Jerusalem, bring one other family out of the city, and join them in the wilderness. This was the family of Ishmael. (1 Ne. 7:1-5, 22.)

Ishmael belonged to the tribe of Ephraim. As the sons of Lehi married the daughters of Ishmael and had families of their own, the two lines of descent were mixed, so that the descendants of Lehi—or the people we usually speak of as Nephites—were actually members of both tribes and had a double relationship to Joseph their great progenitor. (See Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions 5:70.)

When Nephi and his brothers went back again into Jerusalem to obtain the brass plates, they brought with them into the wilderness Zoram, the servant of Laban, and he also was of Ephraim. He married within the group and raised a family. So all in that party now making their way out of Jerusalem were of Joseph through both Ephraim and Manasseh.

The Lord said that he would take them to a promised land, choice above all other lands. It was far across the sea. To reach it would require the building of a ship and an ocean voyage. The Lord commanded them to build the ship, which they did, and under the direct influence of Heaven, they sailed to America, for this was the promised land.

In this new land, the two older sons of Lehi and their families rebelled against the others. Eventually this resulted in two antagonistic nations. They multiplied and eventually millions of people occupied both of the Americas.

For a time there was both ocean and overland traffic between the two continents of the Western Hemisphere. Populous cities were built of stone, wood, and cement, which came into use on an extensive scale. Many of the ruins of those ancient cities have been unearthed in various parts of Mexico, Central America, and South America.

Some of the people became expert seamen and drifted out into the Pacific, reaching the various Polynesian islands. Thus they extended from one end of the Western Hemisphere to the other, and from Hawaii to New Zealand. Traditions, customs, legends, and religious beliefs of all these areas join to tie together these scattered peoples, even to relating the Polynesians to the Americans.

On the mainland, wars between the two branches of the families became ever more fierce. The followers of Laman and Lemuel took the name of Laman and became known as Lamanites. They defied God and established religions of their own, which included the offering of human sacrifices. God cursed them with a dark skin.

The more righteous division called themselves Nephites after their leader, Nephi. Prophets were sent among both nations over many generations with varying success.

One of them, Samuel the Lamanite, predicted that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, would be born in Bethlehem in Judea, and that a sign would be given to these ancient Americans by which they might know when this great event occurred.

On the night of the Savior's birth in the Holy Land, he said there would be no darkness in America; it would be as a day, a night, and a day without any darkness. The sun would rise and set as usual, but the land would remain light. By this the people would know that Christ was born. The prophets also foretold his crucifixion and his resurrection in the Old World, and promised that he would come to ancient America and visit among those people.

This he did in one of the most miraculous periods of all time. Christ appeared to them after his resurrection, allowed the people to examine the marks of the crucifixion, and fully identified himself as the Savior.

The prophets among the people of that time kept careful records of all of these events in what eventually became known as the Book of Mormon. Of the coming of the Savior among the ancient Americans they wrote:

"And now it came to pass that there were a great multitude gathered together, of the people of Nephi, round about the temple which was in the land Bountiful; and they were marveling and wondering one with another, and were showing one to another the great and marvelous change which had taken place.

"And they were also conversing about this Jesus Christ, of whom the sign had been given concerning his death.

"And it came to pass that while they were thus conversing one with another, they heard a voice as if it came out of heaven; and they cast their eyes round about, for they understood not the voice which they heard; and it was not a harsh voice, neither was it a loud voice; nevertheless, and notwithstanding it being a small voice it did pierce them that did hear to the center, insomuch that there was no part of their frame that it did not cause to quake; yea, it did pierce them to the very soul, and did cause their hearts to burn.

"And it came to pass that again they heard the voice, and they understood it not.

"And again the third time they did hear the voice, and did open their ears to hear it; and their eyes were towards the sound thereof; and they did look steadfastly towards heaven, from whence the sound came.

"And behold, the third time they did understand the voice which they heard; and it said unto them:

"Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him.

"And it came to pass, as they understood they cast their eyes up again towards heaven; and behold, they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them; and the eyes of the whole multitude were turned upon him, and they durst not open their mouths, even one to another, and wist not what it meant, for they thought it was an angel that had appeared unto them.

"And it came to pass that he stretched forth his hand and spake unto the people, saying:

"Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

"And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning.

"And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words the whole multitude fell to the earth; for they remembered that it had been prophesied among them that Christ should show himself unto them after his ascension into heaven.

"And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto them saying:

"Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world.

"And it came to pass that the multitude went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come.

"And when they had all gone forth and had witnessed for themselves, they did cry out with one accord, saying:

"Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God! And they did fall down at the feet of Jesus, and did worship him." (3 Ne. 11:1-17.)

The Savior introduced his gospel among them, taught baptism for the remission of sins, set up his church as he had in Palestine, and appointed a Council of Twelve, who became the head of the church following his ascension into heaven.

Such a period of righteousness followed this American ministry of the Savior that there was peace and prosperity in the land for two hundred years.

"And it came to pass in the thirty and sixth year, the people were all converted unto the Lord, upon all the face of the land, both Nephites and Lamanites, and there were no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly one with another.

"And they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift.

"And it came to pass that the thirty and seventh year passed away also, and there still continued to be peace in the land.

"And there were great and marvelous works wrought by the disciples of Jesus, insomuch that they did heal the sick, and raise the dead, and cause the lame to walk, and the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear; and all manner of miracles did they work among the children of men; and in nothing did they work miracles save it were in the name of Jesus. . . .

"And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people.

"And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God.

"There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God.

"And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings; yea, even they were blessed and prospered until an hundred and ten years had passed away; and the first generation from Christ had passed away, and there was no contention in all the land." (4 Ne. 1:2-5, 15-18.)

This period of peace ended as the people again became wicked. The Lamanites finally annihilated the Nephites as a people. The last battle was fought on the Hill Cumorah in western New York State.

Moroni, the last Nephite survivor, sealed up the record he and his father Mormon had made and hid it in the ground for safekeeping. This was about A.D. 420. In 1830 he returned as an angel of God and delivered the record to a young man named Joseph Smith, who published it as the Book of Mormon in 1830.

This is all a part of the saga of Joseph "over the wall." It is a period of history not paralleled on this planet. But it is in fulfillment of the blessing of Jacob upon the head of his son Joseph.

Among others who came to America in those days were the people of Mulek, who were led here following the fall of Jerusalem in the days of Zedekiah. Mulek seems to have been of Judah, as may others of his colony. They merged with the Nephites.
