Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE LATER LAMANITES

During the centuries the Lamanites drifted into at least three classifications.

One grouping included the plains Indians, the hogan dwellers, and the pueblo builders of western America.

There were also those who populated what is now Mexico, Central America, and the northern part of South America, such as the Mayans, the Aztecs, the Toltecs, and the Olmecs. They developed a high degree of intelligence and civilization.

There were those who drifted over the Pacific Ocean and became the Polynesians of the Pacific islands. Even before the coming of Christ, Hagoth and others sailed the seas. (Alma 63:5-8.)

The plains Indians more especially reveal the result of some of the predictions made concerning them. In vision Nephi saw this about them: "And it came to pass that I beheld, after they had dwindled in unbelief they became a dark, and loathsome, and a filthy people, full of idleness and all manner of abominations." (1 Ne. 12:23.)

Nephi also wrote about them:

"And he had caused the cursing to come upon them, yea, even a sore cursing, because of their iniquity. For behold, they had hardened their hearts against him, that they had become like unto a flint; wherefore, as they were white, and exceeding fair and delightsome, that they might not be enticing unto my people the Lord God did cause a skin of blackness to come upon them.

"And thus saith the Lord God: I will cause that they shall be loathsome unto thy people, save they shall repent of their iniquities.

"And cursed shall be the seed of him that mixeth with their seed; for they shall be cursed even with the same cursing. And the Lord spake it, and it was done.

"And because of their cursing which was upon them they did become an idle people, full of mischief and subtlety, and did seek in the wilderness for beasts of prey.

"And the Lord God said unto me: They shall be a scourge unto thy seed, to stir them up in remembrance of me; and inasmuch as they will not remember me, and hearken unto my words, they shall scourge them even unto destruction." (2 Ne. 5:21-25.)

Nephi also saw in vision that they would be driven and scattered by the Gentiles who would come to colonize this land; he wrote these words: "And it came to pass that I beheld many multitudes of the Gentiles upon the land of promise; and I beheld the wrath of God, that it was upon the seed of my brethren; and they were scattered before the Gentiles and were smitten." (1 Ne. 13:14.)

All of this gave rise to the wars against the Indians in the Northern Hemisphere beginning with the sailors who accompanied Columbus, then down through the French and Indian wars and the eventual western wars, including such events as Custer's last stand and the attacks on western settlements and wagon trains. Eventually the Indians were conquered and put on reservations. But the trend changed, and the United States government became friends to the red people, made them wards of the government, and sought to educate them and help them to enjoy life in the country as do all citizens.

In 1824 "the hearts of the Gentiles" were softened toward them and a separate office of Indian affairs was established in Washington. In 1832, only two years after the Church was organized, the Indians were made wards of the government, which began to plan for their education. However, the work was slowed down by continued Indian wars in the settlement of the West. Not until 1896 did the Indian educational program really begin.

The hearts of the gentiles have since then been softened even further, and Congress has budgeted millions of dollars each year for the education and development of the Indians.

One of the great steps in the advancement of the red men came in 1934 with the passage of the Indian Reorganization Act, under which the Indians were allowed self government on their reservations. Steps were taken to place them on a more even footing with the white men.

Soon after 1934, as many as two hundred Indian tribes in the United States had written their own local constitutions for self government, providing among other things the right to elect their tribal officers. They wrote their own constitutions and by-laws. For example, the San Carlos Apache tribe in Arizona wrote as the preamble to their constitution:

"We the Apache Indians of the San Carlos reservation wish to make use of the right of self government and have herewith laid down in form of a constitution our resolutions thereon, to be accepted and confirmed by a general tribal vote, so anybody may know how all our internal affairs shall be carried out."

The constitution of the federated tribes of the Flathead reservation in Montana provides a bill of rights that grants the vote to all Indians over twenty-one, and guarantees equal privileges in the enjoyment of economic resources and all activities on the reservation.

Freedom of worship is guaranteed, as is full liberty in assembly, speech, and press. Accused persons are assured a trial by jury, and free elections are provided in which they may choose their own officials to administer their tribal laws.

These are typical of the other tribal constitutions.

Thousands of the field positions in the Bureau of Indian Affairs of the United States are now filled by full-blooded Indians who are well educated, with advanced college degrees.

Many of the modern Indians have been enriched through discovery of oil on their lands. Some have large agricultural holdings. But there are still others who are very poor, living on marginal lands in arid regions of the country.
