Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

IN MESOAMERICA

Not all of the Lamanites became degenerate, although many did, rejecting God. But some developed a meaningful civilization.

Evidences of this are now being unearthed by archaeologists, who write that the civilization reached by the Incas, the Aztecs, the Olmecs, the Toltecs, the Mayans, and others rivaled the best that Europe had to offer during the pre-Columbian periods.

They knew much of medicine, astronomy, architecture, agriculture, and the arts. For example, the engineering work at Monte Alban, near Oaxaca, some two hundred miles southeast of Mexico City, is the envy of modern builders.

The early natives manufactured delicate jewelry from turquoise, quartz, and other hard stones, not to mention beautiful creations from bones and shells. Combs, rings, beads, and pendants found in the ruins show remarkable skill. Mirrors of silver and copper have been found in various parts of what is known as Mesoamerica. Outstanding was their work in gold—breastplates, rings, and other jewelry. Beautiful pottery has also been unearthed in these ancient ruins.

The calendar stones of ancient America remain one of the marvels of their age, calendars as accurate as our own.

Surgical operations, including the setting of bones and even brain surgery, are noted in the evidences that have been produced. Amputation, bone setting, and skull surgery seem to have been fairly common. Narcotics were administered to ease pain, and it is said that the white milk from the tree "hoje" was used as a coagulant to stop bleeding.

The use of mathematics is obvious among them. The adoption of the zero in ancient America is believed to have antedated its use in Europe.

Irrigation systems established by those people are seen in many places.

The skill of ancient Americans in cutting and fitting huge building stones, some weighing many tons, is still a mystery to modern builders. Without mortar, they fitted huge pieces of stone together so closely that not even a knife blade can be inserted between them. Their builders also understood the arch and used it successfully.

The ruins of Machu Picchu, seventy miles from Cuzco in the high country of Peru, are visited now by many tourists. Found there are buildings made mostly of white granite—palaces, temples, towers, fountains, baths, and private homes. The city is believed to have been built about A.D. 1000, some five hundred years before Columbus.

The city of Chan Chan in northern Peru has well-laid-out streets, reservoirs, cisterns, canals, and pyramids.

Metallurgy was known among many of those ancient peoples. They understood various kinds of alloys, and made metal swords and shields, even helmets. They learned how to cast and solder metal and did some gilding.

Textiles were produced in abundance, with many pieces being highly colored. The dyes on some of the items found in the ancient ruins are still fairly bright.

These people were road builders equal to the ancient Romans. One of their highways is three thousand miles long. Much of their road work was paved. Causeways were built, bridges and tunnels were provided where needed, and some suspension bridges were erected.

Notable among all the ancient ruins are the pyramids, which rival those in Egypt, temples, and observatories for astronomical calculations. The pyramid of the sun and the pyramid of the moon, not far from Mexico City, are amazing.

Whereas many of the Lamanites degenerated and lived as wandering tribes, millions settled down and became well civilized, as the ruins indicate.
