Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE POLYNESIANS

White and brown natives in the Polynesian islands?

White and brown natives in Peru?

White and brown Incas?

Can that be?

The answer is a resounding yes, and they are descendants of Joseph! The American Indians and the Polynesians are cousins, and there is much to prove it.

From the beginning of our Church history, the Latter-day Saints have believed that the South Sea islanders and the American Indians were related, and that the islanders first lived in America and then drifted off into the warm waters surrounding the "islands of paradise."

Now more and more proof comes forward to establish this fact.

Archibald F. Bennett, highly skilled genealogical researcher and executive secretary of the Genealogical Society of Utah for many years, made a detailed study of the genealogies of the Polynesians, listened to their chants, recorded their lineage, matched them with known American pedigrees, and reached the conclusion that the islanders indeed came from our mainland.

But he is alone in this. One of the most ardent advocates of this position is Thor Heyerdahl, the Norwegian explorer and anthropologist. He speaks of his visit to Easter Island, for example, and describes the early European visitors there. Then he writes:

"Next time it was the Spaniards who came. Led by Don Felipe Gonzáles with two ships, they appeared over the horizon of Easter Island in 1770. . . .

The Spaniards met on the island tall, fair men. Two of the biggest were measured and were respectively 6 feet, 6 1/2 inches and 6 feet, 5 inches tall. Many had beards, and the Spaniards found that they were quite like Europeans and not ordinary natives. They noted in their diaries that not all of them had black hair: the hair of some was chestnut brown and in other cases it was even reddish and cinnamoncolored." (Aku Aku, Chicago: Rand McNally & Co., 1958, pp. 31-32.)

"The population did not seem to be absolutely pure and unmixed, for among the native visitors some were conspicuous by their darker skins, while others again were `quite white,' like Europeans." (Ibid., p.29.)

"Father Sebastian pointed out that according to traditions of the natives themselves, many of their ancestors in olden times had white skin, red hair, and blue eyes. And when Father Eugenio settled among them as the first European, and assembled all the people at Hangaroa, he was surprised to find many completely white people among the brown ones." (Ibid., p. 75.)

"Some of their ancestors had been white and red-haired." (Ibid., p. 104.)

"There were handsome people among our ancestors,' said the mayor. `There were two kinds of people on this island: some were dark and some were quite fair-skinned, like you from the mainland, and with light hair. Real white people.'" (Ibid., p. 141.)

I said, "People with red hair must of course have landed on the island in the past. At any rate, the aboriginal settlers must have included some redheads."

"Were there redheads anywhere in the neighborhood?"

"On several of the islands. In the Marquesas group, for example."

"And on the mainland?"

"In Peru. When the Spaniards discovered the Inca Empire, Pedro Pizzaro the chronicler wrote that, while the mass of Andes Indians were small and dark, the members of the Inca family ruling among them were tall and had whiter skins than the Spaniards themselves. He mentions in particular certain individuals in Peru who were white and had red hair." (Ibid., p. 356.)

Heyerdahl photographed well-preserved mummies from ancient America that clearly indicate the light color of the hair and the white skin. He published those pictures in his book American Indians in the Pacific (Chicago: Rand McNally & Co., 1953).

"The whiteness of the skin appeared almost to equal that of Europeans. . . . Their children whose skins had never been stained with paint, also equalled ours in whiteness," he wrote. (Page 83.)

In this last paragraph Heyerdahl quotes Captain Cook regarding the Indians in the American Northwest, near Vancouver. He then proceeds to compare not only the complexion of the Polynesians to that of the Northwest Indians, but also their habits, their manner of dress, their religious customs, and other factors. He expresses a strong opinion that not only are the Polynesians related to the Peruvians, but to the Northwest Indians as well. He also compares medical reports on the blood types of the Northwest Indians and the Polynesians, and notes how similar they are. (Ibid., p. 89.)

A number of Polynesian traditions indicate a migration from high northern latitudes, from a land of bitter winter, a land whose trees were without leaves half the year and where people walked on the water (the ice-covered lakes and ocean). (Ibid., p. 152.)

The traditions of the Polynesians from Hawaii to New Zealand indicate that their forefathers came from the east, from the land of high mountains. (Aku Aku, pp. 39, 92, 100, 110, 134, 182, 189-90, 220. See also Heyerdahl's Kon Tiki pp. 24-25.)

Many have seen the great stone pyramids discovered by archaeologists in Mexico and Central and South America. Pyramids of almost identical structure, both in plan and material, but much smaller in size, have been found in Polynesia.

Stone roadways so characteristic of the pre-Inca period of America are found in some of the Pacific Islands. Giant stone statues such as are found in the lands of the South American Incas have been discovered in the Polynesian islands, with characteristics and markings so similar that few can doubt their common origin. This includes many of the structures found on Easter Island.

The sweet potato of the Pacific islands, known in Polynesia as the kumara (or kumalla, as it is called in Tonga), is now found by botanists to be identical to a plant native to South America, with impressive evidence as to the manner in which it was transported from Peru to the Pacific islands. Cotton, coconuts, pineapples, and papaya are likewise traced from Polynesia to America by botanists, who now announce that the Polynesian varieties of these plants are but offshoots of the parent plants in America.

The ocean currents have been observed in our time to carry drifting objects to Polynesia from two places in the Americas—the Pacific Northwest and Central and South America. Large Pacific Northwest pine logs have been traced in the drifting currents of the Pacific Ocean from the Vancouver area of North America to the Hawaiian, Marshall, and Caroline islands. Hawaiians and other Polynesians have made canoes from these drifted pine logs and in them have traveled from island to island. There are no such trees growing in Polynesia. They came by ocean currents from the Pacific Northwest of North America.

This is even more notable when it is observed that customs and household articles characteristic of the Indians of the Pacific Northwest of North America have been found on a wide scale in Polynesia.

Written descriptions of fortifications built on some of the Polynesian islands remind one of chapters in the Book of Mormon that portray the fortifications built by the great general Moroni in ancient America. Kivas, characteristic of American Indians today, are found in Polynesia.

Words and place names in the language of the Polynesians of the various island groups are now found to be identical to those common among the Inca people of Peru. Many are actually identical in spelling and pronunciation.

One of them is Kanakana, the name of one of the deities of both the Incas and the Polynesians. This name means brightness, light, knowledge, or intelligence. The natives believed that the glory of their God was intelligence, and they therefore named him so. This is noted in both preIncan and Polynesian religions.

Many other religious teachings are the same in both areas. Both peoples believe in the Creation by the Almighty. Both believe that the first man was the father of all living, and that the first woman was the mother of all living, and they use these actual phrases. They believe in the flood of Noah's day. They accept an atonement by a Savior. They believe in a White God who came among their forefathers and performed mighty miracles. They believe in the water of life, or living water, given by the Savior.

Large fonts, which archaeologists claim were baptismal fonts, have been found in both areas. Burial customs are similar. Both groups believed in an all-powerful governing trinity of Gods. There is one story in Polynesia that reminds us of the story of the brother of Jared.

The patriarchal blessings given to Polynesian members of the Church almost invariably indicate a lineage of either Manasseh or Ephraim, but predominantly Manasseh.

Can anyone doubt that people such as Hagoth, the builder of ships, initiated ocean voyages to the South Sea islands? There is every reason to believe that he did.
