Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

JOSEPH AND THE USA

America is the land of Joseph, given to him by divine decree. It was declared to be a land of liberty, where no kings should be raised up to the gentiles.

The prophets said that those nations which occupy this land will be protected from all other nations and will be prospered by heaven itself if the people obey the God of the land.

This continent was preserved from colonization through the centuries. It was held from the rest of the world so that no permanent occupancy was allowed until the Lord himself brought his people here.

America is a land choice above all other lands, said the prophets. It is so because from here the Lord will conduct his worldwide work in the latter days.

One provision in scripture was that God would establish on this continent a free nation, raised up by himself for his own purpose. That nation is the United States.

In vision Nephi saw Columbus's voyage of discovery and the colonization of the "new world" by emigrants primarily from northern Europe. He saw them fighting a revolutionary war for their freedom, and saw that the blessing of the Lord was upon them and the wrath of the Lord was upon their enemies, so that the colonists were victorious.

The Lord then raised up men to write a constitution for this new nation, providing liberty and justice for all. Said he concerning this matter:

"According to the laws and constitution of the people, which I have suffered to be established, and should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles;

"That every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment.

"Therefore, it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another.

"And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." (D&C 101:77-80.)

The Savior had predicted this great event while he was among the Nephites. He referred to the gentiles who would occupy this land in the latter days, and then said:

"For it is wisdom in the Father that they should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel;

"Therefore, when these works and the works which shall be wrought among you hereafter shall come forth from the Gentiles, unto your seed which shall dwindle in unbelief because of iniquity;

"For thus it behooveth the Father that it should come forth from the Gentiles, for this cause that the Gentiles, if they will not harden their hearts, that they may repent and come unto me and be baptized in my name and know of the true points of my doctrine, that they may be numbered among my people, O house of Israel;

"And when these things come to pass that thy seed shall begin to know these things—it shall be a sign unto them, that they may know that the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the people who are of the house of Israel." (3 Ne. 21:4-7.)

So America was the land that would be free, made so by the Almighty. It would provide the peaceful conditions under which the Lord could restore his gospel in the latter days, as predicted by Peter and John. (Acts 3:21 and Rev. 14:6-7.)

It was all so natural the way the Lord worked it out.

This is the land of Joseph.

The gospel was restored through Joseph Smith, a "pure Ephraimite," as Brigham Young said.

The keys of divine power were committed to Joseph and his followers, and they have been passed on down to us of today. And who are we? Ephraim—with some of Manasseh and a sprinkling of a few other tribes. But Ephraim was given the birthright. Ephraim was given the priesthood in these days by angelic ministry. Ephraim stands at the head of this dispensation. Ephraim will bless the lost tribes when they come. Ephraim is taking the gospel to all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people.

The Lord created the United States for one purpose—to occupy this strategic position in the last days preparing for the second coming of Christ. He set it up. He will preserve this nation as the headquarters of his church. If there are wicked on the land, as there are, they may easily be swept off at his pleasure, but America will remain.

How can the work of the Lord be accomplished without this nation which is his base of operation? It is one of his instruments for fulfilling prophecy in the last days, in preparing for the return of his Beloved Son.

America's destiny is great, and the Latter-day Saints are the leaven in the lump. God will preserve the land for their sake as they complete the work of this last dispensation.

It is Joseph's land, and we are Joseph's descendants.
