Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE TOPS OF THE MOUNTAINS

A very important religious connotation is related to Jacob's promise that Joseph would extend himself to the "utmost bound of the everlasting hills." (Gen. 49:26.)

Referred to both by Isaiah and Micah, it tells of the Saints of God migrating to the tops of the mountains, where they would build a temple to which people from all nations would flow. From this place the law and word of the Lord would go abroad to the world.

Isaiah declared:

"And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

"And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

"And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

"O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord." (Isa. 2:2-5.)

Giving essentially the same prediction, Micah said:

"But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall flow unto it.

"And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

"And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." (Micah 4:1-3.)

Other Bible versions confirm the meaning set forth in the King James translation, as given above. For example, the Jerusalem Bible (Catholic) says: "In the days to come the mountain of the Temple of Jehovah will be put on the top of the mountains and be lifted higher than the hills. The people will stream to it and they will say, Come let us go to the mountain of Jehovah—TO THE TEMPLE OF THE GOD OF JACOB—so that he may teach us of his ways and we may walk in his paths."

Dr. Hugh Nibley of the department of ancient languages at Brigham Young University explains that in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia the temple was regarded as a kind of artificial mountain. He suggests that the phrase "the mountain of the house of the Lord" simply means "the temple of Jehovah."

The Knox version (Catholic) reads: "The Temple Hill! One day it shall stand there. . . . The nations will flock there together. A multitude of people will make their way to it, crying, Come let us climb up to the Lord's mountain peak, to the house where the God of Jacob dwells. He shall teach us the right way, we will walk in the paths he hath chosen."

Isaiah makes a part of his prediction these words: "For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:3.)

What does it all mean?

During the latter part of his life, the Prophet Joseph Smith predicted that the Saints—and these were of Ephraim—would move from the Midwest in the United States and migrate to the Rocky Mountains, where they would become a mighty people.

After his martyrdom, persecution became so heavy that the Saints projected the move to the Great Basin in the midst of the Rocky Mountains, where they could become a mighty people.

Actually, the Prophet Joseph first envisioned that migration. At one time he planned to go to those mountains himself, but the martyrdom prevented it. However, he projected the movement of the Saints westward. Brigham Young led them, as the legal successor to the Prophet Joseph, but he gave full credit to Joseph for the plan. Said he:

"I do not wish men to understand I had anything to do with our being moved here, that was the providence of the Almighty; it was the power of God that wrought out salvation for this people, I never could have devised such a plan. . . .

"I did not devise the great scheme of the Lord's opening the way to send this people to these mountains. Joseph contemplated the move for years before it took place." (Discourses of Brigham Young, 1925 ed., p. 735.)

Then what does it mean?

The drama of the latter days in which the Church and kingdom of God were again established on earth included the fulfillment of these biblical prophecies, which in turn meant a migration of the Mormon people to the Great Basin in the Rocky Mountains. And keep in mind that they are modern Ephraim.

There they did establish their Zion. There they did build their great temple, now considered one of the architectural masterpieces in the world.

There they did establish schools, farms, cultural centers, worshipping assemblies, and prosperous industries. And from there the gospel is being sent to the world abroad, just as Isaiah said.

The word and law of the Lord indeed are going forth to every nation—from the tops of the mountains, from the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, from headquarters in Salt Lake City.

Both Isaiah and Micah made prominent mention of the temple of the Lord to be built in the tops of the mountains in the latter days, and said that people from many nations should "flow unto it." That temple was the great Salt Lake Temple, according to President Wilford Woodruff, who dedicated it. At a celebration of Pioneer Day, July 24, 1880, President Woodruff addressed a large gathering in the Salt Lake Tabernacle and said:

"Today I stand in a tabernacle filled with some twelve thousand of the Latter-day Saints who have followed the pioneers into these valleys of the mountains.

"When we cast our eyes over these valleys, then a desert, today they are teeming with the industry of one hundred and fifty thousand of the sons and daughters of Zion, who have been gathered by the commandments of God and the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.

"We, as pioneers and as the people of God, are fulfilling prophecy and making history. This tabernacle in which we are today, is the very tabernacle that Isaiah saw in vision twenty-six hundred years ago, that should be as a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and a covert from the storm and from the rain.

"We are also building the temple of our God, on this block, which the prophet saw was to be built in the last days upon the mountain of the Lord's house, and be established on the tops of the mountains for all men to flow unto. Isaiah ii, 2-3.

"`And many people shall go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His ways and we will walk in His paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.'

"Our whole life, history and travels have been pointed out by the ancient prophets. As the pioneers came into this barren desert and the Saints have followed them to fulfill the prophecies, to make the desert blossom as the rose, to sow our grain beside all small streams and still waters, and use the fir, the pine and the box, to beautify the place of God's sanctuary and to make the place of His feet glorious, and as there is but a remnant of us left as pioneers, or Battalion, or Zion's Camp, let us magnify our calling and build up the Zion and Kingdom of God until it is perfected before the heavens and the earth, and not disappoint those who sent us, nor those who have seen us by vision and revelation, but let us finish and fulfill our destiny to the satisfaction of our heavenly Father, His angels and all good men." (The Elders' Journal 4:130.)

It is all a part of the latter-day work of Joseph through his sons Ephraim and Manasseh.

Each step taken by every pioneer crossing the plains to Utah, every grave of the thousands who died on the way, every farm, school, chapel, and industry established by those pioneers in the upper reaches of the mountain valleys of the Great Basin, all testify of Joseph of Egypt and his latter-day work.

And now that it goes worldwide, the restored Church of Jesus Christ is being firmly established in many nations and will be followed by more as religious liberty is granted.

The Church will again, in the due time of the Lord, be well established in the area of Jackson County, Missouri, the central place of Zion, as designated by the Lord.
