Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE LAND OF JOSEPH

America is the land of Joseph, dedicated to him and assigned to his descendants by prophecy.

When Lehi blessed his son Joseph, he spoke of this matter: "And now, Joseph, my lastborn, whom I have brought out of the wilderness of mine afflictions, may the Lord bless thee forever, for thy seed shall not utterly be destroyed." (2 Ne. 3:3.)

The Lord told Lehi early in the Lehites' journeys that he would bring them to "a land of promise; yea, even a land which I have prepared for you; yea, a land which is choice above all other lands." (1 Ne. 2:20.)

Lehi went beyond that and said: "Wherefore, this land is consecrated unto him whom he shall bring. And if it so be that they shall serve him according to the commandments which he hath given, it shall be a land of liberty unto them; wherefore, they shall never be brought down into captivity; if so, it shall be because of iniquity; for if iniquity shall abound cursed shall be the land for their sakes, but unto the righteous it shall be blessed forever." (2 Ne. 1:7.)

Then he added: "Wherefore, if ye shall keep the commandments of the Lord, the Lord hath consecrated this land for the security of thy seed with the seed of my son." (2 Ne. 1:32.)

Emphasizing the permanent dedication of this land to his children and "them who shall be numbered among thy seed," he declared: "Wherefore, I will consecrate this land unto thy seed, and them who shall be numbered among thy seed, forever, for the land of their inheritance; for it is a choice land, saith God unto me, above all other lands, wherefore I will have all men that dwell thereon that they shall worship me, saith God." (2 Ne. 10:19.)

Jesus himself said: "And behold, this is the land of your inheritance; and the Father hath given it unto you." (3 Ne. 15:13.)

The prophet Moroni, who closed up the record of the Book of Mormon and who had condensed the record of Ether, quoted Ether concerning this land and wrote:

"And now I, Moroni, proceed to finish my record concerning the destruction of the people of whom I have been writing.

"For behold, they rejected all the words of Ether; for he truly told them of all things, from the beginning of man; and that after the waters had receded from off the face of this land it became a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord; wherefore the Lord would have that all men should serve him who dwell upon the face thereof;

"And that it was the place of the New Jerusalem, which should come down out of heaven, and the holy sanctuary of the Lord.

"Behold, Ether saw the days of Christ, and he spake concerning a New Jerusalem upon this land.

"And he spake also concerning the house of Israel, and the Jerusalem from whence Lehi should come—after it should be destroyed it should be built up again, a holy city unto the Lord; wherefore, it could not be a new Jerusalem for it had been in a time of old; but it should be built up again, and become a holy city of the Lord; and it should be built unto the house of Israel.

"And that a New Jerusalem should be built upon this land, unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph, for which things there has been a type.

"For as Joseph brought his father down into the land of Egypt, even so he died there; wherefore, the Lord brought a remnant of the seed of Joseph out of the land of Jerusalem, that he might be merciful unto the seed of Joseph that they should perish not, even as he was merciful unto the father of Joseph that he should perish not.

"Wherefore, the remnant of the house of Joseph shall be built upon this land; and it shall be a land of their inheritance; and they shall build up a holy city unto the Lord, like unto the Jerusalem of old; and they shall no more be confounded, until the end come when the earth shall pass away.

"And there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; and they shall be like unto the old save the old have passed away, and all things have become new.

"And then cometh the New Jerusalem; and blessed are they who dwell therein, for it is they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who are numbered among the remnant of the seed of Joseph, who were of the house of Israel.

"And then also cometh the Jerusalem of old; and the inhabitants thereof, blessed are they, for they have been washed in the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who were scattered and gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the north countries, and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant which God made with their father, Abraham.

"And when these things come, bringeth to pass the scripture which saith, there are they who were first, who shall be last; and there are they who were last, who shall be first." (Ether 13:1-12.)

Moroni also spoke of the manner by which liberty was to be preserved on this choice land. As he wrote the Book of Ether in the Book of Mormon he said:

"And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

"For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off.

"And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God—that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done.

"Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have written." (Ether 2:9-12.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared that the entire Western Hemisphere is Zion: "The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land." (History of the Church 6:318-19.)

The center of Zion will be in the United States, specifically in Jackson County, Missouri, which is the geographical center of the nation. There the New Jerusalem will be built. There will be the mighty temple of the Lord in these final days.

In our Articles of Faith we say that "Zion (the New Jerusalem) will be built upon the American continent; that Christ will reign personally upon the earth."

It is in this place that he will reign. It is thence that "out of Zion shall go forth the law," as Isaiah said. (Isa. 2:3.)

In writing to N. E. Seaton, a publisher in Rochester, New York, on January 4, 1833, the Prophet Joseph said:

"The city of Zion spoken of by David, in the one hundred and second Psalm, will be built upon the land of America. `And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads' (Isaiah xxxv:10); and then they will be delivered from the overflowing scourge that shall pass through the land. But Judah shall obtain deliverance at Jerusalem. See Joel ii:32; Isaiah xxvi: 20 and 21; Jeremiah xxxi:12; Ps. 1:5; Ezekiel xxxiv: 11, 12, and 13. These are testimonies that the Good Shepherd will put forth His own sheep, and lead them out from all nations where they have been scattered in a cloudy and dark day, to Zion, and to Jerusalem. . . ." (History of the Church 1:315.)

It is interesting to read that Brigham Young said:

"When the day comes in which the Kingdom of God will bear rule, the flag of the United States will proudly flutter unsullied on the flagstaff of liberty and equal rights, without a spot to sully its fair surface; the glorious flag our fathers have bequeathed to us will then be unfurled to the breeze by those who have power to hoist it aloft and defend its sanctity.

"How long will it be before the words of the prophet Joseph will be fulfilled? He said if the Constitution of the United States were saved at all it must be done by this people. It will not be many years before these words come to pass." (Discourses of Brigham Young, 1954 ed., p. 360.)

When the Lord gave to the Prophet Joseph Smith what we know as D&C 133 of the Doctrine and Covenants, he said:

"When the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his Father's name written on their foreheads.

"Wherefore, prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom; go ye, go ye out to meet him.

"For behold, he shall stand upon the mount of Olivet, and upon the mighty ocean, even the great deep, and upon the islands of the sea, and upon the land of Zion.

"And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people." (D&C 133:18-21.)

He declares even that when the Ten Tribes return, they will come first to Ephraim—and that will be on this land of Joseph—to receive their higher blessings at the hands of those whom the Lord will assign to that important work. (D&C 133:26-33.) The scriptures then indicate that they will proceed on to Palestine, where they will inherit their ancestral home.
