Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE MISSION OF EPHRAIM

Ephraim's mission is chiefly one for the latter days. He was prominent anciently, but was a rebellious type then. In the latter days, however, having been scattered through the nations and chastened, he now fills his truly intended role.

President Joseph Fielding Smith discoursed considerably upon this theme:

"Joseph, son of Jacob, because of his faithfulness and integrity to the purposes of the Lord, was rewarded with the birthright in Israel. It was the custom in early times to bestow upon the firstborn son special privileges and blessings, and these were looked upon as belonging to him by right of birth. Reuben, the first of Jacob's sons, lost the birthright through transgression, and it was bestowed upon Joseph, who was the most worthy of all the sons of Jacob.

"When Jacob blessed Joseph, he gave him a double portion, or an inheritance among his brethren in Palestine and also the blessing of the land of Zion—`the utmost bound of the everlasting hills.' He also blessed him with the blessings of heaven above, of the deep which lieth under, and of posterity. Jacob also blessed the two sons of Joseph with the blessings of their father, which they inherited, and he placed Ephraim, the younger, before Manasseh, the elder, and by inspiration of the Lord conferred upon Ephraim the birthright of Israel. . . .

"There are passages in the scriptures . . . which have direct reference to descendants of Ephraim and the blessings which were pronounced upon their heads. These blessings are to be realized in the latter days.

"While the Israelites possessed the land of Canaan, they were rebellious and failed to heed the commandments of the Lord. Among these tribes were none who were more guilty of this offense than Ephraim, and because of this rebellion the Lord punished him by mixing him among the nations. It is true that Israelites from the other tribes were also scattered among the nations, but particularly is this true of the Ephraimites. The words of Hosea have direct application to those of the tribe of Ephraim wherein he says: `Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the people; Ephraim is a cake not turned.'

"In scattering Ephraim the Lord had two purposes in mind: 1. The scattering was to be a punishment to a rebellious people; 2. It was for the purpose of blessing the people of other nations with the blood of Israel among whom Ephraim `mixed' himself. The scattering of other Israelites answered the same purpose.

"`We have very good reason to believe, however, that it was the tribe of Ephraim, rebellious, proud, and headstrong, which was scattered more than any other among the people of other nations. The chief reason is that it is Ephraim who is now being gathered from among the nations. In these last days the Lord said that Ephraim should not be rebellious as he was formerly, and that now, the rebellious were not of Ephraim and should be `plucked out.' (D&C 64:35-36.)

"It is essential in this dispensation that Ephraim stand in his place at the head, exercising the birthright in Israel which was given to him by direct revelation. Therefore, Ephraim must be gathered first to prepare the way, through the gospel and the priesthood, for the rest of the tribes of Israel when the time comes for them to be gathered to Zion. The great majority of those who have come into the Church are Ephraimites. It is the exception to find one of any other tribe, unless it is of Manasseh. . . .

"It is Ephraim, today, who holds the priesthood. It is with Ephraim that the Lord has made covenant and has revealed the fulness of the everlasting gospel. It is Ephraim who is building temples and performing the ordinances in them for both the living and for the dead. When the `lost tribes' come—and it will be a most wonderful sight and a marvelous thing when they do come to Zion—in fulfilment of the promises made through Isaiah and Jeremiah, they will have to receive the crowning blessings from their brother Ephraim, the `firstborn' in Israel." (Doctrines of Salvation 3:250-53 [Bookcraft, 1956].)
