Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE RECORD OF JOSEPH

The Book of Mormon is the record of Joseph. It is the sacred volume that was destined to stand by the side of the Bible giving a second witness for Christ.

Written for and by the people of Joseph on this (American) Land of Joseph, it is for the conversion not only of the modern descendants of Joseph, but of Jew and gentile as well.

President Joseph Fielding Smith spoke as follows on that theme:

"The Book of Mormon is the sacred history of the ancient inhabitants of the American continent; it contains the predictions of their prophets, the commandments of the Lord to them, and the history and destiny of those ancient peoples. It is the American volume of scripture and is just as sacred and inspired as is the Bible, which contains the sacred records of the Hebrew race on the Eastern Hemisphere.

"No other book has been so sharply, bitterly, and relentlessly attacked as the Book of Mormon. Yet, like gold tried many times in the furnace, it has passed through all attacks unscathed. Every weapon raised against it has perished, and the wisdom of the self-righteous who have attacked it has come to naught.

"There is an inspiration and feeling of peaceful joy and satisfaction which accompany the sincere and prayerful reading of this book. Its doctrines and literary merit are in keeping with the writings of the Jewish prophets. The sincere student who is willing to put Moroni's promise to the test is forced to say, `Surely this is the work of the Lord and not the work of man, for no man could have written it.'

"Ezekiel saw in vision the great nation of the Nephites, the house of Joseph, when he wrote by prophecy concerning the joining of the records of Joseph with that of Judah. . . .

"It is very apparent that the Bible is the record, or stick of Judah; moreover, that it does not contain a history of the nations which were to come of Ephraim and Manasseh. That stick, or history must be sought for elsewhere. And from whence? It has been declared by some that the Bible as we have it today fulfils this prediction, that this commandment to Ezekiel was a local commandment to him, and he was to write and join the writings of the two nations of Judah and Israel and hold them forth before the people of his day. A careful study of this prophecy, however, reveals that this joining of the records was to be in the latter-days, not in the time of Ezekiel. . . .

"One significant expression in the prophecy of Ezekiel is that the stick of Joseph and his fellows was to be in the hand of Ephraim. Ephraim was to stand at the head of the tribes of Israel in the latter-days, according to his birthright. Joseph Smith, unto whom the record of the Nephites was delivered and who translated it, is of the tribe of Ephraim. The Lord so revealed it. So are most of those who have received the gospel in this dispensation. Therefore this stick of Joseph is in the hand of Ephraim and by him has been joined to the stick of Judah, fulfilling the prophecy of Ezekiel.

"The Book of Mormon is the record of Joseph. It contains the history of the descendants of Joseph on this land, both of Ephraim and of Manasseh. It was in the hands of Ephraim when it was given to Joseph Smith, and it is still in the hands of Ephraim when our missionaries go forth proclaiming its truths to the world, for they also are of Ephraim.

"It was necessary in the restoration of all things that the people of this continent, who anciently had received the favor and blessing of the Almighty, should be brought to light through their history which contained the prophesying and commandments they received from God. Although it should be, as stated by one of their prophets, as a voice speaking from the dead, out of the dust of the ground, they were nevertheless to speak and bear witness for Christ. . . .

"The promise was made that the contents of this record would be made known among all nations. Nephi wrote that the day would come `that the words of the book which were sealed shall be read upon the house tops, and they shall be read by the power of Christ.' . . .

"Wherever the name of Joseph Smith is known the Book of Mormon is also known. Those who sincerely read it accept it as a divinely inspired record." (Doctrines of Salvation 3:209-12.)
