Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE FULFILLMENT

In the hands of Ephraim, the birthright tribe, the work of the Lord is spreading apace in preparation for the second coming of Christ.

When the Savior spoke of his work of latter days, he said two important things: one was that he would hasten it, and the other was that it would fill the whole earth. We are seeing a literal fulfillment of his words in this very time in which we live.

The prophets had said that the Great Apostasy would be followed by a restoration of all things (Acts 3:21) just prior to the second coming of Christ. Actually it would be in the hour of God's judgment. (Rev. 14:7-8.)

This did happen, and in the way the Lord had predicted. Of necessity this restoration would have come through a living modern prophet (Amos 3:7), for God always works through prophets where church matters are concerned. There were none on the earth when he was ready to restore his work, so he raised up a new one in the person of Joseph Smith, Jr.

The work began with heavenly manifestations to Joseph. It was nurtured by members of the Smith family, who were the first missionaries of this day, and then by friends who accepted the great message.

With only six members, the Church was organized on April 6, 1830. Joseph Smith was the prophet, seer, and revelator, and first elder. Oliver Cowdery was second elder. In a matter of months the membership exceeded a thousand, and it has been doubling and redoubling ever since.

Soon the increasing membership required more ministers, so the Lord, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, provided a modern Council of Twelve Apostles (1835), then Seventies as anciently (1835), and bishops (1831) to care for the temporal needs of the Church.

Since that time, as the total membership has increased, the number of General Authorities likewise has increased. Many, of course, have been appointed to succeed those who have passed away, but others have been called to meet the expanding program and needs of the Church. This has been true of all the General Authorities, stake presidencies, bishops, and stake patriarchs.

The Church became a colonizing power early in its history. Its first large settlement was in the area of Kirtland, Ohio, then in Jackson County, Missouri, and later the Saints went to Nauvoo, Illinois. Persecution caused these removals. The Saints were great colonizers when they moved to the Great Basin in the Rocky Mountains also. Brigham Young, their wise colonizing leader, saw the need for establishing settlements in other parts of the Rocky Mountain area, from Idaho to Arizona, from Wyoming to Nevada. They went also into Canada, California, and Mexico, some of their settlements now being prosperous cities. Wards and stakes were established in those areas also.

The Church has been a school-building organization, beginning in a small way in Kirtland, rapidly expanding as the Church has grown, until now there are hundreds of seminaries, including both early-morning and home-study classes for week-day religious education, institutes of religion for college students, and some elementary and secondary schools in several foreign lands.

The first university of the Church was in Nauvoo, where general scholastic courses were provided. At the present time we have Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, with a campus in Laie, Hawaii, and a two-year college in Rexburg, Idaho. The Church today is educating a vast student body in many parts of the world.

Temples have been significant to the Latter-day Saints, with the first one built in Kirtland, Ohio. Today there are temples in a dozen different parts of the world.

Work for the dead has been a prominent factor in Church activity. This has given rise to the genealogical activity of the Church, whereby each person for whom an ordinance has been done vicariously could be properly identified, resulting in the Church's building the largest genealogical depository in the world.

As the Church has grown, meetinghouses have been required for the rapidly increasing worshipping assemblies.

To meet local needs of the Saints, organizations auxiliary to the priesthood have been organized, including the Relief Society, the Primary Association for children, the Young Men and Young Women, and the Sunday School.

With this rapid and extensive growth, intensive training in Church government is required. The world territory has been divided into a dozen areas administered by General Authorities, assisted by Regional Representatives who labor in regions, or subdivisions of the areas. They are the trainers of stake, ward, mission, and branch leaders.

Since most of the Saints are unable to travel to Salt Lake City for general conferences, the presiding officers in 1971 began holding area conferences, taking General Authorities to the far reaches of the world. Such conferences have been held in many areas. General conferences are still held in Salt Lake City.

The Church also has shown the world an example of how to handle welfare and social service problems. It endeavors to care for its own. Not only does it operate a professional program for personal and family problems, but it also helps people in need to support themselves on Church-owned farm and manufacturing projects, and it conducts a large public employment agency, thus preserving the self-respect and desire to work on the part of the beneficiary.

Headquarters management requires office space and modern facilities. These have been provided in the twenty-eight-story office building near Temple Square and in the remodeled Church Administration Building.

As the Church has grown, priesthood direction has increased with it, in local, regional, and area jurisdictions. But there is always inspired leadership at the top.

There have been twelve great presidents of the Church, beginning with the Prophet Joseph Smith. They are:

Joseph Smith (1830-1844)

Brigham Young (1847-1877)

John Taylor (1880-1887)

Wilford Woodruff (1889-1898)

Lorenzo Snow (1898-1901)

Joseph F. Smith (1901-1918)

Heber J. Grant (1918-1945)

George Albert Smith (1945-1951)

David O. McKay (1951-1970)

Joseph Fielding Smith (1970-1972)

Harold B. Lee (1972-1973)

Spencer W. Kimball (1973- )

Under their inspired direction the Church has gone from log cabins to skyscrapers, from ox-cart transportation to airplanes, from hand work in offices to computers. It is indeed a marvelous work and a wonder, rapidly fulfilling the scriptural predictions concerning it.
