Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt ( 1981)

THE MODERN JOSEPH

Since Joseph in Egypt foresaw the ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith and even designated his first name, should we not learn more of this modern namesake of that ancient seer?

Who was Joseph Smith?

President Brigham Young said that he was a pure Ephraimite, a direct descendant of Joseph of Egypt. That agrees with what the ancient seer himself said.

The modern prophet who was named after the ancient one, and whose father's name also was Joseph, was seen in prophecy by others as well as the governor of Egypt.

Malachi said:

"Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts.

"But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap:

"And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

"Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years." (Mal. 3:1-4.)

Joseph Smith was sent to precede the Lord's second coming, just as John the Baptist was sent to prepare the way for his mortal advent.

John was born of Zacharias and Elizabeth six months before the birth of Christ. He lived in humble circumstances and was apparently raised in the wilderness.

Joseph Smith was born into a humble farm family in a frontier area in Vermont. The family moved from place to place, largely due to the infertility of their farms and their inability to make a living.

Eventually they moved to the area of Palmyra, New York, again on a small farm. It was there that Joseph read the message of James that sent him into the woods to pray for light and guidance. (James 1:5.) He wanted to know which Church was right.

God the Eternal Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, appeared to the young man in answer to his prayer. He was told to join none of the existing churches. He was to be the instrument in the hands of God through whom the true Church of Jesus Christ would be restored, even as it was anciently.

His visitations from the angel Moroni are well known. His publication of the Book of Mormon brought forth a new volume of scripture testifying that Jesus is the Christ, and that the Lord visited ancient America and set up his church on this continent following his resurrection in Palestine.

Joseph was persecuted without mercy, was maligned, and eventually was killed for his testimony. But those who knew him well recognized in him the true qualities of greatness. Those who believed him accepted him as the prophet of God promised by Malachi, sent to prepare the way before the Lord.

By angelic restoration he received the everlasting gospel.

By angelic restoration he received divine authority.

He sent missionaries abroad in the world.

He was a temple builder. He built two himself and projected the erection of others.

Joseph Smith fits the pattern outlined by prophecy as the advance messenger for the second coming of Christ.

Keen observers of his own day recognized him as a most unusual man who would surely influence the world for good. Josiah Quincy of Harvard University, publisher of Figures of the Past, after visiting Joseph Smith in Nauvoo wrote: "It is by no means improbable that some future textbook, for the use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like this: What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon prophet. And the reply, absurd as it doubtless seems to most men now living, may be an obvious commonplace to their descendants."

The New York Sun, in September 1843, editorialized on Joseph Smith and said that he "must be set down as an extraordinary character, a prophet-hero, as Carlyle might call him. He is one of the great men of this age, and in future history will rank with those who, in one way or another, have stamped their impress strongly on society. . . .

"It is no small thing, in the blaze of this nineteenth century, to give to men a new revelation, found a new religion, establish new forms of worship, to build a city, with new laws, institutions, and orders of architecture—to establish ecclesiastic, civil and military jurisdiction, found colleges, send out missionaries, and make proselytes in two hemispheres: yet all this has been done by Joe Smith, and that against every sort of opposition, ridicule and persecution." (History of the Church 6:3.)

After his martyrdom, his close associates wrote the following:

"Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it. In the short space of twenty years, he has brought forth the Book of Mormon, which he translated by the gift and power of God, and has been the means of publishing it on two continents; has sent the fulness of the everlasting gospel, which it contained, to the four quarters of the earth; has brought forth the revelations and commandments which compose this book of Doctrine and Covenants, and many other wise documents and instructions for the benefit of the children of men; gathered many thousands of the Latter-day Saints, founded a great city, and left a fame and a name that cannot be slain. He lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people; and like most of the Lord's anointed in ancient times, has sealed his mission and his works with his own blood; and so has his brother Hyrum. In life they were not divided, and in death they were not separated!" (D&C 135:3.)

That is the measure of Joseph Smith as seen by men who knew him best.

The prophet Amos of the Old Testament wrote: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.) These few words give us a key to all the operations of God in the salvation of mankind.

This was evident all through Old Testament times, for there he invariably worked through prophets.

This was equally true in New Testament times. Prophets were placed in the early church as its foundation, but also for the perfection and edification of the Saints and to protect them from every wind of doctrine.

But following the establishment of the early Christian church—in fact, within its very first century—a sweeping apostasy developed. Finally the original church disappeared, crowded out by manmade denominations with their uninspired creeds. The prophets disappeared.

However, a restoration of the gospel was predicted for the latter days, preceding the second coming of Christ.

And how was the gospel to be brought back to earth? By an angel, flying through the midst of heaven in the hour of God's judgment, who would bring it back so it might be preached abroad as a warning to all men before the coming of the Lord.

But to whom would the angel come? There were no prophets on earth when the time of restoration arrived, for Christianity had gone astray and no longer believed in prophets or current revelation. Then what could God do?

He must raise up a new prophet, and that he did in the person of Joseph Smith, Jr. When the restored Church was organized, the Lord said this to Joseph Smith: "Behold, there shall be a record kept among you; and in it thou shalt be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church through the will of God the Father, and the grace of your Lord Jesus Christ, Being inspired of the Holy Ghost to lay the foundation thereof, and to build it up unto the most holy faith." (D&C 21:1-2.)

So he was designated by God himself as prophet, seer, and revelator of the Church.

Persecution was intense all through the ministry of the Prophet, but out of it came some of his most sublime moments. For example, he and some of his associates were confined to a jail at Richmond, Missouri, in 1838:

The brethren were guarded by some of the vilest wretches that could be found, who spent their time in the presence of their prisoners relating their horrible deeds of wickedness. This thing continued for some time, when the Prophet, unable to stand it any longer, arose and rebuked them. The occurrence is graphically related by Elder Parley P. Pratt in the following words:

". . . . On a sudden [Joseph] arose to his feet, and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as near as I can recollect, the following words:

"SILENCE, ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still. I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die THIS INSTANT!

"He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, and without a weapon; calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, he looked upon the quailing guards; whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards.

"I have seen the ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended on a breath, in the courts of England; I have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History, 1950 ed., pp. 203-4.)

Another high point in the spiritual experience of the Prophet came while he was incarcerated in Liberty Jail. Out of it came two of the most glorious of all his revelations, for the Lord spoke comfort to him in the midst of his afflictions. At first the Prophet cried out for help:

"O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?

"How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries?

"Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them? . . .

"Remember thy suffering saints, O our God; and thy servants will rejoice in thy name forever."

And then the Lord spoke:

"My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment;

"And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes.

"Thy friends do stand by thee, and they shall hail thee again with warm hearts and friendly hands.

"Thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job." (D&C 121:1-3, 6-10.)

Then we have this marvelous statement of the Lord:

"The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee;

"While the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand.

"And thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors. . . . and thy God shall stand by thee forever and ever." (D&C 122:1-4.)

Again we have this:

"How long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints.

"Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen?

"Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—

"That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness." (D&C 121:33-36.)

Not even Shakespeare could write like that!

Joseph Smith's visions of the three degrees of glory lifted gospel understanding to a new high. What is known as D&C 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants is also one of the most impressive declarations of doctrine we have. The Prophet's visions of the Savior rank as his most important revelations. Note what he says in D&C 76 as he and Sidney Rigdon were together. This vision came in the Johnson home near Kirtland, Ohio:

"And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

"For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

"That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:22-24.)

In D&C 110, given in the Kirtland Temple, we read:

"We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

"His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

"I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father." (D&C 110:2-4.)

Visitations by Moses and Elijah of old were experienced also, as well as those by "divers other angels," each one committing the keys of his dispensation. (D&C 128:19-21.) So this became a consolidation of all previous dispensations. That is why it is called the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Joseph's vision of the celestial kingdom is most impressive:

"I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell.

"I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire;

"Also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son.

"I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold.

"I saw Father Adam and Abraham; and my father and my mother; my brother Alvin, that has long since slept;

"And marveled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life before the Lord had set his hand to gather Israel the second time, and had not been baptized for the remission of sins.

"Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me, saying: All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God;

"Also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom;

"For I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.

"And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven." (D&C 137:1-10.)

When the Saints left Missouri and moved to Illinois, they established a city that they called Nauvoo. It was originally called Commerce. When the Saints first arrived there, many fell ill because of the swampy conditions. President Joseph Fielding Smith writes:

The Saints began to immigrate to Nauvoo, and the city grew rapidly by such additions. About one year after the location of the site, Nauvoo had a population of over three thousand souls, and six years later, at the time of the great western exodus, about twenty thousand. . . .

Due to the unhealthful condition of the place when the people first arrived at Commerce, many were taken sick with malaria fever, and were nigh unto death. Some of the refugees were sheltered only by tents and wagon covers, for there had been little time, and less means, by which houses, even of logs, could be built. On the morning of July 22, 1839, the Prophet arose from his own bed of sickness and being filled with the Spirit of the Lord, he went forth along the river bank healing all who were afflicted. Among the number were Henry G. Sherwood and Benjamin Brown, who appeared in a dying condition. He later crossed over the river to Montrose and healed Brigham Young and a number of other brethren of the twelve, and took them along with him to assist him in this ministry. What took place in Iowa is thus related by Elder Wilford Woodruff:

"After healing all the sick upon the bank of the river as far as the stone house, he called upon Elder Kimball and some others to accompany him across the river to visit the sick at Montrose. Many of the Saints were living at the old military barracks. Among the number were several of the twelve. On his arrival, the first house he visited was that occupied by Elder Brigham Young, the president of the quorum of the twelve, who lay sick. Joseph healed him, then he arose and accompanied the Prophet on his visit to others who were in the same condition. They visited Elder W. Woodruff, also Elders Orson Pratt and John Taylor, all of whom were living in Montrose. They also accompanied him.

"The next place they visited was the home of Elijah Fordham, who was supposed to be about breathing his last. When the company entered the room, the Prophet of God walked up to the dying man, and took hold of his right hand and spoke to him; but Brother Fordham was unable to speak, his eyes were set in his head like glass, and he seemed entirely unconscious of all around him. Joseph held his hand and looked into his eyes in silence for a length of time. A change in the countenance of Brother Fordham was soon perceptible to all present. His sight returned, and upon Joseph asking him if he knew him, he, in a low whisper, answered, `Yes.' Joseph asked him if he had faith to be healed. He answered, `I fear it is too late; if you had come sooner I think I would have been healed.' The Prophet said, `Do you believe in Jesus Christ?' He answered in a feeble voice, `I do.' Joseph then stood erect, still holding his hand in silence several moments; then he spoke in a very loud voice, saying: `Brother Fordham, I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to arise from this bed and be made whole.' . . . Brother Fordham arose from his bed and was immediately made whole. His feet were bound in poultices, which he kicked off, then putting on his clothes, he ate a bowl of bread and milk, and followed the Prophet into the street."

In this manner the Prophet and the brethren passed from house to house, healing the sick and recalling them from the mouth of the tomb. It was on this occasion that a man, not a member of the Church, seeing the mighty miracles which were performed, begged the Prophet to go with him and heal two of his children who were very sick. The Prophet could not go, but said he would send some one to heal them. Taking from his pocket a silk handkerchief he handed it to Elder Wilford Woodruff and requested him to go and heal the children. He told Elder Woodruff to wipe the faces of the children with the handkerchief, and they should be healed. This he did and they were healed. . . . (Essentials in Church History, 1950 ed., pp. 269-70.)

Nauvoo was incorporated December 16, 1840, when Governor Thomas Carlin of Illinois signed the bill. Stephen A. Douglas was then Illinois secretary of state, and Abraham Lincoln was a member of the legislature; both favored the bill. The city soon became the largest in the state.

The city was authorized to establish the "University of the City of Nauvoo" for "the teaching of the arts, sciences and learned professions." (Ibid., p. 271.) Elementary schools were also established.

"Another provision granted the city the right to organize a militia that was known as the Nauvoo Legion." (Ibid., pp. 271-72.) Joseph Smith became lieutenant general of the legion.

One of the first laws introduced in the city council of Nauvoo provided protection for people of all religious faiths, showing the attitude of the Saints toward other churches regardless of the fact that much of the persecution from which they suffered was generated by gentlemen of the cloth.

Nauvoo was a most interesting and progressive city. It had a population of twenty thousand with more than two thousand well-built houses, and only a few log cabins. Most of the homes were of brick construction, and reflected the high culture of the Saints.

You will be interested to know that it had:

#1 #university

#3 #notary publics

#20 #schools #1 #circulating library #35 #general stores #9 #dressmaking and millinery shops #3 #newspapers #13 #physicians #5 #potteries #4 #stationers #7 #wagon and carriage shops #5 #livery stables and saddle shops #3 #soap and candle factories #7 #brickyards #3 #lumberyards #3 #furniture factories #6 #silversmiths #1 #watch and clock maker #3 #glass factories #3 #hotels #3 #halls for opera and drama #8 #tailor shops #9 #law offices #4 #bakeries #11 #gristmills #6 #blacksmith shops #4 #lime kilns #2 #ironmongers #3 #coopers #1 #goldsmith #1 #comb factory #1 #straw packer #5 #midwives

Although many brethren had been called to missionary service earlier, the Prophet now began the worldwide preaching of the gospel and sent elders beyond the United States to Canada, Europe, South America, and the south seas. He declared that the gospel must be taken to every clime, to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. At the general conference of the Church held in Nauvoo April 6-8, 1840, Elder Orson Hyde was also appointed to dedicate Palestine for the gathering of the Jews.

Persecution continued unabated, however, and the Saints were constantly harassed by their enemies. The Prophet looked to the federal government for help. He was devoted to the Constitution of the United States and under its provisions hoped to receive protection. He had declared it to be an inspired document, a glorious banner.

Since the law did not adequately protect the Saints in Missouri, the Prophet issued an appeal to the people of the entire United States, asking them for fair treatment under the Constitution and to stop the merciless persecution. Said he: "I ask the citizens of this Republic whether such a state of things is to be suffered to pass unnoticed, and the hearts of widows, orphans, and patriots to be broken, and their wrongs left without redress? No! I invoke the genius of our Constitution. I appeal to the patriotism of Americans to stop this unlawful and unholy procedure; and pray that God may defend this nation from the dreadful effects of such outrages." (History of the Church 3:332.)

He made a trip to Washington, D.C., and waited upon President Martin Van Buren in behalf of the Saints. He portrayed their sufferings at the hands of mobs and asked for federal redress and protection inasmuch as the state provided none. The Prophet said of this meeting:

"I had an interview with Martin Van Buren, the President, who treated me very insolently, and it was with great reluctance he listened to our message, which, when he had heard, he said: `Gentlemen, your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you;' and `If I take up for you I shall lose the vote of Missouri.' His whole course went to show that he was an office-seeker, that self-aggrandizement was his ruling passion, and that justice and righteousness were no part of his composition." (History of the Church 4:80.)

The Saints also made an earnest appeal to Congress, but it likewise came to naught.

Finally, as a last effort to call the attention of the nation to the sad plight of the Latter-day Saints, the Prophet declared himself a candidate for the presidency of the United States. He apparently had no expectation of winning that position, but his desire was to dramatize the persecutions of the Saints before the whole nation in the hope of raising public sentiment in their favor. He was nominated for president by his own people in a convention held in Nauvoo on January 29, 1844, and then by an Illinois state convention on May 17, 1844.

What were Joseph Smith's political views?

He advocated reduction in the number of congressmen by two-thirds.

He urged laws to provide for useful employment of state prisoners on roads and other public works rather than to have prisoners languish in jail.

He urged the death penalty for murder.

He urged that prisons be turned into seminaries of learning.

He urged all slave holding states to free the slaves by 1850, with the United States government compensating slave owners through revenue to be obtained through the sale of public lands.

He urged that all men render good for evil, and that honor should become their standard.

He urged less federal spending and lower taxes.

He urged the establishment of a national bank, with branches in all states and territories.

He urged the use of federal troops to put down mobocracy, rebellion, or invasion.

He urged that Oregon be admitted to the Union, and that steps be taken to include Texas, Canada, and Mexico as part of the United States.

On this platform he began his campaign for the presidency, but martyrdom a few weeks later ended his career.

Joseph's great early contribution was, of course, the Book of Mormon. In bringing forth that volume under the direction of the Lord, he fulfilled literally and completely the prophecy of Isaiah. He met the prediction of Ezekiel likewise, and today the Book of Mormon stands as scripture equal in importance to the Bible. Because of the many uninspired translations of the Bible, the Book of Mormon stands out, as the Prophet himself said, as the most correct book on earth.

It is a literal translation from ancient gold plates given him by the angel Moroni.

It is the word of God. It is written by the commandment of Jesus Christ himself. (2 Ne. 29:10-14.)

Now it comes to all mankind as a material witness for the divinity of the Savior and as physical evidence of the veracity of Joseph Smith.

Not only do we have the testimony of the Prophet and the eleven witnesses concerning the truth of that book, but we also have the word of his mother and his wife.

Lucy Mack Smith, his mother, declared that "the Book of Mormon was brought forth by the power of God, and translated by the gift of the Holy Ghost; and if I could make my voice sound as loud as the trumpet of Michael, the Archangel, I would declare the truth from land to land, and from sea to sea." (History of Joseph Smith by His Mother [Bookcraft, 1958], p. 204.)

And his wife, Emma, said:

"My belief is that the Book of Mormon is of divine authenticity—I have not the slightest doubt of it. I am satisfied that no man could have dictated the writing of the manuscripts unless he was inspired; for, when [I acted] as his scribe, [Joseph] would dictate to me hour after hour; and when returning after meals, or interruptions, he would at once begin where he had left off, without either seeing the manuscript or having any portion of it read to him. This was a usual thing for him to do. It would have been improbable that a learned man could do this, and for one so ignorant and unlearned as he was, it was simply impossible." (Preston Nibley, comp., The Witnesses of the Book of Mormon, p. 29.)

The Prophet had repeated impressions from the Spirit that he would be martyred. He prophesied that the Saints would move to the Rocky Mountains and there become a great people. He therefore took the necessary precautions so far as the future development of the Church was concerned.

He held all the keys and powers that angels had bestowed upon him. Those keys were not only for the establishment of the work, but for its continued advancement as well.

The work would be thwarted if he died without leaving those powers to those who would survive him. Therefore, he called the Twelve together and made it known that they had been chosen to carry on the ministry after his death. To give them the necessary authority to do so, he laid his hands upon each of them and conferred upon them all every key, power, and priesthood that he had received from the angels, thus making the Twelve legal successors in the work and empowering them to expand the kingdom.

Persecution continued until finally he and his brother Hyrum were martyred in Carthage Jail.

But he had done his work. He had prepared the way for the coming of the Lord. And today, the Church that he began with only six persons numbers more than four million, and the membership is doubling every twelve to fifteen years.

The work is spread by a large missionary force as well as radio, television, leased telephone wires, and the printed word, so that people in all the free world are given access to the gospel.

So with all this preparation, the Prophet's work has been well done. It is still going forward, and will yet reach even greater heights.

Hail to the man who communed with Jehovah! He was the chosen forerunner of the Lord, the modern counterpart of John the Baptist. He was a great and faithful servant, a mighty seer and revelator of Almighty God, the head of this dispensation, Joseph Smith, Jr.

His people, now numbering in the millions, will be ready to greet the Lord when he comes, and come he will!

"But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap: And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." (Mal. 3:3.)

Yes, the Lord will come, and Joseph Smith has prepared the way for him. He is of Ephraim and is the modern Joseph foreseen by that ancient Joseph who saved Egypt from a seven-year famine.
