Eight-year-old Miyako Tashiro lives in Osaka, Japan. She loves this busy city, which is laced with many canals. She also loves her beautiful country.

Japan is a land of snowy peaks, dense forests, rushing rivers, and clouds of cherry blossoms. The Japanese people create beauty and art of their own as well.

Miyako is part of that artistic tradition. She plays the violin and the piano and practices many hours each week. Her brother, Kazuto, age 12, also plays the violin, and her father, Shigeharu, plays the guitar. When the three of them practice and perform together, Miyako is filled with happiness.

She is learning the art of baking from her mother, Suzuko. They make delicious cakes, cookies, homemade ice cream, and other delicacies. Sister Tashiro is also teaching Miyako the art of origami—folding paper to make flowers, animals, and other figures.

Miyako possesses many of the virtues most valued in Japan. She is obedient to her parents, awake to beauty, and devoted to any task she undertakes. She is a good student and does her homework willingly. Her favorite school subject is arts and crafts, where she learns to sculpt and draw.

Miyako isn’t always serious, though. She can start the whole family laughing by making funny faces. With her friends, she enjoys trading stickers, playing tag, doing tricks on the horizontal bar, riding her bicycle, and jumping rope.

She and Kazuto are close friends. In addition to the violin, they both study Chanbara, a form of sword fighting. They wear helmets and use foam rubber swords, of course.

Miyako loves the gospel and Primary. Each evening she reads the Book of Mormon aloud to her mother. She also reminds everyone of family home evening.

Missionary work comes naturally to Miyako. Once when she was at a friend’s house, she suddenly announced that she had to leave because it was time for family home evening. Intrigued, her friend’s mother asked her to explain, and Miyako did. Another time, she told a friend that she prays often to Heavenly Father. The friend asked questions, and Miyako taught her how to pray.

Miyako was recently baptized and confirmed a member of the Church. She remembers feeling “clean and clear,” she says. She wants to be able to have the Holy Ghost as a constant companion, so she listens carefully for the still, small voice.

She has great faith in the priesthood. If she isn’t feeling well, she asks for a blessing, and when her father puts his hands on her head, she fully expects to be healed. “Her faith has increased my faith,” Brother Tashiro says.

One of Miyako’s favorite places is beautiful Mino Mountain, which the family visits each summer. They take a lunch and hike to a waterfall. There they feast on both the food and the view.

Miyako is a kind girl who loves beauty, her family, Heavenly Father, and Jesus Christ. She is a girl determined to share the beauty of Japan and of the gospel with everyone.
