In 1899 there was not enough water in southern Utah. For more than two years there had been no rain. The streams and wells around the town of St. George had dried up. There was no water for the crops, so the plants died. The cattle died too. Many people began moving away.

Nell was a little girl living in St. George at that time. Her father told her their family would have to move away soon.

In June, Nell and her mother went to a Church conference in St. George. President Lorenzo Snow, the prophet at that time, was going to speak. Nell’s father stayed home to pack for their move. Nell listened carefully to what the prophet said. After the conference, she hurried home. She told her father that President Snow had promised if the people would pay their tithing and plant crops, it would rain and they would have food for the coming year.

Nell’s father explained that their family couldn’t survive another year if the crops didn’t grow. Nell reminded him that her grandfather had talked about how the people in his day were blessed by doing exactly what President Brigham Young (1801–77) asked them to do. Grandfather had promised Nell that if she followed the living prophet, she would be blessed too. Nell believed her grandfather, and she offered to give her father her own savings to help pay their family’s tithing.

The next morning, Nell saw her father plowing the fields, getting ready to plant. Her family stayed in St. George and did exactly what the prophet asked them to do. During the hot, dry weeks that followed, the people of St. George paid their tithing, planted their fields, prayed, and watched the cloudless sky for rain. They were grateful when two months after the conference, it began to rain. The crops grew in abundance that year!

We will be blessed if we follow the living prophet, President Gordon B. Hinckley. President Hinckley speaks for Heavenly Father. What he asks of us is what Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ want us to do. If we are obedient, we will be blessed.

1.  Invite the bishop’s or branch president’s wife to tell about her husband’s childhood, family, job, and duties as bishop or branch president. Explain that because of his testimony and his desire to sustain our prophet, he serves the ward or branch. Have the children think of things the bishop or branch president has asked them to do (pay tithing, pray as families, study the scriptures daily, hold family home evening, keep the Sabbath day holy, and so on). Explain that part of sustaining the bishop or branch president is doing what he asks us to do. Have each child trace his or her hand onto a piece of paper, cut it out, then write on it what he or she will do to sustain the bishop or branch president. Make a poster by gluing the hands onto a large piece of paper. If possible, present the bishop or branch president with the poster.

2.  Prayerfully select a few gospel standards (see My Achievement Days booklet). Ask several adults to conduct teaching stations in various locations around the room to teach the principles selected. Have the children proceed from one station to the next. For example, at one station, the music leader could teach a song. At another station, a member of the presidency could tell a story. At a third, the children could play a matching game. After the children have rotated through the stations, give each child a piece of paper that says, “I will always obey the prophet by _______________.” Have them write or draw one principle to work on during the coming week.

Follow the teachings of President Gordon B. Hinckley to find your way through the maze to Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ. Color the correct pathway; then cut out this page. Display it where it can remind you of some things you can do to return to live with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ.

Start
Be honest.
Pay an honest tithing.
Live the Word of Wisdom.
Pray.
Choose your friends carefully.
Be thankful to your parents.
Participate in family home evening.
Listen to the still, small voice.
Don’t shop on Sunday.
Read the scriptures.
Be a little kinder.
Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ
