Comparison of Popular Spiritual Teachers & the Bible 3 What is the goal increasingly to the character of Jesus. The apostle Paul put it this way in a

of my life? letter to one early church: “For we are

God’s workmanship, created in Christ

What do popular Jesus to do good works, which God

spiritual teachers claim? prepared in advance for us to do”

(Eph. 2:10). Paul wrote to another

Your purpose is to be happy: church, “Each of you should look not

now. Feel good now. That’s the only “Be happy only to your own interests, but also to

thing you have to do.… ‘If it ain’t fun, the interests of others. Your attitude

don’t do it.’”17 (Byrne, The Secret) should be the same as that of Christ

life: You determine your own purpose in Jesus” (Phil. 2:4–5). The growth for which God created

“Your purpose is what you say humanity is growth in the knowledge

it is. Your mission is the mission you of Jesus Christ—not “evolution” in

give yourself…. The earth turns on one’s own consciousness: “Grow in the its orbit for You. The oceans ebb and

flow for You. The birds sing for You. grace and knowledge of our Lord and

The sun rises and it sets for You. The Savior Jesus Christ” (2 Peter 3:18;

stars come out for You. Every beautiful see also 2 Cor. 10:15; Eph. 4:15–16;

thing you see, every wondrous thing Col. 1:10).

you experience, is all there for You. God calls people to turn from their

Take a look around. None of it can own purposes and to embrace his

exist without You. No matter who you purpose for their lives: Jesus began

thought you were, now you know the his earthly ministry with these words:

The Secret) Truth of Who You Really Are.”18 (Byrne, “Repent [turn from your present direction

in life] and believe the good news! ”

The ultimate goal for your life is (Mark 1:15). Later, Jesus informed

the evolution of your consciousness those who wanted to follow him, “If

of yourself as God: “Jesus … taught anyone would come after me, he must

his followers how to reach God- deny himself and take up his cross and

consciousness.”19 (Chopra) “Life will follow me. For whoever wants to save

give you whatever experience is most his life will lose it, but whoever loses his

helpful for the evolution of your life for me and for the gospel will save

consciousness.”20 (Tolle, A New Earth) it” (Mark 8:34–35).

What did the f irst the truth : God designed you to

folloWers of Jesus teach? grow in his grace and to reflect his

Before the world began, God designed glory. He has already determined

each person for a specific and glorious a purpose for your life—and the

purpose: For believers in Jesus Christ, purpose that he has designed for

the goal and purpose of life is to reflect you is far greater than any purpose

God’s glory through lives that conform that you might form on your own.

This free eChart is taken from the pamphlet Popular Spirituality and the Truth ISBN © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, © 2009 Rose This is just one page from a 14 page pamphlet, Pop Spirituality and the Truth, that compares but do not post on the internet or send via email.Your

quotes from Eckhart Tolle, Deepak Chopra, and The Secret with the truth about Jesus Christ from the Click here to receive FREE

Publishing Inc. 9781596363151. The full-color, glossy, and easy-to-understand pamphlet quickly compares 30 friends may sign up for Free Rose Bible eCharts &

www.rose-publishing.com biblical teachings about Jesus with the teachings of Eckhart Tolle, Deepak Chopra, and Rhonda . Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts Byrne. Bible. Includes a comparison chart illustrating how leaders of modern-day popular spirituality claim Rose Bible e-Charts via email.

Save $5 on your $25 order enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com

to honor the Bible, but actually teach the opposite of the true biblical message of forgiveness and redemption through Jesus Christ rather than our own enlightenment. ISBN 13: 9781596363151

Life of Jesus

Who is Jesus and how is he different from all other

religious leaders? See how Jesus and the New

Testament writers answered this important question

in their own words, and be able to answer questions

from believers and skeptics about who Jesus really is.

Includes a map and time line of Jesus’ life.

Pamphlet ............ 9781596363373 ...........$3.99

Also available as a PDF.

Pamphlet

Christianity, Cults & Religions

ECPA Gold Award Winner! The #1 Cults and Religions

Popular Spirituality and the Truth

comparison chart on the market. Researched by some

of the top scholars in the field, Christianity, Cults &

In just 14-pages, you can quickly compare 30 biblical teachings about

Religions compares the beliefs of 20 world religions,

Jesus with the teachings of Eckhart Tolle, Deepak Chopra, and Rhonda

cults, and new religious groups. This pamphlet provides

Byrne. Many popular spirituality teachers claim to follow biblical teachings,

the most up-to-date comparison chart available.

and even Jesus’ own words, but they frequently misuse the Bible to

promote their own contradictory teachings.

Pamphlet ............ 9789901981403 ...........$3.99

When Eckhart Tolle, a “spiritual master of no particular religion,” can

Also available as a PDF, DVD-based Study, Wall Chart,

influence millions of TV and Internet viewers to search within themselves

and PowerPoint®.

for life’s purpose, it’s time to measure those “truths” against the eternal

truth found in the person and work of Jesus Christ. This pamphlet

investigates the spiritual claims of Tolle, Rhonda Byrnes (author of The

Rose Book of Bible Charts, Vol. 2

Secret), and Deepak Chopra, giving exact quotes and shows Bible

This full-color, reproducible book contains over

passages that address key points.

230 pages of popular Rose Bible charts in one

reproducible book! Great for personal study, Bible

Bestselling author Dr. Timothy Paul Jones compares the claims of

studies, small groups, and classes. This book is the

pop spirituality with what the Bible says, providing answers to untrue

sequel to the best-selling Rose Book of Bible Charts,

statements and misunderstandings.

Maps & Time Lines, Vol. 1.

Pamphlet ....................9781596363151 ................$3.99

Book ................... 9781596362758 ...........$29.99

Also available as a PDF. Quantity discounts available.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
