Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

Preface

Not long ago a young wife wrote to me: "I know my husband loves me, but he doesn't show it in the way I would like. It is so strange how a man can really love his wife and yet have absolutely no idea how to express it so she believes him."

The purpose of this book is to help husbands express love for their wives. It will also help wives make their important expectations known.

This book is obviously not an exhaustive report of "what is" in marriage. It is more of an indication of what "might be." And, if it helps make marital expectations known and then acted upon, the time and effort I have spent writing it will have been well spent.

After giving a lecture on love and marriage at Brigham Young University a few years ago, I was driving home and decided I wanted Susan, my wife, to know I loved her. I could buy her some flowers, tell her I love her, and then rush her off to some secluded restaurant. What else could a wife want?

I walked in the house with the flowers and announced my love. Susan looked a little suspicious. I told her that I wanted to do something to show my love and that I intended to take her out to dinner.

After a few moments, she said, "If you really want to show me you love me, go wash the dishes." I thought I was losing my hearing. "What was that again?" I asked. She repeated her request.

"You didn't hear me," I responded. "No, you didn't hear me," she said. Susan told me she had had a frustrating day. She was exhausted. She thanked me for the flowers and said she appreciated being told she was loved. But as far as going out for dinner, she would rather go another evening. "I haven't been able to get to the dishes yet," she said, "and there isn't anything you could do to show your love more than to wash the dishes."

I was overwhelmed! How could any wife prefer a little help around the house to going out for dinner?

Out to the kitchen I went and rolled up my shirt sleeves. As I was slopping around in the soap suds trying to be philosophical about the whole matter, it suddenly dawned on me that husbands and wives often perceive love differently. While my concept of love (as is usual with many men) often deals with doing something romantic, like going out to eat (I have since learned the common Pavlovian phenomenon of men associating good food and seclusion with romance), there are often many more effective ways to show a wife you love her.

I finished the dishes that evening and helped Susan with a few other tasks. She appreciated my help and was able to retire that evening at an earlier hour because of it. We didn't go out that evening, but I had learned a valuable lesson about love.

It is now evident to me that (1) most husbands love their wives, and (2) husbands often try to show their love in ways other than their wives would like them to.

Not long after this experience, I began writing a weekly newspaper column on marriage for the Deseret News. For one of the columns, I related my experience and asked wives to write to me and respond to two questions: (1) What had their husbands done to show their love that the wives appreciated most? and (2) What could their husbands do in the future to show their love that the wives would appreciate?

As my secretaries and I began reading the many responses, we found that certain statements appeared over and over. A profile emerged of what a loving husband would be like. (See Appendix B, "Profile of a Loving Husband.")

During winter semester 1981 at Brigham Young University, I taught a marriage seminar for husbands, wives, and engaged couples. I shared some of my findings and asked the students to respond to the two questions I had asked in the newspaper column. We compared their answers with those I received in the mail. The results were similar. From these numerous responses, we decided to pick twenty that appeared most frequently and test them for priority of importance.

In the marriage class, the women responded, and ten items appeared to have high priority. In the Deseret News, I mentioned the "Profile of a Loving Husband" and asked wives to write for the profile, pick the ten most important items, and rank them in order of importance. Nearly two hundred women wrote for the profile and later returned the questionnaire. I compared the responses to those of my students. The rankings were similar, suggesting consistency in what many wives wanted or expected in a husband. This later suggested the basic idea for this book.

You and your spouse might read this book individually or together. Then you may want to write your own profiles of a loving husband and wife.

Since expectations vary from person to person, no two people will make exactly the same profile. Also, expectations may differ at various stages of marriage. Therefore, a periodic review of expectations seems essential. One aid in such a review is "Measuring Your Marriage Potential" in Appendix C.

The importance of couples' learning to make changes in their marriages was noted by President Spencer W. Kimball: "We are concerned over the mounting number of divorces not only in our society, but in the Church. We are just as concerned with those whose families and marriages seem to be held together in 'quiet desperation.'" [^1]

Dr. Sidney Jourard, marriage counselor and psychotherapist in Gainesville, Florida, said:

I have been struck by the incredible lack of artistry and creativity in marriage partners. Either person may be imaginative in making money or decorating a house, but when it comes to altering the design for their relationship, it is as if both imaginations had burnt out.

For years spouses go to sleep night after night, with their relationship patterned one way, a way that perhaps satisfies neither—too close—too distant, boring or suffocating—and on awakening the next morning they reinvent their relationship in the same way.

There is nothing sacred to the wife about the way she decorated her house; as soon as it begins to pall, she shuffles things around until the new decor pleases her. But the way she and her husband interact will often persist for years unchallenged and unchanged, long after it has ceased to engender delight, zest, or growth. [^2]

A husband and wife must learn to make their own expectations known and make reasonable attempts to meet each other's realistic expectations. This book provides some thoughts on how this may be done.

One final note. Some may be offended that a man (and husband) has written a book about the expectations of wives. I have two defenses. First, I have spent several hundred hours during the past ten years counseling and listening to numerous wives and husbands. From these sessions, I have gained a few insights and opinions. Second, I have recently reviewed several hundred questionnaires and read numerous letters written by women. And from my listening and reading, I would like to share with you what I have learned. You will have to draw your own conclusions about my objectivity.

I appreciate the more than three hundred wives who responded to questionnaires or sent me letters about what they expected of their husbands.

Thanks also to Don Woodward, editor of the "Today" section of the Deseret News; Carma Wadley; and others on the Deseret News staff who have made my column on marriage possible.

Special thanks to the secretarial staff of the Department of Family Sciences at Brigham Young University, who not only typed the original manuscript, but gave several insights on husband-wife relationships as well. Assistance in proofreading was provided by the Faculty Support Center at the College of Family, Home, and Social Sciences at Brigham Young University.

The staff and editors at Deseret Book have been very helpful and supportive of this book since it was proposed. Particular thanks to Jack Lyon for his careful editing; Eleanor Knowles, editor and publishing manager; Ralph Reynolds, design director; and Lowell M. Durham, Jr., general manager; and to others who have assisted.

I appreciate the patience of my six children during the summer of 1981 while Dad wrote some book about marriage.

And to my wife, Susan, I give particular thanks not only for choosing the title for the book, but for other helpful comments and suggestions. Incidentally, after reviewing the first draft of the book, she informed me I could have obtained most of the material from her personal journal and saved myself a lot of time and work.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Write the word Problem in the upper-left hand comer of a sheet of paper. Then, as clearly and concisely as possible, state the problem. Try to limit it to one or two sentences. In our marriage, I am happiest when _______. Agree to acknowledge your anger to each other as soon as you become aware of it. Acknowledging anger is not venting anger; it simply communicates to your partner the state of your emotions without accusation or blame. Don't assume. Husbands and wives frequently have lived together so long, they assume they automatically know what the other is feeling, thinking, or trying to say. This thought was implied in the popular film Love Story, which suggested that "Love means never having to say you're sorry." The implication is that your partner knows you so well you don't have to say anything. Most troubled husbands and wives have long assumed they understand what their mates mean by certain actions, or feel in certain situations, or intend by various words or gestures or tone of voice. Their negative assumptions about their mates' motives frequently produce the negative behavior that they have already assumed existed. By learning not to assume, we give our spouse the opportunity to be understood. The partners identify one sender and one listener at a time. The Family Touch, Atlanta: International Family Association, May 1980.
[^2] Write the word Causes in the left-hand margin. Under this heading, list the ways both of you act or the things you say that contribute to the problem. In our marriage, I am saddest when _______. Renounce together the right to vent anger on each other. Anger is damaging to a love relationship. There are better ways to deal with anger than venting it. Simply talking things through often helps. Learn to ask. Rather than assuming you know in advance what the other is feeling or is going to say, learn to ask your partner what he or she means, feels, thinks, or intends concerning even the most simple things in your marriage. You may find out you didn't really understand your partner as well as you thought. The partners distinguish between listening and receiving. Millard Bienvenu, "Measure of Marital Communication," The Family Coordinator, Vol. 19, 1970, pp. 26-31.
