Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

1

Communication

Although we speak our native language with reasonable clarity, the most difficult communication in the world is often between husband and wife. The inability of married couples to communicate is shown in the story of a middle-aged woman who walked into a lawyer's office to file for divorce. The lawyer asked her to sit down. He got out his pencil and yellow pad and asked the woman some questions.

"Do you have grounds?" he inquired.

"Yes," she replied, "about three-quarters of an acre."

The lawyer paused for a moment, then asked, "Do you have a grudge?"

"No," the woman quickly answered, "but we do have a lovely carport."

Again the lawyer paused. "Does he beat you up?"

"No, I get up before he does every morning. "

Finally in exasperation the lawyer blurted out, "Lady, why do you want to divorce your husband?"

"Because," she explained, "that man cannot carry on an intelligent conversation."

One of the greatest consistencies of my survey is how frequently communication was mentioned as being important in marriage. As one wife wrote, "If you don't have communication, what does anything else matter?"

Of the twenty items in the "Profile of a Loving Husband," communication was consistently ranked the highest. (See Appendix B.) It was given first priority by thirty-eight percent of the wives; another twenty percent listed it as second most important. Nearly eighty percent listed communication as one of the top five characteristics of a loving husband, and it was listed almost ninety percent of the time as one of the top ten. Wives want, more than anything else the survey indicated, to have their husbands communicate with them.

Wives Comment

One wonders if husbands lose their ability to speak and listen when they cross the threshold as they return home each evening. When asked what their husbands could do to show their love, wives responded overwhelmingly in the area of communication. Consider the following comments by wives about husbands and communication:

"I wish my husband would listen and communicate with me, share joys, sorrows, fears, hopes, dreams, discouragements, weaknesses, and strengths. Nothing else could show caring as much as this. It is as much an act of faith as it is love. I wish he would involve me in his prime time and make me feel more important than work, customers, television, sports, hobbies, reading, or other people."

"One way my husband could show his love for me is in our communication. I get frustrated many times trying to talk to him about it. But he feels I am arguing and doesn't want to discuss it, or he doesn't respond the way I feet he should. All he would need to say is "I understand how you feel" or something like that."

"My husband could talk to me more and tell me his innermost feelings without me having to pry them out of him. He could also listen when I tell him something and comment after, even if what I had to say wasn't particularly interesting to him. Also, if he didn't want to listen, he could say so. That way I wouldn't have to continually repeat myself."

"In the future I would greatly appreciate more undivided attention when there are matters to discuss. The children, the chores, the phone, the television, work, and sleep make it difficult to get his undivided attention. I just wish my husband would find time to communicate with me."

"There is so much more to communication in a good marriage than talking about the weather and the children. There are so many times I wish my husband would both listen to my thoughts and feelings and express his to me. I would really feel we could be so much closer if we would talk to each other more about things that really matter. Otherwise he seems so distant and distracted."

"I would like my husband to open up and communicate more deeply with me. Many times his mind is so preoccupied with problems and concerns that I can hardly pry anything out of him. By having open communication where we share personal feelings, I feel we could become even closer than we are now."

"Something I would like my husband to do to show his love for me is to listen more attentively when I talk and respond to my questions with more than a simple yes or no. I need to know what he thinks about what I am saying."

Some husbands apparently prejudge what they think their wives are going to say:

"Mostly I wish my husband would pay more attention to my opinions and at least act as though they have some validity. Sometimes I feel he has his mind made up before I get a chance to explain why I feel the way I do. He will, at times, smile knowingly and proceed with his response. That smile can drive me crazy!"

"I get so I don't like his sentences that start 'I wanted to ask you how you feel about such and such . . . ' I have learned that what follows is not a discussion but a statement of how something is going to be done, and I am supposed to agree. Discussion, real discussion, is a way a husband shows his love."

Apparently some husbands become defensive when talking to their wives:

"One thing I would most appreciate as evidence of his love would be for him to be able to converse with me in an easy, calm, comfortable, honest manner. To talk about feelings, differences, and problems without an explosion would be helpful."

"I would appreciate my husband being able to discuss differences and problems in an objective way instead of feeling the need to be defensive and taking everything so personally. The objectivity is bypassed, and we usually end up considering only his feelings and his difficulties."

But some husbands do make an effort to communicate with their wives. Here are comments from several appreciative wives:

"I guess the best thing we have going for us is an open communication pattern where we can share our feelings without being threatened. I know he loves me, so I feel free to share my inner self without fearing a withdrawal of love from him."

"He treats me like his mental and emotional equal. He discusses his job, politics, current events, literature, and his hobbies with me. He expects me to have interests and talents and not just wait on him. He consults me on decisions that affect both of us and our family."

"Once in a while he will express some deep feelings of love that he has for me. That is nice. I would greatly appreciate it if he would share any of his heart-felt philosophies, aspirations, or disappointments with me."

"I appreciated most one afternoon when my husband spent nearly an hour just quietly listening and talking to me. And he didn't read or look sleepy! In the future I would really appreciate him doing about the same thing-giving me his full attention, saying things he likes about me and why he is glad he married me."

Wives not only want communication with their husbands, but it can have some rather dramatic results.

Communication is LOVE

Dr. James Kilgore, marriage counselor from Atlanta, Georgia, recently stated in The Family Touch [^1] that many marital problems can be attributed to a lack of communication skills. He defined communication as (1) listening, (2) observing, (3) verifying, and (4) enhancing, with the acronym of LOVE.

Listening. Good communication begins with listening. But more people seem to want to be heard than want to hear. Dr. Kilgore suggests that too many of us communicate with the "I" rather than the "ear," that we are more interested in what we are saying than in listening to another person. Rather than trying to understand the other person, we often concentrate too much on our own thoughts and feelings.

Observing. People tend to reveal their feelings through their actions as much as their words. So we should become more observant of such things as drooped shoulders, a wrinkled brow, a stumped or tense body, all of which communicate feelings. If what we see conflicts with what we hear, we should report the contradiction to our spouse. To carefully observe, according to Dr. Kilgore, means to sense the mood of someone else's comments as well as hearing their words.

Verifying. To verify simply means to "check out" rather than assume. A productive part of communication is to clarify what is being communicated. Non-demanding questions such as "Is this what you mean?" or "Are you saying . . . ?" tend to move communication along. Dr. Kilgore believes that good communication moves on these clarifying responses. Being sure means having to say "I'm sorry" less.

Enhancing. To enhance means to intensify, magnify, or elevate the original message so that the sender recognizes that his or her comments have been understood. Husbands and wives who are good conversationalists are not only careful listeners but good responders as well. When one acknowledges what the other is saying, for example, a special bridge exists at that moment over which both can travel more freely.

If a husband and wife can remember LOVE and the four words it represents, listening, observing, verifying, and enhancing, they can improve communication in their marriage.

How Well Do You Communicate?

One of the most frequent statements I have heard over the years from troubled married couples is "We just can't communicate." And my response is "It is impossible not to communicate." What couples sometimes mean is they have a difficult time talking to each other or they are not talking at all. But silence is a high form of communication and is usually quite destructive. Mahatma Ghandi said, "Silence is for your enemies."

We often assume if we don't talk to someone, he will not know our feelings. But much of our communication, perhaps most, is nonverbal and needs to be clarified. The most effective form of communication, however, is speech.

Millard Bienvenu has devised a test to help determine how effective communication really is. For each of the following nineteen items respond with "usually," "sometimes," "seldom," or "never." Perhaps you and your spouse would like to take the test separately and then compare responses.

Measurement of Marital Communication [^2]

According to Bienvenu, the items in "Measurement of Marital Communication" are listed in decreasing order of their importance in effective communication. That is, item 1 is more important than item 2, and item 2 is more important than 3. "Usually" is the best response to items 11, 15, 17, 18, and 19. "Never" would be the ideal response to the remaining items. [^3] By reviewing your responses together, you and your partner should better understand how you communicate. In addition, you might get some ideas to improve your communication.

The Memo Method

In their book Marriage and the Memo Method, [^4] Dr. Paul Hauck and Dr. Edmund Kean state that if you do not know what your spouse is talking about, you won't understand what problems you face. Nor will you know how to deal with them. It is, therefore, extremely important for you to learn how to communicate your feelings and frustrations to your mate and for your mate to communicate his or hers to you.

But this is sometimes difficult. The best and perhaps easiest way to communicate is by speaking, as was pointed out earlier. But husbands and wives often fail to talk about their thoughts and feelings because relatively few people want to listen. And when they do listen, they often ignore or do not believe what they are being told. In addition, as husbands and wives talk, they send numerous non-verbal messages that confuse or distort what they say.

To improve communication in marriage, Hauck and Kean outline the Memo Method, a way to write down one's feelings and thoughts and share them with a partner. Written notes made about grievances in the absence of the partner will likely have greater objectivity than an emotional, face-to-face confrontation.

The object of the Memo Method is to make husbands and wives think before they write down a thought, suggestion, or complaint. Nothing is more patient, the authors claim, than paper. Written and read in solitude, without interference of personalities, problems are stated much more objectively and less irritably.

Here are the three-steps of the Memo Method:

After you have completed these three steps, give your paper to your spouse. Allow him or her adequate time to read your thoughts when you are not present. Then he or she should follow the same three steps and respond in writing to your stated problem with alternative causes and solutions.

Now the stage is set to get together, and, through discussion, see if you agree on the problem. Both should accept responsibility for what he or she is or has been doing to contribute to the problem. Then you should agree on what might be done individually and as a couple to solve the problem.

If there is something in your marital relationship that you have found difficult to express verbally to your spouse, why not try the Memo Method. Just write down your thoughts and feelings and allow your spouse to read them before you talk. This should improve your ability to communicate.

Communicating Feelings

Not long ago, a husband told me the most difficult thing for him to do was to tell his wife about his good feelings for her. While many married couples have difficulty expressing their feelings about each other, some find they can do so with the Memo Method. After writing their thoughts and feelings on paper, most couples find the transition to verbal expression much easier.

William Miller and Larry Hof have begun an interesting program with the Marriage Council of Philadelphia. In their program, "My World of Feelings," [^5] they observe, "In a marital relationship, the ability of two individuals to be aware of the whole range of feelings, to express them appropriately, and to accept them in themselves and in each other, can pave the way for increased self-awareness and for stronger bonds of trust and deeper intimacy. It may make each partner more vulnerable, too. But, perhaps the potential for self-awareness and growth and for increased trust and intimacy is worth the risk!" (P. 98.)

Hof and Miller suggest a husband and wife individually write their responses to the following statements:

After completing the exercise, the husband and wife may exchange lists. Then they should discuss in further detail what each has written.

Hof and Miller conclude, "If my feelings are to serve me and help make sense in life, I must be aware of them and their heights and depths, and be able to express them appropriately in words and actions. In some way, I pay a great price when I refuse to let my feelings have an appropriate and natural place in my life." (P. 98.)

Shared Humor in Communication

It is obvious to most husbands and wives that many humorous incidents occur in marriage. Not long ago I got up late and reached in the bathroom cabinet for my aerosol deodorant. By mistake, I got my wife's hair spray. Susan got a good laugh out of it, but I failed to see much humor in the mix-up. In fact, I was miserable the rest of the day.

In their book A Guide to Successful Marriage, [^6] Dr. Robert Harper and Dr. Albert Ellis note, "Perhaps nothing helps more than a sense of humor to establish or reestablish effective communication in marriage. It is easier, of course, to see humor in other people's marriage troubles than in one's own. It is also easier to find something funny about one's mate's predicaments than about one's own. For humor to facilitate marital communication, it must be shared by husband and wife." (P. 197.)

I recall another incident in our marriage a few years ago that verifies Harper and Ellis's observation about shared humor. Susan and I were fishing from the shore of a lake. She was on one side of a big bush and I was on the other. My wife's casting skills—how can I say it discreetly?—are better at some times than others. The fish were biting fairly well and I heard her wind up for a cast. There was a distinct whip of the rod and suddenly I felt a tug on my shirt collar. Susan called over that she had a snag. I called back "Yes, I know." Just then she began reeling in her line and pulling me into the bush. I finally yelled out that she had caught me with her indiscriminate casting. There was a short pause and then she began laughing. She thought it was so funny. As with the deodorant and hair spray mix-up, I didn't see the humor at all.

I tried to get the hook out of my collar, and just about the time I would have it out, she would give another tug on her line. I was getting more annoyed as the minutes went by. In fact, I was so irritated that I couldn't laugh with her at the incident. A couple of kids fishing down the bank thought the scene was rather entertaining and did my laughing for me.

After I got the hook out, I didn't feel like fishing anymore and it was getting late anyway. On the way home, I clammed up while Susan tried to talk to me about the matter. But at that moment, I just couldn't talk about it. Later on that evening, Susan related the event to the children, who laughed and laughed. By this time, I was able to agree that it was pretty funny. Earlier, however, I could not. Something has to be humorous to both partners before it will help their marriage.

Harper and Ellis ask, "Does this mean that married couples who want to learn and live happily together need to become rather nitwittish about difficulties? Does it take a third-rate comedian to succeed in modern marriage?" (P. 198.) They answer, "No, it takes acceptance, if not immediate resolution of differences. Since, however, anxiety is an omnipresent block to understanding and accepting and dealing rationally with differences between two intimate associates, and since humor is one of the best methods of reducing anxious blockings, shared humor in marriage is one of the better communication techniques." (P. 199.)

As Stephen Leacock noted, "humor may be defined as the kindly contemplation of the incongruities of life." By learning to laugh together at their marital inconsistencies, couples can improve marital communication and make contemporary living seem a little less hectic.

Dealing with Anger

One of the great inhibitors of effective communication in marriage is anger. When a husband or wife becomes angry, things are often said that cause further resentment. In addition, statements are sometimes made under the duress of anger that otherwise would not have been made. Elder Theodore M. Burton said, "Whenever you get red in the face, whenever you raise your voice, whenever you get 'hot under the collar,' or angry, rebellious, or negative in spirit, then know that the spirit of God is leaving you and the spirit of Satan is beginning to take over. (Conference Report, Oct. 1974, p. 77.)

In their book How to Have a Happy Marriage, [^7] Dr. David and Vera Mace make some suggestions for dealing with anger in marriage. The Maces believe that anger is an involuntary, powerful feeling that takes hold of us when we are physically threatened or frustrated. Since few people in contemporary life are threatened for their day-to-day physical survival, most contemporary anger arises through frustration, particularly from unmet expectations.

In marriage, we often find ourselves in situations where expectations are high and frustrations can often occur. For normal people, being married may sometimes generate more anger than any other interpersonal situation.

How should a married couple deal with anger? First, the Maces advise, recognize that anger is a normal emotion that often develops spontaneously as a response to an outside stimulus. "A person who doesn't get angry," they state, "is not a normal human being."

Although we often have a difficult time not becoming angry, we are responsible for what we do about it. The Maces state: "People who say they have an 'uncontrollable' temper are deceiving themselves. They allow themselves to stamp and rage because at some time in their past temper tantrums enabled them to get what they wanted." (P. 112.)

Another common misunderstanding about anger is that by venting it, we get rid of it. The opposite is true. Venting anger sends a message to the body to continue its responses. Recent studies have shown that those who vent their anger, tend, over time, to produce more and more anger. Venting anger vigorously usually leads to physical violence. And venting anger almost always gets your marriage partner angry, too. Then you require more and more anger to continue the fight.

David and Vera Mace suggest a three-step program to deal constructively with anger in marriage:

The Maces conclude, "Only when you have brought anger completely under control in your marriage—and we mean by accepting and resolving it together, not suppressing it—does the way lay clear and open to a continuing growth in love and intimacy. (P. 115.)

We might be angry at times with each other in marriage. But we should learn to control what we do about it by dealing with our anger immediately, before it destroys communication.

The Backster Effect

The tone of voice is another important factor in communication. In our own marriage, Susan and I have never been able to agree on one thing: what constitutes yelling.

I claim yelling is what I do when I call the children home at night when they are down at the other end of the street. Susan says that yelling is talking in a critical and somewhat elevated tone. Her point is that how we talk to each other communicates as much if not more than what we say.

Susan recently took a course in elementary education called "Developing Positive Self-Concepts." She came home elated one night and said, "Here, read this." She handed me an article she had learned about in class. It was called "Plants Are Only Human." [^8]

The article described an experience of Clive Backster, an eminent authority in the field of lie detection. One day, Mr. Backster was watering the plants in his office and was wondering how long it would take the water to get from the pot up to the top leaf. He decided to find out by using a polygraph to measure galvanic response.

Backster attached the electrodes to the plant leaf, and much to his surprise, there on the graph was a tracing that he, as a polygraph expert, had learned to recognize as an emotional reaction. Trying to find out what was going on, Backster threatened his plant by sticking a leaf into his cup of hot coffee. Nothing happened. Then he decided to do something more drastic. He muttered, "I'll burn the plant."

The needle on the chart immediately jumped upward!

The polygraph gave every indication that his plant had an emotional response when threatened. After conducting several other similar experiments, Clive Backster reported his findings in a paper published in the International Journal of Parapsychology describing what has become known as the "Backster Effect." Simply stated, plants supposedly respond to different emotional states of people. And they can apparently tell if you love them or hate them by the way you talk to them and act in their presence.

I was a little suspicious of the Backster Effect, so Susan suggested we try one of his experiments. We were supposed to get two similar plants and lavish one with praise and affection. We were to speak rudely to the other. The one getting the praise would supposedly flourish. The other would die. Better results were supposed to be obtained if both plants were in less-than-ideal soil and were watered less than usual.

But I was not too anxious to try the experiment. That you are talking to plants has a way of getting around the neighborhood. But I did agree to conduct an experiment with our garden. We divided the garden plants into two groups. Susan took the cucumbers, peppers, carrots, peas, and melons and intended to give them lots of praise and affection each day. I agreed to raise the tomatoes and corn. And what would I give them? Lots of water and fertilizer! And at the end of the summer we would see whose plants turned out the best.

The end of the summer did come. For some strange reason my corn was stunted and the tomatoes were only average. But I was still not convinced that her generous crop of cucumbers, peppers, carrots, peas, and melons was a result of praise and affection.

But it did give me something to think about. Maybe Susan was right. If talking harshly would affect plants, maybe it could also affect people. And if that's the case, I should have sneaked out late at night during our contest and spoken rudely to her plants. In the meantime, I have tried to watch my tone of voice when we discuss sensitive matters in our marriage.

Assuming and Asking

Let me point out two additional ways marital communication could be improved:

A wife may ask her husband to say what he thinks she has said. If she says "Yes, that is right, that is what I actually meant," then and only then should her husband feel he understands.

This approach to improve marital communication may seem time-consuming and tedious. But if frequently practiced, it can be highly illuminating. William James wrote, "The most immutable barrier in nature is between one person's thoughts and another's." When husband and wife learn not to assume and to ask, part of the barrier will be removed.

A Communication Exercise

There are dozens of books and hundreds of articles written about communication. One such article was written by Paul Schuable and Clara Hill describing a communication exercise called "Training in Communication Skills." [^9] I have slightly modified the exercise and found it to be useful.

Just for fun, it is recommended that husbands and wives tape record their conversations during this exercise and later critique what they have said. The exercise is done in three separate sessions.

Session one: Identifying sender and receiver. Schuable and Hill claim most of the problems in marital communication arise because we do not know who is sending the message and who is receiving it. Sometimes both partners are attempting to send and no one is receiving. According to this communication model, there can be only one sender and one receiver at a time.

So in session one we identify:

After a couple decides who is going to be Sender and who is going to be Receiver, the conversation might go something like this: Paula, the new bride, would say to Richard, the new groom, "Richard, I have something to say to you." Richard could then reply, "All right, lam willing to receive it." Richard has no obligation at this point to do anything but hear what Paula has to say. She would then speak to Richard in a clear, concise manner. For instance, she might say, "I would appreciate it if you would occasionally help me wash the dishes after our evening meal."

Few couples want to do this exercise because it seems so obvious. But how often in marriage does one partner try to say something to a spouse who is oblivious to the fact that the other person is trying to say something? A beginning point in effective marital communication would be to identify one sender and one receiver at a time, since it is impossible for both to be senders simultaneously.

After Paula has sent her message to Richard (who makes no comment or elaborations), the two switch roles, and Richard then becomes Sender and Paula becomes Receiver. Richard then says something he would like her to know. For example, he might say, "I appreciated your typing my term paper for my class."

After being senders and receivers for several minutes, session one is completed.

Session two: Listening by responding and reacting. In session two there is still a Sender (Partner A), but Partner B is no longer a Receiver. He or she now agrees to be a Listener by doing two things: responding and reacting. The communication model now looks something like this:

At this point, the distinction is made between responding and reacting. Responding is when a partner intently listens to the message sent and then repeats back what he or she has heard. Reacting is a comment, statement, or commentary about the message received.

Going back to our couple, Richard wants to be Sender and Paula has agreed to be Listener. Richard sends his message, which might go something like this: "Paula, I appreciate the meals you cook, but I'm getting a little bit tired of tuna fish casserole. We seem to have it two or three times a week."

Paula may want to lash out at Richard for criticizing her cooking. Isn't he aware that she works until five o'clock each day while he is in school, and she doesn't have time to cook elaborate meals? If Paula were to say something like this, she would be reacting rather than responding. As a rule in the second session, partners should try to respond to a message before reacting to it.

Paula could first respond, "Richard, you're saying I'm not a very good cook and you don't like my tuna fish casserole. Is that correct?" The two partners should clarify the message, restating it if necessary, until Partner A feels his or her message is clearly understood.

In our example, Richard did not actually say Paula was not a good cook. In fact, he had paid her a compliment by saying he appreciated her meals. And he did not say he did not like tuna fish casserole. He just didn't like it as often as Paula cooked it. Paula should continue to respond by repeating back the message until Richard believes she understands what he has said.

After she has responded, Paula may then react to the message by telling Richard how she feels about what he said. She might react by describing her busy schedule and how she thought he liked tuna fish casserole because he always ate it when she fixed it. And she might even say that she is afraid to experiment with untried recipes because of lack of confidence in her cooking skills. All of these statements come under the reacting category.

By distinguishing between responding and reacting, husband and wives can avoid many misunderstandings. Much of what we call conversation is nothing more than simultaneous monologues. We really don't listen to, or in fact may not even care about, what the other person is saying because we are so caught up in our desire to be heard or understood. All we are doing during these "conversations" is getting our next speech ready. Our thoughts and words are often pre-planned.

But if we learn to respond before reacting, if we tried to listen and understand what the other is saying, we might want to change what we would eventually say. But most of us want to be understood by our husband or wife more than we want to understand them.

Session three: Staying on the topic. How often in marital communication do we skip from topic to topic, from issue to issue, and never really go into depth on any one item? Rather than spending one hour discussing eight or ten different issues, would it not be better to spend fifteen or twenty minutes discussing just one in depth and agreeing on some action to take?

After Partner B (Listener) has responded and then reacted to the original message, the model of communication has changed and we now have:

Once Partner B reacts, he or she then becomes Sender and Partner A the Listener who, in turn, will respond and then react to the message sent by Partner B.

Paula might react to Richard's message by talking about how busy she is, her fear of cooking new recipes, and her fear of his criticism. And Richard might be tempted to say "Oh, you're so self-conscious," or, "How could you be more busy than I am?" If Richard were to do this, he would be reacting, not responding.

To first respond, he might say something like, "Paula, I hear you saying you fix tuna casserole so much because you think I like it. Also, you say you like cooking foods you know how to cook to avoid any risk of failure or hearing me complain. Is that what you're saying, Paula?" If Paula says "Yes, that's what I said," Richard has responded and is then free to react to what she said. And thus the model continues back and forth.

Another rule of communication in session three is to leave the topic only when the original sender agrees to do so. For instance, Paula might feel uncomfortable talking about her tuna fish casseroles, so she may try to change the topic of conversation by complaining that Richard has not repaired the bathroom cabinet drawer that he promised to fix two weeks ago. While this may be an issue for her, it is not appropriate for her to bring it up now to evade the tuna fish casserole issue.

After they have resolved that issue, Paula could start a new conversation about the drawer. Richard might agree to hear what she has to say by being a Receiver (session one), or he might even agree to be a Listener (session two). By agreeing to listen, however, he commits himself to say something back to Paula, and hopefully he will remember to respond before reacting.

Richard might be threatened by his failure to fix the bathroom drawer and want, as did Paula, to change the topic or even ignore the message once Paula sends it. Using this model of communication, however, he would agree to stay on the topic (session three) of the bathroom drawer and discuss it until the original sender, Paula, is satisfied she has been heard and some appropriate action will be taken.

In summary, the Schuable-Hill Communication Exercise teaches the following simple but effective concepts in marital communication:

For more information about communication skills in marriage you may want to read Marriage by Spencer W. Kimball, Marriage: Much More Than a Dream by Rex A. Skidmore, The Marriage Dialogue by Lynn Scoresby, How to Strengthen and Improve Your Marriage by Hugh Allred, Peoplemaking by Virginia Satir, and Alive and Aware, Improving Communication in Relationships by Sherod Miller, Elam Nunnally, and Daniel Wackman.

Communication exercises available at Brigham Young University are The Interpersonal Game by Kenneth Hardy, and the CHEC Program (Couples Handbook for Effective Communication) by Hugh Allred. These two exercises are self-explanatory and can be completed at home.

Bridges or Walls?

Richard B. Wilke claims in his book Tell Me Again, I'm Listening [^10] that communication between husband and wife is the key to a fulfilling marriage. In addition, he believes that effective communication in marriage is not easy to attain. Wilke says, "Trying to understand each other in marriage is tough. It's a goal that has to be pursued relentlessly. The task is one that never ends. It's like golf. Just about the time you think you have got the game in hand, you slice one into the trees or blow a simple putt. You never totally win. You work at it. As in most other important things in life, you may succeed today but you have to do it again tomorrow."

To illustrate his point, Wilke relates that some friends of his who have a great marriage are keenly aware of the difficulties of communication. The husband is a busy doctor; the wife is the mother of several small children. Just to remind themselves of the importance of communication in marriage, they have a motto on their kitchen wall: "I know you believe you understand what you think I said, but I am not sure you realize that what you heard is not what I meant."

Wilke says that communication is to love what blood is to the body. When communication stops, love dies and resentment and hate are born. To communicate means to be willing and able to learn from each other. It assumes that someone else has something significant to say. Most of us are ready to give answers before questions are completely asked or understood. Communication simply means we take the other person and what he or she has to say seriously.

Communication also means a certain kind of discipline. On occasion, we may have to hold our tongue. Or, it may mean forcing ourselves to say something as a response when we don't feel like saying it.

Communication also means openness. Since both husband and wife are constantly changing, their understanding of each other requires constant evaluation. As marriage partners change, it is as if they are symbolically shooting at moving targets while they are on the move themselves. Wilke concludes, "Marriages in which individuals build impenetrable walls around themselves are sick. 'I just can't get through to him (or her)' are words of frustration."

Marriage partners have before them the bricks and mortar of communication. With these materials, they can build bridges to or walls between each other. What they build is up to the couple.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Quoted by J. Richard Udry in The Social Context of Marriage, New York: J. B. Lippincott Co., 1974, p. 133.
[^2] Carlfred B. Broderick, Marriage and the Family, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1979, pp. 187-94.
[^3] Ibid., P. 194.
[^4] James Dobson, What Wives Wish Their Husbands Knew About Women, Wheaton, Illinois: Tyndale House Publishers, 1975.
[^5] William George Jordan, "Little Problems of Married Life," Improvement Era, Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, July 1911.
[^6] W. Robert Beavers, "Lessons From a Dancing Chicken," Family Therapy News, Newspaper of the American Association of Marriage and Family Therapy, Vol. 12, no. 3, May 1981.
[^7] My greatest fear/concern for our marriage is _______. 7. Walter McGraw, "Plants Are Only Human," Argosy, Vol. 368, no. 6, June 1969, p. 23.
[^8] The best thing about our marriage is _______. 8. Paul Schauble and Clara Hill, "A Laboratory Approach to Treatment in Marriage Counseling: Training in Communication Skills," The Family Coordinator, Vol. 25, 1976, pp. 277-84.
[^9] What I like most about myself is _______. 9. Robert Wilke, Tell Me Again, I'm Listening, Nashville: Abingdon, 1973, pp. 25-39.
[^10] What I dislike most about myself is _______.
