Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

2

Love

Love is one important aspect of marriage. Most people will not marry and stay married unless they both love and feet loved by their partner. It is not surprising, therefore, that wives expect husbands to express love in their marriage. In fact, expressing love was ranked number two in the "Profile of a Loving Husband."

What Love Is

There have been many attempts to define love. Plato cynically described it as "a grave mental disease." Thomas Carlyle noted that "love is not altogether a delirium, yet it has many points in common therewith." Helen Rowland simply described love as "woman's eternal spring and man's eternal fall." And according to John Barrymore, love is "the delightful interval between meeting a beautiful girl and discovering that she looks like a haddock." Samuel Johnson said, "Love is the wisdom of the fool and the folly of the wise." George Bernard Shaw defined love as "the gross exaggeration of the difference between one person and everybody else." "Love is like the measles," said Josh Billings. "We can have it but once, and the later in life we have it, the tougher it goes with us." H. L. Mencken thought love to be "the delusion that one woman differs from another." Still another writer, unknown, defined love as "one hormone system calling to another." Other anonymous definitions of love are "an intoxication of the nervous system," "triumph of imagination over intelligence," and "a process that turns a young woman's frog into a prince." Alphonse Karr wrote of love, "It is the most terrible, and also the most generous of passions: it is the only one which includes in its dreams the happiness of someone else." The poet Percy Bysshe Shelley wrote, "Love withers under constraint; its very essence is liberty; it is compatible neither with obedience, jealousy, nor fear." Henry Ward Beecher said, "Love is the river of life in this world. Think not that ye know of it who stand at the little tinkling rill, the first small fountain. Not until you have gone through the rocky gorges, and not lost the streams; not until you have gone through the meadow, and the stream has widened and deepened until the fleets could ride upon its bosom; not until beyond the meadow you have come to the unfathomable ocean, and poured your treasures into its depths—not until then can you know what love is."

These are but a few examples of the many definitions of love. And it really does not matter how many there are. The most important definitions of love are the ones assigned to it by two people in a relationship.

For some, "I love you" means "I want to be with you." It may mean "I want to control you," or "I trust you." In some instances, "I love you" means "I want to be intimate with you." Or, it could mean "I want to share your money with you."

In contemporary marriage, love is defined as having at least three components, emotion, behavior, and commitment.

Certainly, love is emotion. Most people describe love as some kind of emotional experience where two people identify with each other William Goode, a sociologist, defined love as "a strong emotional attachment between adolescents or adults of the opposite sexes with at least the components of sex desire and tenderness." [^1] Historically, the Greeks had three different words to describe the emotions often associated with love. Eros referred to sexual or romantic love; agape was related to selfless, altruistic, caring love; philos referred to brotherly or fraternal love.

Love is behavior. In 1 Corinthians 13, Paul lists fourteen characteristics that Christians through the centuries have come to identify with love. (See chapter 5 on spirituality.)

Showing love by behavior is what his book is all about. In addition telling a wife that he loves her, what can a husband do to show it? The answer to that question is the answer to this one: "What does his wife expect?"

Love is commitment. This is very important. Too frequently we think of love only as emotion or behavior. If we were to base our love only on these, our attractions and attachment to each other would depend only on the momentary emotions we feel or the behaviors we experience with our spouses. If our emotions are bland and the behavior questionable, then we may feel unloved or loved less.

If commitment is perceived as a vital component of love, then love will survive ulcers, the absence of make-up, wrinkles, gray hair, or even baldness. Love will also withstand variations in weight; it will not be measured by inches around the waist or the weight on the scales. Including commitment as part of love will help us endure the highs and lows on the roller coaster ride of marital emotions.

Perhaps that is what most wedding vows imply when people marry "in sickness and in health, for richer or for poorer, and for better or for worse." When sickness, poverty, and bad times come, the relationship will survive because the partners are committed to each other. That, indeed, is true love.

Types of Love

Specific types or "styles" of love have recently been described by Dr. Carlfred Broderick in his book Marriage and the Family. [^2] Following is a model of his "types" and definitions with slight adaptations:

The eight types represented in the circle are in four pairs of opposites with the following definitions:

Romantic love is usually emotional, often irrational, and sometimes based solely on sexual attraction. It usually encompasses strong desires to be near, touch, care for, and share experiences with the loved one. There is strong commitment to each other or to the relationship. A romantic lover also often idealizes the loved one or the place or situation in which they find themselves.

Sexual love is often part of romantic love but can be experienced with little or no romantic attachment. Sexual or erotic love is one important part of establishing intimacy between a married couple. (See chapter three on intimacy.)

Manic love is the idealization of a loved one with intense emotions, sometimes to the point of being all-consuming. Sleep, hunger, and common concerns of everyday life are replaced by passion. Common characteristics of manic love are extreme joy and despair, with the tendency to be possessive rather than caring, and clinging rather than giving.

Egoistic love is self-serving or competitive love. In an extreme form, it is detrimental to marriage. Yet, some relationships enjoy a matching of wits and playful competition, where egoistic love is very important. Enough of this style is needed in marriage to protect the interests of the individuals involved.

Pragmatic love (opposite of romantic love) is highly rational, practical, and not very intense. Pragmatic lovers have a limited need to touch, care for, or be with a loved person.

Platonic love (opposite of sexual love) involves little or no sexual interaction in the marital relationship. It is highly spiritual and free from sexual desire.

Companionate love (opposite of manic love) emphasizes friendship and loyalty, and only gradually takes on romantic overtones. Disagreements and periods of separation are easily survived. It is stable, non-demanding, committed, and trusting, but also lacks the drama, intensity, and mood swings of manic love.

Altruistic love (opposite of egoistic love) is being kind, caring, and sensitive to a partner's needs. But it can be destructive if little is required in return. A person in this love. style will often pass up opportunities for more personal fulfillment. They may appear to be saintly. However, they lack the self-preservation value of egoistic love. Demanding nothing but the opportunity to serve, altruistic lovers are often taken advantage of.

Of these love types, Broderick notes: "We can see no single formula is ideal. Rather a case can be made that the most successful mixtures are those types which are not extreme in any one direction." [^3]

In summary, most happily married couples tend to have a balance rather than a preoccupation with any of the styles of love. It is also likely that each of the types contributes something of value to a marriage and that conversely each type alone, or in combinations of one or two, is enough to sufficiently strengthen the marital bond.

Love Intensity Varies

Some married couples, particularly newlyweds, become unduly concerned because they experience hills and valleys in their emotional intensity. They assume that because they feel less emotionally intense toward each other at times that something must be wrong.

Not long ago, I was in a counseling session with a young man and woman who had been married just a few months. They had come to see me because after a recent fight she accused him of not loving her anymore. It was discouraging to them that their relationship could seemingly deteriorate to this level after just a few months of marriage.

I explained to them that we often think of love as all or nothing. Supposedly, either we love our marriage partner or we don't. Or, we may decide that our spouse previously loved us but no longer does. (I have found even in many divorces that ex-husbands and wives still love each other in various ways.) Sometimes we also view love as an elusive butterfly—difficult to capture, magnificent after attaining, and extremely fragile upon possession.

After some conversation, I suggested to the young couple that they probably still loved each other (which they admitted), but that the intensity of their relationship may have slightly diminished after the initial rapture of the wedding and honeymoon. In fact, the young man and his new bride were probably entering phase 2 of marriage, as described by Dr. Abraham and Dorothy Schmitt at the University of Pennsylvania. (See chapter seven on autonomy, pp. 111-20.)

Few married couples always feet the same high emotional intensity toward each other, even though they may be deeply committed to their relationship. Events and circumstances outside the relationship may also demand the interest and attention of a husband or wife. Subsequently, his or her marriage partner may feel they are competing with these events for their spouse's time and interest. Jobs, college, children, parents, hobbies, and involvement in community and church activities are among the competitors that may cause a husband or wife to feel ignored or "unloved."

During the married years, the intensity of the emotions will vary up and down, even if it is ever so slight. And it is during these times of "down" that we frequently feel unloved or accuse the other of not loving just because we feet the intensity less.

Dr. James Dobson, author of What Wives Wish Their Husbands Knew About Women, [^4] has asked, "How many vulnerable young couples 'fall in love' with love on the first date . . . and lock themselves in marriage before the natural swing of their emotions has even progressed through the first dip? They then wake up one morning without that neat feeling and conclude that love has died. In reality, it was never there in the first place. They were fooled by an emotional high." (P. 90.)

Dr. Dobson further notes, "Even when a man and woman love each other deeply and genuinely they will find themselves supercharged on one occasion and emotionally bland on another. However, their love is not defined by the highs and lows, but it is dependent on a commitment of their will." (P. 91.)

Love intensity also varies during times of confrontation in marriage. Many married couples not only become annoyed at each other, but they also become disappointed because they believe happily married couples do not "fight" or ever get angry at each other. In an article, "Little Problems of Married Life," [^5] William George Jordan said: "Those married people who tell me, ten or fifteen years after the wedding, that there never has been one cross word spoken between them, never a moment of even irritation, never a single shadowing cloud of disagreement, belong to one of three classes: They have been mercifully endowed with a talent for forgetting, they handle truth with a certain shyness, or one of them is the overawed victim of the other's personality." (P. 787.)

Jordan then makes an interesting analogy: "Have you ever heard an old sea-captain boast that in all his experience he had never seen a squally sea, never a dull, heavy storm-laden sky, never heard the tempest shriek through the rigging, then threaten to tear away the masts? His pride is in his skill, not in his luck. The matrimonial sea never remains absolutely serene and calm, with no ruffling waves for years at a time. The vital point is that the storms have all been weathered in safety, and the love and trust, purified by time, remain undaunted." (P. 788.)

The intriguing aspect of this quotation is that it was made in 1910, more than seventy years ago.

It has been estimated that only fifty percent of behavior in marriage is based on reason and intellect. The other half of what we do is an outgrowth of our emotions. We often disregard the fact that we, as husband and wife, are as yet imperfect and susceptible to mood swings, and that even temple marriages require constant attention and effort. By ignoring our emotions, we create illusions of what marriage is like. And it is the false ideas of marriage that cause disillusionment or even divorce.

Perhaps contemporary marriage would seem less disconcerting if we would reexamine some of the false ideas we have about it, such as "There is no conflict in a good marriage." If we could realize that most husbands and wives do, on occasion, become emotionally charged, we might be less upset when it occurs. Maybe then we could get on with the business of dealing with our emotions rather than denying we have them in the first place. And remembering in the process that we still love each other.

How to Express Your Love

As noted in the "Profile of a Loving Husband," wives frequently expect a husband to show his love by word and by deeds. This was also borne out in the many letters from wives indicating at least four ways love might be conveyed: (1) verbal expression, (2) written expression, (3) doing deeds, and (4) gifts.

Verbal Expression

There once was an elderly wife who complained to her aging husband that he seldom told her he loved her. "I told you I loved you when we first got married," he responded angrily, "and if anything changes, you'll be the first to know."

As absurd as this story may seem, it is amazing how infrequently many husbands say to their wives those three little words, "I love you." It takes about three seconds, and most wives not only want it, but expect it.

One wife wrote, "We wives all love being told we are loved and appreciated—a husband just can't do too much of this."

Still another woman said, "More than anything else, I would like my husband to express verbally what it is he loves about me and tell me that he loves me more often. I need that verbal reassurance as the days go by; I need to be told more than once or twice with the assumption that I will just know it for the rest of 'my life."

Apparently, some men say "I love you," but in a sarcastic way. One wife said, "I wish he could tell me he loved me without putting a joke or laugh with it. He just can't say it seriously."

Most women know they are loved, and all they need is reassurance. Sometimes it is just better to be reminded than to be informed. "I need the reassurance of his loyalty to me," one wife said, "both in words and actions." Similarly, another said, "Verbal expression (a real event would be to have it written!) is important, not just "I love you," but expression of specific appreciation for me as a person and what I accomplish in life."

Most wives need verbal expression from their husbands to assure them of continuing love and security. A husband should be wise enough to know this about his wife and loving enough to do it. He can build her self-esteem just through his words to her. Words have power. A husband can show his love for his wife with a card or candy or flowers. But by all means, say it with words.

Written Expression

When speaking is difficult or impossible, another effective means of communication is to write your feelings on paper and share them with a loved one. One wife wrote:

"My husband makes me feel very close to him when he buys me a greeting card. But, he doesn't leave it at that—he writes something extra inside that sincerely expresses a feeling he has that the greeting doesn't convey. Just a few extra words to let me know that he loves me deeply are appreciated. Some men seem to be afraid of saying or writing what they term 'mush.' But they would be surprised what effect it could have on their relationship with their wife. If they would dig down deep in their heart and let some of that love out, most marriages would improve greatly."

One woman said, "I enjoy receiving a small personal gift occasionally or even a love note scribbled on the back of an old envelope. It seems that life is too busy and all we do is attend to the necessary chores and the day is gone too soon."

Another woman wrote, "Three years ago, after a particularly difficult move (aren't they all!), he wrote me a note thanking me for many of the things I have done. I still have the note. And last year he wrote a page of reasons 'Why I Love Karen.' That page is like gold to me."

I have personally found conveying love in writing to be very rewarding. It has always been difficult for me on Valentine's Day to go down to the drugstore and buy my wife a valentine. For one thing, I always get there late, and the cards are pretty well picked over or there are just one or two left on the floor with footprints on them. And I feel that what is written in cards is rather impersonal. It is wrong, I think, to always let someone else express your feelings for you.

When we were engaged, I was confused about love and had difficulty expressing how I felt toward Susan. Conveying my love was difficult because I really didn't know what to say except "I love you." On the Valentine's Day before we were married, I sat up all night and wrote Susan a long poem, one of my first, titled "Love, Undefined." I gave it to her on Valentine's Day, along with a wrinkled commercial card, and she was impressed, or at least she acted like it. Anyway, she still has the poem in a scrapbook, which impresses me. But writing my thoughts down during a confusing time in our relationship was helpful to me, and I think it conveyed something of my love to her.

A few years after we were married, I suggested, and Susan agreed, that rather than buying the commercial cards on Valentine's Day, we would make our own and then write a few lines in them. I have enjoyed doing this and appreciate the cards I get from her. I hope she feels the same way about mine.

Doing Deeds

Husbands can talk about love all day, every day, but if they fail to do something to show their love, their wives may doubt their sincerity.

One wife expressed it well: "Saying 'I love you,' of course, is great to hear, but I like actions rather than words. My husband can say he loves me until he's blue in the face, but if he acts as though it is a great burden to do things for me, his love is in doubt. "

Another said, "I guess the biggest thing, in my opinion, a husband can do to show his love and appreciation for his wife is not bringing candy, flowers, or that kind of thing, but just doing things to show her that she is important."

Following are some comments by appreciative wives:

"My husband has done many things around the house so that my daily chores could be done more efficiently. He put shelves in the fruit room, made a long folding table in the laundry area, put a board with hooks along a wall for the children to hang coats on, and put up another board in their bedroom with hooks on which to hang their sacks and toys. These actions demonstrated that he heard, understood, and loved me enough to help make my work easier."

"Recently I left home early to fill a church assignment. While I was gone, my husband made the bed, vacuumed the bedroom carpet, and washed a large picture window (one I have a nightmare trying to clean)—all before he went to work. Did that ever tell me he loves me!"

"I appreciate it when he pitches in and helps me instead of just watching me work. He'll dry the dishes or help with dinner or get the kids ready for bed. I am also grateful when he helps with breakfast on the weekends. And occasionally he has helped me bottle fruit. Now these things don't happen very often, but when they do, it thrills me to think he cares enough to do them."

"The ways he shows me he loves me are by giving a helping hand with the kids, helping with the housework if I get in a bind, or especially taking time to listen with an understanding heart. Doing things for me means much more than the words 'I love you,' although I appreciate him saying that frequently also."

"My husband has a real hard time saying, 'I love you,' but he shows me in a hundred ways. For example, if I lie down in the day, he tip-toes around, he shares the housework, he opens the car door for me, he takes my arm to cross the street, and he never belittles me or picks an argument. He is just a great husband and we are seventy and seventy-one years old. That is love enough for me!"

One young wife said, "It isn't that men don't know how to love women. It's that people don't know how to love people. We tend to do for them what would make us happy if someone would do it for us. And then we wonder why the other person isn't happy. After all, it would make us happy, so it has to be right."

Many men, as she noted, so some things for their wives to show love. But how do wives get husbands to do the things they want them to do? Dr. W. Robert Beavers, director of the Southwest Family Institute in Dallas, Texas, may have the answer. Writing in a publication of the American Association of Marriage and Family Therapists, Dr. Beavers, on a rather humorous note, said that wives are always trying to get husbands to do something: be more affectionate, pick up their clothes, and so on. In his article, "Lessons From a Dancing Chicken," [^6] he notes, "I frequently tell a story about an Arkansas boy who went north and ran into a fellow named B. F. Skinner, who taught him how to make a chicken do three things: dance, play baseball, and ride a fire engine. Such wondrous knowledge should be shared so he went back to Arkansas and opened up an establishment called the I.Q. Zoo, a display of fabulous animal feats. Now if an ordinary person can make a chicken dance, surely you can get your husband to _______________ (fill in the blank). It's a matter of knowing how."

First, says Dr. Beavers, you must believe that the chicken isn't evil, and isn't making every attempt to thwart your hopes and dreams. It's hard to train a chicken that you think has it in for you.

Second, you must reward the chicken with something the chicken likes, not what you think he ought to like, nor with whatever's handy. (For humans, he notes, probably the most powerful reward is a moment of shared delight.)

Third, you must reward approximations of the behavior desired. If you wait until the chicken does the complete dance before rewarding it, you will wait a long time. A turn of the head to the left or a foot moving in the right direction should merit a quick reward.

Fourth, you must ignore behavior you don't want; it is called "undancing behavior." The combination of alert rewards and careful neglect of the unwanted is a powerful tool in producing a dancing chicken.

Fifth, punishment is not necessary, according to Dr. Beavers, in creating a dancing chicken. A starved chicken just doesn't dance nor do much of anything else very well. Without frequent rewards, punishment sometimes becomes perceived as a reward and encourages behavior it is supposed to diminish.

One can also ask the chicken to become a collaborator by discussing which rewards would be effective, helping to improve negotiating skills.

Dr. Beavers says one more element is needed; a rule must be imposed; The responsibility for change and the desire for change must be kept within the same person. This makes it clear who is chicken and who is trainer at a given time.

This rule plus the five steps in teaching a chicken to dance can help many husbands and wives break frustrating patterns and build satisfying ones. If you can get a chicken to dance, you ought to be able to get your husband to take out the garbage once in a while. And all it might take is a little peck on the cheek now and then.

Giving Gifts

Apparently, giving a gift symbolically conveys love to many wives. And it is, indeed, a symbol. But a gift is cheap no matter the amount paid for it, if a husband is not willing to give of himself, his time, his affection, his appreciation, or his thoughts to his wife. Many men believe buying frequent and often expensive gifts for their wives will suffice for expressions of love. It was interesting in the "Profile of a Loving Husband" that "He brings me unexpected gifts, flowers, and cards and sometimes writes a note attached to the gift," something judged by many husbands to be important, received relatively low ranking by wives. In fact, only six percent of the wives listed gifts in their top five priorities. And when ranked, it was often only eighth, ninth, or tenth, indicating many other things were more important. Wives simply cannot be appeased with gifts. Of the twenty items listed in the "Profile of a Loving Husband," seventeen received a higher ranking than did giving gifts.

Nevertheless, gifts are important in that the absence of gifts often communicates inattentiveness, unconcern, or a general withdrawal of feelings. One wife said, "Of course, all wives like little gifts and surprises brought home for no reason at all, other than to show love."

And another said, "For anniversaries and birthdays, instead of going out to eat, I would appreciate personal gifts. It would make me feel 'remembered.' "

And gifts don't have to be either practical or expensive. In fact, one wife wrote, "Why does a husband have to always give 'practical' gifts like toasters or irons or food slicers? Why can't he buy something more personal than an appliance I 'need.' And, by the way, a gift doesn't have to cost a lot." Another wife echoed this sentiment: "In the future, I'll be as happy as the day I married him if he only remembers 'It's the little things that count.' And a gift that doesn't cost a penny can often make a woman feel like a million dollars."

But sometimes giving a gift of value is important. It is amazing to me how a husband cannot afford a five dollar gift for his wife, but somehow can come up with the money to buy a three-hundred-dollar rifle or fifty-dollar fishing rod for himself on sale at the local sporting goods store. A wife wrote, "One of the nicest gifts my husband ever gave me was a lovely, expensive music box that played one of our love songs. I was overwhelmed! It was a tender and long-remembered moment for both of us."

And sometimes, just silly, spontaneous gifts convey a great deal of love and caring. One such gift was described by a young college wife:

"As a full-time student and part-time worker, both my husband and I must share responsibility for taking care of our domestic needs. One day I had written out a grocery list, but never made it to the grocery store. The last item on the list was soft drinks (Fresca), and I had underlined it. I guess I had a craving for it. I was delighted that evening when I returned home from school and found that not only was the grocery shopping done, but in the middle of the living room floor was a large heart made out of forty-eight Fresca bottles. Although our budget couldn't really afford that much pop, our marriage certainly needed that extra sparkle."

Of all the gifts mentioned, flowers were given most frequently and were apparently most appreciated. It seems essential, therefore, that husbands learn to understand "flower power" in conveying love.

Consider the importance of flowers as shown in the following quotations:

"In the future, my husband could remember how important birthdays are to me, and throw a surprise party for me. We could also go out to dinner for no reason at all, or he could be more romantic by surprising me with flowers.

"Husbands should remember little things such as candy, a poem, flowers, or anything of dating days. Some of the important things my husband could do to show his love would be leaving cards or notes, or calling me from work or school to say he loves me, or bringing flowers home."

And apparently many husbands do give their wives flowers. One wrote, "For my birthday, my husband sent me an arrangement of real flowers. I was so pleased I took pictures of it so I could always remember it."

A mother with a large family wrote, "At the birth of each child my husband brought me a flower, one for each child we had. So when our twelfth child was born, I received a dozen red roses. "

One young wife wrote, "Occasionally, my husband brings me one flower, for no reason at all!"

My father wrote a poem about a rose just a few months after my mother died. She and my father had grown roses in their garden and had frequently exchanged a rose "for no reason at all" other than to express their love for each other. In his poem, "One Rose," Dad helps husbands better understand the power of a flower.

One Rose You surely recall youth's sweet moments: The stars and the moon shone so bright As you wined her and dined her to music With a bouquet of roses each night. It was, oh, such a beautiful courtship; You kissed her full lips and pink cheek And sighed in her ear, "I love you, my dear." There were orchids or roses each week. The honeymoon deepened your romance As you pledged your true love once again. This bond would not sever; You'd love her forever. There were pansies and pinks now and then. Then came babies, the bottles, the budget; And things just didn't seem to go right: But don't you suppose She still needed a rose And a kiss on a Saturday night? There was cooking, and sewing, and cleaning While time itself seemed to take flight. The work's never done; Still she longs for some fun And one rose on a Saturday night. You declare love with gifts when expected— Anniversaries and each Christmas Night— But some people say There's a much better way: Try a rose on a Saturday night. As the years pass, we all grow neglectful: Hold her hand; touch her lips; hold her tight. As life ebbs to a close, She still longs for a rose. Bring a fresh one this Saturday night. One day when your sweetheart has left you, You will have God's own word she's all right. When the spring breezes stir Fragrant memories of her, Press a rose to your lips every night. —Alvin R. Barlow

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Children should be perceived as a source of fulfillment and growth rather than as a source of stagnation and confinement. Ed Wheat, Love-Life, Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan, 1980.
[^2] A couple will likely find joy in parenthood if they have as many children as they desire and can care for. Paul Ammons and Nick Stinnet, "The Vital Marriage: A Closer Look," Family Relations, Vol. 29, 1980, pp. 3 7-42.
[^3] Many couples use discretion when to have a second, third, or an additional child. That same wisdom and discretion can and ought to be used to decide when to have the first child. Carol Tavis and Susan Sadd, The Redbook Report on Female Sexuality, New York: Delacorte, 1977.
[^4] How many children a couple will have, and when, are decisions that only the couple, with the guidance of their Father in heaven, can make, since they are the ones who must experience the consequences of their decisions. Writings of Parley P. Pratt, edited and published by Parker Pratt Robinson, Salt Lake City, 1952, pp. 52-54.
[^5] Almost every married couple will confront the situation of controlling conception. And most couples, by one means or another, will choose to control conception during some part of their marriage. Otherwise, each couple could have nearly twenty children. The inability or unwillingness to decide about controlling conception is, in essence, a decision to have a child. Hugh B. Brown, You and Your Marriage, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960.
[^6] If, for certain personal reasons, a couple decides that having a child, or another child, immediately is unwise, the choice of method is one that each could and should decide in consultation with their physician and in the context of their religious beliefs. Methods vary in reliability and each has its own advantages and disadvantages. Abstinence is one way to control conception. Like any other method, abstinence has side effects, some of which are harmful to the marriage relationship. Also, I believe abortion is not an acceptable way to control conception. Jessie Bernard, The Future of Marriage, New York: World, 1972.
