Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

3

Intimacy

It became clear in the "Profile of a Loving Husband" and from the numerous letters received from women that wives want to be close physically, mentally, emotionally, and spiritually to their husbands.

In his book Love-Life, [^1] Dr. Ed Wheat has a chapter titled "The Secret of Staying in Love." In it, he notes, "It is a remarkable fact that while millions of men and women have no difficulty falling in love, at least half of that number seem unable to stay in love. The secret of staying in love for any couple . . . is a life long love affair. The secret in one potent word is intimacy." (P. 130.)

Often when we hear the word "intimacy" we think only of sexual intimacy. While this is part of it, intimacy is much more than sexual relationships. Listed below are some of the strands, according to Dr. Wheat, that make up the bonds of intimacy between husband and wife. They are in no particular order, and each couple may have others of their own to add.

Intimacy Bonds

Physical touching of an affectionate, non-sexual nature

Shared feelings

Closeness without inhibitions

Absence of psychological defenses

Open communication and honesty

Intellectual agreement on major issues

Spiritual harmony

Sensitive appreciation of the mate's physical and emotional responses

Similar values held

Imparted secrets

Genuine understanding

Mutual confidence

A sense of warmth, safety, and relaxation when together

Sexual pleasures lovingly shared

Signs of love freely given and received

Mutual responsibility and caring

Abiding trust

The Need for Touch

Two dominant trends became evident in the "Profile of a Loving Husband." Wives want affection and touch in addition to fulfillment through sexual relationships. And they want it in that order.

Item 7 of "Profile of a Loving Husband" was: "He expresses affection by touch without sexual overtones." Item 4 was "He helps me attain sexual satisfaction in our relationship." It is interesting that item 7 was consistently rated higher than item 4, suggesting that touch and affection are as important, if not more important, than sexual relationships. What most husbands do not realize is that touch and affection for most wives is sex!

It is obvious, therefore, that men and women often have differing perspectives of sexuality in marriage. While men often see sex as intercourse, women usually view sex as the preliminaries.

Many husbands do not understand that wives expect touch and affection without always having to head straight to bed. Yet that was consistently reported by many wives. For instance, one wife wrote, "My husband and I have a rewarding and mutually satisfying sexual relationship so it is not like I get tired of the activity because I do enjoy it. But there are times when I would like to be close and have him hold me without going beyond that. Sometimes when I am tired, I'd rather just go to sleep in his arms."

Another wife wrote: "Not long ago my husband did just a little thing, but it sure made my day. He put his arms around me, kissed me, and said, 'How I love you!' This was not a prelude to making love or having me do anything in particular for him. It just made me feel great!"

One appreciative wife noted, "My husband shows his affection by putting his arm around me, smiling at me, hugging me, and holding my hands, especially in places other than in the bedroom."

But it is apparently very difficult for many men to be affectionate by touch without sexual overtones. In Love-Life, Dr. Ed Wheat emphasizes the importance of husbands touching their wives in non-sexual ways.

He notes:

A tender touch tells us that we are cared for. It can calm our fears, soothe pain, bring us comfort, or give us the blessed satisfaction of emotional security. As adults, touching continues to be a primary means of communicating with those we love, whether we are conscious of it or not. Our need for a caring touch is normal and healthy and we will never outgrow it.

But if touching is so valuable and pleasurable, why is it necessary to advise couples to do more of it? The answer lies in our culture. While our western civilization is highly sexual, it frowns on or ignores touching apart from sex. This is particularly true for men, for there are only three acceptable kinds of touching in today's world: the superficial handshake, aggressive contact sports, and the sexual encounter. Men have been conditioned to turn to sex whenever they feel any need for loving closeness. No wonder experts believe that our extreme preoccupation with sex in this society is actually an expression of our deep, unsatisfied need for the warmth, reassurance, and intimacy of nonsexual touching.

Physical contact is absolutely essential in building the emotion of love. Anything else you do will be of little avail unless you learn to touch each other often and joyfully in non-sexual ways. If you would like to kindle a flame in your own marriage, then begin to show your love through physical touching. (Pp. 183-84; italics added.)

Sexual Fulfillment Desired

The second part of intimacy is that wives want and seek fulfillment with their husbands in the sexual relationship itself. This finding is consistent with a recent report by Paul Ammons and Nick Stinnet who studied seventy-two happily married couples in Oklahoma. The couples were mostly rural, middle-aged, middle-income people who had been married between fifteen and twenty-five years. The number of children varied from two to twelve.

In their article "The Vital Marriage: A Closer Look," [^2] Stinnet and Ammons reported that one thing these seventy-two couples had in common was that fulfilling sexual relationships were found to be a central and profoundly important part of their marriages. A majority, eighty-five percent of the respondents, reported moderately high to very high needs for sexual fulfillment. This suggests that for these happily married couples, and undoubtedly others, sexual fulfillment is an important component of marriage and a major way of sustaining intimacy in their relationship. The similar high need for sexual fulfillment was found equally in husbands and wives.

I might add that in all my years of marriage counseling, I have never found a marriage that was satisfying and stable unless both husband and wife were deriving sexual satisfaction from the relationship. This need for sexual satisfaction was also reported in our surveys and letters:

"My husband is very concerned that he pleases and satisfies me in love-making. In fact, he seems to find his greatest pleasure in making the experience a delightful and pleasurable one for me, in making sure that I truly enjoy it. This has just thrilled me, that he is concerned about me and not just interested in satisfying himself."

"My husband is a patient, considerate, and creative lover who finds pleasure in helping me find sexual fulfillment."

But apparently there is need for improvement in some sexual relationships. One wishful wife noted, "I wish he would take the time to sexually arouse me, so I could enjoy being close to him."

Another wife related, "I would greatly appreciate it if my husband would grab me, carry me off to the bedroom, and make love to me. Our sexual relationship needs improvement!"

If sexual fulfillment is not attained immediately in some marriages, and there is some evidence that it is not, married couples should note that it is something they can look forward to. A recent survey of over one hundred thousand readers of Redbook magazine found that most couples married for several years reported a satisfying sex life. About thirty-three percent rated the sexual aspect of their marriage as "very good," and another thirty-four percent rated it as "good." Thus, two-thirds of those reporting were satisfied with their sexual relationship. Only twenty-one percent rated their sexual relationship as "fair," and the remaining twelve percent stated it was either "poor" or "very poor." [^3] So the odds for sexual fulfillment in marriage are good.

But if sexual fulfillment is not found immediately, the couple need not become distraught. Like other dimensions of a satisfying marriage, sexual fulfillment does not come automatically; it requires some effort.

An LDS Perspective

One of the first Church leaders to write at length on the subject of intimacy was Parley P. Pratt. In an essay entitled "Intelligence and Affection," [^4] Elder Pratt noted:

Some persons have supposed that our natural affections were the results of a fallen and corrupt nature, and that they are "carnal, sensual, and devilish," and therefore ought to be resisted, subdued, or overcome as so many evils which prevent our perfection, or progress in the spiritual life. . . . Our natural affections are planted in us by the Spirit of God, for a wise purpose; and they are the very main-springs of life and happiness—they are the cement of all virtuous and heavenly society—they are the essence of charity, or love; and therefore never fail, but endure forever. There is not a more pure and holy principle in existence than the affection which glows in the bosom of a virtuous man for his companion.

The fact is, God made man, male and female; he planted in their bosoms those affections which are calculated to promote their happiness and union. That by that union they might fulfill the first and great commandment, . . . "To multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue it." From this union of affection, springs all the other relationships, social joys and affections diffused through every branch of human existence. And were it not for this, earth would be a desert wild, and uncultivated wilderness.

On a similar note, Elder Hugh B. Brown wrote in his book You and Your Marriage: [^5]

Sex is not an unmentionable human misfortune, and certainly it should not be regarded as a sordid but necessary part of marriage. There is no excuse for approaching this most intimate relationship in life without true knowledge of its meaning and its high purpose. This is an urge which more insistently than others calls for self-control and intelligence. (P. 76.)

Elder Brown also noted:

Thousands of young people come to the marriage altar almost illiterate insofar as this basic and fundamental function is concerned. The sex instinct is not something which we need to fear or be ashamed of. It is God-given and has a high and holy purpose. (P. 73.)

Because so many newlyweds are apparently uninformed about sexual matters in marriage, Elder Brown counseled, "If the partners would discuss together before marriage the serious problems involved therein, . . . if they would frankly discuss the delicate and sanctifying aspects of harmonious sex life which are involved in marriage . . . , much sorrow, heartbreak, and tragedy could be avoided." (P. 21; italics added.)

Prerogative or Duty?

Certainly the decade of the '70s will be remembered for many things, including the reexamination and redefining of relationships between men and women. During the past few years, many people have become more sensitive to women in general and sexuality in particular. At the end of the decade, however, one wonders how long many of the myths and stereotypes about women and sexuality will be perpetuated. Among these many beliefs is the long-held tradition that sex is a man's prerogative and a woman's duty.

Prerogative means "an exclusive right or privilege exercised by virtue of rank or office; a right or privilege limited to a specific person, or persons of a particular category." The idea prevails that women are the sexual playthings of men, that sexual interaction in marriage is to be at the whim and desire of the husband. The only obligation of the wife, supposedly, is to meet his sexual demands as they are made.

In her book, The Future of Marriage, [^6] Jessie Bernard notes that the relationship between many husbands and wives is being reexamined in what she described as the "His" and "Hers" perspective of marriage. Dr. Bernard suggests that two people in marriage can have the same experience and yet have entirely different perceptions of the experience. What may be meaningful and fulfilling for one may not be for the other. She also states that just because a husband enjoys a sexual relationship is no guarantee that his wife will enjoy it at all. The sociologist observed that many contemporary mates may have to learn more about female sexuality if marriage is going to be a viable relationship in the future.

The motives for sexual relationships in marriage are also believed to vary. The notion that men give love to get sex and women give sex to get love is yet another example of a sexual myth that still exists. This may be true for some, but need not be for all.

The belief that sex is something with which women placate men is fostered in many of the so-called men's magazines. There has recently been much controversy about the erotic photographs in these publications, but many marriage counselors and family life educators are equally concerned about the sexual philosophies advocated in much of the reading materials for men.

Professor J. Richard Udry of the University of North Carolina notes in his text The Social Context of Marriage [^7] that much of the literature for men enforces the idea that women are sexually subservient. Dr. Udry observes that more than one hundred men's magazines are directed specifically at arousing sexual fantasies in males. Men, he claims, learn to view all women as having an unusually high sexual orientation, while this may be true of only ten to fifteen percent. These magazines, according to Professor Udry, reflect the stereotype of the hypersexual female waiting to fulfill the sexual demands and fantasies of males. Many men, unfortunately, have similar expectations of their wives.

Dr. Udry notes other sexual myths are perpetuated in magazines for males. Many of the publications depict only extremely beautiful women with a certain physique. This suggests that such women are the only ones capable of sexual interaction. Not all women, he states, are as attractive as those in the magazines nor do they all have the same body type. This does not mean they cannot have fulfilling sexual relationships.

Marriage could be more meaningful if sexual fulfillment were sought and experienced by both husband and wife. The idea that sex is a man's prerogative and a woman's duty has been believed too long by too many. Perhaps the time has come when sexual interaction in marriage can be an enjoyable prerogative for both.

The Early Years of Marriage

A few months ago, I spoke to a group of young married couples about the sexual dimensions of marriage. After my talk, a few couples came up with a question or two and then left. One couple, however, stayed until everyone else had gone and then hesitantly came over as I walked toward the door. They asked if I could stay a few minutes longer and answer a few questions for them.

I agreed and about that time the young wife started to cry. They said they had been married less than a year and thus far she had not been able to find much sexual fulfillment. They loved each other very much, but had found sexual intimacy to be frustrating. Their honeymoon, they said, had been a disaster.

The couple had sought counsel from a physician who advised them they probably wouldn't be able to achieve satisfaction for two or three more years and would just have to "wait it out." Such advice was of little comfort to the recently married couple.

I asked them a few questions about sexual fulfillment. It was soon evident that no one had ever asked them these questions before, let alone given them any answers. The problem, I ascertained, was that no one, including the physician, had informed them of some basic aspects of sexuality. I talked to them for about fifteen minutes, and they felt somewhat assured that there was still hope for them and their marriage. But their experience is all too common and unnecessary among newlyweds.

Many of the problems young couples experience with intimacy go back to their childhood and the things they were taught, or not taught, about sex. In accordance with gospel principles, young people should be taught to wait until marriage for sexual relationships. But they should also be taught to have a healthy and satisfying sexual relationship once they are married.

How we teach these matters seems to have particular significance for young women, because too many wives attain little or no sexual satisfaction in their marriages. Frigidity, the inability or unwillingness to find fulfillment in intimacy, is common in the United States. In his book The Individual, Marriage, and the Family, [^8] Lloyd Saxton notes, "Frigidity is very common in our society, with one fourth of the married female population never having experienced orgasm by age twenty-five and as many as one in ten never experiencing it at any time during their married lives." (P. 79.)

Perhaps the inability of couples to make a successful sexual adjustment after marriage is due, in part, to many of the analogies we use to encourage young people to wait until marriage for sexual relationships. There is the chewed-up bubble gum, cake with the icing missing, and the nail, board, and nail hole, all of which must evoke some interesting images in the minds of young people. Another favorite is crushing a flower, such as a rose, and then asking young women if they want to be like bruised rose petals.

Young women are not flowers; they are normal human beings with strong biological and emotional inclinations toward intimacy. Crushing flowers in Seminary or Young Women's classes probably will not inhibit those feelings, and it will probably make them more confusing.

Rather than just saying "don't" and hoping they "won't," a more reasonable and effective approach may be to explain sexuality from a physical, social, mental, and spiritual perspective. This would help young people understand the problems associated with immorality as well as the blessings of intimacy in marriage.

Young people can be taught to be virtuous without being prudish. To be virtuous means to "conform to moral and ethical principles; [to be] morally excellent, upright, and chaste as a person." To be prudish, on the other hand, means to be "excessively proper or modest in speech, conduct, dress, etc." While I know many young men who would like to marry a virtuous young woman, and vice versa, I know of absolutely no one who wants to marry someone who is prudish.

We should teach young people about sexuality so that they have a healthy concept of it after marriage. Intimacy is not something we avoid because it is evil. It is something we wait for because it is good.

As for the honeymoon, many young couples might be consoled by the statement of Mark Twain that "on the typical honeymoon, the second biggest disappointment is the Niagara Falls." With tongue in cheek, the American humorist raised a serious question about a sensitive issue.

Many newly married couples are simply exhausted at the end of their wedding day, and a hectic wedding day may lead to a hectic wedding night. Both fatigue and emotional pressures do little to help sexual interaction.

Many newly married couples also begin a honeymoon with unrealistic expectations of what sexual fulfillment should be. In their recent text Modern Marriage, [^9] Dr. Henry Bowman and Dr. Graham Spanier note many young couples expect to experience the equivalent of the San Francisco earthquake the first time they are intimate. If, as is usual, the experience is a shade milder, many head for the nearest technical manual to see what they are doing wrong. It takes time to develop full sexual adjustment. One cannot team all there is to know in one short episode.

There may be a few awkward moments on the wedding night. This is particularly true if one of the partners, usually the husband, is in a hurry. Intimacy is never an emergency.

About sexuality in marriage, Dr. Bowman and Dr. Spanier observe:

In developing a new skill or new art, the novice makes many errors. In learning to walk, skate, play, swim, drive a golf ball, or bid a bridge hand, we perpetrate so many mistakes that after mastering the necessary, we look back in embarrassment at the immensity of previous ignorance, and the magnitude of our original awkwardness. We do not let our mistakes defeat us; nor stop with them.

A newly married couple, in many instances, is confronted with the problem of learning a new art, acquiring a new skill. They are almost certain to make mistakes at first. They may feel that their ignorance is stupendous and their clumsiness colossal. They need not leap to conclusions and defeat themselves. They may learn by their mistakes. With patience, understanding, intelligence, self-analysis, an ample amount of love, and a liberal sprinkling of a sense of humor, errors may be corrected. Hence care, patience, perspective, and a will to succeed pay large dividends. (P. 259.)

While honeymoons may be disappointing for various reasons, most newly married couples report enjoying their honeymoons, even though problems may occur. And usually, as noted in the Redbook survey, sexual relations improve over a period of time. If dissatisfaction persists, a couple may want to seek help from their physician, their bishop, and a competent counselor. There are many resources to help couples achieve sexual fulfillment. Several helpful books are Human Intimacy: Illusion and Reality by Victor L. Brown, Jr. (Salt Lake City: Parliament Publishers, 1981); And They Shall Be One Flesh by Lindsay R. Curtis (Salt Lake City: Publishers Press, 1968); and The Marriage Act: A Christian Guide to Sexual Love by Tim and Beverly LeHaye (Grand Rapids: Zondervan Corporation, 1976).

Husband Too Busy

One of the advantages of writing a newspaper column about marriage is reading the letters received. It makes me aware of the concerns in contemporary marriages. Apparently, sexual adjustments are not limited to the early years of marriage, as indicated in the letter below.

Dear Dr. Barlow,

My husband and I are in our early fifties and he is so involved in his occupation and church work that he is frequently away from home. This has created several problems, one of which is that our children do not see him very much and I am raising them alone. But the most critical problem concerns me. He is so busy and gone so often that he seldom makes love to me. Sometimes we go for four or five weeks without any physical relationship at all. Is this normal? Could marital problems arise because of this trend?

My answer was:

To reply to your last question first, yes, serious problems could and often do arise in marriage when either or both of the marriage partners do not find sexual fulfillment in their relationship. This is particularly true if the lack of fulfillment occurs over months or years and resentment builds. With what is known about sexual relationships today, married people need not experience prolonged sexual frustration if both are willing to learn a few things and have a little patience with each other. Most married couples, I believe, can solve the vast majority of their marital problems alone, including sexual ones, if both husbands and wives are willing to cooperate with each other. On occasion, however, professional counseling or medical help may be sought if sincere effort has been made with little or no results.

As to your first question pertaining to the frequency of sexual relationships in marriage, allow me to make a few observations.

When it comes to making love, it has been noted that many people seem particularly preoccupied with numbers. In other words, how often is normal? Marriage counselors are frequently asked this question.

Several studies have been made that indicate the frequency of sexual relationships not only varies from couple to couple but also varies with the same couple from time to time. The length of time married, age, health status, resentment, guilt, the inability to communicate, particularly about sexual matters, all are factors. Immediate pressures such as business, emotional, social, family, and financial also seem to be variables which influence the frequency and intensity of physical intimacy in marriage.

Simply put, there is no set "normal frequency" pattern for sexual relationships. Most studies indicate that many married couples have sexual relations several times a month, so your pattern of once every four or five weeks is statistically atypical.

The most important factor, however, in sexual relationships in marriage is not so much with quantity, but with quality. Frequency is not nearly as important as satisfaction. Trying to bring satisfaction to your partner each time you do encounter lovemaking is far more important than trying to run a bedroom marathon. To find what brings satisfaction to each other in marriage suggests that a husband and wife must communicate about their sexual fulfillment, or lack of it. And when sexual frustration does occur, it should be dealt with quickly before a husband or wife becomes even more resentful.

If your sexual needs are not being met by your husband, you have every right in the world to tell him so. The tendency is for many married women to withhold this information and use it as a weapon in marriage or become the modern marriage martyr.

Once you tell him, let's assume that he will arrange to stay home more with you and your family. Perhaps he will try to meet your needs a little more, rather than give way to the many occupational obligations of his job or demands of his church.

In my humble opinion, any husband too busy to make love is simply too busy.

The Three Rs of Infidelity

There are additional potential problems if a husband and wife go for prolonged periods of time without sexual relationships. It sometimes leads to infidelity. When a couple marries, it is implied in the wedding vows that they will "forsake all others." Within the Church, of course, it is explicit that this means forgoing any sexual relationship with any other person.

The question has recently arisen as to how many married people actually live up to this vow. Whatever the trends and statistics may be, enough married people are unfaithful to raise another interesting question: How do couples who originally commit themselves to forsake all others become sexually involved with other people?

In his book Couples, [^10] Dr. Carlfred Broderick, marriage counselor from the University of Southern California, notes, "Over the years I have listened to the explanations of dozens of individuals who, despite such a commitment [of fidelity], found themselves involved in adulterous relationships. Again and again, their stories revolved around three issues which I have come to think of as the three R's of infidelity: Resentment, Rationalization and Rendezvous." (P. 161.)

Resentment. Dr. Broderick reports that most unfaithful married people resent their spouses. Usually, they have not found a way to deal with marital problems or resentments. Dr. Broderick notes that the preventative for infidelity "is a developed and well-oiled mechanism for dealing with strain in the marriage."

Another frequent source of resentment in marriage comes from sexuality, and too often people enter marriage with unrealistic expectations about it. When the expectations go unfulfilled over a long time, resentment builds. Then people sometimes seek a new relationship to find what they feet is lacking in the present one.

Rationalization. If a married person becomes unfaithful, he or she uses some degree of rationalization. The person may simply deny the possibility of getting involved with someone else. A wife may flirt with another man and yet feel it means nothing. Or a husband may be high on drugs or alcohol, become uninhibited, and deny that anything will or could happen, when it already is occurring.

But, Dr. Broderick reports, the most interesting form of rationalization involves virtue rather than vice. He notes, "I am convinced that more people get themselves into the pain of infidelity through empathy, concern and compassion through a base motive. . . . With a little help from rationalization, sympathy leads smoothly into tenderness, the tenderness to the need for privacy, the privacy to physical consolation, and the consolation straight to bed." (P. 163.)

Rendezvous. A rendezvous is a meeting or an appointment to meet, and infidelity depends on a rendezvous if it is to occur. But Dr. Broderick suggests there are some intermediate steps.

Most extramarital relationships begin, interestingly enough, as friendships and "just happen." Two people meet at unplanned places such as work, parties, or the like. From these unstructured meetings they proceed to systematic associations that appear to be legitimate. There are more frequent meetings at work or parties. Husbands and company secretaries find excuses to be together for lunch "for business reasons," or two neighbors find their friendship escalating and one finally invites the other over when the spouse is gone.

A house guest sometimes turns into a sexual host, or a wife and a fellow male student may find they have more in common than a college course. A husband and a female co-worker find they spend hours planning together, but their planning eventually goes beyond their jobs.

From these systematic associations, couples plan for and seek a private or secret rendezvous so often associated with infidelity. And that is usually when it occurs. Dr. Broderick concludes, "If you find yourself in a situation involving a delicious privacy with an attractive member of the opposite sex, you should begin to look for ways to restructure the situation. No doubt you will think of a dozen reasons why it is unreasonable to go out of your way to avoid perfectly legitimate and innocent companionship, but then that may simply mean you need to review the three R's of infidelity one more time." (P. 166.)

Never Too Old

Undoubtedly there are also sexual adjustments during the later years of marriage. But it is becoming increasingly evident that many of those problems are culturally induced. An undergraduate class at Brandeis University was asked to complete the following: "Sex for most old people is _______. What would you have written if given the same assignment?

Perhaps your answers would be similar to those of the Brandeis students who stated that sex for most old people is "unimportant," "past," "negligible," "nonexistent," and so on. Sexual functioning, however, depends to a great extent on one's attitudes and beliefs, and for many people the expectation that sex is nonexistent in the later years of married life may become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Others, who reach the age of sixty-five and find that they still have strong sexual desires, may be overcome with guilt and erroneously believe they are "oversexed. "

Sexuality for the elderly is not a recent invention. It has been important to most elderly people who have been studied. Sexuality is not just the ability to have sexual intercourse; for many it is the need for continued closeness, affection, intimacy, and romance.

With our recent acquisition of knowledge about human behavior, we have become aware of several contemporary needs. We need to recognize the normalcy of sexuality. We also need to clear away the obstacles in people's minds that prevent the expression of affection and intimacy in the later years.

In his book Sexual Life After Sixty, [^11] Dr. Isadore Rubin lists some of the prevalent myths many people, including some of the elderly, have about sexuality. Three of those myths are the vital fluids myth, the menopause myth, and the hysterectomy myth.

The vital fluids myth, according to Dr. Rubin, is the belief that sexual intercourse weakens a person, since semen is deemed to be one of the vital fluids of the body. "It is a major self-defeating myth," the author notes, "which discourages sexuality in the older years." The corollary of this belief is that if one abstains from intimacy during the later years of life and thereby retains this vital body fluid, the catastrophe of old age will be avoided and life prolonged. Even more specific, according to Dr. Rubin, is the common belief that each drop of semen emitted is equal to the loss of forty drops of blood. "Such myths die very hard," he notes, "particularly if they are constantly repeated by what often seem to be scientific sources."

Still another major misconception is the belief that menopause means the end of a woman's sexuality. This is particularly true when reproduction is thought to be the only purpose of sex. Many believe that if a woman is no longer capable of having children, she no longer needs sexual interaction. Dr. Rubin reports that as late as 1931, one medical authority defined menopause as "that time in a woman's life at which her sexual activities come to their natural termination," asserting that "the cessation of the monthly recurring menstrual flow indicates that the termination of sexual activity has arrived." The same medical doctor could not account, however, for the common-sense observation that the sexual desire not only continues in many women after menopause, but for some actually increases.

A third major myth has to do with hysterectomy, the partial or complete removal of the uterus. A hysterectomy does not create any physical inability that would prevent either the husband or wife from attaining sexual satisfaction, except in very rare cases. What a hysterectomy may change, according to Dr. Rubin, is the husband's or wife's mental attitude and their expectations of what will now happen in their sexual relationship. Unfortunately, mental changes can be as effective as physical changes in ending sexual fulfillment.

Enough studies have been conducted to lay aside the myths about menopause and hysterectomies. If the sex life deteriorates seriously after either of these two events, the cause should be sought not so much in the physical but in the psychological aspect of the couple's relationship.

The sexual relationship today is being more and more recognized as a rich and vital aspect of human relationships. It is another language by which couples share deep intimacies. The importance of sexuality has been recognized for younger married couples, but it has certainly not yet been widely advocated for older married people. Preoccupation with the security needs of the aged has led most people to overlook their sexual needs altogether. Not until recently have we been made aware of the importance of sex to the psychological well-being of older married persons in our society as well as the young.

There is little doubt that the sexual lives of elderly couples can be far richer than most people realize. As Martin Berezin of Harvard University explained, "The one thing which neither grows old nor diminishes is the need for love and affection. These drives, these wishes never change." In essence, you are never too old.

Some Thoughts on Having Children

Another letter I received had to do with sexual intimacy and controlling conception. A husband wrote:

Dear Dr. Barlow,

I have enjoyed reading your column for over a year and read what you wrote concerning hormones and moodiness in women and would be interested in your thoughts on what our doctor calls "Tired Wife Syndrome. "

My wife had a physical checkup and the doctor gave her a prescription for a drug. He told her that it wasn't hormones or a chemical imbalance that was causing her to feel depressed or be out of patience with the children. He said it was just a case of tired wife syndrome caused mainly by having children too fast and no energy to cope.

We decided after our third child was born marking three of our four years of marriage, that we needed to wait for an indefinite period of time before having another child. This brings up another question. What are your feelings on controlling conception? We would appreciate your thoughts on this area.

My answer was;

Married couples, and particularly newlyweds, face both opportunities and challenges in contemporary marriage. And many of those opportunities and challenges are in the realm of having children. How many? How far in between? And, when to begin?

Students in my marriage classes have frequently asked such questions. Here are some of the guidelines I have suggested:

Since controlling conception is a concern for many Latter-day Saint couples, the following may be informative.

Dr. Homer Ellsworth, a gynecologist and former member of the Melchizedek Priesthood General Committee was asked, "Is it our understanding that we are to propagate children as long and as frequently as the human body will permit? Is there not any kind of 'gospel family-planning,' for lack of a better way to say it?"

Dr. Ellsworth's comments were printed in the August 1979 Ensign, pages 23-24. Following are some of his thoughts in answering the question:

I hear this type of question frequently from active and committed Latter-day Saints who often ask questions that are outside my professional responsibilities. Here are some of the principles and attitudes I believe apply to this fundamental question, a question most couples ask themselves many times during their childbearing years.

I rejoice in our basic understanding of the plan of salvation, which teaches us that we come to earth for growth and maturity, and for testing. In that process we may marry and provide temporal bodies for our Heavenly Father's spirit children. That's basic, it seems to me. In contemplating this truth, I also take great delight in the Church's affirmative position that it is our blessing and joy, and our spiritual obligation, to bear children and to have a family. It impresses me that the positive is stressed as our goal.

I rejoice in our understanding that one of the most fundamental principles in the plan of salvation is free agency. The opportunity to make free agency choices is so important that our Heavenly Father was willing to withhold additional opportunities from a third of his children rather than deprive them of their right of choice. This principle of free agency is vital to the success of our probation. Many of the decisions we make involve the application of principles where precise yes-and-no answers are just not available in Church handbooks, meetings, or even the scriptures.

Our growth process, then, results from weighing the alternatives, studying the matter carefully, and seeking inspiration from the Lord. This, it seems to me, is at the heart of the gospel plan. It has always given me great joy and confidence to observe that in their administration of God's teachings, our inspired prophets do not seek to violate this general plan of individual agency, but operate within broad guidelines that provide considerable individual flexibility.

I recall a President of the Church, now deceased, who visited his daughter in the hospital following a miscarriage.

She was the mother of eight children and was in her early forties. She asked, "Father, may I quit now?" His response was, "Don't ask me. That decision is between you, your husband, and your Father in Heaven. If you two can face him with a good conscience and can say you have done the best you could, that you have really tried, then you may quit. But, that is between you and him. I have enough problems of my own to talk over with him when we meet!" So it is clear to me that the decisions regarding our children, when to have them, their number, and all related matters and questions can only be made after real discussion between the marriage partners and after prayer.

In this process of learning what is right for you at any particular time, I have always found it helpful to use a basic measuring stick: Is it selfish? I have concluded that most of our sins are really sins of selfishness. If you don't pay your tithing selfishness is at the heart of it. If you commit adultery, selfishness is at the heart of it. If you are dishonest, selfishness is at the heart of it. I have noted that many times in the scriptures we observe the Lord chastising people because of their selfishness. Thus, on the family questions, if we limit our families because we are self-centered or materialistic, we will surely develop a character based on selfishness. As the scriptures make clear, that is not a description of a celestial character. I have found that we really have to analyze ourselves to discover our motives. Sometimes superficial motivations and excuses show up when we do that.

But, on the other hand, we need not be afraid of studying the question from important angles—the physical or mental health of the mother and father, the parents' capacity to provide basic necessities, and so on. If for certain personal reasons a couple prayerfully decides that having another child immediately is unwise, the method of spacing children—discounting possible medical or physical effects—makes little difference. Abstinence, of course, is also a form of contraception, and like any other method it has side effects, some of which are harmful to the marriage relationship.

As a physician I am often required to treat social-emotional symptoms related to various aspects of living. In doing so I have always been impressed that our prophets past and present have never stipulated that bearing children was the sole function of the marriage relationship. Prophets have taught that physical intimacy is a strong force in strengthening the love bond in marriage, enhancing and reinforcing marital unity. Indeed, it is the rightful gift of God to the married. . . .

So, as to the number and spacing of children, and other related questions on this subject, such decisions are to be made by husband and wife righteously and empathetically communicating together and seeking the inspiration of the Lord. I believe that the prophets have given wise counsel when they advise couples to be considerate and plan carefully so that the mother's health will not be impaired. When this recommendation of the First Presidency is ignored or unknown or misinterpreted, heartache can result.

As I meet other people and learn of their circumstances, I am continually inspired by the counsel of the First Presidency in the General Handbook of Instructions that the health of the mother and the well-being of the family should be considered. Thirty-four years as a practicing gynecologist and as an observer of Latter-day Saint families have taught me that not only the physical well-being but the emotional well-being must also be considered. Some parents are less subject to mood swings and depression and can more easily cope with the pressures of many children. Some parents have more help from their families and friends. Some are more effective parents than others, even when their desire and motivation are the same. In addition, parents do owe their children the necessities of life. The desire for luxuries, of course, would not be an appropriate determinant of family size; luxuries are just not a legitimate consideration. I think every inspired human heart can quickly determine what is luxury and what is not.

In summary, it is clear to me that couples not let the things that matter most be at the mercy of those that matter least. In searching for what is most important, I believe that we are accountable not only for what we do but for why we do it. Thus, regarding family size, spacing of children, and attendant questions, we should desire to multiply and replenish the earth as the Lord commands us. In that process, Heavenly Father intends that we use the free agency he has given in charting a wise course for ourselves and our families. We gain the wisdom to chart that wise course through study, prayer, and listening to the still small voice within us.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] David Knox, Marriage Happiness, Champaign, Illinois: Research Press Co., 1971.
[^2] Larry Hof and William Miller, Marriage Enrichment: Philosophy, Process, and Program, Bowie, Maryland: Brady, 1981.
[^3] Rudolf Dreikurs, Children: The Challenge, New York: Hawthorn Books, Inc., 1964.
[^4] E. E. LeMasters, Parents in Modern America, Homewood, Illinois: Dorsey Press, 1970.
[^5] Rudolf Dreikurs, Social Equality: The Challenge of Today, Chicago: Henry Regnery Co., 1971.
[^6] Dreikurs, Children: The Challenge.
[^7] Kahlil Gibran, The Prophet, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1960, pp. 17-18.
[^8] Decisions about controlling conception will vary from couple to couple. What may be appropriate for one couple may be inappropriate for another. We should, therefore, not judge others' decisions. Lloyd Saxton, The Individual, Marriage, and the Family, 3rd ed., Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1977.
[^9] Having children involves more than physically bearing them. Parents are to provide for the physical, emotional, and social well-being of their children and teach them moral values. Having children and failing to provide these things could have serious implications for both parents and children. Henry Bowman and Graham Spanier, Modern Marriage, New York: McGraw Hill, 1977.
[^10] The sexual relationship has several functions, two of which are reproduction and relationship enhancement. When conception is not desired or no longer possible, it does not mean that sexual relationships should cease. 10. Carlfred Broderick, Couples: How to Confront Problems and Maintain Loving Relationships, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1979.
[^11] Married couples ought to examine their motives for having children. We should have children not just because of social or peer pressure, but because we genuinely want them. Guilt is a questionable incentive for having children. 11. Isadore Rubin, Sexual Life After Sixty, New York: New American Library, 1965, pp. 42-52
