Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

4

Fatherhood

Martin Luther once said, "No man is so virtuous as to marry a wife only to have children." Having children is obviously a joint venture between husband and wife even though the father's part is minimal in comparison to that of the mother. And, as far as rearing children in America, the same trend seems evident. After the children are born, fathers often have little, if anything, to do with their rearing. This was apparent in numerous letters I received and in the survey. Of the twenty items in the profile, the one on helping rear and discipline the children was ranked fourth.

During the last decade there have been some interesting discussions about single-parent families, which now constitute some eleven percent of all families in the United States. Approximately ninety percent of single-parent families, Incidentally, are headed by women. The question has been raised whether or not one parent can adequately raise a family. The pros and cons are weighed and the debate continues. But it also has been noted that in intact, two-parent families, most children are reared by the mother anyway. In America, we are almost to the point where parenthood means motherhood. The wives who wrote me letters and responded to my questionnaires want help from their husbands in rearing their children. They wrote:

"I love our children dearly and have enjoyed being a mother. I have been able to accept my husband's lifestyle most of the time even though it has not always been easy. It is apparent now that I probably should have insisted that he spend more time being a father and husband. Our children would have benefited from a closer relationship with their father. He is a very wise, brilliant man, and is sensitive and caring with others, particularly in his church work. But he is unable to respond to his children in this same manner. He has felt his responsibility so keenly, I guess, that he becomes the authoritarian father and lectures instead of discussing. Well, it just didn't seem worth the hassle and unpleasantness to attempt to show him how much we need and want part of him and some of the charm that he shows so abundantly to others."

"I wish my husband would take the time to listen and understand the needs of each child, the younger ones as well as the older ones. I would like him to have the kind of relationship with his children that he has with me. Then we could share our thoughts on how to fulfill the needs of each child and demonstrate our love for them as my husband and I try to do for each other."

"I wish my husband would spend more time with the children and help them with their chores, homework and getting ready for bed. And I wish he would do it willingly instead of hollering at them all the time. It is hard for me to keep up with all the children and follow through on each task alone."

"I want my husband to read bedtime stories to our children and in general make more effort to play with them, talk to them, and do things with them. I would appreciate it if he would encourage them to obey and help me. And if they see their Daddy helping clear the table and keep the clothes and rooms picked up, I feel they would respond better."

Apparently some fathers are involving themselves more with rearing the children, as was expressed in some of the letters. Some appreciative wives wrote:

"Whenever my husband is home in the evening he puts our three children to bed. This is the time the children spend with their father, talking together while they prepare for bed and say their prayers. It has made each of the children feel closer to their father. I appreciate the break it gives me from the children, and they respond so much better to him after having listened to me most of the day. It also gives me a chance to clean the kitchen and straighten the house before going to bed."

"My husband is a full partner in parenting. Although I am with the children all day while he is at work, he talks to me during the day about their activities, progress, and needs. When he comes home, he plays with them and takes care of them while I prepare dinner. He helps get them to bed and gets up with them in the night as often as I do."

"My husband shares his time with the children. Rearing children is a joint project, never Dad with the football game and Mom with the kids. He also supports what I say when disciplining the children, by saying 'Do what your mother says!' and then if there is ever a question, my husband and I discuss it privately at another time.

Children and Marriage

In his book Marriage Happiness, [^1] David Knox states that children are inextricably involved in the marital relationship. A couple recently told me that if they did not have their children, they would have few marital problems. Such a statement is an oversimplification, but it bears a thread of truth. (A friend of mine also pointed out not long ago that when Adam and Eve were in the Garden of Eden they didn't have any children!)

Knox identifies several areas couples should consider carefully. These include the number and spacing of children, the discipline and time spent with children, activities parents believe their children should or should not become involved in, competition between husband and wife for the love of a child or children, competition between children for the love of parents, and sex education for children.

While it is the wife who usually experiences the greater impact of having children, there are a few things a husband can do immediately to assist his wife with child rearing in the home. The first is to become more involved with his children each day. (See "Father Types," pp. 71-76.) And the second, as unusual as it may seem, is to be more attentive to and supportive of his wife. One woman wrote, "My husband shows he understands my feelings toward the end of a long day by his willingness to share the responsibilities of parenthood." Still another wife wrote, "He shows he cares about me because he cares for our children."

Many wives feet that if their husbands ignore their children, they also ignore their wives. A woman who finds fulfillment in her marriage is much more likely to find fulfillment in being a mother, and probably will do a better job at it.

Family Complexity

A family is a rather complex array of relationships, and the more people there are in a family, the more complex it becomes. The larger the family, the more a husband needs to help his wife. For instance, a family of four (two parents and two children) has six relationships, while a family of six (two parents and four children) has fifteen relationships. By increasing the family size from four to six, the number of relationships is more than doubled.

For a while, Susan and I could not understand why having six children seemed so much more demanding than when we had four children. The reason, we finally realized, is that in our family of eight, we have twenty-eight relationships compared to the fifteen we had when we had four children. How did we arrive at that conclusion? Here is the formula:

Y2 - Y X = ——— 2 X = number of relationships Y = number in family

Using this formula, we find in our family of eight the following number of relationships:

(8 x 8) - 8 64 - 8 56 X ———— = ——— = — = 28 2 2 2

Consider the following diagram of a family of five, two parents and three children. In the family of five, each family member has a relationship with each other represented by a line and a number within the circle:

Father's relationship with mother is represented by line 1, and his relationship with child #2 by line 3. Mother's relation, ship with child #2 is represented by line 6, and her relationship with child #3 by line 7. Child #2's relationship with child #3 is represented by line 10, and so forth.

Let's add a baby to the family, making a total of six: two parents and four children. Now there is more than just one more mouth to feed. The family dynamics become even more diverse. The family would now look like this:

Before the baby arrived, there were ten relationships in the family, but when the baby was born, each family member had a new relationship, adding not one, but five, relationships to the family for a new total of fifteen. So we see the complexity of the family change as each child is born and additional demands are made on mother.

It is little wonder that with each new baby a wife needs and wants more help from her husband in rearing the children. A mother of ten children said, "The more children we have, the less help I get." How many relationships are in her family of twelve (two parents and ten children)? Use the formula to find out. Is it any wonder she would like some help from her husband? Between husband, wife, and children, she has sixty-six relationships to monitor. But in her case, the help from husband decreased as the family complexity increased.

A Wife's Major Satisfactions

Of all the relationships in a family, which one is the most crucial? In families where both parents are present, it is always the one between husband and wife. Why? Because when that relationship is threatened, or impaired, it influences all other relationships in the family. When we talk about having strong family ties, we often think of the parent-child relationship. But the most important part of family life is marriage.

Sometimes we become so preoccupied with being good parents that we neglect our spouses. And by so doing, we undermine our capabilities as fathers and mothers. Dr. Larry Hof and Dr. William Miller, marriage counselors and educators from Philadelphia, have recently written Marriage Enrichment, Philosophy, Process and Program. [^2] In it, they note: "This book focuses almost exclusively on marriage enrichment because of our belief that the most effective and efficient way to enrich families is to focus on the husband-wife relationship. We believe the quality of the marriage greatly influences, and may in fact determine, the quality of the total family relationship. This does not negate the value of looking upon the family as an integrated system, but rather emphasizes the central importance of the marital dyad in the larger system of the family." (P. 3.)

Dr. Hof and Dr. Miller raise an interesting point. When both a father and mother are in the home, can we have strong family ties without first having strong marital relationships?

While attending college several years ago, my dorm mother was Jean May. We called her Sister May. She was nearly seventy years old. One evening she invited a few of us into her apartment for doughnuts, and we began talking, of all things, about marriage and family. The conversation lasted late into the evening, and toward the end of our get-together, she asked a question I have never forgotten: "Where do you think most women get their major satisfactions in life?" she asked. "From their husbands or from their children?"

We talked it over for a few minutes, and as single, young men unanimously agreed that most women derive their major satisfactions and fulfillment from their husbands.

Sister May rocked a few times in her rocking chair and said, "I think I disagree. I have observed that most women get it from their children." She nibbled on her doughnut and continued, "It's not that women want it that way. Fulfillment is often sought in children because it is all too often missing with husbands."

She made that comment nearly twenty years ago, and I haven't been able to get it out of my mind. Is parental fulfillment often sought by husband and wife because of marital dissatisfaction? And need it be?

One thing for certain, children leave home sooner or later. Where does that leave Mom and Dad? All too often, they find themselves living with a stranger who, over the years, served as a partner in parenting.

In summary, Dr. Hof and Dr. Miller believe that the quality of the marital relationship greatly influences the quality of the total family relationship. If they are correct, perhaps we husbands should give greater attention to our wives in order to strengthen our families.

The Courage to Be Imperfect

While most men are not giving enough time and attention to being a father, a few go to the other extreme and become preoccupied with the role. A father may worry how his children compare to those of his neighbors and friends. Or he may compare himself to other fathers and then worry and fret because he does not seem to have the same skills and attitudes as other fathers.

It may be that his excessive self-consciousness as a father actually hinders him in his role. Being an effective father does require persistent effort and thought. But even in the best of families, mistakes are going to be made by fathers, mothers, and children. Positive outcomes in rearing children do not always come about as a result of following a formula. Children will mature and grow, hopefully with the help of, but sometimes in spite of, their parents.

Perhaps we fathers, particularly new ones, might relax a little more with our children. We could make a concerted effort to rear them adequately, but also learn to enjoy them. And in the process, we could allow for some mistakes to occur. President Brigham Young said, "We are not required in our sphere to be as perfect as Gods and angels are in their spheres." (Journal of Discourses 10:223.) President Young also said, "Those who do right, and seek the glory of the Father in heaven, whether their knowledge be little or much, or whether they can do little, or much, if they do the very best they know how, they are perfect. . . . When we are doing as well as we know how in the sphere, and station which we occupy here . . . we are justified." (Deseret News, August 31, 1854, P. 1)

Dr. Rudolf Dreikurs notes in his book Children: The Challenge, [^3] "Parental perfection is an impossible goal, and striving for it seldom leads to improvement, but more often to giving up in despair. We all make mistakes. Very few are disastrous. Many times we won't even know that a given action is a mistake until after it is done and we see the results! Sometimes we even have to make the mistake in order to find out that it is a mistake. We must have the courage to be imperfect and allow our children also to be imperfect. Only in this way can we function, progress, and grow." (P. 108; italics added.)

Father Types

Whether or not they realize it, most fathers have a model for interacting with their children. In his book Parents in Modern America, [^4] E. E. LeMasters describes five such models and notes the advantages and disadvantages of each. The five models (relevant for mothers as well) are (1) father as martyr; (2) father as buddy or pal; (3) father as policeman or drill sergeant; (4) father as teacher-counselor; and (5) father as coach. Let us briefly examine each.

Father as martyr. Many fathers, without knowing it, adopt the martyr model, wanting only the best for their children. They are willing to sacrifice almost anything, including themselves, for the benefit of their children. Martyr fathers say such things as "Nothing is too good for my children" or "I would do anything for my child." While this appears to be a virtuous attitude, the martyr father does not often act in the best interests of either himself or his children.

Altruism is a desirable part of family life. But if the giving and caring is one sided, as it often is with martyr fathers, the one giving is often taken advantage of by the one receiving.

Martyr fathers usually feel guilty because they are not doing enough for their children. Nor will they ever be able to do so. Having taught at five universities in the United States, I have often been amazed at the hostility and resentment many students have for their parents. I realized that many of these students were coddled and pampered as children. They were usually given gifts and many material things, along with an excess of attention, which is equally detrimental to a child's well-being. Many children of martyr fathers (and mothers) expect their parents to continue to give after they leave home. When the parents can no longer maintain the level of giving, the children are often offended and question the love of the parent.

Most martyr fathers overprotect their children, since they feet excessively responsible and guilt-ridden in their role as parent. Neither guilt nor overprotection is conducive to the well-being of parent or child, particularly as the child matures. Dependent children eventually become demanding children.

The child of a martyr father or mother will almost always revolt and reach out for a more flexible life-style both in and outside the home as he learns to be an individual. Such revolt usually brings conflict with the martyr parent, who then takes the attitude, "Look what you 're doing to me—and after all I've done for you." Such words, often uttered as the martyr parent ages, only bring frustration and guilt upon the child.

Father as buddy or pal. Many fathers, particularly those of the middle-class, have adopted the role model of a buddy or pal. Fathers are supposed to play ball with their children, play games with them, and "get down on their level." While fathers need to play and spend time with children, there are some problems with the "buddy-pal" model of fathering.

Many fathers try the buddy role as a last resort. "If you can't beat 'em, join 'em." The father tries to join his child's peer group, much as a social worker infiltrates juvenile street gangs in large cities. As social workers seek acceptance and try to influence the gang leadership, they operate on one other premise: they have no authority in the gang! Such a role is not only difficult but dangerous for a father to assume.

Sensing that many youth mistrust older people, fathers will often seek the pal or buddy model to alleviate this mistrust. Many people generally do not revere the aged, and some even tend to pity them. And children soon incorporate these values. Since we tend to dichotomize people into being either young or old, many fathers (and mothers) disassociate themselves from the old group and try to involve themselves with the young.

In many ways, the buddy model is extremely unrealistic. If being a pal means being "equal" to a child emotionally and intellectually, the child is free to receive or reject any advice from his father just as he would from any other friend. By law, parents are responsible to rear and guide their children. But letting a child arbitrarily accept or reject parental guidance is demeaning for the parent. This model may work well for very young parents of very young children or teenagers, and it may work well for parents during recreation with their children. But when it comes to the "shoulds" and "should nots," to "yes" and "no," a father-as-buddy will lose much of his influence over the child. Rather than trying to act like and be accepted by youth, parents should act their age, whatever it may be.

The buddy role also involves considerable risk, since there is a tendency to retreat to a more formal, authoritarian model if things do not go well. This shift in role model is difficult for a father to manage without damaging his image in the eyes of the child. In other words, the "friendship" is threatened and may even cease when the "pal" becomes authoritarian.

Father as policeman or drill sergeant. This is the traditional authoritarian father who sees his responsibility as making sure his children understand various rules and then punishing the children for disobedience. Such fathers believe this model will keep children from getting into trouble. If they do get into trouble, the father can always defend himself by saying, "I told him not to do it."

This role is not always effective, particularly in a society becoming more democratic and advocating social equality. Just because an adult tells someone younger to do something does not necessarily mean it will be done. Excellent reviews of rearing children in a society advocating social equality are Social Equality: The Challenge of Today [^5] and Children: The Challenge [^6], both written by Dr. Rudolf Dreikurs. In the latter book, he notes:

Rapid changes take place, but few are aware of the nature of the changes. It is largely the impact of democracy that has transformed our social atmosphere and made the traditional methods of child-raising obsolete. We no longer have rules such as prevailed in the autocratic society from which we are emerging. In a society of equals we can't rule over another. Equality means that each decides for himself. In an autocratic society, the ruler was superior to and had the power over the submissive. Regardless of his station in the world, the father of each family ruled over the members, including the wife. Today, this is no longer true. Women proclaimed their equality with men; and as the husband lost his power over his wife, both parents lost their power over their children. This was the beginning of the general social upheaval that has been widely felt but little understood. (P. 7.)

While the policeman model may work while the children are young, it rarely functions as the child matures. The father will have to abandon his badge and swagger stick about the time of the pre-teens if he wants to maintain any reasonable rapport with his children, particularly after they leave home.

The policeman model may work for some fathers who can convey a great deal of love simultaneously with strict discipline. They can become benevolent despots. But relatively few fathers who adopt this model have either the love or the capacity to convey love to the subordinated child.

Father as teacher-counselor. Like the previous models, this one has some advantages in that fathers and mothers do have things they want to teach their children. This is particularly true in the area of moral or spiritual values.

The teacher-counselor father assumes that the child has almost unlimited potential for growth, and that the role of the parent is to tap that potential. This model is also based on the assumption that the father knows all the right answers. The only problem, supposedly, is to motivate the child to find out what the right answers are.

Within the middle class, this is the dominant model. While it has some fine features, it also creates some problems. This model is excessively child oriented. Since children are supposedly very teachable, the father feels responsible to make his children "into something." Their successor failure, according to this model, depends on the skills of the father. And since the child is the center of the father's universe, he or she often receives excessive attention and becomes spoiled. But little attention is given to the needs of the father or the needs of society in this way of rearing children. And since the father is never sure how his children will turn out he often feels guilty if they do not follow his teachings.

Father as coach. Perhaps the father-as-coach model is better than the preceding models. At some point children must leave home, and yet parents want them to retain some relationship with them during and after their presence in the home. How might parents accomplish this?

First of all, they would see their role as parents beyond the immediacy of day-to-day living. Physically, most children will leave home around their eighteenth year. Psychologically, however, children begin to separate themselves from father and mother as they enter the teens. And maybe what parents can do best is to prepare them to leave home and live in the larger world.

With this perspective, everything we do should prepare our children to function separately, autonomously, and happily in society. The home becomes a microcosm of the larger world, a mini-world where we train children to cope outside the home. The childhood threats of "leaving home" are a prototype of what is to come. Knowing that one day our children will leave, we loosen our grip on them gradually so the transition is not abrupt.

In our home, then, we are going to coach our children in the strategies of life's "game." We are going to teach them the skills for daily living and then hold frequent practice sessions in the home. We will learn together to deal with such things as love, forgiveness, sharing, anger, lying, cheating, and confrontation, and try to understand these behaviors and their consequences.

We will have to be aware of our children's fitness (physical, mental, moral, and spiritual) and have some knowledge of the arena in which they are going to play. We will be aware of both old and new rules. Children must develop stamina, assertiveness, and a competitive spirit. And they must accept some rules of discipline.

We will teach our children that they must sometimes subordinate self for the success of the team. In addition, we will always have the welfare of our players in mind. And most important, we will remember that once the game is underway, it is up to the players to win or lose. The coach must stand on the sidelines and see the results of long and strenuous practice games, of chalk-talks, simulated plays, and constant critiquing of skills and knowledge in scrimmage sessions. But once the players are on the field, they assume the responsibility for the outcome, win or lose. They must strive not only to win but also learn to live with defeat.

Like the other four models, this one has limitations. A coach often has professional preparation, while a father has little other than what he learned from his father. A coach can select his players, but a father must prepare and play everyone in every game, regardless of talent. In difficult situations, coaches can substitute. Fathers cannot. A coach can see the immediate results of his efforts. A father has to wait thirty or forty years to see the final results of his efforts. Coaches can quit or get fired. Parents usually can't. And coaches are expected to at least respect their players, regardless of performance. Parents, however, are expected to love their children, no matter what.

All these are just models, and have only limited application to fatherhood. We don't want to make fatherhood overly complicated. If we don't become obsessed with the role, if we learn to help our wives, we will probably do adequately.

Bows, Strings, and Arrows

All people, husbands, wives, and children, are unique individuals but have chosen to become involved in relationships that require some cooperation and identification with others. The most intimate of these is marriage. The most encompassing is family. How might a proper balance be struck in all these responsibilities?

I like the analogy of Cyril Connolly. He says the perfect union between man and woman is like a strung bow. Who is to say whether the string bends the bow or the bow tightens the string? Yet male bow and female string are in harmony with each other, and their arrow can be aimed. Too taut, the bow or string will break. Unstrung, the bow hangs aimless; the cord flaps idly.

In The Prophet, Kahlil Gibran compares marriage and parenthood with the bow, and children with arrows:

Your children are not your children. They are the sons and daughters of Life's longing for itself. They come through you but not from you, And though they are with you yet they belong not to you. You may give them your love but not your thoughts, For they have their own thoughts. You may house their bodies but not their souls, For their souls dwell in the house of tomorrow, which you cannot visit, not even in your dreams. You may strive to be like them, but seek not to make them like you. For life goes not backward nor tarries with yesterday. You are the bows from which your children as living arrows are sent forth. The archer sees the mark upon the path of the infinite, and He bends you with His might that His arrows may go swift and far. Let your bending in the archer's hand be for gladness; For even as He loves the arrow that flies, so He loves also the bow that is stable. [^7]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] I feel the closest to you spiritually when _____. Spencer W. Kimball, Marriage, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978, pp. 39-41.
[^2] I feel closest to the Lord when _____. Eda LeShan, The Wonderful Crisis of Middle Age, New York: David McKay Co. Inc., 1973.
[^3] I feel the most inspired when _____.
[^4] Religion helps me enjoy life because _____.
[^5] The religious beliefs that mean the most to me are _____.
[^6] Participation in Church activities is important to me because _____.
[^7] The things I'd like to do more (with you) in the spiritual area are _____.
