Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

5

Spirituality

One of the interesting findings of the "Profile of a Loving Husband" was that the item "He helps me attain my spiritual needs" was ranked fifth out of twenty items. The conclusion could be made that the respondents to the survey were mainly from the intermountain area where religion, particularly the Latter-day Saint religion, is a dominant part of life. But it is likely that having spiritual needs fulfilled in marriage is important for other wives as well.

According to my letters, conversations, and survey results, a husband may give gifts, do many deeds to convey love, learn to communicate, help with the children, and do many other things conducive to a successful marriage. But until he learns to help his wife meet her spiritual needs, they both may never find the fulfillment possible in their marriage.

Here are some comments of wives about spiritual matters in marriage:

"Something I would like to do with my husband in the future is to spend more time growing together spiritually. I can have a spiritual experience by myself, but it is so much better if we can share that time and experience together. Whenever I am close to my Heavenly Father I feel close to my husband also, and if he is with me, at my side, it makes me feel much closer to God. The best way for us to increase our love for each other is to have many spiritual experiences together."

"My husband could show his love to me in the future by continuing to put the Lord first in his life and also letting me know he loves me in his daily acts and words."

"I need example, the example of a husband who is striving to attain the same spiritual goals as I am. Also, I need encouragement from my husband to do the things I believe I should do."

"I need a husband who will be the spiritual leader in our home. I need to be able to depend on him to seek the guidance of the Lord concerning our family."

"My husband helps me find the time each day, with. out interruptions from the children, so I can read, study, meditate, and pray. (Of course I should do the same for him.)"

"I wish my husband would initiate family discussions on spiritual matters. I guess he thinks I am the leader of the children and expects me to follow through with their prayers, etc."

"I need my husband to set an example of the basic Christian teachings, such as total honesty to everyone, keeping the Sabbath day holy, etc."

"My husband loves me enough to take me to church frequently. "

"My husband could be more consistent and take more responsibility for having family prayers and spiritual talks with our children. It would greatly increase the spirituality in our home."

"My husband and I try to pray together frequently. It starts our day off right."

"My husband and I enjoy attending our Church and taking part in it. We try and support each other in our church work."

"Since becoming parents, we have found prayer to be an important part of our lives."

"As a wife I have a need not only to understand the scriptures, but also a need to discuss them with someone. My husband reads and discusses the scriptures with me often."

When Susan and I were attending graduate school at Florida State University, we met another couple, Scott and Beverly Zimmerman, with whom we have retained a friendship for many years. We have always felt that Scott and Beverly were deeply committed Latter-day Saints. After graduating from Florida State, we and the Zimmermans lived in different parts of the United States while teaching at various universities and now, ten years later, we find ourselves living in the same neighborhood and attending the same ward.

A few weeks ago, Beverly and I were in the chapel foyer with our small children during sacrament meeting (it's called the First Church of the Foyer). I was explaining to Beverly my interest that spirituality ranked so high in the "Profile of a Loving Husband." Knowing Beverly's interest in the matter, I asked her how she felt a husband could help his wife attain her spiritual needs. She responded with the following ideas.

A husband can help his wife fulfill her spiritual needs by supporting her efforts to reach her spiritual goals. Business partners realize that a strong company depends on the success of both partners. A married couple likewise must realize that a strong marriage depends on the success of both the husband and wife. A husband who supports his wife in achieving her spiritual goals will see the whole marriage benefit.

A married couple needs to be able to discuss their individual and joint spiritual goals and how they can help each other achieve these goals. For example, the wife may have an individual goal to study the scriptures but never seems to find time during a busy day of caring for several small children. The husband might agree to put the children to bed one night a week to give his wife an evening of uninterrupted study. Or the wife may have a goal of providing compassionate service to her neighbors. She decides to send a warm meal to a sick neighbors home. Her husband might support her by not complaining if his own meal needs to be rewarmed. The couple should have a joint goal of teaching moral principles to their children. The husband can support that goal by having family discussions about it.

A husband can help his wife spiritually by treating her as his spiritual peer. He can share his personal experiences and spiritual insights with his wife and seek her advice on scriptural matters. He should realize that a woman's spiritual well-being is closely related to her physical and emotional well-being and make sure her needs in these areas are being met as well.

A Spiritual Leader Speaks

President Spencer W. Kimball, in his book Marriage, [^1] states:

There is a never-failing formula that will guarantee to every couple a happy and eternal marriage; but like all formulas, the principle ingredients must not be left out, reduced, nor limited. . . . The formula is simple; the ingredients are few, though there are many amplifications of each.

First, there must be the proper approach toward marriage, which contemplates the selection of a spouse who reaches as nearly as possible the pinnacle of perfection in all the matters that are of importance to the individuals. Then those two parties must come to the altar in the temple realizing that they must work hard toward this successful joint living.

Second, there must be great unselfishness, forgetting self and directing all of the family life and all pertaining thereunto to the good of the family, and subjugating self.

Third, there must be continued courting and expressions of affection, kindness, and consideration to keep love alive and growing.

Fourth, there must be complete living of the commandments of the Lord as defined in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

With these ingredients properly mixed and continually kept functioning, it is quite impossible for unhappiness to come, for misunderstandings to continue, or for breaks to occur.

Defining Spirituality

It is generally understood that spirituality is a rather subjective area of marriage. Many husbands and wives think that religion or spiritual values are abstract concepts in one's mind, but like many other matters in marriage, the spiritual dimension is often shown by specific behaviors. Until a husband and wife know what spirituality means to each other, it will be difficult for them to fulfill each other's spiritual needs.

Following is a communication exercise to help you discuss the spiritual aspects of your marriage.

Communication about Spiritual Issues

Instructions: Look over the following list and decide together which sentences you will discuss. Then take turns completing the sentences. After you have discussed one sentence, select another one and do the same:

Princes of the Gentiles

Two of the most controversial passages in the Bible relating to marriage are Genesis 3:16, where God said unto Eve, "Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee," and Ephesians 5:22, where Paul admonished, "Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands." These two scriptures seem to put women in a subservient position to men. And there is little question that in some cultures men have higher status than women.

But Paul also said that "the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church" (Ephesians 5:23), suggesting that the leadership Jesus gave his church is the kind of leadership a husband should give his wife. What kind of leader was Jesus?

On one occasion the mother of James and John came to Jesus desiring that her sons be given greater recognition than the other disciples. She wanted one to sit on his right and the other to sit on his left in his kingdom. Jesus replied that they may not understand the rigors of true discipleship. Jesus replied, "Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion . . . , and they that are great exercise authority . . . . But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant." (See Matthew 20:20-27.)

Just as in Biblical times, there are still "princes of Gentiles" who have dominion over others and exercise authority. Unfortunately, many of these "princes" want to exercise that dominion and authority over the women they marry. Those professing discipleship to Christ must remember that he said, "It shall not be so among you." (Matthew 20:26.) Jesus' followers would become great not by dominion and authority, but by becoming servants and ministers to others. And this is the model. A Christian husband should be "head" of his wife by ministering to her and serving her needs.

The relationship of Jesus and his disciples is also illustrated in an incident just prior to his crucifixion. At the time of the Feast of the Passover, Jesus admonished his disciples to love one another and then said, "Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you." (John 15:15; italics added.) This friendship between Jesus and his disciples is another example for husbands and wives. I know of few better ways for a husband and wife to live together than as friends.

As mentioned in chapter 2, companionate or friendship love is a vital part of a husband-wife relationship. Perhaps more of our time in marriage is spent as friends than in any other way. There are times for romance, but most of our marriage is spent being friends.

Young people may become romantically involved with a person they may not even like. And after marriage, a friendship usually develops between the husband and wife. But sometimes it does not. I frequently advise young people approaching marriage to become friends before marriage. That way they won't have to run the risk of a friendship not emerging after marriage. There are too many married couples today who are not friends. They would rather spend time with almost anyone than each other. Couples must simply learn to be friends. I share the sentiments of Eda LeShan, who wrote: "One of the most valuable attributes of marriage is that one's partner can truly be one's best friend, and friendship was never more important. If one defines a friend as someone who loves you in spite of knowing your faults and weaknesses, and has even better dreams for your fulfillment than you have for yourself, it can surely be the foundation for what each of us needs most: . . . permission to quest for one's own identity." [^2]

If anyone questions which is greater in the sight of God, husbands or wives, he or she ought to consider the words of Paul: "For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female Jesus said the ability to love others is the sign of true discipleship. (John 13:35.) This is particularly true for husbands and wives. (See Colossians 3:19; Titus 2:4-5.) And John might have been speaking to husbands and wives when he wrote, "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another." (1 John 4:7-11.)

I appreciate Paul's definition of love. He gives a fairly concise description of what love is and is not in 1 Corinthians 13:4-7:

Love Is Is Not Patient (Suffereth long) Anxious Kind (Is kind) Cruel Supportive (Envieth not) Jealous Modest (Vaunteth not) Boastful Humble (Not puffed up) Arrogant Polite (Doth not behave unseemly) Rude Unselfish (Seeketh not her own) Demanding Non-Defensive (Not easily provoked) Irritable Trusting (Thinketh no evil) Suspicious (Rejoiceth not in iniquity Honest but in truth) Deceitful Submissive (Beareth all things) Resistant Confident (Believeth all things) Doubtful Optimistic (Hopeth all things) Pessimistic Permanent (Endureth all things) Conditional

When we become this kind of person, our charity or love "never faileth." (Verse 8.)

As I have studied these fourteen characteristics of love, I have become particularly impressed with the last four, bearing, believing, hoping, and enduring, and how they relate to a Christian marriage. These four words might be summed up in one word: commitment.

During the past decade we have seen the increasing popularity of short-term marriage—not for a few years, but for only a few months or even weeks. Some celebrities marry for only a few short days. My concern increases when I talk to newly married couples who, after one or two months, are ready to call it quits. Not long ago a young woman phoned me late at night (she actually woke me up) and wanted to know if we could talk for a few minutes. She began to cry and told me how unhappy she was in her marriage. Nothing seemed to be going right, and it wasn't at all like she thought it was going to be. After a few minutes, I finally got a chance to say something and asked her how long she had been married. There was a muffled cry, and then she responded, "Two weeks." Such cases are not uncommon.

I recently had the opportunity, along with an estimated one billion other people, to watch on television the wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana of Great Britain. Besides the pageantry of the ceremony, I was particularly impressed when the prince promised to marry Lady Diana "for better or worse, for richer or poorer, in sickness and in health." This, to me, is what bearing, believing, hoping, and enduring mean in marriage.

Bearing means that we will withstand the difficult times of marriage; we will not give up when things get a little bit rough, particularly during the first years of marriage.

Believing means that we have the confidence in ourselves, in each other, and in God to survive the difficult moments in married life.

Hoping means looking beyond the present. If we are "poor and sick" and things seem "worse" than ever before, we must be able to foresee better times ahead. If we are deeply in debt, we have to envision the time when we will be out of debt. Hope has been defined as the ability to tie a knot and hang on when you come to the end of your rope.

Enduring means that love is permanent. We are going to endure some hardships together. Our love will not depend on changing moods and situations. We will endure all we can, if possible "all things," as Paul says. Of course, in some situations endurance may be impossible.

Latter-day Saints have a special understanding of what marriage should be like as they take upon themselves the covenants of eternal marriage in the temple. As Elder David O. McKay said, "The love of husband and wife is an eternal bond, not sealed lightly in frivolity or passion but entered into by premeditation, careful observation, sacred association and prayer. (Conference Report, April 1930, p. 82.)

I was once speaking with a group of Latter-day Saint couples about commitment, belief, and hope in marriage. One woman said she and her husband had been married for seven years. They had experienced a particularly difficult marriage because of sickness, irregular work, and several other problems. She said there was one quotation that had saved their marriage. They had read it often during the difficult years, and she read it for us: "Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with another." (Doctrine and Covenants 90:24.) That is real commitment!

Confess Your Faults

Recently, a young man who had been married only a few months was describing to me the adjustments he and his wife had made. He concluded, "You might say we have a strange and wonderful relationship—she's strange and I'm wonderful."

The tendency to blame one's spouse for problems and to see one's self as flawless is all too common. Why are we so willing to criticize our spouse's inadequacies and to deny our own faults?

To overcome this tendency, the apostle James encouraged the early Christians to "confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed." (James 5:16.) This may be good advice for husbands and wives.

It is not uncommon in marriage counseling for a husband and wife to come in with a long list of complaints of what the other person is doing to cause stress in their relationship. Both partners can name the times, places, and dates when their spouse did something to offend them. Yet, when asked about their own faults, they deny any wrongdoing. Of course, if nothing else, they have contributed to the stress by allowing it to evolve to the point where it now is.

The inability to recognize one's own faults apparently was a common tendency during the time of Jesus. Drawing on his familiarity with carpentry, he commented on this tendency, using the analogy of a speck of sawdust, a mote, and a large piece of wood, a beam:

Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye. (Matthew 7:1-5.)

By learning to acknowledge our own faults, we are much more likely to help our spouses change than by constantly keeping their inadequacies before them. The likelihood of a person admitting his own weaknesses is usually much greater when his spouse is willing to acknowledge weaknesses as well. By admitting errors and showing willingness to work for reconciliation, you have acknowledged to your spouse what both of you probably recognize: you are two strange people with a potentially wonderful relationship.

James not only encouraged us to confess our faults to each other but encouraged us to pray for each other's weaknesses. It is much easier to pray for the inadequacies of another, as did the Pharisee with the publican (see Luke 18:9-14), than it is to kneel down together as husband and wife and request your spouse to pray in behalf of one of your faults. Jesus said, "Every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." (Luke 18:14.)

Offenses Will Come

Frequently I encounter both married and single people who believe it is possible for a husband and wife to live together year after year without raising their voices or having any kind of confrontation. There are such marriages that may mature over time, or else the husband and wife may be so distant emotionally that they don't care to become involved in any way whatsoever with each other. But for most husbands and wives, there will be times when they will both offend and be offended. Jesus knew this. He said, "It is impossible but that offences will come." (Luke 17:1.) He also said that people should forgive each other even if offended seven times daily! (See Luke 17:1-10.) Few of us get to that point, but some may come close.

Because Jesus knew that offenses would be given and received by his disciples, he taught reconciliation and forgiveness, both of which are important in marriage.

Reconciliation. With slight adaptation, Jesus' teachings on reconciliation can be applied to husband and wife. For instance, in the following scripture, substitute the word spouse for brother. Jesus said, "Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother." (Matthew 18:15.)

Here Jesus says that if one is offended, he has the obligation to go to the person giving the offense and seek reconciliation. When I discuss this concept with couples, they usually say that this teaching seems inappropriate. Why should the offended person seek out the offender? People often think, "They are the ones who hurt my feelings! They should come to me!"

However, most of us can remember a time when we offended someone unintentionally, and we appreciated the person coming to us to make us aware of the offense.

I remember that once as a Church administrator I publicly praised a person who had just been released from a Church assignment. I meant well in so doing and thought nothing of it the rest of the day. That evening I received a phone call from another member of the Church who, in a gentle way, let me know that I had offended him. He said that a few weeks earlier he too had been released from a similar Church assignment and that I had failed to mention his release or recognize his service. I appreciated the phone call because I had unknowingly offended him, and his call gave me the chance to repent and make amends.

Another reason to seek out others when they offend us is that as we sit and stew and smolder, the offense grows in our minds. People frequently ask me when to seek out an offending party and when to just "forgive and forget." I usually answer that if the offense is causing one to lose sleep or disrupting one's daily activities, he should seek reconciliation with the other person.

We should let our spouses know, in a kind way, when they have offended us. Otherwise, they may continue to offend unknowingly.

Not only should we seek out an offending person for reconciliation; Jesus also taught that when we are the offender, we should go to the person we have offended. In the Sermon on the Mount, he said, "Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift." (Matthew 5:23-24.)

In other words, we should reconcile our differences with others, and then we will be ready to worship the Lord. Suppose that you are driving to church, but you and your spouse are not talking to each other because you said something about her always being late. Since you offended her, you have the obligation to seek reconciliation. But as the offended party, she also is obliged to work things out with you. Jesus implied that it is difficult to worship when we have ill feelings toward others. This is particularly true with our husbands or wives.

Jesus also mentioned the importance of seeking reconciliation promptly: "Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing." (Matthew 5:25-26.)

Whether we are the offended or the offender, we have the obligation to seek out the other party for reconciliation. We should do so while we have the opportunity. If we do not, we put ourselves into an emotional prison. Conflict usually gets worse if not confronted and resolved.

The Apostle Paul gave similar advice: "Let not the sun go down upon your wrath." (Ephesians 4:26.) This is where the adage "Never go to bed angry" comes from. When my wife and I were first married, we tried to work out our differences late at night before going to bed. But we never could. We found that by getting some sleep and then discussing our differences the next morning when we were alert, we could quickly resolve our concerns. Most of the time, our differences the night before were so petty that upon waking we couldn't even remember what they were.

"Let not the sun go down upon your wrath" means that we should resolve our differences promptly, perhaps within twenty-four or forty-eight hours. By dealing with our "adversary" quickly, we can avoid the emotional prison that Jesus described.

Forgiveness. Someone once said, "If you were bitten by a snake, you can either chase the snake or get rid of the poison." Most of us, when offended, want to retaliate, or chase the snake. Perhaps there is wisdom in leaving the snake to itself and concentrating on getting rid of the venom. This is what forgiveness is all about.

When Jesus gave the Sermon on the Mount, he taught a higher law than that lived by his disciples. The Mosaic law prescribed "eye for eye, tooth for tooth." (Exodus 21:24.) Jesus taught, however, that we should not retaliate, but turn the other cheek. (Matthew 5:39.)

As a young man, I had a difficult time understanding this teaching. But I failed to learn early in life that the best way to end a confrontation is to not retaliate. What I did learn in my rural upbringing was that if one lives by the sword, he dies by the sword.

Not retaliating admittedly takes self-control, but for husbands and wives, it is a must. Two people seeking vengeance on each other will soon destroy each other, physically, emotionally, or both. And we learn not to retaliate by forgiving. It is true that if retaliation does not occur, the offending party may benefit. But the principle of forgiveness was meant for the offended more than for the offender.

After explaining the principle of forgiveness in my marriage class not long ago, I challenged the students to seek out someone they resented and to initiate reconciliation by going as the offended party to the offender. I suggested that they tell the person that they frankly forgave them, if possible, and then see what happened.

One student, divorced for several years, later reported that she had had many resentful feelings toward her former husband. Since she and her young son had not seen him for a long time, the resentment had grown and was becoming unmanageable. She wrote to her former husband and let him know that his absence since the divorce had caused her much suffering. She told him she forgave him for what he had done, or failed to do.

Then something interesting happened. She realized that she too was part of the problem. So she confessed her faults and asked her former husband to forgive her. She signed the letter and sent it to his last known address.

She was not certain her former husband would receive the letter. But the moment she dropped the letter in the mailbox, it was as if an enormous load had been taken off her mind. She had experienced what it means to get rid of the venom rather than chasing the snake.

As a marriage counselor, it is amazing to me how a husband and wife can offend each other and then carry that resentment for years. One woman described to me something her husband had done nearly eighteen years earlier. She had never been able to forgive him. If she had sought reconciliation when the offense was first committed, she might have worked through her resentment and frustrations. As it was, she had let it go and been resentful for nearly two decades of marriage. It was obvious that the venom had poisoned their relationship.

There are three sentences that work miracles in marriage: "I love you," "I'm sorry," "Please forgive me." While these are difficult to say, they indicate a willingness to acknowledge faults and a desire to be reconciled. Husbands and wives should frequently use these sentences.

Jesus prayed, "Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." (Matthew 6:12.) And at the end of his prayer, he reminded his disciples, "If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." (Matthew 6:14-15.)

Failure of a husband and wife to forgive each other may cause them not to be forgiven for their own sins. Literally, "with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again." (Matthew 7:2.)

Defraud Not

After counseling many couples who either contemplate divorce or actually divorce, I have noticed a pattern that precedes most separations. There are frequent arguments, sporadic separations, talk or threats of divorce, and prolonged periods of time, usually months, with little or no sexual interaction. While there is much more to marriage than intimacy, it is usually an excellent barometer of the well-being of a marriage.

Paul warned against withholding sexual fulfillment in marriage. His counsel, given nearly two thousand years ago, is still valid. In my years of counseling, I have seldom found a marriage that was both stable and satisfying unless both husband and wife were receiving some degree of sexual satisfaction.

Writing to the early saints in Corinth, Paul warned against fornication and then admonished, "Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise also the wife unto the husband. The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband: and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife. Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency." (1 Corinthians 7:3-5.)

Paul encouraged couples to give to each other their sexual or conjugal rights. That he spoke to both husbands and wives shows that women and men have equal rights to sexual fulfillment. He suggested that the body is not for individual gratification, but for the fulfillment of one's husband or wife. He also wisely encouraged husbands and wives not to withhold sexual fulfillment unless both partners agree to abstain for a short time for fasting and prayer. But he warned them not to abstain too long test they should be tempted in their sexual desires.

Some people may "defraud" their husband or wife because they have a difficult time reconciling their sexual feelings with their religious beliefs. They may not realize that God created the human body (Genesis 1:26-27), including the basic sexual drive of men and women. After the human body with all its marvelous functions had been created, "God saw every thing that he had made, and behold, it was very good." (Genesis 1:31.) He then commanded his creations to "multiply, and replenish the earth." (Genesis 1:28.)

Furthermore, in order to overcome loneliness (Genesis 2:18), Adam and Eve became "one flesh." (Genesis 2:24.) Becoming "one" involves many dimensions of marriage, including the sexual act. And sexual unity is still as essential in marriage as it was thousands of years ago.

It is interesting to me that the word sex is not found in the Bible. Yet physical intimacy is described in the scriptures. The word know, meaning "to become acquainted with," is often used in the scriptures to describe the oneness that can develop through sexual interaction. This word is first used in Genesis 4:1: "And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain."

Finally, the Bible admonishes husbands and wives to seek their sexual fulfillment with each other, and in so doing, to take pleasure and rejoice. Sarah, wife of Abraham, referred to the conjugal relationship when she asked the Lord, "Shall I have pleasure?" (Genesis 18:12.) And Solomon admonished, "Rejoice with the wife of thy youth." (Proverbs 5:18.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Margaret E. Sangster, "Our Own," in Best-Loved Poems of the American People, New York: Garden City Books, 1936, p. 59.
[^2] Nick Stinnet and James Walters, Relationships in Marriage and Family, New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1977.
