Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

6

Sensitivity

Oscar Wilde once said, "Each man kills the thing he loves," and the irony of that statement provokes much thought. Perhaps we often take the greatest liberties with those relationships that are most important to us.

We can kill something in one of two ways: (1) by an abrupt act of violence (abuse) or (2) through failure to provide the elements essential for growth (neglect). Both methods are efficient, with the first being sudden and easily noticeable. The second, however, is more subtle, prolonged, and difficult to detect. It was obvious from the numerous letters I received from wives that they wanted and expected greater sensitivity, concern, appreciation, or awareness from their husbands. In other words, they didn't want their relationships to die because of neglect.

We are perhaps more vulnerable in marriage than in any other relationship. A husband and wife are psychologically and emotionally naked before each other. They have no pretenses and no facades because facades erode quickly. One's true self soon emerges after the wedding ceremony and a spouse's weaknesses and strengths emerge. Marriage usually brings out the best and the worst in people.

No one knows a person better than his spouse, and this knowledge can be a two-edged sword. It can be used to help a spouse become a better person by capitalizing on strengths and overcoming weaknesses. Or, as is sadly and frequently the case, it can be used to cut down a spouse by pointing out weaknesses and ignoring strengths.

Here are some comments wives made about their husbands' sensitivity, or lack of it, as the men leave and return home each day:

"One of the things I would really appreciate in the future is the total undivided attention of my husband when we meet after our day's activities. I would like to sit down with him right then and really try to understand each other's experiences and feelings. Perhaps that sort of listening or sensitivity is what we lack most in our marriage. But when he listens—not just to what I am saying, but to how I am feeling—then I know he really loves me."

"I wish my husband would ask me, "How was your day?" or as he leaves in the morning, say, 'I hope you have a good day with the children.' Usually it is the other way around, with me saying something to him."

"It would be nice if my husband would come home from work, look into my eyes, and ask me how I feel, how was my busy day, and then give me a kiss and a long hug."

And wives need encouragement. They reported:

"I want my husband to tell me more often that I look nice or that he likes my hair, outfit, etc."

"Once in a while my husband tells me I look nice and compliments me on a meal. Usually he supports me in the things that I want to do concerning my own life."

"Husbands need to understand that a wife and mother's day is very busy and that we need an encouraging word. Don't judge us critically, but try to understand and talk to us about various matters."

"My husband praises me in public and among his friends. He seldom demeans, jokes, or criticizes me around others or reveals our personal problems or inadequacies to others."

"Usually he praises and gives appreciation for me privately and publicly. He is always telling our children what a great mother they have and what a terrific cook she is."

When wives are not feeling well, they would like extra concern, sensitivity, and help, as indicated in these comments:

"My husband is quick to sense when I'm not feeling well and even offers to come home from his work to help out. Although I've never had him do this, it makes me feel that I'm his first priority and come first in his life."

"There are a few times I remember that I was really sick, almost unable to get out of bed, let alone take care of the children, get meals, or anything else. My husband was able to take right over and handle everything and even has taken off work to stay home and help me. I always felt very grateful to him and very much appreciated his willingness and ability to help."

"My husband cooks breakfast every Saturday morning while I relax and get some extra sleep. Also, there are times he will step in and help when I'm not feeling well. A sick mom goes to bed at our house."

Wives want a husband who will help with the difficult household work. Women need more help and special attention when they are working, sick, or pregnant:

"I wish my husband would show more kindness and caring the next time we have a baby. After taking me home from the hospital he should stick around and help. Sometimes he gets angry at me for not getting the dishes done promptly after breakfast and the house cleaned up after I get home from the hospital. He needs to be more understanding of the fact I just can't bounce and bustle around the house immediately after having a baby."

And sometimes there are just bad days for wives. According to one wife, husbands need to be more sensitive during these times as well:

"In the future I hope my husband will be more understanding when he comes home and finds the house in a disaster. I try hard, but some days just come when a child is ill and hangs on me all day and cries. The phone rings constantly and unexpected company keeps coming. My entire day goes down the tube, the house is a wreck, and my nerves are shot! It hurts me and shows a lack of concern when my husband comes home and says, 'Can't you organize things better and keep this house clean? What a mess!' Far better would be a smile and words like, 'My, but you've had a rough day today! Can I help?' I resent his thinking that I'd slept all day. "

These comments suggest that husbands need to be more sensitive to wives on many occasions. Following are discussions of some of those times.

Leaving home. After graduating from college, I began my teaching career at Davis High School in Kaysville. There I met Ken Sheffield, who was just completing a long and successful career as a teacher and administrator.

One thing my wife Susan and I noticed about Ken and his wife Lucile was the concern and attentiveness they showed each other. They confided that they were particularly sensitive about their last words spoken as they parted each morning. What they said and how they said it often set the tone for the whole day. They took care not to leave each other in the morning with negative thoughts or feelings.

As a newly married couple, Susan and I thought this was a good idea and have tried to incorporate it into our own marriage. And most of the time, we have been successful.

A poem that reminds me of Ken and Lucile is "Our Own," by Margaret E. Sangster:

If I had known in the morning How wearily all the day The words unkind would trouble my mind That I said when you went away, I had been more careful, darling, Nor given you needless pain; But we vex our own with took and tone We may never take back again. For though in the quiet evening You may give me the kiss of peace, Yet it well might be that never for me The pain of the heart should cease! How many go forth at morning Who never come home at night! And hearts have broken for harsh words spoken That sorrow can ne'er set right. We have careful thoughts for the stranger, And smiles for the sometime guest; But oft for "our own" the bitter tone, Though we love our own the best. Ah! lips with the curve impatient, Ah! brow with the shade of scorn, 'Twere a cruel fate, were the night too late To undo the work of the morn! [^1]

Arriving home. One of the most intriguing aspects of marriage is that two people can experience the same event and yet have entirely different perceptions of what happened. When I come home from work, I think of myself as a knight on a white horse who has been out slaying dragons all day. The only thing that could add to the analogy would be if a moat were around our house, a drawbridge were lowered, and the children all lined up and did a trumpet fanfare as I arrived.

Susan, however, sees things differently. She perceives my arrival as being more like the U.S. Cavalry charging in with a bugle call to rescue her from the frequent ambushes of our children. In other words, help has finally arrived.

While this illustration may sound somewhat facetious, it demonstrates something we realized early in our marriage. We found we were often insensitive to what each other had experienced during the day.

Some time ago I was away from home three or four days and missed my family a great deal. I was anxious to get home, but upon returning was disappointed at my welcome. None of the children came to greet me as they were preoccupied with some other activity. My absence had not been noticed as much by my family, it seemed, as it had by me. Susan was unusually quiet during the next few hours, which added to my dismay.

Later that evening I told Susan how disappointed I was. She then told me what had happened while I had been gone. The car wouldn't start, the washing machine had broken down, the hot water heater worked only part of the time, and the children had been less than cooperative. These things had made our time apart difficult for her.

Both husbands and wives confront difficult situations. Perhaps marriage would be less hectic if we were more sensitive to each other's problems when we meet in the evening.

Appreciation

One wife wrote to me:

"I think what women really want is appreciation. Whether we want to admit it or not, our lives are spent in service to our husbands, children, neighbors, church, school, and community. We don't get a paycheck, raise, or promotion for rendering these services. And then we sometimes are asked to do more. Once in a while we get praised for these things, but sometimes it becomes hollow and meaningless. On occasion, we get a genuine thanks and honest appreciation. I can keep going a long time for a few well-timed thank yous. If my husband wants to give me something to satisfy my inner-most desires, he could say thank you more often. This could come in the form of notes, or hugs, or kisses, or a special intimate evening. It can be a wink or a few words said. It can be stopping during the middle of his day to call me for no other reason than "just because." It could be a dozen other things that, surprisingly enough, don't cost large sums of money—just a little time and effort. Just knowing I am still a part of his thoughts and feelings, that I am an integral part of his life, would be great. It would keep my 'gas tank' full."

As husbands, do we express enough gratitude to our wives? Psychologist William James once wrote a book on human needs. Some years later, after the book was published, he commented that he had forgotten to include the greatest need of all—the need for appreciation. Perhaps that is why he later wrote, "The deepest principle of human nature is the craving to be appreciated."

Since that time others have also suggested that appreciation is one of the most positive gestures one person can make to another. But if this is so, why is sincere appreciation so infrequently expressed in some marriages and altogether missing in others? Is it because we do not appreciate each other, or is it because we do not make the effort to express our appreciation?

In their book Relationships in Marriage and Family, [^2] Dr. Nick Stinnet and Dr. James Walters note, "The records of marriage and family counseling clinics suggest that many marital complaints and problems stem from a lack of feeling appreciated. A severe lack of appreciation for a marriage partner can place the marriage relationship in danger of being terminated. For example, when a wife feels that her husband does not appreciate her, her ego is threatened. Her sense of worth is attacked. Lack of appreciation or ridicule can easily result in a wife feeling resentment, bitterness, and even hatred toward her husband." (P. 85.)

Sincere appreciation says, "You are a person of worth and dignity. You have much to contribute to others." It also says, "I am interested enough in you to see and acknowledge your positive qualities." Expressions of appreciation strengthen relationships, and their importance cannot be overemphasized. Nearly everyone has good qualities that can be appreciated by others.

President Spencer W. Kimball said:

Love is like a flower, and, like the body, it needs constant feeding. The mortal body would soon be emaciated and die if there were not frequent feedings. The tender flower would wither and die without food and water. And so love, also, cannot be expected to last forever unless it is continually fed with portions of love, the manifestation of esteem and admiration, the expressions of gratitude, and the consideration of unselfishness. . . .

Many couples permit their marriages to become stale and their love to grow cold like old bread or worn-out jokes or cold gravy. Certainly the foods most vital for love are consideration, kindness, thoughtfulness, concern, expressions of affection, embraces of appreciation, admiration, pride, companionship, confidence, faith, partnership, equality, and dependence. [^3]

Elder Neal A. Maxwell said, "If another person only had in his storehouse of deserved self-esteem what you had put there, what would he have to draw upon and to sustain him?" [^4]

If you are a husband, put down this book and go find your wife. Put your arms around her and tell her how much you appreciate her. Give her some specific reasons why. You might even show your appreciation by helping her in some way. But you should have some household ammonia nearby to revive her in case she faints.

Wives and Self-Esteem

One of the critical issues in marriage today is self-esteem. Most marriage counselors would agree on at least two things: We each are basically responsible for our own self-esteem, and our self-esteem is greatly influenced by how we think others perceive us.

Perhaps no one knows us better than our spouses, and the insights they have about us can be used to build our self-esteem or to destroy it.

In his book What Wives Wish Their Husbands Knew about Women, [^5] Dr. James Dobson, family specialist at the University of Southern California School of Medicine, has reported that low self-esteem is a major problem facing women in America today. He has asked more than ten thousand women to respond to a simple questionnaire; fifty percent reported low self-esteem to be their worst problem. Over eighty percent of the women listed low self-esteem among their top five problems. Dr. Dobson notes, "This finding is perfectly consistent with my own observations and expectations; even in seemingly healthy and happily married young women, personal inferiority and self-doubt cut the deepest and leave the most wicked scars. Feelings of inadequacy, lack of confidence, and a certainty of worthlessness have become a way of life, or too often, a way of despair for millions of American women." (P. 22.)

Marriage counselors have become acutely aware that a husband or wife can often contribute to or be the major cause of a spouse's low self-esteem. If married people want to belittle each other they know the pet words, the old jokes, and the hackneyed phrases that can rattle their spouses on cue. They know what to say and when to hurt each other's feelings and lower self-esteem.

But on the positive side, couples can learn to build each other's self-esteem if they desire. If Dr. Dobson's findings are correct, this is particularly important for husbands to learn to do. But how do they do it?

Dr. Carlfred Broderick, marriage counselor, also from the University of Southern California, notes in his recent book Marriage and the Family, [^6] "Both research and experience show us there are many things one can do directly to help increase a partner's sense of worth. Some techniques are so well known that it is almost embarrassing to recount them here: a compliment, a non-demanding touch, an appreciative look, a smile. Perhaps one might add remembering important things, avoiding hurtful or sensitive areas, and paying attention when the other person is talking. Yet despite the almost universal awareness of the power and value of these gestures, they are missing altogether from many relationships and exceeding rare in many more." (Pp. 80-81.)

Broderick believes that many young people never saw these things in their parents' home. Others, he states, may withhold these gestures to manipulate their spouses. They may also refrain from building the esteem of their spouses in order to feet superior to them. Or they may build up their partner's esteem only later to reveal that they never meant any of the good things they said, thereby contributing to their own and their spouses' cynicism.

A husband should learn how to increase his wife's self-esteem by giving her a storehouse of praise from which she can draw as needed. In addition, he needs to be particularly sensitive when her esteem is low. We all have days when we do not feel our best.

Because of hormonal changes, women have feelings that men sometimes do not understand. These changes occur monthly during the menstrual cycle, with pregnancy, and during menopause. All can cause moodiness. During these times a husband should be particularly sensitive to the needs and feelings of his wife.

Dr. Dobson reports, "Self-esteem in women is directly related to estrogen levels; hence, it fluctuates predictably through the 28-day cycle." Estrogen levels in women are at their lowest point, as is self-esteem, immediately before, during, and after menstruation. The level of estrogen peaks near the time of ovulation, at mid-cycle. This is also the time most women experience the greatest emotional optimism and self-confidence." (P. 151.)

Similar symptoms may occur during pregnancy and after childbirth, when some women experience postpartum depression, and during menstruation.

Among the emotional symptoms often accompanying menopause are prolonged depression, low self-esteem, low frustration tolerance, and inappropriate emotional responses such as crying for no reason or depression during relatively good times. Others are irregular sleep patterns, inability to concentrate, and difficulty in remembering.

Tremendous Trifles

We need to be sensitive in seemingly small matters in marriage. Someone once called them marital termites. In almost every prolonged relationship, including marriage, there are usually things people do that irritate each other. And just because they appear to be insignificant to others does not mean they should or will be insignificant to you.

I had a roommate in college who used to flip his ear while we were studying, and it was highly irritating. Once I had a secretary who had been married just three weeks. I asked her how everything was going. She said the relationship was going well, but then she paused. "There is one thing he does that I can't stand. He always leaves the toilet lid up. And if there is anything I can't stand, it's walking into a bathroom and looking down into a toilet."

If couples are honest with each other, they will admit that minor incidents lead to major annoyances. In his book Marriage, [^7] Dr. Robert O. Blood, Jr., notes that a tremendous trifle is anything that irritates one party but is a mere trifle to the other. To outsiders also these often seem trifling—the cap left off the toothpaste, dirty socks on the bedroom floor, or slurped soup. They seem especially trifling to offenders if they are unaware of their behavior.

Dr. Blood suggests we should not underestimate the impact of tremendous trifles: "Tremendous trifles cause tremendous damage. When anxiety in the threatened partner explodes in denunciation of the offending spouse, he reciprocates defensively. Conflict and mutual recrimination become chronic if the trouble is literally an everyday affair. The fact that the issue is trifling makes it harder to deal with rationally. Major tragedies call out the best in people, but petty irritants are handled in petty ways." (P. 355.)

There are at least four things you can do about tremendous trifles. First, explain to your spouse the annoying behavior and ask him or her to change the habits. Second, if possible, segregate the trouble. Buy two toothpaste tubes and label them "His" and "Hers." Place clothes hampers in strategic places to catch dirty socks or underwear. Get to the bathroom first in the morning so you won't have to face the whiskers in the sink. Third, try humor if both of you can laugh about the incident. Fourth, if your spouse simply will not or cannot change, you may have to increase your tolerance and simply learn to be forgiving. After all, if you ask, you will find that your spouse has a list of your tremendous trifles.

A Weighty Matter

There are, perhaps, few other areas in which husbands and wives need to have greater sensitivity than in weight gain. This is particularly true for women during and after pregnancy. But physical and emotional problems from excessive weight gain also occur at other times. And a marriage partner can be either a help or hindrance during these times.

Most husbands and wives go through a periodic "Dump the Plump" campaign, when one or both try to lose weight. For some this seems to be a continuous process, while for others it is on-again, off-again. There are hundreds of programs and gimmicks for dieters as evidenced by a quick glance at the advertising sections of newspapers and magazines or the yellow pages of the phone book. Have you ever stopped to think, however, that a husband's or wife's weight may be related to their marital relationship?

Sometimes wives gain weight and their husbands tell them to take it off or else. Not knowing what the "or else" entails, they go on a fanatic campaign to lose weight and save their marriage. Little do most husbands realize that there is an inverse correlation between how frequently they ask their wives how much they weigh and the actual weight loss. The more frequently husbands ask, the less weight wives lose.

There are psychological reasons for being overweight. In a few instances, a wife may be afraid of intimacy or has become nonchalant about the relationship. Because of many men's preoccupation with how women look, several extra pounds on a woman may make her less sexually desirable, by design, to her husband. Some women were sexually abused as children and are so terrified of intimacy as adults that they work hard to stay overweight so that they become less attractive.

In her recent book People Around You Can Make You Fat, [^8] Dr. Lee Headley, Los Angeles therapist, notes:

I have observed it to be rather typical in marriage situations to find an overweight woman married to a man who was seemingly calm, competent, and secure. Looking at such a marriage from the outside, it seemed that the overweight woman was lucky to have a husband like that, and it appeared that she was quite dependent on him.

Looking at the marriage from the inside, the husband was often not nearly as secure and self-operating as he seemed, and needed to have a woman who would always be there for him because she had no other option. He was often as uncertain of himself as she was of herself, perhaps more so. Although a couple may never talk about what really goes on, the overweight woman may realize that thinness would jeopardize her husband's security as well as her own, and since she feels responsible for him, she may hesitate to upset the whole apple cart by getting thin. (P. 208.)

Sometimes a spouse is a hindrance to a partner who is dieting. For example, a husband may try to help his wife by acting as a coach and making frequent suggestions as to how she could improve. This, however, frequently leads to resentment by the dieter.

A spouse may try to be a referee who blows the whistle at every infraction of a weight loss rule. He or she may act as a scorekeeper and keep a daily record of every pound lost or gained. But a partner best helps a spouse lose weight by being a cheerleader at the sidelines, applauding his or her efforts. Perhaps a partner could encourage his or her spouse rather than constantly remind him or her about a weight problem. Cheerleaders often do the most good when the game is not going too well.

Marital Sand Traps

Each afternoon as I drive home from the University, I pass a golf course. People seem to be enjoying themselves with their drives, chips, putts, and so forth. And then there are the sand traps.

Golfers in sand traps do unusual things. They become angry and expend unnecessary time, energy, and emotion trying to get themselves out. Perhaps they should use greater effort to avoid sand traps altogether.

Marriage partners also tend to get into their own special kinds of sand traps. Almost every couple seems to have sensitive areas where unnecessary time, energy, and emotions are expended in unproductive efforts. And, as in golf, most of these sand traps could be avoided with a little skill and fore sight.

What are some of the sand traps in your marriage? On what do you and your spouse spend unnecessary rounds of repeated confrontation? What are some of the things you say or do that cause tension?

In their book Me and You and Us, [^9] Dr. Gerald Smith and Alice Phillips list some common areas of sensitivity in marriage: becoming preoccupied with work, forgetting to buy groceries, making the same point over and over, reading the paper while listening or half-listening, accepting a dinner invitation without first checking with a partner, agreeing to visit some people and then complaining about doing it, being too rational or uninvolved during conversation, nagging, the husband comparing his wife to his mother, going to a party and not spending much time with the spouse, and a partner saying "I agree" when he doesn't agree and just wants to keep the peace.

We should approach the sensitive areas in marriage like someone else's feet in a dark movie theater. Avoid unnecessary contact, relax, and enjoy what we were originally seeking.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Kahlil Gibran, The Prophet, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1960, p. 16.
[^2] Lloyd Saxton, The Individual, Marriage, and the Family, 3rd ed., Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1977.
[^3] Robert O. Blood, Marriage, 2nd ed., New York: The Free Press, 1969, p. 292.
[^4] Abraham and Dorothy Schmitt, "Conflict and Ecstasy: A Model for a Maturing Marriage," in Marriage and Family Enrichment: New Perspectives and Programs, edited by Herbert A. Otto, Nashville: Abingdon, 1976, pp. 110-20.
[^5] Paul Ammons and Nick Stinnet, "The Vital Marriage: A Closer Look," Family Relations, vol. 29, 1980, pp. 37-42.
[^6] Herbert A. Otto, More Joy in Your Marriage, New York: Hawthorn Books Inc., 1969, pp. 75-79.
[^7] Darhl M. Pedersen, "Dimensions of Privacy," Perceptual and Motor Skills, vol. 48, 1979, pp. 1291-97.
[^8] Kahlil Gibran, The Prophet, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1960, pp. 15-16.
[^9] Gerald Smith and Alice Phillips, Me and You and Us, New York: Peter H. Wyden, Inc., 1971, p. 89.
