Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

7

Autonomy

In The Prophet, Kahlil Gibran wrote:

Give your hearts, but not into each other's keeping For only the hand of Life can contain your hearts. And stand together yet not too near together; For the pillars of the temple stand apart, And the oak tree and the cypress grow not in each other's shadow. [^1]

The thoughts expressed in these few lines raise a very interesting question about marriage. How much time should husbands and wives spend together? Wives want and need time with their husbands. But must all the hours a husband and wife are away from work, children, and other responsibilities be spent together?

Wives Expect Autonomy

It was indicated in many of the letters from wives that they appreciated being involved in activities that did not always directly relate to husband, children, or family. In addition, in the "Profile of a Loving Husband," autonomy ranked seventh out of twenty items.

One of the best ways a husband can help his wife have more autonomy is to help her with her many responsibilities.

Here are some comments from wives about autonomy:

"I would appreciate having a little more help with the children. It would be nice occasionally to have my husband just take them for a drive—anything—to give me some time for myself. There is also the problem of bedtime. He could say, 'I'll get the kids into bed tonight so you can go read or watch television.' "

"I think women like to be treated as distinct individuals who are unique, intelligent, and important. We like someone to talk to us and listen to us. We need rewards and recognition just as our husbands do. We like to be included in the planning and decisions that affect our lives."

And apparently numerous other husbands do help their wives find the time they need to do things alone:

"I appreciate my husband's constant encouragement to find some activity that would take me out of the home for a time each week while he cares for the children. This results in my being able to take several classes at the University. While I view the physical and financial support as a great manifestation of love, surpassing that has been the emotional support and pride of a husband who delights in my accomplishments."

"My husband encouraged me to take voice lessons, something I have wanted to do for years. All I needed was a little encouragement to do so."

"My husband respects my intelligence and considers my point of view and trusts me to make major decisions while he is gone."

"My husband builds up my self-confidence and sense of personal worth. Whenever I decide I want to improve something about myself, he supports me with the encouragement, cooperation, financial resources, and time to do what I desire to do. Sometimes he will work right along with me."

An American Peculiarity

In his book The Individual, Marriage and the Family, [^2] Lloyd Saxton notes that in America expectations about husband-wife togetherness are different than in any other country: "The expectation is to marry to "live happily ever after" in mutual companionship and emotional support. This cultural ideal of togetherness, which is especially prevalent in the middle class, is a romantic illusion in that it emphasizes unrealistic goals: the exclusive possession of the love object and almost complete identification with it." (P. 251.)

Once couples realize that even between the closest human beings infinite distances exist, they can learn to appreciate their differences as well as their similarities. Robert O. Blood notes, "Couples must share their basic values and key activities, but this does not prevent them from going their separate ways the rest of the time. . . . Happy are those who find it possible to maintain a flexible bond between growing personalities. For them, marriage is a liberating force and a creative achievement." [^3]

Conflict may arise if either husband or wife expects the other to give up all previous interests, activities, and attitudes that he or she cannot share. Stable, fulfilling marriages will likely result if couples build their relationships on the expectation that all must grow as individuals, maintaining individual interests present at the beginning of the marriage in addition to developing new interests after marriage that may or may not be shared.

A Time and a Season

According to Ecclesiastes 3:1-8, there is a time for every purpose under heaven. And part of that is a "time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing [or, in the Hebrew, to be far from each other]," There are times for husbands and wives to be together and times for them to be apart.

I have had some fascinating discussions about autonomy in my marriage classes. Students' expectations vary widely. Some feel that every free moment should be spent with their spouses while others want a great deal of time to pursue personal interests.

Until recently, husbands have expected and usually received the most autonomy in marriage. Their jobs have taken them away from home. For many, there are conventions and nights out with the boys or weekends hunting and fishing. Sports takes a lot of time for men. One wife suggested that her husband be declared legally dead if he watched three consecutive football games on television.

With all his time for self or friends, many husbands are insensitive to the desires of their wives. A husband may argue that when he has to be gone, his wife is able to stay at home. While this is true, she usually has to care for the home and children as well as some of the husband's responsibilities while he is gone. All this time at home can bring about "cabin fever," which can only be cured by getting away from the "cabin" for a few days. Going home to mother has usually been viewed with disdain by most husbands, but a few days visiting parents or friends without having to watch children and keep house may do wonders for a wife. One wife I greatly admire arranged with a friend to go on a river trip for a few days while her husband took care of their home and children.

Carried to an extreme, however, autonomy can destroy a marriage. It is well known that during prolonged separations "absence makes the heart grow fonder . . . for someone else." I am not encouraging prolonged or frequent separations, but an occasional time for both husband and wife to take a breather from their many responsibilities. Then, during this time, the partners may want to think about ways to be a better spouse and recommit themselves to their relationship upon returning.

It is unlikely that any two marriages have exactly the same degree of autonomy for husbands and wives. Different people have different expectations of autonomy. And the desire for autonomy may change within the marriage as the years pass. What is important is that each marriage partner examine his or her own need for autonomy and understand the autonomy expected by his or her spouse.

Four Phases of Marriage

The need for mutuality (joint identity and activities) and autonomy are part of the adjustments many people experience in marriage. Dr. Abraham Schmitt, marriage counselor and professor at the University of Pennsylvania, believes marriages that survive pass through four different phases of mutuality and autonomy as shown in the following chart (modified):

In his article, "Conflict and Ecstasy: A Model for a Maturing Marriage," [^4] Professor Schmitt states that successful marriages go through the phases of Ecstasy I, Conflict, Ecstasy II, and Freedom.

Ecstasy I is the romantic part of mate selection. At the peak moment of closeness, two people commit themselves to marriage for life. This is a time experienced as intense union, when a couple's total needs for intimacy are met.

The Conflict phase begins soon after the marriage as the two people attempt to communicate their wants and needs to each other. They want each other to know that they are two different human beings whose identities are not to be lost in the relationship. During the conflict phase the couple begins to ascertain exactly what they will and will not derive from their marriage. And they begin to determine which of their needs will be met and which were just dreams. A mature couple can pass through the conflict phase without being smothered by the union or devastated by separation.

The third phase, Ecstasy II, begins when a couple realizes that both partners are unique individuals who make valuable contributions to the marriage. They begin to value rather than be threatened by their differences.

Ecstasy II is followed by the fourth and most rewarding phase—Freedom. In this phase, the partners feel free to be close and free to be separate as needed for psychological welfare.

Dr. Schmitt suggests that the couples in phase two, Conflict, should not give up, but should realize that the next phase, Ecstasy II, is attainable.

A loving marriage is not two organisms feeding on each other for sustenance; it is two separate beings, developing in different ways but at the same time touching each other's lives profoundly.

High Ego Strength

An important finding of a study by Ammons and Stinnet [^5] was that the happily married couples they studied had high ego strength and could function apart from each other. A majority (seventy-five percent) of the respondents expressed a moderate need to make independent judgments and take independent actions. Only two percent expressed high dependency needs, and not one of the respondents reported high needs to accept undue blame or admit inferiority.

According to Ammons and Stinnet, the importance of healthy ego strength to a happy marriage appears relevant to forming rewarding personal relationships, handling stress well, and attaining sexual gratification. They also note that stress and conflict are inevitable in an intimate relationship. Stress can be debilitating for those with low ego strength. Their underlying insecurity and fear of losing the relationship may cause them to cling to their mate in neurotic desperation. High ego strength enables couples to weather stressful times and frees them to solve their problems while leaving each partner's integrity intact.

Acknowledging Individual Strengths

It is apparent that individual strengths are crucial to a satisfying marriage. But if you were asked to list your own personal strengths, could you do it? And could you identify those of your husband or wife? Some would be able to list one or two, but the vast majority would have a difficult time doing so. Why? In his book More Joy in Your Marriage, [^6] Dr. Herbert Otto notes, "Our research in human potentialities indicates that fewer than 1 out of 110 persons ever take time to list the good qualities they have. When asked to enumerate both their weaknesses and strengths, most people will list approximately three times as many weaknesses as strengths."

Our preoccupation with our personal weaknesses can affect our marriage. According to Dr. Otto, what we think of ourselves has much to do with how we see and relate to others. If we see ourselves as lopsided, with more weaknesses than strengths, we are likely to be more conscious of another person's weaknesses than we are of his strengths.

To help a married couple become more aware of each other's strengths, Dr. Otto has devised an exercise called "His and Her Strengths."

You and your wife should take a piece of paper and at the top write "My Strengths." Then write down all the good things you perceive about yourselves. Write for five or ten minutes but do not show your list to your spouse yet.

On the other side of the paper write "My Spouse's Strengths" and write all the good traits that you see in your spouse. Write as much as you can in five or ten minutes.

After you have completed both lists, take turns reading your lists aloud. Add to your list any strengths mentioned by your spouse that are not already on your list.

Avoid discussing shortcomings or problems during this exercise. If one of you starts to mention a weakness, the other should remind him that only strengths are being discussed.

Dr. Otto concludes, "All of us rejoice when someone we care about recognizes our positive qualities or that we have done something well. It also makes us feel good if we can praise someone we love about specific strengths."

The "His and Her Strengths" exercise helps a couple increase their awareness of their strengths and correct each other's lopsided perceptions of their weaknesses.

Dimensions of Privacy

Wives, as well as husbands, need privacy on occasion. Contrary to popular belief, there is no one single type of privacy. At least that is the conclusion of Dr. Darhl Pedersen. In Perceptual and Motor Skills, [^7] Dr. Pedersen reports that there are at least six types of privacy, which suggests that privacy may vary from time to time according to circumstances and the individual's need. In addition, people may also have a favorite kind of privacy. The six types of privacy identified by Dr. Pedersen are:

Intimacy with family. A person is alone with family members to maximize family relationships.

Intimacy with friends. A person is alone with friends to maximize interpersonal relationships.

Reserve. A person withholds comments about personal aspects of himself from others.

Anonymity. A person is surrounded by others but does not expect to be recognized.

Solitude. A person is alone in a private area such as a bedroom or study.

Isolation. A person is alone in a remote area.

According to this study, there are many ways a husband can help his wife find some privacy.

A husband may help his wife find intimacy with family simply by making time for the family to be alone without distractions or interruptions. This might be on a camping trip, on a hike, or during family devotionals.

A husband might encourage intimacy with friends by helping his wife to have an occasional night out. Not long ago Susan wanted to see a certain movie, and I didn't really want to go. I suggested she call a friend and invite her. Much to our surprise, the friend had to ask her husband if she could go, and he said, "No! Women aren't supposed to go anywhere without their husbands." We were quite shocked at his response and wondered if his attitude is typical of many husbands.

Privacy by reserve could be found by a husband not demanding that his wife reveal all of her thoughts and opinions. Sometimes what she thinks may be none of his business! Either too little or too much disclosure may hinder communication. There must be a balance between disclosure and reserve.

The need for anonymity might be met in several ways. Some people like to go to a ball game and become one of the several thousand in the crowd. I like to stroll through shopping malls and was surprised to find that Susan enjoys this too. Many people find anonymity by going to the beach or a public gathering where they are surrounded by people who don't know them. A movie star wearing sunglasses is a classic example of someone trying to maintain anonymity.

A husband can help his wife find solitude right in their own home by not invading her privacy in a study, sewing room, or bedroom. He can also keep curious children from intruding. Encouraging a wife to find solitude may be just what she needs to do it.

Isolation is difficult to find, but it can be done, especially in natural settings such as the mountains, the woods, the beach, or the desert. A husband might arrange to take over the household duties for a few days while his wife visits such a spot. One woman wrote to me about her retreat:

"Shall I tell you what I found? Silence. Beautiful and quiet. I was alone. I walked in the hills, I studied my scriptures, I knelt and prayed in the mountain trees, I watched sunsets and listened to the crickets and locusts at night. I heard no sounds but the words I spoke when I prayed as I walked along the fields. I slept and awoke in the mornings, and didn't have to get up. I would stay in bed and listen to the birds sing. I meditated, and found sunrises in hills. I basked in the most elegant three days of my life.

"At the end of that time I came home, refreshed, to begin again. And I could begin. And when I think of those days, I think of an oasis—of peace."

I began this chapter with a quotation from Kahlil Gibran, I close with another that expresses the need for balance in mutuality and autonomy in marriage:

But let there be spaces in your togetherness, And let the winds of the heavens dance between you. Love one another, but make not a bond of love: Let it rather be a moving sea between the shores of your souls. Fill each other's cup, but drink not from one cup. Give each other of your bread but eat not from the same loaf. Sing and dance together and be joyous, but let each one of you be alone. Even as the strings of a lute are alone though they quiver with the same music. [^8]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] If his marriage and home are a man's Shangri-la, why is he so frequently absent? Whyte notes that husbands want to turn over more of the child-rearing responsibilities to their wives than the wives want to assume. One of the most frequent complaints of wives, according to Whyte, is summed up in one sentence: "He doesn't spend enough time with me or the children." And in most cases, husbands agree. William Whyte, "The Wives of Management," in Reflections on Marriage, edited by William N. Stephens, New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co. Inc., 1968, pp. 271-91.
[^2] If a man's major interests are home and marriage, why is it, as many psychologists note, that men show a remarkable ability to repress home worries while on the job? Rarely, however, can men shut out occupational concerns while at home.
[^3] If a man's marriage and home life are more fulfilling than his occupation, why is the prospect of retirement so threatening? If marriage has precedence over job, retirement would seem to be something for which a couple could strive—time to be together.
[^4] If a husband had to make a choice, which would he take: an increasingly satisfying work life and a proportionately less satisfying home life—or the opposite? Whyte suggests that many would be surprised at the answer.
[^5] Paul Ammons and Nick Stinnet, "The Vital Marriage: A Closer Look," Family Relations, vol. 29, 1980, pp. 37-42.
[^6] Herbert A. Otto, More Joy in Your Marriage, New York: Hawthorn Books Inc., 1969, pp. 75-79.
[^7] Darhl M. Pedersen, "Dimensions of Privacy," Perceptual and Motor Skills, vol. 48, 1979, pp. 1291-97.
[^8] Kahlil Gibran, The Prophet, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1960, pp. 15-16.
