Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

8

Time

Many wives in my survey wished they had more time alone with their husbands. They wrote:

"I appreciate it when my husband takes time out to make me feel like a woman. I feel like a mother, a daughter, a daughter-in-law, a Church member, and so on all day long. I need to be reminded from time to time that I am a woman, a wife, and me. My husband has done this by leaving Friday as my day to do what I want. Usually we go out to dinner. It was easy to do B.C. [Before Children and Before (intense) Church activity], but it has become increasingly difficult. Now we go to weddings and other functions, but at least we are together. Spending time together is an absolute necessity." (Italics added.)

"I appreciated it when my husband took a week off work (he works every day except Sunday) and took me, just me, on a vacation. He is a retail store manager and feels very responsible in his position. It made me feel very loved when he set his work aside for that long just to be with me."

While some husbands spend adequate time with their wives, many do not. One wife wrote, 'I would like him to sense my moods and respond with some time especially for me when I am tired, frustrated, or burdened. I would like this time without him complaining and without having to ask for it."

Another young woman said, "In the future, I would appreciate more planning for time together. Specifically, setting aside time for just us. Time to share experiences, develop interests we can share, become better acquainted, and just be good friends."

An older woman wished her husband would just "offer to go out in the evening for a walk or bike ride."

Wives do expect an occasional night out with their husbands. One happy wife said, "I enjoy going on little trips with him or just a date to dinner or a show. But it doesn't have to cost anything to make me happy. All he has to do is let me know he's glad I'm there." And another satisfied housewife simply wrote, "We have a regular date night. He tries very hard to follow the advice of our church leaders, who say we should go out alone as husband and wife."

Some wives don't want to go out on the spur of the moment. One wife admonished husbands, "Plan ahead for dates. Spur of the moment planning is difficult, and by planning you can get more in. Or, it can just make you happier in looking forward to the time together."

Television

Many wives feel they often compete with the television set for the time their husbands spend at home. One wife observed, "Because my husband is usually married to the television, I was pleased and flattered that last Sunday he consented to go for a walk with me. We sat on the grass and talked and watched the sunset, and generally enjoyed each other's company. The personal attention that I rarely get was truly appreciated and fondly remembered."

Another wife noted, "As for something my husband could do in the future, I would appreciate more time spent together in the evenings. He is a very busy man with heavy church responsibilities, and when he has an evening at home, he spends it doing paperwork and then watches television." Another young woman was rather vehement about television: "Some night after the kids are asleep, I wish he would, without my asking, help me straighten up the house and then turn the television off (I hate that television!). Then we could spend the evening hours together."

The television even regulates what time husbands and wives go to bed, sometimes separately. One disappointed wife wrote, "Another expectation is less television. He could use this time to talk to me. Why do we have to wait every night until after the news and weather report before going to bed?"

Some marriage counselors advise newlyweds not to become highly involved with the television, particularly during their first year of marriage. Television can subtly steal the time that you should be devoting to your spouse and later to your children. It will take away the most wonderful hours of your day—hours that could be spent communicating, sharing, and learning to relate to one another. There is no giving or receiving when you spend your time watching television.

Sports and Hobbies

Often when wives are not competing with the television, they become sport or hobby widows. A few years ago at Southern Illinois University, I taught a class for married couples. One evening I asked them to anonymously list their major concerns in their marriages.

Later I compiled a list of their responses and found that a major problem was the husbands' involvement in sports. Many of the husbands spent almost every weekend driving to Saint Louis to watch the Cardinals during baseball and football seasons. Most of the time the wives were left behind.

One wife recently wrote to me about the annual deer hunt, "I wish he would give up deer hunting. It causes so many problems. As much as six weeks before and two weeks after he treats me rudely. If I go with him and his family, he ignores me and talks to them. If I say anything, he accuses me of being a stick-in-the-mud."

Not long ago I counseled a couple on the verge of divorce. Part of the wife's concern was her husband's excessive involvement with golf. I suggested they plan some joint activities during the following week. They agreed to try seven more days of marriage to see what might be done.

They agreed that on Monday they would go out dining, and on Wednesday, they would stay home and review some personal matters together. Then came Thursday.

On Thursday afternoon, she suggested they drive into a nearby city for a musical play. He replied, "No, I have a golf game that afternoon. I must be there." I reminded him that this might be their last week together. He said it didn't matter—the golf game had been planned for several weeks and he couldn't cancel it. His wife and I tried to help him see that his marriage was more important than the golf game, but somehow he couldn't see how his game interfered with his marriage. His wife became furious and told me there would be no need for further counseling. She walked out of the room. And her husband had the audacity to ask, "What's wrong with her?" Is it any wonder that they divorced just two weeks later?

Some husbands, however, are sensitive to their wives' concerns and take their wives along. One wife wrote, "When other fellows ask my husband to go jogging, he tells them, 'No thanks. I'd rather jog with my wife.' The other fellows would be more challenging for him because I am not really a fast jogger. But it makes me think he sincerely enjoys my company."

Many husbands claim they are too busy to spend time with their wives or families. But being too busy is not the real issue. Husbands somehow find time for the things they want to do.

Occupations

Wives often compete for time with their husbands' jobs. And many wives find they are, at best, a close second. In some instances, it isn't even close.

A few years ago, William H. Whyte wrote an article called "The Wives of Management." [^1] He asked some questions that few dare contemplate: Does a man derive his major satisfactions from his occupation or from his marriage? Where does a man spend most of his time?

Of course everyone knows that the answer to the first question should be that a man's major satisfactions in life come from his marriage and home.

However, while this belief is common, Whyte questions whether or not it is correct. He asks:

"Doing all this work for the family," Whyte notes, "is a rationalization for many men. Even if the money were not the incentive, many U.S. males would continue to knock themselves out while highly involved in some type of employment."

Granted that most men work to support their families, two additional questions must still be asked. First, where do employed husbands spend most (and often the best) of their waking hours? With their wives and families, or at work? Second, when husbands are not working, where or with whom do they spend their time? With wife and family or in pursuit of other interests?

If wives are going to get the time they want from husbands, husbands may have to rearrange their priorities.

Psychological Absence

When husbands and wives are together, sometimes the husbands aren't "really" there. A few years ago, some family life specialists studied some fishermen and their families living on a European coast. They wanted to know how these men could go to sea for months at a time without disrupting their families.

One important thing the researchers teamed was that the husbands were not gone by choice nor did they want to "get away" from their wives and children. Fishing was their only means of making a living, so periodically the men would have to be separated from their loved ones.

The researchers also found that even though the husbands were physically absent from the home during their fishing trips, they were psychologically present. The fishermen often thought about their wives and looked forward to returning home. The wives often talked to their children about the men and expressed concern for their safety, and all eagerly looked forward to being reunited.

While many men are physically present in the home, they are often psychologically absent. Too many husbands bring home unfinished work or spend a disproportionate amount of time working at hobbies, reading newspapers, taking catnaps, or watching television. A husband's physical presence in the home should be matched by his psychological presence. Wives don't like to be ignored, particularly when husbands are at home.

How Much Time?

Two years ago, I attended a convention where Dr. Stephen Glenn of the Family Development Institute in Washington, D. C., was the speaker. He reported that, on the average, a husband and wife in the United States spend approximately thirteen minutes a day talking to each other on a personal basis.

According to Dr. Glenn, mealtimes do not count because "conversations" such as "Please pass the butter"or" Is there any more casserole?" are less than personal. Most table-talk is nothing more than simultaneous monologues, and with children present, it is difficult to carry on a conversation about marriage.

Other occasions that don't count for time together include PTA meetings, social engagements, and even some church meetings. At such functions there is little time for personal interaction.

Going to movies and watching television don't count either unless you have acquired the knack of intimate conversation over popcorn or between commercials.

And time spent discussing daily routines of running the home or rearing the children doesn't count either. Wives simply expect time with their husbands alone.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Apparently the couples were able to quickly recognize their need of each other. They also recognized their own and each other's intellectual and other limitations and learned to help when needed. Lee Rainwater, Richard Coleman, and Gerald Handel, "Day In, Day Out," in Reflections on Marriage, edited by William N. Stephens, New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1968, pp. 251-70.
