Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

9

Help

When I was growing up, I heard a song written by Al Frisch about people in love. The first line was "Two different worlds, we live in two different worlds." That this is often true is indicated in the "Profile of a Loving Husband."

It is almost as if husbands don space suits and blast off each morning for another planet, the world of work. At the end of the day they reenter the home atmosphere for a few hours with their wives. However, husbands often see home as a place to refuel so they can go on exploring worlds away from home.

Wives usually assume three major responsibilities noted by Rainwater, Coleman, and Hanel in their article "Day In, Day Out" [^1]: household management, child servicing, and husband servicing.

But if wives nurture their children and to some degree their husbands, who nurtures the wives? How long can they give without, in turn, receiving? Wives want and need nurturing from husbands. And one way husbands can nurture their wives is to become involved in her world and help with her many responsibilities.

Wives Expect Help

That wives would, on occasion, appreciate their husbands helping them is shown by the following comments:

"When my husband gives me his time and helps me, I appreciate him the most. I have decided that I must feel this way because of the many hours I spend every day and week giving personal service to him and our children. Recently he gave extra help when I was chairman of the PTA carnival, president of Primary, and teaching in that organization when no teachers were available. This meant my husband had to rearrange his work schedule since I was so busy during the week. Help with housework or the children, especially when they are small, is what I appreciate most."

"I think the thing I would appreciate most is to have my husband's help on special occasions. When he knows I have to get ready to go somewhere, I would like him to come home a little earlier and help with supper or the children or even just be there so getting ready will not be such a hectic experience for me. Usually by the time I get everything ready so I can go somewhere, I'm too tired and discouraged even to want to go."

"My husband shows his love to me the most when he helps with the household tasks and doesn't criticize when something isn't done. Many men insist that they shouldn't be involved with the work at home because they 'work all day' and are tired when they get home. Well, that is a cheap cop-out. I also work outside the home as a nurse and know what it feels like to come home tired. I believe that neither the man's nor the woman's responsibility to each other stops with a paycheck."

Do Husbands Really Help?

One of the biggest shocks of my marriage occurred one summer when Susan wanted to take a few classes at the university. I was not teaching for a few months and planned to do some writing. So, being the big-hearted husband that I am (or thought I was!), I agreed to become a house-husband and take over her responsibilities while she went back to school. No big problem, I thought, I'll just fix a few meals now and then and make sure the baby sleeps all day, and I will be able to write magnificent articles. Little did I know.

That summer turned out to be a transition in our marriage. Not that I became Super Helper, but I did become keenly aware and more appreciative of what Susan and other wives do to rear children and manage a home. And I would like to think that I now help more than I did before.

Before that, I had agreed to take out the garbage most of the time (which was fifty-one percent to me and ninety-nine percent to her) and do some of the major lifting and more strenuous work around the yard. Beyond that, I did little else. And what I didn't know was that I was typical of most husbands in the United States.

In the July 1981 issue of Family Therapy News [^2] is a fascinating article by Nadine Brozman, "Men and Housework: Do They or Don't They?" Her conclusion? They don't, regardless of all the reports to the contrary. Nadine Brozman summarized the findings of four major advertising agencies that were interested in knowing if they should focus some of their advertising on husbands who might be purchasing major household items and working in the home. They found that "the American husband may say he helps out at home, but save for tending the lawn and taking out the garbage, he's not contributing much."

Much of the research focused on husbands who assist working wives. A report by Batten, Batten, Durstine, and Osborne Advertising Agency concluded, "Today's man wants his woman to work at two jobs—one outside the home and one inside the home. Men may be sympathetic to the fact that this is a tough juggling act for any woman. Yet the majority are not willing to lift the traditional household responsibilities from their wives. The indications are that men would rather pay for labor-saving devices for their wives than labor at wifely tasks themselves."

Most of the men in this study said they expected a wife to assume major responsibility for household chores, whether she was working outside the home or not. More than seventy-five percent said their wives were primarily responsible for cooking, and seventy-eight percent considered cleaning the bathroom their wives' domain. The chore that men seemed most unlikely to do was the laundry.

According to Barbara Michael, vice president of Doyle Dane Bernbach Advertising Agency, "The major disadvantage that the typical husband perceives in having a working wife is the effect not upon the children but upon himself, a husband has to spend more time on household chores that he doesn't like. And with the exception of lawns and home repairs, he pretty much doesn't like any of them. The fear of detrimental effects on children was followed in depth of concern by fear of a decline in cleanliness standards and a sense that the extra income was not sufficient compensation for inconvenience."

A study by Cunningham and Walsh Advertising Agency showed that if husbands do help, it is mostly in grocery shopping and some cooking. They reported, "When not cooking, some husbands are helping around the house in other ways. Taking out the garbage is the man's primary household assignment. Almost half vacuum most or some of the time and two out of five wash the dishes. One in three makes beds and loads the washing machine, while one in four cleans the bathrooms, dusts, and dries dishes. Husbands leave the cleaning of the refrigerator and oven to their mates."

This study shows that a sizeable minority of husbands are taking more responsibility around the house. For the majority, the apron strings have not yet been tied behind their backs.

Still, the prediction is made that what is now a small nucleus of homemaking husbands will grow to a significant segment of society in the future. One such favorable study by Benton and Bowles Advertising Agency of 452 married men indicated that eighty-eight percent agreed that a husband should at least "help out" with chores, particularly if his wife is employed. In a two-week period, eighty percent of the husbands with children under twelve years of age had taken care of the children. And forty-seven percent had helped cook a meal; thirty-nine percent had vacuumed the house; thirty-three percent had cooked an entire meal; thirty-two percent had done the food shopping; and twenty-nine percent had done the laundry.

Perhaps husbands will assist their wives more with household tasks in the future, and not only because it would be a nice thing to do; simply put, wives expect it!

Wives and Stress

If your marriage is like most, you probably have your ups and downs. But think for a moment. What was happening the last time your wife hit the "down" side of life? Was there a death of a close friend or family member? Were there troubles with in-laws? Was a child about to leave home? If you could think of specific events that produced stress, you validated the findings of Dr. Thomas H. Holmes and Dr. Richard H. Rahe of the University of Washington School of Medicine. Their study suggests there are particular times when husbands need to be particularly attentive and offer a helping hand.

Writing in the Journal of Psychosomatic Research, [^3] Holmes and Rahe described a way to correlate stressful events with sickness. They predicted a relationship between stress and illness, and tested their hypothesis with more than five thousand patients.

The two doctors devised their Schedule of Recent Experiences, which assigns numerical values to typical events in people's lives. These events include marriage, death in the family, changes in a job, pregnancy, a large mortgage, and so on. To use the Schedule, check off events that have happened to you within the last year.

Event Value Event Value Death of a close family 63 Outstanding personal 29 member achievement Personal injury or illness 53 Spouse begins or stops work 26 Fired from work 47 Starting or finishing school 26 Retirement 45 Change in living conditions 25 Change in family member's 44 Revision of personal habits 24 health Trouble with boss 23 Pregnancy 40 Change in work hours, 20 Sex difficulties 39 conditions Addition to family 39 Change in residence 20 Business readjustment 39 Change in schools 20 Change in financial status 38 Change in recreational habits 19 Death of close friend 37 Change in church activities 19 Change to different line 36 Change in social activities 18 of work Mortgage or loan under 17 Change in number of 35 $10,000 marital arguments Change in sleeping habits 16 Mortgage or loan over 31 Change in number of family 15 $10,000 Change in eating habits 15 Foreclosure of mortgage 30 Vacation 13 or loan Christmas season 12 Son or daughter leaving home 29 Trouble with in-laws 29

Now add up the assigned values of these events. Holmes and Rahe found that a score of 150 would make one's chances of developing an illness or a health change about fifty percent. If your score is over 300 points, your chances of a health change are up to almost ninety percent. As the score increases, the probability that a health change will be a serious illness increases.

Many of the stressful events are ones that we generally consider to be occasions of joy and celebration. For instance, outstanding personal achievement has a value of 29, a vacation 13 (Susan and I recently had one that must have rated 63), and Christmas, "The Season to Be Jolly," 12. Positive events can produce stress as well as negative events.

Common events such as pregnancy (40), starting or finishing school (26), change in residence (20), change in sleeping habits (16), and change in eating habits (15) are particularly harmful only when they occur in clusters.

From the Holmes and Rahe study, it is evident we can have not only a bad day, but a bad year as well. And during such times husbands should be a little more patient, considerate, and helpful than usual.

Mutual Help

The importance of helping each other in marriage was demonstrated by a study in Great Britain a few years ago. Several people who had met in mental institutions later married each other, and the question arose, "Is marriage a viable relationship for the mentally impaired?"

In her book Marriage and Mental Handicap, [^4] Janet Mattinson reported locating and interviewing thirty-six mentally handicapped couples who had been married from one to fifteen years.

She found that thirty-two of the thirty-six (eighty-nine percent) were still married. This is an impressive statistic when compared to the sixty percent of "normal" couples who stay together in the United States. How could mentally handicapped couples have a lower divorce rate? The answer was simple—they had learned to help each other.

In conjunction with the Department of Sociology in the University of Exeter, Mattinson interviewed the thirty-two couples still together. The following were among her findings:

In summary, Janet Mattinson observed:

I was particularly impressed by the mutual help these husbands and wives gave to each other and by the complementary nature of the partnerships. Recognizing their own intellectual and emotional limitations, they used their partner for what they could not do. . . . The success of many of these marriages seemed to be related to the initial expectation not having been too high. That they had done so much better than most people had expected them to do gave them enormous satisfaction. And some failure was not distressful to them as it might have been to other people whose aims were higher. (P. 201.)

After reading this study, I really wonder who is normal. Who actually provides the best models for marriage? Who gives the help? Certainly we who deem ourselves to be at least average in intelligence have something to learn from these British couples. Perhaps we should admit that we all have limitations and learn to help each other. We could also lower our expectations of what our marriage partner should be, particularly if these expectations are unrealistic. And we could probably be more cooperative and thereby compensate for some of our weaknesses.

A Wife's Plimsoll Mark

Even though many wives undertake tremendous responsibilities, they have limits. And husbands have a particular responsibility to help when these limits are exceeded. These limits have been called by some the Plimsoll mark of mental health.

Samuel Plimsoll was born in Bristol, England, in 1824, and as a youth became interested in commercial shipping. He watched ships load and unload their cargos day after day. Young Samuel Plimsoll soon made a simple observation; regardless of the cargo space available, each ship had its maximum capacity. And after each ship exceeded its limit, it became likely to sink as it went to sea. Many did.

In 1868 Plimsoll entered Parliament for Derby and eight years later passed the Merchant Shipping Act, which prevented ships from sailing in unsafe conditions. One provision of Plimsoll's Act called for making calculations of how much each ship could carry. Marks or lines were then drawn on the hull of each ship, and as the ship was loaded with cargo, it would sink lower and lower into the water. Finally the water level on the side of the ship would reach the mark, and the ship was then loaded to capacity. These marks became known as Plimsoll marks.

Like ships, people have differing capacities to withstand stress. Some stresses are unavoidable, but some we bring on ourselves. Many of these could be eliminated or reduced with a little foresight and effort. Examples of these avoidable stresses are excessive debt, frequent arguments, sexual difficulties, frequent changes in residence, unnecessary or elaborate remodeling and decorating, an increase or decrease in church activity, changes in eating habits or prolonged dieting, excessive weight gain, or an inordinate amount of time spent with sports or hobbies.

Every wife must establish her own Plimsoll line of what she can and cannot handle. Once the line is determined, a husband should help her monitor the load level and assist when the limit is being approached. As with ships, action must be taken when the level is exceeded.

There are at least three things a husband can do when his wife is overloaded. First, he can unload part of the cargo pound by pound or, depending on the condition of his wife, remove large portions immediately. Second, he can help redistribute the load. Sometimes ships and marriages become imbalanced because the load is not properly distributed. A husband may have to assume more of the responsibilities his wife has been carrying. Third, a husband may help his wife re-evaluate what must be carried now and what could be put off until another time. Wives might use the same three principles to help overburdened husbands.

Slave or Servant?

One important aspect of marital love is altruism, the practice of unselfish concern for the welfare of another. After discussing this concept in class not long ago, a student told me of a decision he and his wife made shortly after their marriage that had contributed to many years of fulfillment. They decided to be servants to each other, but never slaves.

The student said that a slave does something for someone else with little or no appreciation, and the services performed are expected rather than anticipated. But a servant, he said, does something for someone else because he wants to, and he gets satisfaction from helping another person.

Marriage might be more satisfying if we were more altruistic. Husbands should stop demanding service from their wives and start giving more appreciation and praise.

One Husband Who Helps

If any husband doubts whether or not his wife would appreciate some help around the house, he ought to consider the following letter I received from a wife not long ago:

Dear Dr. Barlow:

Your column in the Deseret News has inspired me to come straight to my typewriter and tell you about my husband, Phil.

Phil and I were married one year ago last Monday. We are both in our mid-thirties. We have both been previously married. We both have two children from our previous marriages, although his children live in Denver with their mother. My children live with us.

We were engaged for five months, to which I attribute the success of our marriage in a large part. We both have parallel ideals and goals. We are both totally committed to a successful marriage.

I was most impressed with my husband's love for me immediately after our marriage. He took another man's children into his home and into his heart and loved them without discrimination.

How does this show his love for me? I remember as a child hearing my mother say, "When someone does something nice for my children, they do something nice for me." I felt much the same way. Before our marriage, Phil learned how important it was to me to have him treat my children well. It all began with his honest effort to please me. It now has evolved into a genuine love and interest in "our" kids that comes from his love for his family.

From the beginning he has helped me by sharing in our household responsibilities. He cooks, cleans, and supervises the children. He can do the laundry as well as I can. He has never come home from work and planted himself in front of the television. When I'm free, he's free. When I'm working, he's working. All this in spite of the fact that I quit my job in December and have since been a full-time homemaker.

We are now expecting a much-wanted addition in March and I have been in bed with complications. My dear Phil comes home from work and plunges himself into dinner. He frequently serves me a beautiful meal in bed, feeds the kids, does the dishes, throws in a batch of laundry, plays UNO with the kids and me, gets the kids washed and ready for bed—all this and more with never a complaint.

What could he do in the future to show his love? Nothing more nor less than he has already done in the past. He is an unusual man, a patient and tireless husband. Even in trial there is always optimism in his voice.

I have no doubt that this will continue if I do my part. I love him, support him, believe in him, encourage him, praise him. In return, he gives it all back to me, twofold. Thank you for giving me a forum to openly adore my wonderful husband.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Lloyd Ogilvie, "Marriage As It Was Meant to Be," in Making More of Your Marriage, edited by Gary R. Collins, Waco, Texas: Word Books, Publishers, 1976, pp. 21-22.
[^2] Psychology Today, May 1981, p. 17.
[^3] Spencer W. Kimball, Marriage, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1978, p. 35.
[^4] Jan Struther, "Epithalamium," reprinted by permission of Curtis Brown, Ltd., London, on behalf of the estate of Jan Struther.
