Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

10

Final Comments

Toward the end of his life Sigmund Freud wrote, "The great question . . . which I have not been able to answer, despite my thirty years of research into the feminine soul, is 'What does a woman want?'" (Quoted in Charles Rolo, Psychiatry in American Life, 1963.) You now have an advantage in that you know what many, in fact several hundred, wives expect from husbands. The most important expectations, however, are the ones each man's wife has of him, and it is important that she make these known.

Lloyd Ogilvie, in his article "Marriage As It Was Meant to Be," [^1] notes, "It is absolutely essential to clarify what two people need and expect in their marriage. . . . Most frustrations in marriage come from unexpressed desires and uncommunicated dreams. When these are brought out in the open, a new realizable agreement can be worked out. This needs to be done repeatedly and often."

Many husbands and wives become offended at lists of what the perfect husband or wife should be. I am among those who resist the "Paul and Patti Perfect" syndrome. A few months ago I was interviewed on a television call-in program about the "Profile of a Loving Husband." The interviewer introduced me as the professor who had a list of what the perfect husband should be. Because of his introduction, a few irate husbands called in asking how anyone could compile such a list. I explained that it was not my intention to compile such a list, nor, Incidentally, is that the purpose of this book. I have simply compiled some of the expectations wives have of their husbands and tried to indicate which of these are most important.

It is important that husbands know what other wives expect as well as knowing the expectations of their own wives. In a counseling session, a woman tried to explain to her husband that she liked him to touch her and hold her without always heading straight to bed for sexual relationships. After she told him, he became offended and said, "Oh, that's just you. You're the only woman in the world that feels that way!" At this point, I told him about the "Profile of a Loving Husband" and explained that the item "He expresses affection by touch without always having sexual relationships is a common expectation of many women. And his wife was elated to find that she was not alone in her expectation.

Husbands who read this book may also find that some of their wive's expectations are very similar to those of others. They cannot, therefore, dismiss them as idiosyncrasies of their wives only.

A Word About Divorce

While I was training to be a marriage counselor at Florida State University, one of my professors asked an intriguing question: "Is divorce the enemy or ally of marriage?"

Some students recalled the heartaches and pain that divorce frequently brings and suggested it would be best for society if there were no divorces.

"What if," the professor continued, "there were no divorces? Once married there would be absolutely no way to get out of it no matter what." Carried to that extreme, we began to reconsider our opinions.

As long as people have the right to choose their marriage partners, unwise choices will sometimes be made. And even if an adequate choice is made, situations sometimes arise that make marriage difficult and in some cases impossible.

I believe that no one should remain in a relationship where his or her life is threatened or sought. No marriage is worth a human life.

In addition, I believe no one need stay in a marriage where he or she is beaten or physically abused. Common sense dictates that no relationship gives men or women the right to strike each other.

In my opinion, there are also legitimate cases of mental cruelty where one or both marriage partners are emotionally abused over an extended period of time. Such cases are difficult to ascertain, but they often cause as much or more pain as physical abuse.

Certainly there are other circumstances that warrant divorce, including continued non-support or repeated infidelity. But in many marriages where husbands and wives are unhappy, divorce is only one option.

I agree with Roberta Temes, psychotherapist and assistant professor of psychiatry at Downstate Medical School in New York City. In a recent edition of Psychology Today [^2] she wrote,

Couples often consult me about a marriage that is no longer satisfying. They seek 'divorce counseling.' I tell them that divorce is only one option. Patience is a choice, too.

I further tell such couples that there is pain in being single, in being married, and in being alive. Marriage does, however, provide a person to blame for pain. I must convince them that divorce is not a necessary ritual, that individuation and maturity can be achieved without shedding a spouse.

Marriage needs new rules. My wish for my patients is that the solution of the 70's, which was to find a new mate when the current one was no longer need-fulfilling, will be obsolete. I hope the 80's solution will be to explore the absurdity of marital myths and develop rules to allow occasional unhappiness in marriage.

Dr. Temes's thoughts are noteworthy. All too often we demand of marriage what we seldom demand of any other aspect of life—perfection. As students, few of us constantly achieved 100-percent on all of our assignments. No adult always expects a 100 percent return on an investment. No cook is able to make a perfect cake 100 percent of the time, no matter how experienced. And a baseball player who gets a hit only thirty-three percent of the time is pretty well satisfied. Why, then, should we always expect perfection in marriage?

President Spencer W. Kimball said, "Divorce is not a cure for difficulty, but is merely an escape, and a weak one. We have come to realize also that the mere performance of a ceremony does not bring happiness and a successful marriage. Happiness does not come by pressing a button, as does the electric light; happiness is a state of mind and comes from within. It must be earned. It cannot be purchased with money; it cannot be taken for nothing." [^3]

Marriage—an Act of Creation

A few weeks ago, I gave a talk on marriage to a group of newlyweds. After my talk a former student came up to see me. She and her husband, she said, had been happily married for three years. And it had been about that long since she had been in my class.

Like most teachers, I was curious about what she had learned in my class, so I asked her what from the class had most helped her marriage. She said the most important thing I ever taught her was that newlyweds should plant something together and watch it grow. As we discussed this concept, I realized that I had taught her something very important.

Suppose that as a couple you had a great ambition to have a beautiful garden, a place of peace and serenity with tall trees, shrubs, lawns, and flowers. What if you had the plot of ground and tools and then took your lawn chairs and sat down on your land and waited for your garden. How long would you have to wait? Waiting alone would not bring it about. You would have to learn all about soil chemistry, plants, and landscaping. You would have to work hard for months or even years. But one day your dream would come true, and you would be able to enjoy your beautiful garden.

So it is with marriage. Just because we say "I do" at a ceremony, we expect a marriage to happen in some miraculous way, not realizing that it takes time, hard work, and learning new skills to have a satisfying marriage. This idea was beautifully expressed in a poem years ago by an Englishwoman, Jan Struther, who described marriage as an act of creation. She wrote:

The raw materials of love are yours . . . Fond hearts, and lusty blood, and minds in tune: And so, dear innocents, you think yourselves Lovers full-blown. Am I, because I own Chisel, mallet and stone, A sculptor? And must he Who hears a skylark and can hold a pen A poet be? If neither's so, why then You're not yet lovers. But in time to come (If senses grow not dulled nor spirit dumb) By constant exercise of skill and wit, By patient toil and judgement exquisite Of body, mind and heart, You may, my innocents, fashion This tenderness, this liking, and this passion Into a work of art. [^4]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Lloyd Ogilvie, "Marriage As It Was Meant to Be," in Making More of Your Marriage, edited by Gary R. Collins, Waco, Texas: Word Books, Publishers, 1976, pp. 21-22.
[^2] Psychology Today, May 1981, p. 17.
[^3] Spencer W. Kimball, Marriage, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1978, p. 35.
[^4] Jan Struther, "Epithalamium," reprinted by permission of Curtis Brown, Ltd., London, on behalf of the estate of Jan Struther.
