Brent A. Barlow, What Wives Expect of Husbands ( 1982)

Appendix C

Measuring Your Marriage Potential

A simple test "Measuring Your Marriage Potential" [^1] has been constructed by David and Vera Mace from Winston-Salem, North Carolina.

The Maces view marriage not as an unchanging relationship, but as a fluid, flexible interaction because goals in marriage constantly change. The Maces use the term "marital growth" to describe this process.

This test is self-administered and self-scored. All that is needed is a pen or pencil and a piece of paper. It can be taken without any advance preparation. A husband and wife should take it separately and then compare their scores and discuss the implications. Here is the test:

Listed below are ten areas of a marital relationship:

Each partner should write down the ten areas and enter a score, on a scale of zero to ten, to the right of each item. First go through the list and make a quick response. Then take a little more time to go over the areas and revise the scores if you think it is necessary. The score represents where the marriage now stands in relation to where it could be if every possible resource were put to work in bringing it up to its full potential.

A perfect score of ten, for example, for "Appreciation and Affection" would mean that neither partner ever missed an opportunity to give warm support and praise. A score of zero, on the other hand, would suggest that every opportunity is passed by. Relatively few couples, according to the Maces, rate their marriage at either extreme of zero or ten. Most scores fall somewhere in-between.

After each person has evaluated the ten categories, the scores should be added up. The resulting figure represents a percentage of the marriage potential that person has assigned to the relationship. The difference between the assigned score and 100 indicates the marriage potential yet unattained.

The next step is critical. The Maces suggest that the couple set a time when they can be alone together, uninterrupted, for at least an hour. During this period they should compare scores for the separate areas and the total score.

Nearly all couples who have taken this test, according to the Maces, have found it to be a significant experience. Many find their scores nearly identical, which suggests that their separate perceptions of the marriage as a whole are similar. When a significant disparity in a score exists, it suggests that a closer examination should be made of that area. The couple should discuss why they placed such different values on this particular part of their marriage.

If the scores are identical or very close, and low, clearly some work should be done. The Maces counsel such couples not to be discouraged about these low scores because "they mean you have money in the bank that you've never used. There are some good things waiting to be claimed."

For many couples, the discussion of the test is very challenging. It means facing some of the realities in their marriage they may have previously avoided. Often the partners know but have never jointly faced the reality that specific areas of their marriage can be improved.

After discussing their scores, the couple should plan steps that both agree upon to improve their relationship in their deficient areas. They could write down and sign their plan so that they have a written commitment to which they can refer.

The Maces warn against the danger of attempting to change too much too quickly. "Do it in easy, manageable steps," they caution. "If you try to jump over a four-foot wall together and you're only able to clear a three-foot wall, you're both going to hurt yourselves." They further suggest that the couple share their commitment with another couple or couples to whom they can report progress, or with a counselor.

A final interesting aspect of this test is that it can be repeated. Since the measure of marriage potential used is subjective, the scores can change over time. As you gain clearer understanding of yourselves and each other, you may alter your evaluation of what is possible for your marriage. Your scores will change as you move toward a more realistic perception of what you are capable of achieving together.

You may want to change the list of areas to be evaluated. If you do not have children, for instance, you may want to drop parent effectiveness and add another area such as decision making, use of time together, balancing separateness and togetherness, or spiritual development.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Common goals and values Family Coordinator, January 1978, pp. 63-67. Also in Readers Digest, July 1980, pp. 63-68.
