For the information of the members of the Church, the First Presidency has issued the following statistical report concerning the growth and status of the Church as of December 31, 1978:

Number of stakes of Zion

Number of full-time missions

Number of independent branches in stakes

Number of mission branches

Number of countries with organized wards or branches

(These statistics reflect an increase of 694 wards and branches during 1978.)

Total membership reported by stakes, missions, and Church offices at the close of 1978

Children of record baptized

(This convert baptism figure is an estimate based on 1978 reports received at Church headquarters prior to conference.)

Birthrate per thousand

Number of persons married per thousand

Death rate per thousand

(This represents an increase of 37,000 priesthood holders during 1978.)

Full-time missionaries

Total enrollment during the 1977–78 school year:

Seminaries and institutes, including special programs

Church schools, colleges, and continuing education

Persons assisted with cash or commodities

Persons assisted by LDS Social Services

Persons placed in gainful employment

Man-days of labor donated to Welfare Services

Commodities distributed from storehouses (in pounds)

Names cleared in 1978 for temple ordinances

The Genealogical Department is acquiring records in 43 countries and has a total of 983,000 one-hundred-foot rolls of microfilm, equivalent to 4,679,000 volumes of 300 pages each.

Number of endowments performed during 1978:

Temples in operation

Temples planned or under construction

Temples undergoing remodeling

There were 204,900 more endowments done in 1978 than in 1977, even though one of the temples was not in operation.

Elder Delbert L. Stapley, a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles; Ida Jensen Romney, wife of President Marion G. Romney, Second Counselor in the First Presidency; Dr. Ernest L. Wilkinson, former president of Brigham Young University; President Rudolph H. Luckau, president of the New Zealand Wellington Mission; President Robert Austin Trump, president of the Centerville Utah South Stake; Raymond J. Pace, former member of the General Church Missionary Committee and Regional Representative; and Wendell B. Mendenhall, former chairman of the Church Building Committee.
