CONCLUSION

As set forth in the preceding pages, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints proclaims the need of Temples at the present time, reared and dedicated to the service of the Most High; and affirms that upon the Church has been placed the commission to build and maintain these sanctuaries, and to administer therein the saving and exalting ordinances of the Gospel for both living and dead.

This labor has already attained a magnitude at once impressive and surprising. Ordinances of baptism with accompanying confirmation, ordination in the Priesthood, and sealing both in the relation of husband and wife and in that of parents and children, as solemnized in the Temples of the current dispensation, already number many millions; and the continuation of the work is marked by unabated zeal and devotion.

The Gospel of Jesus Christ is given for the salvation of human-kind; its requirements apply alike to the living whose blessed privilege it is to hear its glad tidings while in the flesh, and to the dead who may accept the truth in the spirit world. The genius of the Gospel is that of altruism unbounded; its power to save extends beyond the portals of death. As the vicarious work for the dead can be done only in sanctuaries specially devoted thereto, there will be an ever-present need for Temples so long as there are souls awaiting this ministry.

The present is the age of greatest import in all history, embodying as it does the fruition of the past and the living seed of the yet greater future. The present is the dispensation of fulness, for which the dispensations of bygone centuries have been but preliminary and preparatory. The saving and sanctifying labor incident to modern Temples surpasses that of the Temples of earlier times as the light of the full day exceeds the twilight of the dawn.

The authority of administration in the Temples of Solomon, Zerubbabel, and Herod, was that of the Lesser or Aaronic Priesthood; for the Higher or Melchisedek Priesthood, otherwise known as the Holy Priesthood after the order of the Son of God, had been taken from Israel with Moses. The temples of the present are administered under the greater authority. The importance of the distinction between these two orders of Priesthood may warrant a further consideration in this place. That the two are essentially separate and distinct is made plain by Paul in his epistle to the Hebrews:

    "If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for
    under it the people received the law,) what further need was there
    that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedek, and
    not be called after the order of Aaron?

    "For the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
    change also of the law."[1]

The apostle emphasizes the superiority of the Priesthood named after Melchisedek by affirming that Jesus Christ was a High Priest of that exalted order.[2] This Priesthood was held and exercised by the patriarchs in  turn from Adam to Moses. Aaron was ordained to the priest's office, as were his sons; but that Moses held superior authority is abundantly shown.[3] After Aaron's death his son Eleazar exercised the authority of High Priest of the Lesser Priesthood; and even Joshua had to ask of him counsel and instruction.[4]

From the ministry of Moses to that of Christ the Lesser Priesthood alone was operative upon the earth, excepting only the instances of specially delegated authority of the higher order such as is manifest in the ministrations of certain chosen prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and others. It is evident that these prophets, seers, and revelators, were individually and specially commissioned; but it appears that they had not the authority to call and ordain successors, for in their time the Higher Priesthood was not existent on earth in an organized state with duly officered quorums. Not so with the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood, however, for the courses or quorums of that order were continued until the time of Christ. The last to hold and exercise the authority of the Aaronic Priesthood under the old or Mosaic dispensation was John the Baptist, who was specially commissioned. The matter is thus set forth in a modern revelation:

    "Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the
    wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they
    might behold the face of God;

    "But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence,
    therefore the Lord in his wrath (for his anger was kindled against
    them) swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the
    wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

     "Therefore he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy
    Priesthood also;

    "And the Lesser Priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the
    key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

    "Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the
    remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the
    Lord in his wrath, caused to continue with the house of Aaron among
    the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled
    with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb;

    "For he was baptized while he was yet in his childhood, and was
    ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old
    unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make
    straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to
    prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all
    power."[5]

The Higher or Melchisedek Priesthood was restored through the personal ministry of Jesus Christ, and remained with His apostles and in the Church under their administration, but was again lost as the great apostasy progressed.

The Holy Priesthood in its fulness has been restored in the present age,--not alone the lesser functions of deacon, teacher, and priest, which constitute the distinctive offices of the Aaronic order including the Levitical, but the higher authority as well--that of the elder, the seventy, the patriarch, the apostle, and the high priest.[6]

The Temples of today are maintained and the distinctive ordinances pertaining thereto are administered under the authority of the Higher of Melchisedek Priesthood, the greatest and highest commission ever conferred upon man. The Divine prediction voiced by Malachi is in  process of rapid fulfilment. Elijah the prophet has been sent to earth and he has committed to the Church that power and authority by which the vicarious service in behalf of the dead was inaugurated. Through his ministration the hearts of the fathers are turning toward the children, and the hearts of the children toward the fathers, and this in preparation of the approaching advent of our Lord, the Christ.[7]

FOOTNOTES

1. Hebrews 7:11, 12.

2. See Hebrews 5:6, 10; 6:20; compare Psalm 110:4; see also Genesis 14:19.

3. Consider the Lord's rebuke to Aaron and Miriam, Numbers 12:1-8.

4. See Numbers 27:18-23.

5. Doctrine and Covenants 84:23-28; read the preceding verses 14-22.

6. "The Aaronic Priesthood is named after Aaron, who was given to Moses as his mouthpiece, to act under his direction in the carrying out of God's purposes respecting Israel (Exodus 4:14-16). For this reason, it is sometimes called the Lesser Priesthood; but though lesser, it is neither small nor insignificant. While Israel journeyed in the wilderness, Aaron and his sons were called by prophecy and set apart for the duties of the priest's office. (Exodus 28:1.)

"At a subsequent period of Israel's history, the Lord chose the tribe of Levi to assist Aaron in the priestly functions, the special duties of the Levites being to keep the instruments and attend to the services of the tabernacle. The Levites thus chosen of the Lord were to take the place of the first-born throughout the tribes, whom the Lord had claimed for His service from the time of the last dread plague in Egypt, whereby the first-born in every Egyptian house was slain, while the eldest in every Israelitish house was hallowed and spared. (Numbers 3:12-13, 39, 44-45, 50-51.) The commission thus given to the Levites is sometimes called the Levitical Priesthood; (Hebrews 7:11.) it is to be regarded as an appendage to the priesthood of aaron, not comprising the highest priestly powers. The Aaronic Priesthood, as restored to the earth in this dispensation, comprises the Levitical order. (Doctrine and Covenants 107:1.) This priesthood holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and the authority to attend to the outward ordinances, the letter of the gospel; (Doctrine and Covenants 107:20.) it comprises the offices of deacon, teacher, and priest, with the bishopric holding the keys of presidency.

"The greater or Melchisedek Priesthood is named after the king of Salem, a great High Priest of God (Genesis 14:18; Hebrews 7:1-17.) before his day it was known as 'the Holy Priesthood, after the order of the Son of God, but out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of His name, they, the Church, in ancient days, called that Priesthood after Melchisedek.' (Doctrine and Covenants 107:2-4.) This priesthood holds the right of presidency in all the offices of the Church; its special functions lie in the administration of spiritual things: comprising as it does the keys of all spiritual blessings of the Church, the right 'to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly and Church of the First Born, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant.' (Doctrine and Covenants 107:8, 18-19.) The special offices of the Melchisedek Priesthood are those of apostle, patriarch and evangelist, high priest, seventy, and elder." The "Articles of Faith," XI: 13-15.

7. See Malachi 4:5, 6; also pages 82-86, and 122, this book.

PLATES

ILLUSTRATIVE OF MODERN-DAY TEMPLES

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Note: Among the illustrations following, are several showing interior views of the Temple at Salt Lake City, specifically Plates 8 to 38 inclusive. Each of these pictures is protected by Photo Copyright, and all rights pertaining thereto are expressly reserved.

Plate 1.--The Kirtland Temple

Plate 2.--The Nauvoo Temple

Plate 3.--The Great Temple, Salt Lake City

Plate 4.--The Temple in Winter

Plate 5.--Statue surmounting the Capstone of the Temple

Plate 6.--One of the Doors to the Temple

Plate 7.--The Temple Annex

Plate 8.--Annex Assembly Room

Plate 9.--Passage connecting Annex with Temple

Plate 10.--Lower Corridor in Temple

Plate 11.--The Baptistry

Plate 12.--Lower Lecture Room

Plate 13.--Garden Room

Plate 14.--Upper Corridor

Plate 15.--Side Corridor

Plate 16.--Art Window,--Expulsion from Eden

Plate 17.--World Room, Looking West

Plate 18.--World Room, Looking East

Plate 19.--Terrestrial Room, Looking West

Plate 20.--Terrestrial Room, Looking East toward the Veil

Plate 21.--Celestial Room, Looking East

Plate 22.--Celestial Room, Looking West toward the Veil

Plate 23.--Sealing Room for the Dead

Plate 24.--Sealing Room for the Living

Plate 25.--Reception Room adjoining Sealing Room for the Living

Plate 26.--Outer Ante-Room

Plate 27.--The Holy of Holies

Plate 28.--Hall-way on Third Floor

Plate 29.--Elders' Room

Plate 30.--Council Room of the Seventy

Plate 31.--High Council Chamber

Plate 32.--Council Room of the Twelve Apostles

Plate 33.--Council Room of the First Presidency of the Church and the Twelve Apostles

Plate 34.--The Memorial Window

Plate 35.--Main Assembly Room, general view

Plate 36.--Stand and Pulpits for Melchisedek Priesthood in Main Assembly Room

Plate 37.--One of the Spiral Stairways in Main Assembly Room

Plate 38.--One of the great Granite Stairways

Plate 39.--Temple Block, Salt Lake City

Plate 40.--The Tabernacle on Temple Block--Exterior

Plate 41.--The Tabernacle--Interior

Plate 42.--Statue of Joseph Smith, the Prophet

Plate 43.--Statue of Hyrum Smith, the Patriarch

Plate 44.--St. George Temple

Plate 45.--Logan Temple

Plate 46.--Manti Temple

PLATE 1.--THE KIRTLAND TEMPLE

This, the first Temple reared to the name of the Lord in modern times, was erected at Kirtland, Ohio. The corner stones were laid in July, 1833, and the building was finished and dedicated in March, 1836. The structure is still existent though no longer owned by the people who reared it, nor used for the distinctive purposes characteristic of Temples.

The Kirtland Temple was built by the Latter-day Saints in the period of their early history as a Church--in the days of poverty and persecution. In less than two years after the completion of the building, the people were forced to leave, and the Temple soon thereafter passed from their custody.

In this Temple many heavenly manifestations were witnessed; and therein the Lord Jesus appeared in Person, and instructed His chosen servants.

PLATE 2.--THE NAUVOO TEMPLE

This structure, built by the Latter-day Saints at Nauvoo, Illinois, was the second Temple of the present dispensation. It was begun in 1841, and completed in 1846. In it was constructed the first Baptismal Font of modern times for the sacred ordinance of Baptism for the Dead.

Owing to religious intolerance and violent persecution, a general exodus of the people had begun before the building was finished, though not before many had received their blessings and endowments therein. Certain parts of the Temple were dedicated for ordinance work long before the dedication of the building as a whole.

In 1848 the Temple was partly destroyed by fire; and in 1850 the ruined walls were leveled by a tornado.

PLATE 3.--THE GREAT TEMPLE AT SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

This splendid structure was forty years in building. The corner stones were laid April 6, 1853; the capstone was placed in position April 6, 1892, and the completed Temple was dedicated April 6, 1893; each of these events was marked by impressive ceremony. The walls are of solid granite eight feet thick in the first story and six feet in the upper parts. Many stones of emblematical significance appear representing sun, moon, stars, the earth, and the clouds.

On the main inscription stone at the east we read: "Holiness to the Lord" and on the keystones of the arched windows at both east and west ends, "I am Alpha and Omega," and above these is the awe-inspiring emblem of the All-seeing Eye.

PLATE 4.--THE GREAT TEMPLE IN WINTER

The Temple is centrally located in the easterly half of Temple Block. The grounds are beautified by a profusion of shrubs, trees, and flowers. Many observers have voiced their uncertainty as to whether the Temple appears more beautiful when environed by the greenery of summer or by the white foliage of hoar-frost or snow. The scene herewith presented was caught by the camera in the spring of 1912.

PLATE 5.--STATUE SURMOUNTING THE CAPSTONE OF THE GREAT TEMPLE

The stonework of each of the six towers ends in a sphere of granite. The termination of the east center tower is the highest stone in the building and constitutes the capstone. Anchored to this granite globe is a figure wrought in copper over-laid with gold; it stands over twelve feet high, and represents Moroni, an ancient Nephite prophet, who as a resurrected being visited the boy-prophet, Joseph Smith, in 1823, and afterward delivered to him the ancient record since published to the world as the Book of Mormon. The design is that of a herald with a trumpet at his lips. The statue is the work of C. E. Dallin.

The capstone on which the statue stands is one of the record-stones of the Temple. In a receptacle within the granite mass are a number of books and other records.

PLATE 6.--ONE OF THE OUTER DOORS OF THE TEMPLE

There are four outer portals leading into the Temple beside the entrance from the Annex. Each of these four doorways occupies a court between the towers. The doors are hung in pairs, each door twelve feet high and four feet wide. The woodwork is of oak, hand-carved. The middle and upper panels hold heavy plate glass in front of which are grills of bronze. Even the door-knobs and escutcheons are of special design, in which appear the bee-hive and the inscription "Holiness to the Lord." On the central side of each of the doorways is a niche roofed by a canopy of granite, to accommodate a statue.

PLATE 7.--ANNEX TO THE GREAT TEMPLE

Each of the four Temples in Utah is provided with a small detached building known as the Annex. This is used for office purposes and other incidental service, and contains an assembly room in which are held devotional exercises preliminary to those of the Temple proper.

The Annex of the Salt Lake City Temple is an attractive building of cream-colored oolite, standing about one hundred feet north from the main structure. The Annex is connected with the Temple by a passage, partly below ground-level.

PLATE 8.--ASSEMBLY ROOM IN THE TEMPLE ANNEX

This room, thirty-six feet square and provided with spacious alcoves on two opposite sides is used for purposes of general assembly preparatory to the ordinances of the Temple. Here congregate on the morning of each day of service all who are to take part, either in administering or receiving ordinances. The large painting, which appears at the center of the accompanying illustration, is Weggeland's full-sized copy of Munkacsy's "Christ Before Pilate." Portraits of living authorities of the Church adorn the walls of the main section, and portraits of deceased Presidents and Apostles are hung in the alcoves.

Just inside the vestibule of the Annex is the office of the Temple Door-keeper, to whom must be presented, by every person applying for admission to the Temple, a certificate or "recommend" signed by the Bishop of his Ward, and the President of his Stake, attesting the worthiness of the bearer to enter the House of the Lord.

PLATE 9.--PASSAGE CONNECTING ANNEX WITH TEMPLE

A flight of stairs leads downward from the main floor of the Annex to this semi-subterranean passage, which runs southerly about ninety feet and terminates at the threshold of the Temple. The door opening directly into the lower corridor of the Temple appears in the background.

This is the usual avenue of entrance to the Temple. Only those who assemble for the council meetings of the Priesthood pass the outer portals into the Temple direct.

The passage is well lighted and ventilated, and in cold weather comfortably warmed. A strip of the old-style rag carpet covers part of the floor.

PLATE 10.--LOWER CORRIDOR OF THE TEMPLE

The Lower Corridor is entered from the Annex Passage through the north wall of the Temple, and extends thence southerly to the opposite side. The corridor is twelve feet wide, and is richly finished and furnished.

On the east wall is a large painting by William Armitage, showing the Prophet Joseph Smith preaching to the Indians. Smaller paintings are hung on either side. Doorways leading from this corridor admit to the Lower Lecture Room and the Garden Room on the east, and to the Baptistry and its dressing rooms on the west. At the south end is seen the lower section of the Grand Stairway.

PLATE 11.--THE BAPTISTRY

The Baptistry or Baptismal Room is thirty-two by forty-five feet and is situated on the west of the Lower Corridor. The great Baptismal Font occupies the center of the room, and is supported by twelve life-sized oxen of cast-iron, which stand in a depression three feet below the floor level. The oxen are grouped, three facing toward each of the cardinal points of the compass.

In this font, which has a capacity of over four hundred gallons, is administered the ordinance of baptism by immersion. By far the greater number of baptisms here solemnized are in behalf of the dead, in which ordinance the deceased person is represented by a living proxy.

Steps are provided for convenience in entering and leaving the font. Platforms guarded by a railing are furnished with seats for the accommodation of recorders and witnesses whose presence at each ceremony is requisite.

PLATE 12.--THE LOWER LECTURE ROOM

The room so designated is entered from the Lower Corridor near the north end. It is forty by forty-five feet in area, and is seated to accommodate two hundred and fifty persons. This room is used in the first course of instruction incident to the Endowment. As seen in the accompanying illustration it is plainly furnished, without wall-ornament or other embellishment. The portal hung with curtains, which appears in the back-ground of the picture, leads into the Garden Room.

PLATE 13.--THE GARDEN ROOM

As already seen, the Lower Lecture Room is marked by simplicity and plainness; the Garden Room is characterized by richness and beauty. Here ceiling and walls have been painted by master artists, who have depicted with effective skill the distant glory of sky and cloud, and the nearer beauties of earthly life. Landscape scenes cover the walls from floor to ceiling: there are gardens and glens, hills, valleys, and brooks, fruits and flowers, birds and other living things, all appearing amidst a setting of beauty, plenty, and peace. Lions and lambs are reposing in companionship, while insect and bird fly together.

The room represents the earth as it was before sin entered and brought with it the curse; it is the Garden of Eden depicted in miniature. On one side is a richly-upholstered altar, upon which rests the Holy Bible.

PLATE 14.--THE UPPER CORRIDOR

The illustration presented herewith shows the Upper Corridor at the head of the Grand Stairway. The walls are hung with portraits and paintings of scriptural scenes. In the back-ground, at the north end of this corridor, is the doorway leading into the Celestial Room, shown in Plates 21 and 22. A portal on the right leads into one of the ante-rooms (Plate 26) to the Sealing Room for the Living; that on the left is the entrance to a side passage which in turn leads into the World Room (Plate 17).

PLATE 15.--SIDE CORRIDOR

From a landing near the top of the Grand Stairway a side corridor leads to the west and opens into the World Room. The picture here shown was taken from the west end of this corridor, and the observer is therefore looking east into the Upper Corridor already described and illustrated. The large wall painting presents a scene from the Book of Mormon record--that of the Resurrected Christ ministering to the children on the occasion of His visit to the Nephites. (Book of Mormon, III Nephi 17:23, 24.) The painting is the work of William Armitage.

PLATE 16.--ART WINDOW,--THE EXPULSION FROM EDEN

The passage from the Garden Room below to the World Room on the next floor is by way of the Grand Stairway and the Side Corridor last described. On the south side of the passage is a splendid art window of elliptical shape depicting the expulsion of the first parents of the race from Eden after the Fall. It is of particular appropriateness in this part of the building, and impresses the beholder as a symbol of the great change brought about by the Fall of Man.

PLATE 17.--THE WORLD ROOM, LOOKING WEST

The walls of the World Room are painted with scenes typical of the earth after the Fall. There are hills and crags, trees and flowers, but the whole presentation is that of the fallen state. In place of gentle slope and mossy dell, there are precipitous hills and broken rocks. The trees are gnarled and misshapen. In the accompanying picture two lions are seen in deadly combat, while the lioness stands nearby awaiting the outcome of the struggle. Two bears are feasting on the carcase of an animal killed by a lynx which, driven from its prey, has taken refuge in a tree. Compared with the blessed peace of Eden these scenes are strikingly impressive by their contrast.

PLATE 18.--THE WORLD ROOM, LOOKING EAST

On the rear walls of the World Room are depicted further scenes of disturbance, disruption, and violence. Rocky crags, blasted shrubs, and deformed trees are shown in impressive detail; and in the distance a storm scene is pictured. Deer appear in life and death struggle; birds of prey are slaying their weaker kindred. On the summit of the cliffs is an eagle's nest, holding the eaglet brood; and alongside stands the mother bird awaiting the arrival of her mate, who is approaching in rapid flight with a lamb in his talons.

This room is devoted to instruction concerning the effect of the Fall, and the state of the earth under the curse of God.

PLATE 19.--THE TERRESTRIAL ROOM, LOOKING WEST

This spacious chamber, which is entered from the World Room last described, presents the appearance of combined richness and simplicity. The walls are hung with framed canvases, some of which are rare originals, others excellent copies, depicting incidents in the life of Christ, and scenes in Palestine. Near the east end of the room is a prayer-altar, on which are placed copies of the Holy Scriptures.

The room is all the more restful in its general effect by contrast with the scenes of turmoil and conflict which the World Room so strongly portrays. In this room instruction is given and lectures are delivered relating to the significance of the endowments, and the practical duties of life. It is sometimes designated as the Upper Lecture Room, but is also known as the Terrestrial Room.

PLATE 20.--TERRESTRIAL ROOM, LOOKING EAST TOWARD THE VEIL

This is the room shown in Plate 19, but here it is pictured from a point at the west end. The framed canvas on the right is the original painting by Girard depicting the scene of Joseph in prison, interpreting the portentous dreams of Pharaoh's butler and baker. A picture of the Holy Family occupies a prominent position at the east end, immediately above the Veil.

The Veil, which separates the Terrestrial Room from the room that typifies the Celestial state, is a portiere hung in four sections. The Veil is approached by a short flight of steps from the floor of the room.

PLATE 21.--THE CELESTIAL ROOM, LOOKING EAST

The Veil of the Temple hangs between the Terrestrial Room last described and the Celestial Room shown in the accompanying picture. This is the largest of the ceremonial rooms, and of all it is the most splendidly finished. In area it is sixty by forty-five feet, and its height is thirty-four feet. Wall columns support entablatures from which spring ten arches immediately beneath the cornice. The ceiling is vaulted and paneled; beams and cornices are carved to represent clusters of fruit and flowers. At the east end are large mirrors, and around the room, in the wall niches and recesses, are paintings and statuary. Three large portals on the south, each closed by a pair of sliding doors, open into the two sealing rooms and the Holy of Holies (See Plates 23, 24, and 27.) On the north side, not shown in the picture, are large casements, corresponding in position to the opposite portals; these are hung with portieres, which in material and color match the silken Veil.

PLATE 22.--THE CELESTIAL ROOM, LOOKING WEST TOWARD THE VEIL

This will be readily recognized as the Celestial Room illustrated by the last picture, Plate 21. The View here shown, however, is that obtained from the east end, as the observer looks toward the Veil of the Temple. The corner door-way on the left opens into the Upper Corridor at the top of the Grand Stairway, as is seen in Plate 14.

The Celestial Room is richly carpeted, and the movable furniture is all excellent in kind; the furnishings throughout harmonize with the splendid finish of ceiling and walls. Living plants are distributed about the room and the effect is that of beauty and completeness. The walls are of soft-brown color, while the columns are embellished in light-blue and gold.

PLATE 23.--THE SEALING ROOM FOR THE DEAD

Of the three small ceremonial rooms entered from the Celestial Room, this, the Sealing Room for the Dead, is reached first as one proceeds easterly from the Veil. This apartment is slightly raised above the floor of the large room, and is furnished in subdued color. At the altar in the fore-ground kneel the parties who appear as proxies for the dead. The art-window at the rear of the alcove represents the resurrected prophet, Moroni, in the act of delivering to the boy, Joseph Smith, the ancient record since translated by the power of God and published as the Book of Mormon. The event here depicted occurred on the 22d of September, 1827.

This room is reserved for the sacred ordinances of sealing in behalf of the dead, which ordinances comprise the sealing of husbands and wives and of parents and children.

PLATE 24.--THE SEALING ROOM FOR THE LIVING

The most easterly of the three small rooms adjoining the Celestial Room is here shown. This is the Sealing Room for the Living, wherein is solemnized the holy rite of Celestial Marriage. Marriage ceremonies for the period of mortal life alone are not performed within the Temple. The parties who come to the House of the Lord to be wedded by the authority of the Holy Priesthood for time and eternity kneel at the altar shown in this picture and there enter into eternal covenant with each other. Here, also, living children who have been born outside the pale of Celestial wedlock, though within the legally constituted state of matrimony, may be sealed to their parents provided those parents have been first sealed to each other.

The room is finished in light tints and bright tone. The door in the recess affords admittance from an anteroom.

PLATE 25.--RECEPTION ROOM ADJOINING SEALING ROOM FOR THE LIVING

From the Upper Corridor, entrance to the Sealing Room for the Living is afforded through two small apartments, known as reception halls, waiting-rooms, or ante-rooms. It is possible, therefore, to reach the Sealing Room without entering the Celestial Room. This plate shows the inner of the two, with the door of the Sealing Room open; through this portal the altar is revealed, as well as a glimpse of the Celestial Room beyond.

PLATE 26.--OUTER ANTE-ROOM

This cozy apartment is entered from the Upper Corridor and communicates by an inner door with the Reception Room shown in Plate 25. Like the preceding, this room is used for no ceremonial rites, and is utilized solely as an ante-chamber for those who await admittance to the Sealing Room within. Through the outer door, which stands open in the picture, appears part of the balustrade of the Grand Stairway.

PLATE 27.--THE HOLY OF HOLIES

This, the Holy of Holies of the Temple, is situated between the two sealing rooms already described; it is therefore the central of the three small rooms referred to as opening directly into the Celestial Room. It is the most elaborately finished of all the smaller apartments. A flight of six steps leads to the elevated floor of this room, and the portal is guarded by a pair of sliding doors, which in a measure correspond to the inner veil of the ancient sanctuaries.

The room is circular in form; and on the side opposite from the portal is a splendid art-window, picturing the visitation of the Eternal Father and His Son the Christ to the boy-prophet Joseph Smith. The event here delineated occurred in the early spring of 1820. (See "The Articles of Faith," 1:12-14.)

Beneath the pictured scene is inscribed the forceful admonition of James, through the study of which the boy, Joseph Smith, was led to seek Divine aid:

    "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all
    men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him."
    (James 1:5.)

And below appears the utterance of one of the Celestial Personages:

    "This is my Beloved Son; hear Him."

PLATE 28.--THE HALL-WAY ON THIRD FLOOR

By way of this corridor, the several council rooms on the third floor of the Temple are reached. The picture is taken looking east along the corridor into the Dome Room, which is so named from its most prominent feature--that of a large central dome, which forms the ceiling of the Holy of Holies.

On the north of this hall-way, or on the left as the observer stands. are two doorways opening into the Council Room of the First Presidency and Twelve Apostles; on the opposite side are the entrances to the Council Room of the Twelve, the Council Room of the Seventy, and the Elders' Room.

PLATE 29.--THE ELDERS' ROOM

This apartment, furnished with chairs, table, and an altar for prayer, is provided for the use of the presiding Councils of the quorums of Elders belonging to the near-by stakes. The room is reserved for devotional service only.

PLATE 30.--COUNCIL ROOM OF THE SEVENTY

The seven presidents of the first quorum of the Seventies constitute a presiding council, having jurisdiction over all other quorums of Seventies in the Church. The room shown herewith is devoted to the use of this presiding body, which is known as the First Council of the Seventy. The room is furnished to accommodate the seven presidents and a clerk or recorder. At stated intervals the Council meets here for devotional service, and to consider matters pertaining to the spiritual upbuilding of the quorums in their charge. Business sessions are held at the offices of the Council in another building.

PLATE 31.--HIGH COUNCIL CHAMBER

The presidency of each Stake of Zion comprises three high priests,--a president and two counselors. To assist the presidency in conducting the affairs of the stake, and having specific duties as a judicial body, are twelve other high priests, duly chosen and set apart, who constitute the High Council of the stake. The Stake Presidency and the High Council meet as one body to consider matters pertaining to the welfare of the stake, or as a court to hear appeals from the Bishop's court of any ward within the stake, or to exercise original and initiative jurisdiction.

The room provided in the Temple for the use of Stake Presidencies and High Councils is shown in the accompanying plate. The presiding bodies of several stakes have the use of this chamber, the time of occupancy being regulated by rule. No Church trials are held, nor is other procedure of a secular or temporal nature here conducted. This is strictly a room for devotion and spiritual instruction. A rear view of the Memorial Window (Plate 34) is presented in this room.

PLATE 32.--COUNCIL ROOM OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES

The spacious chamber here pictured is exclusively devoted to the use of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. The Council assembles at stated intervals in regular session, and whenever summoned by the President of the Twelve for special sittings.

The room is supplied with twelve chairs of a kind, beside which there are other chairs for recorders, also a table, a desk, and an altar used in prayer. On the walls are hung oil portraits of the First Presidency, the Twelve Apostles, and the Presiding Patriarch.

On the north side are two doorways opening upon the hallway or corridor shown in Plate 28; on the west is a doorway communicating with the Council Room of the Seventy (Plate 30). A large circular mirror adorns the north wall.

PLATE 33.--COUNCIL ROOM OR THE FIRST PRESIDENCY AND THE TWELVE
APOSTLES

This room is forty by twenty-eight feet and is furnished with seats for the First Presidency of the Church, the Twelve Apostles, the Presiding Patriarch and a recorder, seventeen in all. As the picture shows, the chairs of the Apostles are arranged in order around the altar; the seats of the First Presidency and the Patriarch form a line alongside the wall.

The walls support several paintings by Alfred Lambourne, among which are his Hill Cumorah, and Adam-ondi-Ahman--replicas of canvases hung in the Celestial Room; and beside these are several scenes illustrative of the life and the atoning death of Christ. A few portraits of Church leaders now deceased also appear; prominent among these are paintings of Joseph and Hyrum Smith and Brigham Young. In this chamber the presiding councils of the Church meet as appointed. The chamber connects with an ante-room in which is set the art window shown in Plate 34.

PLATE 34.--THE MEMORIAL WINDOW

In a small apartment adjoining the Council Room of the First Presidency and the Twelve, there is the large memorial window pictured herewith. The Temple is shown as it stands with the inscription "Holiness to the Lord," appearing as in the clouds above the great building. On the left-hand panel, beneath the bordered escutcheon, we read:

  Corner stone laid April 6, 1853, by
  President Brigham Young,
  Assisted by his Counsellors,
  Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards.

And on the right-hand panel, similarly placed, is the inscription:

  Dedicated April 6, 1893, by
  President Wilford Woodruff,
  Assisted by his Counsellors,
  George Cannon, Joseph F. Smith.

PLATE 35.--GENERAL VIEW OF MAIN ASSEMBLY ROOM

The fourth floor of the Temple is occupied entirely by the Main Assembly Room and its vestries. The room pictured in the accompanying plate is one hundred and twenty feet long, eighty feet wide, and thirty-six feet high. At either end is a series of pulpits with terraced platforms.

The body of the room is furnished with reversible seats by means of which the audience may conveniently face either stand as occasion requires. At the time this picture was taken, these seats had been removed, and only the fixed lecture chairs on the end platforms and in the gallery remained. The view here shown is that of an observer looking toward the west, at which end is situated the stand devoted to officers of the Aaronic Priesthood.

PLATE 36.--STAND AND PULPITS FOR MELCHISEDEK PRIESTHOOD IN MAIN
ASSEMBLY ROOM

The view presented herewith shows with some detail, one of the end stands in the Main Assembly Room already described. The stand is really a series of four terraces, on each of which is a central lectern with a smaller table on either side. The highest terrace is under a canopy, on the front of which is inscribed the particular order of Priesthood to which the stand belongs. The accompanying picture shows the stand at the east end of the great room, which is reserved for the officers of the Higher or Melchisedek Priesthood.

The lecterns with the smaller book-tables and all allied wood-work of the stand are hand carved. The room is finished in white and gold.

PLATE 37.--SPIRAL STAIRWAY IN MAIN ASSEMBLY ROOM

Access to the gallery of the Main Assembly Room is afforded by four stairways, one in each corner of the great hall. These four stairways are of similar design. Each is a graceful spiral, winding about a central post. This picture shows the stairway in the southwest corner of the Main Assembly Room.

The picture is of interest in illustrating the fact that all parts of the great Temple are finished with thoroughness and care. There is no neglected corner. It would seem, indeed, that the builders had well learned the poet's lesson:

  "In the elder days of art
        Builders wrought with greatest care
  Each minute and unseen part;
        For the gods see everywhere."

PLATE 38.--ONE OF THE GREAT GRANITE STAIRWAYS

Each corner of the great Temple is marked by a large tower; and in each of these four corner towers is a stairway reaching from basement to roof, and every step is of solid granite. A central column of granite four feet in diameter supports, at the inner end, the one hundred and seventy-seven granite steps. Each step is six feet six inches long and weighs over seventeen hundred pounds; this amounts to over one and a quarter million pounds as the weight of the seven hundred and eight steps in the four tower stairways.

PLATE 39.--TEMPLE BLOCK, SALT LAKE CITY

The city square or block upon which stands the great Temple is occupied in part by other buildings devoted to Church purposes; among these are the Assembly Hall, the Tabernacle, the Bureau of Information, and, on the north half, therefore not shown in the picture, the Temple Annex, the Conservatory, and other minor buildings.

Temple Block is a square of ten acres; it was laid off in 1847, and reserved for the uses to which it has since been put; this was but a few days after the arrival of the "Mormon" Pioneers in the valley of the Great Salt Lake. The entire block is surrounded by a wall fifteen feet high, consisting of a base of cut sandstone, courses of adobes or sun-dried brick, capped by a sandstone coping; the adobes are plastered on both sides. The block has been beautified by the best art of the landscape gardner, and with its wealth of trees, shrubs and flowers, presents a scene of attractive beauty.

PLATE 40.--THE TABERNACLE--EXTERIOR

By architects and others this building has been pronounced one of the most remarkable auditoriums ever erected. As the picture shows, it is simply a great dome supported by buttressed walls. It was in course of erection from July 1864 to October 1867.

The immense dome-roof is a lattice-work construction and is self-sustaining. The roof span is without a single pillar. More remarkable still, the roof is built entirely of wood and was constructed without nails or metal spikes. The enormous beams and trusses were held together by wooden pegs and rawhide thongs. While the Tabernacle was in course of construction, iron nails and spikes were obtainable only as they were brought across the plains by wagon and team, and the high cost prevented their use.

Many modern buildings present larger roof spans, but such are generally constructed of metal. The roof covering of the Tabernacle consisted originally of wooden shingles: these have been replaced, however, by sheet metal. The building is two hundred and fifty feet long and one hundred and fifty feet in greatest width; from floor to ceiling at the middle the distance is seventy feet; and the net work of beams and trusses between ceiling and roof is ten feet high.

PLATE 41.--THE TABERNACLE--INTERIOR

A gallery thirty-six feet wide extends around the interior of the Tabernacle except at the west end, where the gallery gives place to the great organ and a terraced platform providing accommodations for Church officials and the choir. In the choir space, seats are provided for three hundred singers, with other seats for nearly as many more in the adjacent sections of the spacious gallery. The building, as a whole, affords seating room for nearly nine thousand persons, but audiences much larger than this have assembled on many occasions. The acoustic properties of the building are surprisingly good.

The great organ occupies nearly a thousand square feet of floor space, and towers to a height of forty--eight feet. The instrument is, in reality, a combination of five individual organs,--Solo, Swell, Great, Choir, and Pedal organs. To operate the bellows an electric motor of ten horse-power is employed and the air capacity is about five thousand cubic feet per minute. The instrument comprises one hundred and ten stops, and over thirty-six hundred pipes. The pipes range from a fraction of an inch to thirty-two feet in speaking length. This splendid instrument, which at the time of its construction was the largest organ in the country, is the product of local talent and all its wood-parts are of native material. The organ as it stands represents a cost of over one hundred and twenty-five thousand dollars.

PLATE 42.--STATUE OF JOSEPH SMITH, THE PROPHET

Life-size statues of Joseph and Hyrum Smith are seen on Temple Block. On the front tablet of the pedestal supporting the bronze figure of Joseph, we read:

    JOSEPH SMITH

    THE PROPHET OF THE NEW DISPENSATION OF THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST
    OUR LORD. HE WAS BORN AT SHARON, VERMONT, ON THE 23RD OF DECEMBER,
    1805; AND SUFFERED MARTYRDOM FOR THE WORD OF GOD AND THE TESTIMONY
    OF JESUS AT CARTHAGE, ILLINOIS, ON THE 27TH OF JUNE, 1844.

    HIS VISION OF GOD

    I SAW TWO PERSONAGES WHOSE GLORY AND BRIGHTNESS DEFY ALL
    DESCRIPTION. ONE OF THEM SPAKE UNTO ME AND SAID:

    THIS IS MY BELOVED SON: HEAR HIM.

    I ASKED WHICH OF ALL THE SECTS WAS RIGHT AND WHICH I SHOULD JOIN.
    I WAS ANSWERED I MUST JOIN NONE OF THEM; THEY WERE ALL WRONG; THEY
    TEACH FOR DOCTRINE THE COMMANDMENTS OF MEN; I RECEIVED A PROMISE
    THAT THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL WOULD AT SOME FUTURE TIME BE MADE
    KNOWN TO ME.

    THE BOOK OF MORMON

    THIS BOOK WAS REVEALED TO HIM, AND HE TRANSLATED IT BY THE GIFT AND
    POWER OF GOD. IT IS AN INSPIRED HISTORY OF ANCIENT AMERICA, AND
    CONTAINS THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. IT IS THE AMERICAN TESTAMENT OF
    OUR LORD AND SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.

    THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CHURCH

    JOSEPH SMITH RECEIVED DIVINE AUTHORITY THROUGH THE MINISTRATION OF
    ANGELS TO TEACH THE GOSPEL AND ADMINISTER THE ORDINANCES THEREOF.
    HE ESTABLISHED AGAIN IN THE EARTH THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST,
    ORGANIZING IT BY THE WILL AND COMMANDMENT OF GOD ON THE 6TH DAY OF
    APRIL, 1830.

    HE ALSO RECEIVED COMMISSION TO GATHER ISRAEL AND ESTABLISH ZION
    ON THIS LAND OF AMERICA; TO ERECT TEMPLES AND PERFORM ORDINANCES
    THEREIN BOTH FOR THE LIVING AND THE DEAD; AND PREPARE THE WAY FOR
    THE GLORIOUS COMING OF THE LORD JESUS CHRIST TO REIGN ON EARTH.

The tablet on the back of the pedestal bears the following inscription:

    TRUTH-GEMS

    FROM THE TEACHINGS OF JOSEPH SMITH

    THE GLORY OF GOD IS INTELLIGENCE.

    IT IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR A MAN TO BE SAVED IN IGNORANCE.

    WHATEVER PRINCIPLE OF INTELLIGENCE WE ATTAIN UNTO IN THIS LIFE WILL
    RISE WITH US IN THE RESURRECTION.

    THERE IS A LAW IRREVOCABLY DECREED IN HEAVEN BEFORE THE FOUNDATIONS
    OF THIS WORLD, UPON WHICH ALL BLESSINGS ARE PREDICATED; AND WHEN
    WE OBTAIN ANY BLESSING FROM GOD IT IS BY OBEDIENCE TO THAT LAW ON
    WHICH IT IS PREDICATED.

    THIS IS THE WORK AND GLORY OF GOD: TO BRING TO PASS THE IMMORTALITY
    AND ETERNAL LIFE OF MAN.

    ADAM FELL THAT MAN MIGHT BE: AND MEN ARE THAT THE MIGHT HAVE JOY.

    THE INTELLIGENCE OF SPIRITS HAD NO BEGINNING, NEITHER WILL IT HAVE
    AN END. JESUS WAS IN THE BEGINNING WITH THE FATHER: MAN WAS ALSO IN
    THE BEGINNING WITH GOD. INTELLIGENCE, OR THE LIGHT OF TRUTH, WAS
    NOT CREATED OR MADE, NEITHER INDEED CAN BE.

    THE SPIRIT AND BODY IS THE SOUL OF MAN; AND THE RESURRECTION FROM
    THE DEAD IS THE REDEMPTION OF THE SOUL.

    "IT IS THE FIRST PRINCIPLE OF THE GOSPEL TO KNOW FOR A CERTAINTY
    THE CHARACTER OF GOD; AND TO KNOW THAT MAN, [AS MOSES], MAY
    CONVERSE WITH HIM AS ONE MAN CONVERSES WITH ANOTHER."

PLATE 43.--STATUE OF HYRUM SMITH, THE PATRIARCH

The statue of Patriarch Hyrum Smith, like that of his brother Joseph, the Prophet, has been moved from its first place of installation in the granite niche at the east Temple entrance and is now upon the open grounds. Both statues are set on pedestals of Utah granite, which pedestals with their bases have a total height of four feet four inches. The figures were modeled by Mahonri M. Young, a sculptor of Utah nativity. On the front face of the pedestal supporting the statue of the Patriarch is a bronze plate on which appears the following:

    HYRUM SMITH

    THE PATRIARCH AND A WITNESS OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

    AN ELDER BROTHER AND THE STEADFAST FRIEND AND COUNSELOR OF JOSEPH
    SMITH, THE PROPHET.

    BORN AT TUNDRIDGE, VERMONT, FEBRUARY 9TH, 1800; SUFFERED MARTYRDOM
    WITH THE PROPHET AT CARTHAGE, ILLINOIS, ON THE 27TH OF JUNE, 1844.

    THE FRIENDSHIP OF THE BROTHERS HYRUM AND JOSEPH SMITH IS FOREMOST
    AMONG THE FEW GREAT FRIENDSHIPS OF THE WORLD'S HISTORY. THEIR NAMES
    WILL BE CLASSED AMONG THE MARTYRS FOR RELIGION.

    THE BOOK OF MORMON--THE PLATES OF WHICH HYRUM SMITH BOTH SAW AND
    HANDLED; THE REVELATIONS IN THE BOOK OF DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS; THE
    CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS--THESE, TO BRING THEM
    FORTH FOR THE SALVATION OF THE WORLD, COST THE BEST BLOOD OF THE
    19TH CENTURY.

    "I COULD PRAY IN MY HEART THAT ALL MEN WERE LIKE MY BROTHER HYRUM,
    WHO POSSESSES THE MILDNESS OF A LAMB AND THE INTEGRITY OF JOB; AND,
    IN SHORT, THE MEEKNESS AND HUMILITY OF CHRIST. I LOVE HIM WITH THAT
    LOVE THAT IS STRONGER THAN DEATH."--JOSEPH SMITH.

    "IF EVER THERE WAS AN EXEMPLARY, HONEST AND VIRTUOUS MAN, AN
    EMBODIMENT OF ALL THAT IS NOBLE IN THE HUMAN FORM, HYRUM SMITH WAS
    THE REPRESENTATIVE."--PRESIDENT JOHN TAYLOR.

    AS HE SHARED IN THE LABORS, SO DOES HE SHARE IN THE HONOR AND GLORY
    OF THE NEW DISPENSATION WITH HIS PROPHET BROTHER.

    IN LIFE THEY WERE NOT DIVIDED; IN DEATH THEY WERE NOT SEPARATED; IN
    GLORY THEY ARE ONE

PLATE 44.--THE ST. GEORGE TEMPLE

The Temple at St. George, Washington county, Utah, was the first Temple built and opened to sacred service in what is now the State of Utah. The building is one hundred and forty-two feet long, ninety-six feet wide, and eighty feet high. The tower vane is one hundred and seventy-five feet from the ground. It is built of red sandstone with a foundation of black volcanic rock. The building has been plastered and whitened on the outside and stands in striking contrast to the red rock and soil of the vicinity. The cost of the building was considerably over half a million dollars. It was built through free-will offerings of the people and by voluntary labor. The ground was broken for the foundation in November, 1871, and the Temple was dedicated in April, 1877. In common with other Utah Temples this is supplemented by an ante-building known as the Annex, which was built in 1882. The Annex comprises boiler and machinery rooms, recorder's offices and other minor apartments. The Temple provides rooms and equipment for all classes of ordinance work provided for in the greater structure in Salt Lake City.

PLATE 45.--THE LOGAN TEMPLE

This, the most northerly of the Houses of the Lord in Utah, is situated at Logan, Cache county. Excavation work preparatory to laying the foundation was begun in 1877: corner stones were laid in September of the same year; and the Temple was dedicated to sacred service in May, 1884.

The building is one hundred and seventy-one feet long, ninety-five feet wide, and eighty-six feet high to the square; the east tower is one hundred and seventy feet high. The walls are of dark colored silicious limestone, with trimmings of lighter tint. There are five full stories within which are found rooms corresponding to all the essential apartments, both for general and ceremonial purposes, as described in detail in connection with the Temple in Salt Lake City.

The secondary building, corresponding to the Annex, at first known as the Extension, was built before the main structure: it is eighty feet by thirty-six and lies north of the Temple.

PLATE 46.--THE MANTI TEMPLE

The site for the Manti Temple was selected in June, 1875; excavation work was begun in April, 1877; the corner stones were laid two years later; and the building was dedicated May 21, 1888.

The Temple is built on rock in place and consists of material taken from the Very deposit on which it is founded. This is an excellent variety of oolite of light cream color. The building is one hundred and seventy-one feet long, ninety-five feet wide, and eighty-two feet from the ground to the square. The tower at the east has a height of one hundred and seventy-nine feet, that at the west is ten feet lower; and each of these towers is thirty feet square at the base.

The Temple occupies a position of eminence and is approached by a stairway twenty feet wide, comprising one hundred and twenty-five steps. The hill slope by which the Temple is approached is carpeted by a luxuriant lawn beautified with trees and flowers; each tree is set in a great flower-pot hollowed out for its accommodation in the solid rock. The soil for trees, grass and flowers had to be brought from a distance, as the rocky hill-slope was absolutely bare.

