Rodney Turner, Woman and the Priesthood ( 1972)

PREFACE

Woman And The Priesthood is a reaffirmation of certain basic ideals pertaining to those eternal relationships which exist between God, man and woman. Never has there been a greater need to consider these ideals in their wholeness and interrelatedness, for never have they been subjected to greater distortion and fragmentation. As the world hurtles toward its certain destruction, it spins off bits and pieces of truth. Fragmented truth is the raw material out of which error, the mother of moral and spiritual confusion, is made. She has a large and ever-increasing posterity.

The current assault on personal morality and the institution of marriage originates in Satan's campaign to destroy the family of God. If our common enemy is to be thwarted in his efforts, the Lord's people must be armed with an understanding of and a commitment to those principles which never change. Failing to do so will enable Satan to breach the walls of both Church and home, producing casualties far greater than any yet suffered.

There can be no illusions, no blind optimism. Life in this fallen world is made up of lights and shadows in varying proportions depending upon the individual. Each of us is a portrait done in colors mixed in part by our own hand and in part by circumstance and the hands of others. I have tried to present as honest and, therefore, as balanced a view of the sensitive themes treated in this book as my own understanding would allow. This has necessitated the juxtaposition of things as I believe they are with things as I believe they should be. Reality is most clearly perceived in the light of valid ideals.

Consequently, I have emphasized broad principles rather than detailed specifics. In doing so, the chief frame of reference is the word of the Lord as taught by his prophets, both ancient and modern. No apology is made for this approach since I am convinced that temporal and eternal salvation is attainable only when revealed truth is given preeminence over the rationalizations of men, however well intentioned.

Woman And The Priesthood is not and does not purport to be an authoritative statement on any of the doctrines of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The opinions stated herein are my own, being a distillation of more than twenty years of teaching, counseling and personal experience. Let them stand or fall on their own merit. That they are subject to challenge goes without saying. However, every effort has been made to assure doctrinal accuracy and inferential validity. Still, the whole truth escapes us, being possessed by God alone.

Humility enjoins tolerance upon us all—as is suggested by the following remarks of Brigham Young concerning the doctrine of sanctification:

Were the former and Latter-day Saints, with their Apostles, Prophets, Seers, and Revelators collected together to discuss this matter, I am led to think there would be found a great variety in their views and feelings upon this subject, without direct revelation from the Lord. It is as much my right to differ from other men, as it is theirs to differ from me, in points of doctrine and principle, when our minds cannot at once arrive at the same conclusion. I feel it sometimes very difficult indeed to word my thoughts as they exist in my own mind, which, I presume, is the grand cause of many apparent differences in sentiment which may exist among the Saints. [^1]

May I caution the reader against the unwarranted assumption that the writer is "as good as his word." For me, as with most of mankind, the ideal is yet to become an unblemished reality. I have not written from the lofty peaks of moral and spiritual perfection, but from the "low valley" and "plain road" of human fallibility.

A generation of Latter-day Saints is coming which, because they are pure in heart, will be privileged to establish a modern "City of Holiness" and to enter the literal presence of Jesus Christ, the God of Israel. It is to them and to their parents, teachers and guides that this work is hopefully directed.

Rodney Turner

Provo, Utah

June 6, 1972

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ephesians 3:14, 15.
