Rodney Turner, Woman and the Priesthood ( 1972)

I

The Family of Man

For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named. [^1]

Man is a citizen of the eternal universe and the highest order of intelligence found therein. All other species of life are lesser than and subservient to him. And man, in all of his gradations, is, in turn, subject to the patriarchal rule of Elohim, the Man of Holiness, the supreme exemplar of the race. [^2] His family lives in the vast reaches of space in states ranging from organized intelligence to resurrected immortality. Therefore, those who seek man's origin on this small planet, do so in vain. This earth is but one of God's latest creations, organized for the purpose of providing some of his children with bodies of flesh and bone as well as a dwelling place where they can undergo the experiences of mortality.

In testifying of the risen Christ, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon declared: "That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." [^3] Similar testimonies to the ubiquity of man were given by Moses [^4] and Enoch [^5] and Abraham. [^6] Man is the living witness of the divine Father's nature, existence and unceasing efforts to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of his begotten sons and daughters. [^7]

The celestial residence of this Most High God is the birthplace of the entire human family. [^8] William Wordsworth, with poetic insight, wrote:

Our Birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:

The soul that rises with us, our life's Star,

Hath had elsewhere its setting,

And cometh from afar:

Not in entire forgetfulness,

And not in utter nakedness,

But trailing clouds of glory do we come

From God, who is our home. . . . [^9]

Divine revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith made it possible for the Latter-day Saint poetess, Eliza R. Snow, to expand on Wordsworth's thought.

O my Father, thou that dwellest In the high and glorious place,

When shall I regain thy presence, and again behold thy face?

In thy holy habitation, Did my spirit once reside?

In my first primeval childhood, Was I nurtured near thy side? . . .

I had learned to call thee Father, Through thy Spirit from on high;

But until the key of knowledge Was restored, I knew not why.

In the heavens are parents single? No; the thought makes reason stare!

Truth is reason, truth eternal Tells me I've a mother there. . . . [^10]

Declared Elder Melvin J. Ballard:

No matter to what heights God has attained or may attain, he does not stand alone; for side by side with him, in all her glory, a glory like unto his, stands a companion, the Mother of his children. For as we have a Father in heaven, so also we have a Mother there, a glorified, exalted, ennobled Mother. That is a startling doctrine, I recognize, to some folk, and yet we ought to be governed by reason in giving consideration to this doctrine which is a revelation from God. . . Motherhood is eternal with Godhood, and there is no such thing as eternal or endless life without the eternal and endless continuation of motherhood. [^11]

The doctrine that mortals were first begotten in spirit by a heavenly mother is shocking to those who have assumed that the expression "Father in heaven" was mere metaphor. They are victims of the pagan-Christian notion that God's being is altogether dissimilar from that of man's. This is scripturally unsupportable and theologically incorrect. The physical being of man testifies to the physical being of God. Each is an affirmation—not a negation—of the other. We do not refer to deity as he simply to avoid reference to him as it. He is a he. The pronoun, he, would be logically meaningless (having no referent in fact) were there not some appropriate counterpart to God which established his heness—that something is termed, she. We cannot define anything that is not relatable to something else. This is precisely why Christian theologians maintain that he, God, is incomprehensible and indefinable. Christ, however, maintained that it was life eternal "to know thee the only true God." How can we know an incomprehensible deity? There are men and there are women; there are fathers and there are mothers. God does not produce his children by spontaneous generation from inert matter or by some sort of cloning from his own body. All life forms have their own respective progenitors in accordance with the law of biogenesis. [^12]

The origin of man is the destiny of man. Thus, insofar as dwelling with God is concerned, his worthy sons and daughters do not go to heaven—they return to heaven. In doing so they join that divine dynasty of fathers, mothers, sons, and daughters which constitutes the family of God in immortal glory. [^13] Although they are holy beings, their majesty is not cold and impersonal, they do not reign in passionless splendor. To the contrary, as resurrected men and women, they know life in its perfection—in its fulness. Words stand mute before the joy of their lives. We speak of happiness, delight, ecstacy—but how little we know of them! How brief and mitigated are our encounters with them! Mortals cannot experience the infinite richness, the indescribable wonder which characterizes the lives of those who qualify for membership in the exalted family of Man. [^14]

This family begins and ends in eternity. Indeed, from the divine perspective, mortality is but a segment of eternal time. [^15] Compartmentalizing the spiritual and the temporal is characteristic of finite man, not God. Time, space and matter are everlasting. The Lord draws no distinction between his spiritual and his temporal creations. [^16] All that he does partakes of his own nature and is, therefore, eternal. Then too, by definition, the universe consists of one reality. A supernatural (metaphysical) order of existence is a figment of the imagination. Things spiritual and things temporal co-exist on a single continuum of matter, much as wave lengths of radiant energy appear as progressively darker hues on a light spectrum. All that exists anywhere throughout the eternities—whether temporal or spiritual, organic or inorganic, from the person of God to the most minute micro-organism or particle of matter—is to be found on that continuum. [^17]

Therefore, earth-life is not something wholly distinct from life in heaven; it is an inexact replication of it. We learned of marriage, family and home in our "first estate." It was there that the foundation of human society was laid. Upon that foundation the Lord built the first home on this earth. Marriage and the family were not the chance inventions of primitive men (the opinions of social anthropologists notwithstanding); they are creations of God. [^18] Their roots are in heaven; their branches touch the earth. They figure prominently in our happiest contemplations. When skillfully woven into a tapestry of righteousness and truth, they abide forever. Life's fabric never becomes worn, its colors never fade, its threads never break.

Unfortunately, there is one who seeks to destroy this tapestry before it can be completed. He does everything possible to pervert and defile the natures of men and women, together with those divine institutions which are based upon those natures. He seeks nothing less than the overthrow of the home; his attacks on personal morality and the marriage relationship are but means to that end. Just as Lucifer sought to win the Father's family in heaven, so does he now seek to rob God of his family on earth. Satan is a home-wrecker without peer. His efforts in this respect began almost as soon as man and woman were placed in the garden. However, he was thwarted by love—Adam's love for his Father and for Eve, and the Father's love for his children. Love remains the single most potent defense we have against the forces of evil.

Winds of Change

Indeed, our world is dying for the want of love. Its death throes are a catalogue of the sins of man. They are on every hand: shouted from the housetops, flaunted before our eyes—shamelessly, defiantly. Prophecy is proving only too reliable. All things are in commotion, men's hearts do fail them as they cry "peace, peace" but find no peace—either within their nations, their families or themselves. [^19] We are being swept along in an ever-swifter tide of changing events of such complexity as to defy the talents of our presumably best minds. All around we see the flotsam—the debris—of broken homes, broken lives and broken hearts. Theories are advanced, vast sums expended, programs multiply, and panaceas pronounced—still conditions worsen. The finger of accusation is pointed first here, then there, at this, at that—but solutions are not forthcoming. We drug ourselves with drugs, alcohol, sex, money, possessions, pleasures, status, power, things—even hatred—but we are not healed. Perhaps the problem is racism—we will fight for our rights. Perhaps the problem is poverty—we will demand wealth. Perhaps the problem is war—we will riot for peace. Perhaps the problem is masculine oppression—we will espouse female equality. Yes, the problem is easily identifiable: it is huge, ubiquitous and invidious—and it is always someone else's fault.

Has modern man encountered some irresistable force for social disorganization? Has the so-called knowledge explosion blown us from our ancient moorings and precipitated us into a new order of things which requires the abandonment or radical modification of our basic ideals and institutions? Specifically, is the family as we have known it—like some pre-historic animal—doomed to extinction? A growing host of contemporary thinkers believe so. They feel that the technological revolution has triggered a series of cultural explosions in virtually all aspects of life which will inevitably affect the nature of all human relationships. They believe that a new age is upon us; one calling for a rethinking of our priorities and values. For them the past is irrelevant and the present is but prologue to things to come. Many who espouse such sentiments are also prepared to declare the concept of god a vestigial remain from that past and write "superannuated" across the ten commandments.

With the demise of moral absolutes, they argue, human relationships can be more meaningfully redefined. Lives may touch more lightly, less permanently than before. Sexual love can be less restricted so that men and women may interact with less self-consciousness, more openly, more spontaneously. Our allegiances can be nobler, less selfish because they will be directed toward the good of all mankind. Everyone can be everyone else's keeper. No need for narrow loyalties to a particular family, religion, or nation; mankind should be our only loyalty, we should be bound by no other. Since all are equal, there is no place for intolerance or talk of differences—there are none. So go the views of modern social hedonists. However, we cannot redefine—much less annul—God's laws. Sin is sin whether it travels by camel-back or jet propulsion. Every age has claimed to be the exception to the rule for which there is no exception. Material progress is no excuse for surrendering divine principles. The world desperately needs to preserve the ideals of chastity, marriage, and the family. The more complex, remote and artificial the general culture, the more imperative it becomes to perpetuate the home and those foundation principles upon which it rests.

Undeniably, the achievements of science and technology have wrought profound modifications in the material circumstances of life on this planet, but they do not necessitate the surrender of our traditional moral values and social patterns. And it is folly to blame our deteriorating social and moral climate on them. Material progress is not the villain in the piece; society's ills long antedated the industrial revolution or the atomic age. Actually, our altered material situation has served more to expose our ills than to create them.

The problem does not lie in what man knows, or has, or confronts, but in his inability to successfully cope with changing circumstances. Is every ship sunk in a gale? The storm which swallows up one vessel sees another safely on its way. It is one thing to say that we are threatened by the winds of change, it is another to say that those winds make shipwreck inescapable. Such obvious evils as immorality, suicide, alcoholism, drug addiction, divorce, desertion, crime, delinquency and civil strife are not the inevitable fruits of modern life. Rather, they are but proofs that we have abandoned those principles designed to bless and sustain mankind irrespective of any external conditions encountered.

Further, it is fruitless to ask whether changes in the general society have produced the deteriorating position of the home, or whether the deterioration of the home has led to these changes. It is futile to debate sub-causes and sub-effects. What we must determine is the first cause, the beginning of beginnings. Not to do so is to become enmeshed in symptoms of symptoms. This is precisely what we have done. The result is confusion and impotence. It is much like a canoe floating inexorably toward a cataract while its occupants argue over who was at fault for losing a paddle. One says, "It slipped from my hand because you pushed me." The other replies, "But you threw me off balance." The first rejoins, "Yes, but you tipped the canoe when you reached for your cap." And so on to final disaster. Urbanization, industrialization, shifting economic patterns, universal education, geographic mobility, the threat of nuclear destruction, a burgeoning population, the emancipation of women, organized religion's diminishing significance, and the emergence of a hedonistic moral code—all of these popular suspects have contributed to our ills and compounded our problems, but no one—nor any combination of them—constitutes the primal cause of social disorganization.

Loss of the True God

That cause is spiritual rather than temporal in nature, being nothing less than man's false conception of God. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the character of God, and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another. . . ." [^20] All correct religious principles stem from that one central truth. When it is obscured or lost, the lives and institutions of men are characterized by relative weakness, instability and decay. Theology is to religion what a tree is to its fruits; bad theology produces bad religion. If we err in our understanding of God and his kingdom, we will err in our understanding of man and his institutions. In nothing is the harvest of a given religious philosophy more clearly perceived than in its impact on the basic structure of society. If marriage is dishonored, if the family is divided, if the home is unstable, it is because those spiritual laws which produce social stability and progress have not been obeyed. The failure to do so may be due to either ignorance or sloth, but the consequences are the same. To the extent that anyone lives in accordance with those laws their homes will be places of marital peace and happiness. However, in the absence of true religion—the gospel of Jesus Christ in its fulness—there is a structural weakness in the best of marriages and familial arrangements that makes for fracturing and disorganization under conditions of severe stress. Such conditions are upon us now. Even knowledge about the revealed Gospel of Jesus Christ is not enough today. Unless that knowledge is internalized, its sustaining power remains untapped. True religion cannot be worn, it must be absorbed. The world cannot practice true religion while it worships a false, non-existent god. True religion involves correct knowledge of the "only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." [^21] The world was robbed of that God many centuries ago.

He first revealed himself to man in the Garden of Eden where God walked and talked with Adam and Eve. They knew by direct observation that they were in the literal, physical image of Deity. Man did not theorize God into existence or rationalize a kinship to him—our first parents experienced this knowledge. [^22] Thereafter, they taught it to their family, and it became the common legacy of mankind. However, the passage of time saw men pervert this truth by turning to Satan-inspired gods of wood and stone. Heavenly bodies, the phenomena of nature and various forms of animal life were assigned divine attributes. [^23] The created became the creator.

But then, as civilized man discovered more and more about the natural order of things, he repudiated his primitive gods in favor of a more esoteric deity. God was dematerialized into an essence of mind by the Greek philosophers who exalted him to transcendent eternality—the "Nous of the Cosmos." He became Aristotle's self-thinking thinker and unmoved mover—an ineffable omnipresence. Satan, the great extremist, had led mankind from one absurdity to another! Both well-served his purposes: the literal, material, anthropomorphic nature of God had been negated. However, heaven sent another witness of the truth into the world: the Only Begotten Son of the Father took upon himself a body of flesh and bone and testified that he was the perfect representation of the Father. [^24] The very presence of Jesus Christ was a living reconfirmation of the fatherhood of God, and therefore, of the reality of his heavenly family. And when the Son of the Man of Holiness ascended "to my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God," his material body of flesh and bone was inseparably connected to his spirit body for all eternity. [^25]

In birth and in death, Jesus demonstrated in the most objective way possible not only the materiality of God's own being, but the literalness of his fatherhood as well. Jesus was not speaking metaphorically in calling him Father; he was witnessing to a fundamental reality. He was literally sired by the Father both in spirit and in flesh. [^26] Jesus, Adam and Moses—as well as others—perceived by personal experience, the anthropomorphic nature of God and, therefore, the theomorphic nature of man. But again, all too soon, this priceless truth was repudiated—pearls had been cast before swine. The Christian Neo-Platonists of the post-apostolic period were repelled by the notion of a material god; the concept was too exoteric for these rational sophisticates, being incompatible with their philosophic preconceptions. Not wishing to abandon Christianity entirely, they clumsily super-imposed an esoteric definition of god on the plain declarations of scripture. God was defined in their Christian creeds as he had been described in their pagan classrooms. To this extent, the Nicean and Athanasian creeds might have been written by Plato himself. Jesus, the revelation of the Father, had seemingly lived, died and been resurrected in vain; his witness was set aside in favor of the uninspired rationalizations of spiritually blind philosophers.

In destroying the truth about God, the advocates of philosophy's deity robbed mankind of the truth about itself. Plato triumphed over Paul who had testified, "For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named." [^27] Christian apologists cut the golden link between the Father's family in heaven and his family on earth. In doing so, they made man less than an orphan in the universe—he was rendered a mere creature, an animal, devoid of any inherent divinity or reason for existing other than to glorify some amorphous cosmic mind. The teachings of Jesus Christ were replaced with the doctrines of devils. [^28]

Once more, idols arose—this time, invisible idols—idols of the mind. The divine foundation of marriage and the family was again destroyed. How could they be more than mere temporal institutions designed for man's mortal condition? God was without body, parts and passions—he had no materiality. Men and women could not, therefore, be his literal progeny; they were simply his creatures. True, man was endowed with certain moral and intellectual faculties which set him apart from other life forms, but he had no direct connection with that transcendent being which ruled the universe. Under the theological circumstances, any idea that men and women could establish eternal relationships patterned after God's own heavenly family was ludicrous.

Indeed, rather than marriage being a divine order, it was a lower state of existence—celibacy was far more godlike. Sex was a thing heaven tolerated; like man's very body, it was of the earth earthy. After all, had not the original sin of Adam and Eve been sexual in nature? Such were the teachings of post-apostolic Christian theologians. The great apostasy was underway. It was forseen by the Prophet Isaiah.

The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do languish. The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left. [^29]

Can men transgress laws, change ordinances or break covenants which they never had? And if the laws and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ—including marriage—are not the ones Isaiah had in mind, then to what is he referring? Certainly not to those pertaining to the Law of Moses, for Christ fulfilled that law himself. [^30] Then too, the burning of the inhabitants of the earth is invariably associated in scripture with the world coming of the Son of Man in the last days. [^31] No, Isaiah was plainly alluding to the paganization of the Church of Christ. This was confirmed by the Lord in a revelation given in 1831 in which the apostasy was cited as the reason for restoring the true Church. [^32]

Is it any wonder that increasing numbers of professing Christians are prepared to abandon the old ship of matrimony for a more modern form of marital transportation? In the past, marriage faired comparatively well because the cultural elements were, in the main, friendly toward it. Today, however, these elements are in ferment; cultural storms are raging and the seas of change are heaving themselves beyond their bounds. Under these circumstances, false religion is incapable of safeguarding the home from serious threat. The sins of the Neo-Platonic fathers are being visited upon their children's children. False theology is the basic cause for the jeopardy in which marriage finds itself. False theology stripped the family of its divine nature and destiny. False theology weakened the foundation of the home, making it vulnerable to the tremors and earthquakes of modern civilization.

Modern marriage is in danger because modern marriage has no transcending reason for being. Children are no longer an economic asset. Large families are considered an evil by those who fear an expanding world population. Traditional mores are giving way to moral relativism, etc. etc. The theological and spiritual impoverishment of many churches is exposed by the feebleness of their counter-attack and the spineless manner in which they are acquiescing to some of the most outrageous proposals made by the basest elements of society. Ours is not the first civilization to discredit man's basic institutions; virtually every ancient society did so—now they are museum specimens.

Unfortunately, the trials of modern life are tending to disintegrate the very foundation of the Christian home. Sexual laxity among young people, birth control and intemperance, are insidious, vicious enemies of the home. When family life disintegrates, the foundation and bulwark of human society is undermined. [^33]

Those who are committed to the worship of the true God and who find in his literal fatherhood the key to life's meaning, will not be overcome by the world. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is built upon the sure foundation of revealed knowledge concerning the family of Man. Neither it nor that family will be overthrown.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Genesis 1:27.
[^2] The origin of the sexes has not been revealed. A nascent form of sexuality may have characterized each primal intelligence. In its fullness, maleness or femaleness was acquired as a genetic endowment from mankind's celestial parents. In asserting that sex is eternal, John A. Widtsoe wrote: "A wiser power than any on earth understands why a spirit in the far off beginning was male or female." Priesthood and Church Government, p. 90. Hereafter this work will be designated as PCG, followed by the appropriate page number. See TJS, pp. 352-55.
[^3] Human traits and emotions were manifest in man's first estate. While the manner in which they are now expressed may be somewhat a matter of learned behavior, the inclination to do so is not. Whatever our situation, to some extent we all express the common emotions of the race as it existed in the pre-mortal world and as it exists now.
[^4] Genesis 1:27, Matthew 19:4; Ether 3:14-16; Moses 3:1, 7, 9; Job 38:7. Joseph Smith declared: "The organization of the spiritual and heavenly worlds, and of spiritual and heavenly beings, was agreeable to the most perfect order and harmony: their limits and bounds were fixed irrevocably, and voluntarily subscribed to in their heavenly estate by themselves, and were by our first parents subscribed to upon the earth. Hence the importance of embracing and subscribing to principles of eternal truth by all men upon the earth that expect eternal life." History of The Church, Vol. VI, p. 51.
[^5] See TJS, p. 354.
[^6] JD 14:120, See JD 12:194.
[^7] JD 18:233.
[^8] Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, The Song of Hiawatha, The Poems of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1901, p. 291.
[^9] D&C 88:36-39; 93:30-32.
[^10] See D&C 93:33.
[^11] See D&C 93:28; Abraham 3:22; Moroni 8:8.
[^12] Ballard, op. cit., p. 248, JD 11:305.
[^13] See Alma 34:34; 40:11-14.
[^14] JD 9:305.
[^15] See D&C 88:28-35. The fourth class, the mortal sons of perdition—being a unique group—are not pertinent to this discussion.
[^16] See D&C 101:78.
[^17] See John 14:16, 17; 16:13; D&C 76:50-52, 71-79, 81-84; 84:44-46, 74; 88:6-13; 130:21-23; 2 Nephi 31:12, 13; Moses 6:60, 61.
[^18] Presently, we are in a fluid (repentable) state which allows us to modify our condition. The resurrection seals that glory upon us which we ultimately attain. See D&C 76; 88:29-35; Alma 41.
[^19] See Moses 5:42.
[^20] Matthew 6:21.
[^21] 21. John 17:3.
[^22] See 1 Nephi 17:1, 2.
[^23] Isaiah 3:12.
[^24] See JD 4:143.
[^25] See Genesis 3:16-19.
[^26] See D&C 101:36-38.
[^27] 3 Nephi 11:11.
[^28] Ecclesiastes 1:14.
[^29] D&C 122:5-8.
[^30] TJS, p. 296. See also JD 2:122, 125.
[^31] JD 2:125.
[^32] 32. See D&C 1:14-16.
[^33] 33. President David O. McKay, "The Instructor" January 1958, p. 1.
