Rodney Turner, Woman and the Priesthood ( 1972)

II

Man and Woman

So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. [^1]

Man and woman originate in God. [^2] Whatever their differences, the sexes are biologically, psychologically and spiritually bone of one another's bone and flesh of one another's flesh. They develop out of a shared beginning. Even as a fetus establishes its species before it reveals its gender, so are men and women human before they are masculine or feminine. Like branches of a tree, they emerge from a common trunk. In doing so, they remain together even as they grow apart in their individual quests for fulfillment.

In growing apart, men and women do not develop traits and emotions which are wholly unique—much less antithetical—to one another. [^3] Male and female qualities are found in both sexes in balanced, but not equal, proportions. As with hormones, those qualities which are dominant in one sex are designed to be recessive in the other. In this way, each sex is distinguished by its chief characteristics. This permits each to draw upon the virtues and strengths of its opposite member without any loss of self-identity and without any claim to moral exclusiveness.

Compassion is no more unique to women than is courage to men. Both sexes are designed to manifest all of the attributes of God, but each is to do so without doing violence to its own nature and calling. Both should sing the same song, but not the same part. For example, mother love stems from being a mother, not from being a father. While both sexes are to express the same basic emotions, they are to do so as men and as women. Jesus often manifested love, compassion and gentleness, but he did so in the context of his manhood. He did not become effeminate in order to effect a gentle demeanor. Nor will any true woman assume a masculine attitude in order to express courage, determination or any other presumedly masculine quality.

One's sexual nature determines one's eternal possibilities. Satan's efforts to nullify that nature is a direct consequence of his own awful plight. The Gods are men and women in the fullest and best sense of those terms. They graciously share their endowments with their faithful children. However, it is most unlikely that men and women had their sex arbitrarily imposed upon them. For while scripture states that God "made" man male and female insofar as this world is concerned, it does not explain the basis upon which any given spirit is tabernacled in a male or female body. [^4] But regardless of when or how males and females came into being, the principle of agency must have played a part in anything God did; coercion is alien to his nature. Then too, the arbitrary assignment of sex would have rendered him particularly vulnerable to criticism at the last judgment. Thus, just as it is very likely that one's sex reflects one's own inate predisposition or personal choice, so must the roles the sexes play stem from their own inherent proclivities. What men and women are should determine how they will act—not vice versa.

Today, much in the fashion of Huxley's Brave New World, men speak of controlling the genetic factors in the unborn so as to produce various human types which will meet society's pre-determined requirements. This is diabolical. Man is more than a composite of protein molecules; he is not meant to be manipulated, even by God—much less by anyone else. God's humility protects us from the devil's pride. Being far more humble than some of Satan's unwitting allies, the Lord has never presumed to impose his will on others; He has always respected man's independent co-eternality. God's laws are framed to serve man as he is and as he wills to be. Law is the servant, not the master, of mankind. [^5] Men and women are not programmed with artificial characteristics to serve the veiled purposes of some cosmic scientist. The sexes are genuinely distinctive from one another; only in denying their true natures do they become false and artificial.

More than male gallantry lies behind the belief that, in this fallen state, women as a group are more refined and spiritually inclined than men. Said Brigham Young:

The men are the lords of the earth, and they are more inclined to reject the Gospel than the women. The women are a great deal more inclined to believe the truth than the men; they comprehend it more quickly, and they are submissive and easy to teach. . . . [^6]

Having observed several women leave a saloon, President Young asked:

What do you think of that, sisters? It is a disgrace to the name of lady. Is it any more a disgrace in woman than in man? Yes, because he is by nature coarser and more prone to such wickedness than she is. Woman is altogether of a finer nature, and has stronger moral inclinations; it is not natural for her to indulge in wickedness that man takes common delight in. [^7]

It is this very difference between the fallen natures of men and women which is being undermined by contemporary social and moral trends. Women cannot change their attitudes and behavior without changing themselves. If women are not the gentler, the purer sex, it is because they have altered that nature with which the Creator endowed them in the beginning.

Not only should men and women manifest their shared human traits and emotions within their respective natures, it is also imperative that they honor those roles which are indigenous to those natures. Men must act the part of men—being sons, husbands, fathers, providers, agents of God in the world at large, and brothers to their brothers. Women must act the part of women—being daughters, wives, mothers, homemakers, teachers and guides of their children and sisters to their sisters. These are the core roles each is ordained to play. All other things are secondary to them. When men and women cannot or will not fulfill these roles, society is thrown off balance with resulting disorder and suffering.

Only through an harmonious blending of their natures can man and woman achieve perfection. Such a blending requires that they fulfill their foreordained callings. There can be no warfare between them. Neither must deny or betray the virtues, rights and privileges of the other. Neither must impugn the uniqueness of the other. To weaken or repudiate the profoundly distinctive qualities of either sex is to pervert the original natures of both. This is death. Only as the sexes comprehend and magnify one another can manhood and womanhood be transformed into godhood.

As unto the bow the cord is,

So unto the man is woman:

Though she bends him, she obeys him,

Though she draws him, yet she follows,

Useless each without the other! [^8]

The very beings of man and woman serve to delineate their proper roles and, therefore, to delimit the manner in which they are to exercise physical and moral agency. As with all other things, mankind has been placed in a kingdom of law appropriate to its nature, to which it is subject, and in which it must fill the measure of its creation. [^9] When men and women attempt to ignore the appointed bounds of their habitation by violating the laws and breaking through the frontiers of that kingdom, the inevitable consequences are futility and sorrow.

Degrees of Glory

Regardless of what they were in the beginning, in mortality, neither men nor women are struck from a common mold. Like the stars in the heavens, they are of many different spiritual, moral and intellectual magnitudes. This diversity, together with man's essential complexity, accounts for the failure of the social sciences to achieve the validity and reliability possible in the physical sciences. While we refer to the laws of physics and chemistry, we are yet to seriously apply that term to man's findings pertaining to his inner-most self. For this reason, human progress has been predominantly of a material order. Man continues to know more about his outer environment than his inner nature. He continues to obey those laws which serve his flesh with far more zeal than those which serve his spirit.

Yet the essence of man is his spirit—the seat of human individuality. [^10] The variety of physical types and characteristics which distinguish one race, one ethnic group, or one individual from another, testify to similar spiritual differences among men and women. We brought many of these differences with us from our former estate. Although sinless at birth [^11] and tabernacled in infant bodies, the spirits entering mortality are physically mature men and women possessing distinctive attributes, capacities and proclivities. [^12] We do not spring into existence at the moment of conception, becoming as it were but chance recapitulations of our hereditary forebears. Human individuality is an eternal principle. We do not become individuals, we are individuals. We are not founded in mortality, we are added upon by mortality. Mortality modifies personality, it does not create it. And at death, we return to a spirit state, retaining those modified qualities which we formerly possessed. [^13] The thread of life is never broken; it is characterized by an ongoing continuity from one phase of existence to another. Were this not the case, it would be meaningless to speak of the eternal nature of man.

In the beginning, all men and women were characterized by the positive attributes with which they were endowed by their divine parents. Thus each individual began organized existence with a natural-spiritual predisposition toward moral virtue. This is why Brigham Young maintained that the "natural man" (meaning the immortal spirit) is good.

That which was, is, and will continue to endure is more natural than that which will pass away and be no more. The natural man is of God. We are the natural sons and daughters of our natural parents, and spiritually we are the natural children of the Father of light and natural heirs to his kingdom; and when we do an evil, we do it in opposition to the promptings of the Spirit of Truth that is within us. Man, the noblest work of God, was in his creation designed for an endless duration, for which the love of all good was incorporated in his nature. It was never designed that he should naturally do and love evil. [^14]

However, God's "design" for his children is mitigated by the moral agency with which he has also endowed them. The power to be good is equally the power to be evil. So that while those women who yield themselves to the Spirit of the Lord will be modest and virtuous—if taught these principles—yet modesty and virtue are not characteristic of all women. This applies to every facet of human personality. Women do not necessarily manifest a love for virtue, goodness, marriage, motherhood and the things of God simply because they are women any more than men manifest a love for courage, honor, strength and fatherhood simply because they are men. The "natural" tendencies of which Brigham Young spoke have been negated in some men and women. The true woman is she who understands and seeks to perfect her eternal nature, while the false woman is she who, for whatever reason, has gone against it. Such generalizations are inevitably tainted with oversimplification, still, they are of value in arriving at a sense of the pattern of things. No harm is done so long as we do not fail to qualify them when considering a specific individual. With this understanding, we proceed to generalize.

Each of us is a living degree of glory. We range from those who are characterized by godly dispositions on down to those who are extremely "carnal, sensual and devilish." Broadly speaking, it may be said that the dominant spiritual coloration of each of us is either celestial, terrestrial, or telestial—which is to say, either holy, good, or wicked. [^15] These basic spiritual temperaments are, of course, subject to such modifying influences as one's hereditary endowment, psycho-physical makeup, external environment and life experiences. Still, all things being equal, the chief determinant of one's interests, attitudes, beliefs and behavior is the spirit's own proclivities.

These proclivities are expressed through the human will which is ordinarily capable of responding to all external stimuli in its own unique way. And it is only when the spirit is free to exercise its own will (mind) that its true character can be ascertained. This is why moral agency is so vital to the work of God. [^16] However, one's spiritual status is not only determined by the quality of the individual will and the extent to which the things of God are comprehended, it is also determined by the degree to which one is responsive to the spiritual powers of God. The more these powers directly influence the individual's life, the closer one is to God and, therefore, the greater one's present glory.

A telestial person is one who is more or less indifferent to God and His laws and who, therefore, tends to resist his Spirit. A terrestrial person is one who seeks to live according to the light and knowledge possessed and who, therefore, is relatively responsive to the influence of the Spirit. A celestial person is one who not only enjoys the Spirit, but who has come unto Christ by entering into a valid covenant with him, thereby receiving the higher endowment known as the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^17] Thus, one's degree of mortal glory is determined by the extent to which he or she has become spiritually one with God. [^18]

The City of Men

The very attributes which characterize a woman of high spiritual endowment suggest that, for now, her essential mileu is the home rather than the world at large. Those who are continually subjected to the ravages of wind, rain, heat and cold are invariably weathered by them. Likewise, no woman can fully identify with the work-a-day world of men and escape unmarked. Men, with their generally less refined natures, do not; how can women hope to do so? Modern urban life is often soul-desensitizing. The dull routine, the unremitting pressures, the ceaseless competitiveness, the constant jostling with alien personalities, the daily necessity of reestablishing one's worth—these are the elements which batter away at the basic personalities of many men and women today.

One has only to recall the bone-weary demeanor of subway riders in New York, the strained expression on the faces of most pedestrians in any city, or the frustration of home-bound workers on the car-clogged freeways of the land to know that we have paid a high price for twentieth century civilization. Consider how most people spend their leisure time. Modern man never exposes his basic unhappiness more clearly than when he is pretending to amuse himself. How joyless are his pleasures!

The urbanization of human life has taken a toll in human identity. As men become alienated from the earth which gave them life, so do they become alienated from themselves. Self-rejection, anxiety, loneliness—how frequently we hear such terms today! It is significant that Cain became a fugitive and a vagabond only after he had defiled the earth with his brother's blood. It was then that the earth turned against him, forcing him to wander for survival. And it was because he had become a wanderer, exiled from the land, that he built the first city on this planet. [^19] Without God, the city and all that it represents is a curse. It allows wicked men to establish concentrations of mutual contamination where evil can feed upon itself while hiding in the anonymity of its own mass.

When women willingly join men in their "city," when they willingly forsake the home, they, too, become fugitives and vagabonds in the earth—fugitives from their own natures, vagabonds in a masculine world. For it is in willingly becoming "city dwellers" that they compromise those qualities and attitudes which are the hallmark of the true woman. They do this, not by their physical presence in the city, but by their emotional commitment to it. The Savior declared: "where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." [^20]

It is in putting their hearts upon the "treasures" of the city that they become spiritually impoverished. Their destitute condition is exposed by a certain brittle facade which, although similar to that of many males, is nevertheless more offensive because it is a contradiction of the feminine character. In its extreme form, this acquired masculinity emerges as a third sex—being neither truly male nor female. That women can take on something of the male temperament is undeniable. Indeed, if obliged to live and think like a man—facing the life situations of a man—there are few women who will not do so. [^21]

The foregoing is equally applicable to men. At present, we can only guess at the impact of technology on the human personality. Men have moved indoors, away from the land, from the natural order of things into the artificial environment of the modern office, plant and store. It is in just these settings that the toll on the male character has been the greatest. The influx of millions of women into these same settings seems only to have accelerated the process of change for both sexes.

As was previously stated, however, these alterations in the human temperament are only symptomatic of the fact that the world has lost its way. Admittedly, this generation has had a radically different order of things imposed upon it, but men and women can cope with change without compromising their own identities when they are committed to righteous principles. Lacking those principles, and becoming conditioned to non-masculine and non-feminine roles—with all of their concomitant implications—men and women tend to think, talk, dress, and respond less and less as men and women. The recessive qualities inherent in each sex assume a kind of perverse dominance and, like some cancer of the emotions, destroy the very being they were meant to temper and enhance.

If women, by imitating the masculine way of life, assume male nuances, it is not unlikely that men, in duplicating the thought patterns and activities of women, will assume female attitudes and characteristics. This is precisely what is happening among some segments of society today. The two sexes are breaking away from their natural moorings and drifting toward each other.

Indeed, society has less and less need for men and women as men and women. Modern technology—both industrial and medical—has made it possible for the sexes to replace one another in virtually all enterprises between birth and death. Even government affirms the equality of the sexes. No distinction—whether in law, education, employment, economic rewards or civil and personal rights—are to be tolerated. In so far as human biology will allow, we are legislating a uni-sex society. Women are not being so much liberated as they are being absorbed into a neuter gender world of common humanity. Many are simply exchanging one form of bondage for another. When the novelty of their new surroundings has worn off, they will long for the good old days, forgetting that they, too, left much to be desired.

Admittedly, circumstances have forced many women to join the work-a-day world for sheer survival. From time immemorial, infant mortality, disease and war have created serious imbalances in the ratio of males to females. Many women have been obliged to live with little or no male support. Then there are those whose husbands are either unwilling or unable to provide for their families. Divorce and desertion are also major causes of the influx of wives and mothers into the labor force. Many of these women are victims of unrighteous social conditions. However, there are many others who are not justified in leaving their homes for outside employment. They—and often their husbands—are motivated by purely selfish factors. Dislike of childbearing and childbearing and/or the other duties associated with motherhood and homemaking, rejection of husband, an appetite for material luxuries, economic freedom, the desire to gratify some ambition, to exploit a presumed talent or to be part of that supposedly more exciting world beyond one's front gate—these are the chief reasons millions of women are turning to the "city of men." These women left home to embrace marriage, only to leave home to escape it.

Woman's Freedom

The false prophet has been joined by the false prophetess. Strident female voices now proclaim the emancipation of woman from her womanhood. No longer is she to be bound by the restrictions of her traditional role in society. No longer will she accept the male-imposed bondage her sex has known from time immemorial. She is free! This movement is but one manifestation of a general retreat from the old established order of things. Ours is the time of fulfillment of Isaiah's words, "As for my people, children are their oppressors and women rule over them." [^22] The order of heaven is being turned upside down. Life is in commotion. The tides of change are moving swiftly, sweeping before them much that has been; it was inevitable that many women would be swept along by these tides. Mass education, industrialization, and the technological revolution have profoundly influenced the lives of millions of females. They have become breadwinners in their own right. Money is freedom. The political and social emancipation of women is due more to their growing economic independence than to any other single factor. In this respect, they are not unlike children who, finding themselves gainfully employed, promptly demand greater freedom of action than they previously enjoyed. Males have abetted this trend, not only by creating the very conditions which allowed women to achieve economic independence, but by their own willingness—even eagerness—to have them become co-producers of material wealth.

Woman's historic calling as wife and mother is being minimized. As the family has diminished in size and importance, so has the role of mother and homemaker. Modern inventions have allowed for the semi-automation of the home. Technology has created time; many wives and husbands are inclined to hoard it for themselves. It is paradoxical that the conveniences of modern life have led to decreased, rather than increased, emphasis on the family. As it becomes easier to have children and care for the home, we are less and less inclined to do so. The reason for this is obvious: we no longer need children as we once did. Or perhaps we might say, the need for children as children has not been too widespread. Once they were an economic asset, now they are a liability. Now they must be desired for themselves, not for any economic contribution they might be able to make. Sadly, fewer and fewer men and women have this desire. Hearts are shrinking. The love of many grows cold. Having little love to give, they have little need for children upon whom to bestow it. Many reasons may be advanced for having small families—all very logical—but the truth is, nothing within our power really deters us from producing life but the want of love.

The radical feminist movement is anti-woman. Those who succumb to its blandishments are not freed, but enslaved. How many times have men been sold into servitude with promises of freedom! Those who speak of liberating women are time-bound in their thinking. They define freedom in terms of the here and now. Temporal freedom. Mortal freedom. The freedom to be fulfilled as they will to be fulfilled. Selfish freedom. Ego-centric freedom. Knowing no world but this world, having no god but a false one, they are determined to drink life to its dregs. In all of this, they are but mimicking those they purport to repudiate. Like slaves, their overweening ambition is not to transcend their masters but to join them. Contrary to their charge, it is not the male ego, but the female nature which has rightly defined wifehood and motherhood as the noblest callings of womankind.

Extremists in the feminist movement utterly reject this viewpoint. The idea of losing their lives in a cause other than themselves is considered laughable. They do not agitate for the right to be women; they demand, instead, the right to be persons—meaning, the right to renounce their uniqueness and, therefore, their responsibilities as women. Certainly, one should be respected as a person, but this does not necessitate the denigration of those characteristics which make one a male or female person. We cannot dichotomize humanity and sexuality; the two are interwoven in every normal person. Nor is sexuality limited to sex activity anymore than piety is limited to prayer. Both terms are multifaceted. The sexual natures of man and woman encompass all of the emotions, powers and proclivities which serve both to unite and to distinguish the sexes. Consequently, those who refuse to accept the full implications of their sexuality do not obey those divine laws which direct and control that sexuality. It is no accident that many advocates of woman's "rights" also espouse the cause of complete sexual permissiveness.

In insisting upon the privilege of uncontrolled sexual activity, as persons, these deluded souls are reducing themselves to something less than complete human beings. Their attitude constitutes the shadow of the eternal reality which will follow. For paradoxically, their negation of those responsibilities which are associated with being a whole man or a whole woman will lead to God's negation of them as whole persons. Having denied the divine meaning of manhood and womanhood, they will be shorn of those attributes and powers which are the essence of these states of being. To that extent, the impersonal pronoun will apply; rather than being a he or a she, they will become an "it." [^23] And that, presumably, is what they were agitating for all along.

While women are fully justified in denouncing male exploitation, to insist upon being accepted as neuter persons rather than female persons, is to expose themselves to even more pernicious forms of male exploitation in the future. They forget that woman's nature was meant to have a mollifying effect on man. For it was from her that he was to first learn the ways of tenderness and compassion, of sacrifice and devotion. Only by magnifying their roles as mothers, can women effectively temper their sons. When women reject their divine appointment and strike out in pursuit of some quasi-liberty patterned after the behavior of men, there is no one left to gentle their sons and prepare them to love and honor woman as she was meant to be loved and honored. Thus, an emotional vacuum is created in the hearts of men and women alike. Life for everyone becomes unbalanced, skewed in favor of the material and the rational as opposed to the spiritual and the emotional. Hearts become hardened. Lives are blighted. Minds destroyed. Bodies corrupted. Souls lost.

We must not forget that woman was given to man to be his "helpmeet"—not his competitor. God's pronouncements upon Adam and Eve subsequent to their transgression in Eden were meant to apply to the entire human race. [^24] If men and women refuse to abide by the principles enunciated in those pronouncements, nothing can save them from personal and collective disaster. Indeed, to the degree that we have deviated from them, we are evidencing the pathology of disorganization. Those who will not faithfully execute the will of God as revealed in the first judgment will inevitably face the consequences of their rebellion at the last judgment.

Men need liberating no less than women; the entire human race is in bondage to sin and error. The whole world needs to be liberated from its false conceptions of God, man, woman, love, marriage, sex, family, and life itself. Man's problems do not arise from his institutions, but from his ignorance of their true nature and purpose. It is a straight and narrow path that leads to true freedom. Few have been the times when mortals have enjoyed the liberty, the security, and the happiness for which they were organized. Only as men and women come to understand and to accept themselves for what they are, will they find the happiness they seek through becoming what they were meant to be.

The Time of Fulfillment

But it may be asked, "Were men meant to be nothing other than husbands and fathers? Were women meant to be nothing but wives and mothers? What of our own needs? Is there to be no self-identity as a person in one's own right? Can I not sing my own song, dream my own dream, express my own creative ability—can I not be fulfilled in the secret places of my own soul?" If "man is that he might have joy," if eternal life is to be more than an everlasting recapitulation of mortality, how could it be otherwise? Clearly, men and women are meant to be "free indeed." The enslaved farmer depicted in Edwin Markham's "The Blind Plowman," or the haggard seamstress of Thomas Hood's "Song of the Shirt" are not examples of the nobility of work. Rather, they make plain the fact that we are stripped of our essential humanity when we are reduced to the quest for bread alone. So too, our divine potential cannot be realized unless that inner core of self-hood is fulfilled along with all else. We are not only children of God, not only human beings, not only men and women—we are also eternal intelligences—self-existing personalities. Our heavenly Father wills the perfection of his sons and daughters in every dimension of their beings. A "fulness of joy" can come in no other way.

However, for many reasons, we cannot expect—much less demand—total self-fulfillment in mortality. Life has its priorities. First things must be done first because they are first things. Now is the time to lay the foundation for eternal life—not to live it. We cannot now be all that we would be or do all that we would do. Indeed, perfect happiness through total fulfillment is impossible in this life. [^25] The Savior surrendered himself to the will of the Father "from the beginning." [^26] In doing so, he muted his glory in order to minister to his brothers and sisters. How many gifted men and women have willingly sacrificed their desires and abilities for others! This is the essence of true discipleship. We cannot have an eye single to the glory of God if we insist upon self-fulfillment here and now. Paradoxically, genuine self-fulfillment can only be achieved as we voluntarily surrender it. We must lose our life before we can find it.

Then too, one's particular circumstances together with the impact of the agency of others on one's own agency precludes total fulfillment in mortality. This life is characterized by imbalances, by injustices. The wicked seem to prosper about as much—if not more—than the righteous. Virtue does not appear to triumph as often as we would like. The inequities of this world tempt us to covet the other man's health, freedom, wealth, talents and pleasures. We overvalue the things of time because we underestimate the things of eternity. The bird in hand continues to be more highly prized than the uncertain covey in the bush. Lacking faith in God and his promises, we put our trust in man—his arm and his possessions. Solomon had all that money and power could buy. He was glutted with success. Yet being so, he pronounced it all "vanity and vexation of spirit." [^27] It was "vanity" because it could not be forever retained. It was "vexation of spirit" because it did not produce lasting happiness.

This does not mean that material possessions and self-realization are without enduring value; to the contrary, they are of everlasting worth. What it does mean is that there is a due time and a proper way to achieve them. Like God, himself, we must labor before we can rest. The basic needs of mankind must be satisfied before we can cater to our special interests as individuals. It is not, therefore, a matter of women being limited to their roles as wives and mothers. They can and should develop all of the dimensions of their being to the extent that their primary roles will permit.

However, if they are to do so without inadvertently stealing time, effort and devotion from the things that matter most, they must be convinced that nothing they may do outside of the home can begin to equal in lasting significance the things they can accomplish in the home. Lacking this conviction, many women commit little disloyalties against their families while carefully justifying themselves in doing so. Indeed, the ability to rationalize our failings is one talent with which we are all fully endowed at birth. The Savior's admonition to "seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness," applies with equal force to men and women. This commandment cannot be kept without self-denial. For most, this means setting aside some of life's ambitions, opportunities, and pleasures. For others it means surrendering life itself. Jesus did both. [^28]

But that is all past. Today we sing, "Once a meek and lowly lamb, now the Lord, the great I AM." And so shall it be for every righteous man and woman. Faith in the Lord must include the hope that—whatever our present limitations—we will yet come into our own. Joseph Smith, who was also cut down in the prime of his manhood, assured the saints that nothing of genuine worth is really lost. "All your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection, provided you continue faithful. By the vision of the Almighty I have seen it." [^29] And Brigham Young promised the Saints:

I say again—"Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness," and in due time, no matter when, whether in this year or in the next, in this life or in the life to come, "all these things" (that appear so necessary to have in the world) "shall be added unto you." Everything that is in heaven, on the earth, and in the earth, everything the most fruitful mind can imagine, shall be yours, sooner or later. [^30]

With such assurances, men and women can rejoice in being what they were meant to be and in doing all that God has called them to do.

Footnotes

The Spirit of the Lord is God's universal influence which guides and sustains all life. The gift of the Holy Ghost is the privilege of receiving specific instruction and support when needed from the third member of the Godhead.

---
Notas:
[^1] Abraham 3:24, 25.
[^2] See Matthew 19:17.
[^3] Moses 2:31.
[^4] See JD 8:209.
[^5] Genesis 2:7-15; D&C 27:11.
[^6] See Moses 2:27; 6:9.
[^7] Ibid., 3:18.
[^8] See JD 2:120.
[^9] Moses 3:18-20.
[^10] I Corinthians 11:8, 9.
[^11] See Acts 17:28; D&C 88:13, 41; 93:29-33; TJS, pp. 352-355.
[^12] Psalm 24:1.
[^13] 2 Samuel 12:8.
[^14] D&C 132:37-39.
[^15] See Genesis 24.
[^16] Ibid., 24:58.
[^17] I.V., Luke 1:26-28. Mary became, in fact, the wife of Joseph only after bringing forth her first born son. See Matthew 1:24, 25.
[^18] They did not become mortal until after they fell. See 2 Nephi 2:22.
[^19] See Genesis 2:20-23. Eve was no more made from the literal rib of Adam than he was literally moulded from the ground. Mankind are procreated, not created.
[^20] 1 Corinthians 11:12.
[^21] Genesis 3:20. Note that whereas the pre-mortal name of Adam is known, that of Eve is not.
[^22] See D&C 115:3, 4; 1:30; 3 Nephi 27:8.
[^23] See D&C 63:62; John 3:29; Matthew 9:15; 25:1-13; Ephesians 5:23-25; Revelation 21:9.
[^24] See D&C 130:11.
[^25] Abraham, Sarah and Jacob are three examples of those whose names were changed after making higher covenants with God. See Genesis 17:1-5, 15-16; 32:24-28.
[^26] Genesis 3:16.
[^27] See Ibid., 2:16, 17.
[^28] See 2 Nephi 2:25.
[^29] I Timothy 2:14.
[^30] See Moses 6:59.
