Rodney Turner, Woman and the Priesthood ( 1972)

III

In the Beginning

. . . We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them; . . . [^1]

God is the highest good; the summum bonum of life. [^2] His works testify to his perfection and are flawless when they leave his hands. Summing up his labors in organizing the earth, the Creator told Moses: "all things which I had made were very good." [^3] Life on this planet began in the heights of excellence. The world was a place of light, life and truth. Sin and death were unknown. Man was magnificent in form and intelligence. He did not originate in chaotic darkness. He did not evolve over eons of time out of ignorance and bestiality. He did not stumble upon God and his laws—much less fabricate them. They were revealed to man at the outset of his earthly soujourn. To be happy, it only remained for him to obey those laws and to worship that God. This, the race has not done.

Employing their God-given agency, men have rampaged across the world defiling and defacing every lovely thing. In this senseless enterprise, they have been fiercely abetted by Satan, who contrived to lead the pillage and spur his dupes on to ever more terrible assaults against heaven's rule. Suffice to say, every ideal God has shared with man has been perverted by him. [^4] The Lord taught Adam correct principles pertaining to religion, government, society, the family and general morality only to have his children—generation after generation—wrest them into a thousand counterfeit forms. In the main, the story of mankind has been the story of paradise lost. But how was it in the beginning? Let us return to the Garden.

In the Garden

After organizing the earth and preparing the Garden of Eden, the Most High placed Michael, who subsequently became known as Adam, in his new home. [^5] Although he was a perfect being, yet he was incomplete—for "man" is both male and female. [^6] Adam was but half of man therefore, he was alone. But, as the Lord observed, it was "not good" for him to remain so. [^7] If man was to achieve eternal life and "a fulness of joy" (which must be shared to be possessed), he could not remain alone.

To be alone is to be without life-creating power, without ultimate wholeness or the perfection of heaven. Those of a divine temperament are frustrated until this condition is remedied. Spirit cannot be isolated from spirit without suffering some degree of death. The gods are not alone. They delight in sharing themselves with others. But what a miserable deity the Christian world has concocted for itself—one that is utterly transcendent, formless, sterile, void of materiality, having no companion and no peers—yet ruling in awful remoteness over a vast and uncomprehending universe. [^8] Such a state would relegate the God of Heaven to the depths of hell! Jesus, the living revelation of the Father, gave the lie to this satanic doctrine. His life was one of constant interaction with others. Little children, publicans, sinners, pharisees—the high and the low—all knew (without knowing) what it was to walk and talk with God made flesh. He died so that no one need ever be alone or lonely again.

Of course, various members of the animal kingdom were also denizens of the Garden and they were doubtless interesting and amusing company, but they were not the god kind, the man kind. [^9] They were lesser orders of life, totally distinct from man. Adam could not treat them as equals or become one with them. He was worthy of a companion whose attributes and powers were like his own. Nor would another male—a mere replica of himself—do, for he would still be alone. He needed the complement of his own being—a female. When he awakened from the sleep of forgetfulness put upon him by the gods, she stood before him. Man was complete.

Giving Woman Away

In the divine order, woman is given to man, not man to woman. Eve was brought to Adam to be his helpmate, he was not brought to her. Paul noted, "For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of the man. Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the man." [^10] At first glance, it might appear that woman is inferior to man, that she exists only for his benefit. This is incorrect. Man and woman are equal before the Lord. However, they are not the same before him. Maleness and femaleness do make for very real differences between the sexes. God respects these differences; his reactions to them are not arbitrary. The respective callings of men and women simply reflect the unique qualifications and temperaments of each. Indeed, as was previously stated, their happiness depends upon their acceptance and magnification of these intrinsic natural factors. The highest expression of godhood is achieved through a perfect blending of the attributes of man and woman. How could she be less than his equal?

The practice of giving men their wives stems from the principle of stewardship and, ultimately, from the fact that all organized life exists as such by the grace of God and is, in effect, his possession. This does not mean that man is merely God's puppet. Being co-eternal with deity, we have a certain autonomy—free will. However, in aspiring to the divine way of life, we voluntarily submitted to the divine rule of law. It is, therefore, in God that "we live, and move, and have our being." [^11] He possesses us because we willed to be possessed. "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein." [^12] It is his "property right" to give his daughters to whom he will. The custom of the father of the bride "giving her away" originated in Eden. An examination of the scriptures, especially the Old Testament, reveals many instances where wives were given to men, by a father, another wife, a king, or a prophet. For example, Laban gave his daughters Leah and Rachel to Jacob, and they, in turn, gave Jacob their hand-maidens as concubines. Pharaoh gave Asenath to Joseph. Jethro gave his daughter Zipporah to Moses. Saul's daughter Michal was given to David and later taken from him and given to another. And so it goes. Even the Lord, in rebuking David for taking Bathsheba, told him through Nathan the prophet:

"And I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such things." [^13]

The Doctrine and Covenants also attests to this principle.

Abraham received concubines, and they bore him children; and it was accounted unto him for righteousness, because they were given unto him, and he abode in my law; as Isaac also and Jacob did none other things than that which they were commanded; . . . as also many others of my servants, from the beginning of creation until this time; and in nothing did they sin save in those things which they received not of me. David's wives and concubines were given unto him of me, by the hand of Nathan, my servant, and others of the prophets who had the keys of this power; and in none of these things did he sin against me save in the case of Uriah and his wife; and, therefore he hath fallen from his exaltation, and received his portion; and he shall not inherit them out of the world, for I gave them unto another, saith the Lord. [^14]

However, the giving of a wife should be done only with the willing consent of the woman herself. Any degree of coercion is devilish. God, who forces no man to heaven, will not justify the marriage of a female to anyone she does not freely accept. The story of Isaac and Rebekeh is a case in point. [^15] Abraham, concerned lest Isaac marry a Cannanite, sought a wife for him from among their own people in Haran. After meeting Rebekeh, Abraham's trusted servant approached Bethuel, her father, in behalf of Isaac. Although her family agreed to the alliance, the final decision was left to Rebekeh, "Wilt thou go with this man?" and she said, "I will go." [^16] Another intermediary was the angel Gabriel who, acting in behalf of the Father, presented Mary with the most sacred proposal any mortal woman has ever received. After explaining to the young virgin that she had found favor with the Lord and was to be blessed above all women in bearing the very Son of God, she gave her consent saying, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word." [^17] Unfortunately, this principle has been frequently violated. Countless females have been bought, sold, used and destroyed at the whim of unfeeling fathers, husbands, masters, kings, conquerors, libertines, etc. No one has the right to force any woman either to marry or to remain married against her will. Free agency is a golden thread woven through every principle of life and salvation.

The Woman, Eve

The two immortals met as apparent strangers. [^18] Whatever association they may have had in their previous estate was completely forgotten. Initially, the man did not refer to her as a specific person with a unique identity. However, he did recognize her as being of his species—the man kind—rather than merely another form of the animal kind. Unlike the brute creation, she was "taken out of man." For this reason he declared her to be "bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh," and assigned her a generic identity just as he had every other living creature. "She shall be called Woman." [^19] Since the male determines the sex of the unborn child, woman is a product of man. And since the female brings forth the race, man is a product of woman. Each serves the other. Paul observed, "For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman; but all things of God." [^20]

How long Adam and the woman lived in the Garden before transgressing the law is unrevealed. Although they were husband and wife, the pre-fall period of their relationship could hardly be characterized as a courtship—much less a marriage. Apparently, it was a time of deepening, but innocent association. Men and women should become friends before they become mates. What we can be to others depends upon what we have experienced with others. Adam and the woman not only experienced innocence in paradise together, but also temptation, transgression, fear and divine judgment. These things helped to forge an unbreakable bond of love and mutual concern between them. In Adam's eyes, she was no longer just Woman, she was his beloved wife. He named her Eve—the mother of all living. [^21]

The significance of the woman being named Eve is heightened by the fact that it was done, not by God, but by her husband. Adam had been made lord of all creation—guardian over the entire earth and every living thing thereon. In connection with this appointment, he named all things. The right to name connotes the right to rule. In naming his wife, Adam became—by divine appointment—her steward. And in accepting that name, Eve acknowledged Adam's position and submitted herself to the righteous leadership of the holy priesthood. A similar commitment is inferred in those marriages where the woman takes upon herself the name the man gives her—his name.

Further, to name is to claim. In naming Eve, Adam claimed her for his own. Likewise, the only church Christ acknowledges as his own is the one which he personally—by direct revelation—has named and claimed: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. [^22] Only this church can be the "bride of Christ"—all others have taken his name in vain because he has not given them that name. [^23] Further, those who merit the celestial kingdom receive a new name from the Lord—this name is the "keyword." [^24] They are claimed by the Father as his sons and daughters, for in receiving that name, they enter into a higher association with him. [^25] So too, the naming of Eve marked the beginning of a new and profoundly significant relationship between earth's first husband and wife. Their marriage had been spiritually consummated. Man and woman were prepared for parenthood. They left the Garden together and entered that fallen world which awaited their coming. There were promises to keep.

The First Judgment

The judgment of God upon "Woman" as represented by Eve was:

. . . I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. [^26]

This is the origin of the supposed "curse on woman." At first glance it might appear that God acted out of pique, that he arbitrarily determined to make woman suffer for daring to transgress his law. Such was not the case. It was, in reality, a revelation pertaining to woman's temporal calling as a wife and mother. Adam was forewarned of the inevitable consequences should he break the law. [^27] He deliberately (but not willfully) transgressed it. Lehi tells us that "Adam fell that man might be." [^28] Paul corroborates this view, "And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression." [^29] God, in personifying all truth and all law, functioned as the spokesman of truth and law. Cause led to effect: transgression resulted in the fall and the fall resulted in death—both spiritual (banishment from God's literal presence) and temporal (mortality). [^30] The wages of sin is, inevitably, death. [^31] In meeting with the fallen pair prior to their expulsion from the garden, the Lord simply made clear the implications of their new condition.

Relatively speaking, pain and sorrow are the natural concomitants of child-bearing and child-rearing for mortal women in a fallen world. Moreover, Adam's transgression affected all creation. His entire stewardship fell when he fell; the earth, vegetation and animal life became subject to change, decay and death.

And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast harkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; . . . [^32]

The Lord's words appear harsh when viewed "through a glass darkly" by our carnal minds. The truth reveals them to be otherwise: the earth, having become a telestial kingdom, would, according to its appropriate natural law, produce vegetation in opposition to that indigenous to the garden. Man, faced with this opposition, would be obliged to labor for his sustenance. The virtually effortless life he had known in the garden was replaced by one of contrasts, contradictions and struggle. He would, indeed, "be as gods, knowing good and evil." That knowledge would be gained as those who had passed this way before had gained it: by experiencing truth (reality) in its various dimensions. Mortality was but one of them. Man was destined to know many "thorns and thistles" before his temporal day ended.

Woman's Second Steward

God's dictum that man was to "rule over" woman has more often than not been misinterpreted and misapplied. [^33] Some unconscionable males have sought religious sanction for their domination and abuse of woman-kind by appealing to scripture—Christian and otherwise. In most areas of the world in most periods of human history, the subordination and oppression of females has been justified—actually, dictated—on the grounds of manifest male superiority. Actually, the inequality of the sexes is a male myth fabricated to the specifications of the male ego. It has cost womankind dearly. Often viewed as little more than chattel, the vast majority of women have been denied any meaningful sense of identity or personal worth. We are reminded of the arrogant duke in Browning's "My Last Duchess." Irritated because his gentle wife did not exist for him alone and because she had a heart "too soon made glad" by the courtesies of others, her husband "gave commands; then all smiles ceased together." She had been a possession which could not be possessed. The duke, commenting on her portrait to the emmissary of a count whose daughter he hoped to marry, dismissed his last duchess from mind by pointing to another of his properties: "Notice Neptune, though, taming a sea-horse, thought a rarity, which Claus of Innsbruck cast in bronze for me." [^34]

Human beings are not things to be used and discarded by other human beings. How we are regarded by others influences our self-respect and, consequently, what we become. Held in low esteem—even contempt—some classes of women exist in cultural wastelands generation after generation. The derelictions of their menfolk are stoically endured; it is woman's lot. Because of the darkness of their lives, such women have long since lost all self-vision. And their menfolk—trapped in that same darkness—suffered a like fate; they became blind leaders of the blind.

Of course, the overall treatment of women varies from culture to culture and group to group. However, it is safe to say that, with but a very few exceptions, women have never been shown the respect, protection, guidance or love they both needed and deserved. They are the betrayed sex. Unfortunately many modern women are compounding their plight by betraying themselves in new and more damaging ways. Still, the cause of womankind is just. If they are to plead it effectively, they must understand what their true cause is, what God willed for them in the beginning, and why he said, "thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee."

In the beginning, man and woman enjoyed the immediate presence of God. They were spiritually alive, therefore they had no need of a Savior or a mediator. Although married, they had not yet forsaken "father and mother;" they were, so to speak, still living at home. And they had no conscious intention of leaving that home, there being no reason to do so. Nor did man seek to impose his will on woman. Each looked upon the other as an equal, a peer. Indeed, they related to one another more as brother and sister than as husband and wife. Theirs was still a marriage in name only. Initially, it was to God that they turned for love and instruction, not to one another.

This apparently idyllic arrangement ended with Lucifer's successful beguilement of Woman. She was, for all her physical maturity, like a little girl who, lacking experience, succumbs to the blandishments of a would-be molester. Hers was not the knowing, sophisticated sin of a worldly person. It was more the seduction of an innocent, trusting child. Note that the stated reasons for her disobedience reflect her feminine nature: the fruit was good for food (tasty), pleasant to the eyes (beautiful), and would make her wise (curiosity). [^35] Doubtless, the last rationalization was the deciding factor—feminine curiosity being what it is. Adam, having greater understanding, was impervious to such appeals. He was not beguiled; he partook "that man might be." [^36] The apostle Paul cited this distinction between the two as justification for women keeping silent in church. He may have felt that they had already caused enough trouble. [^37]

Be that as it may, their transgression made them spiritually contaminated. Since no unclean thing can dwell in the presence of God, [^38] He could not permit his intimate association with his errant children to continue. Divine law required that they be driven from the Garden of Eden. They had to leave home. However, the Lord did not love them one whit less for their disobedience. He had no intention of abandoning them to some unknown fate. Communication with the man would be maintained by God's own voice and by angelic messengers. The guidance and protection the Lord had afforded his daughter was also to continue. However, inasmuch as he could no longer be her immediate head, God appointed the man to act in his stead and "rule over" Woman. [^39] This assignment was, in fact, given to Adam in connection with the keys and powers of the priesthood previously bestowed upon him as sovereign lord over the earth and all things thereon. [^40]

The Order of Heaven

It is an irrevocable law that every thing must be bound by and subject to a law higher than itself. The gods in eternity are subject to other gods above them. There is no such thing as a headless god. [^41] The treason of Lucifer was motivated by his desire to be independent of all authority—a law unto himself. Therefore, he fell from law into lawlessness, into chaos. All who would defy their bounds and limitations, becoming answerable to no one, partake of his spirit and are potential candidates for his fate. Thus, the order of heaven requires that every soul have a head, a steward over him or her. Every steward is, therefore, someone else's stewardship. No one is "headless." Exalted men and women rule over their own posterity (not the posterity of others) throughout all eternal time.

This is not according to present customs, for now when a young man reaches the age of twenty-one years he is free from his parents, and considers that he is no longer under the necessity of being controlled by his father. That is according to our customs, and the laws of our country. It is a very good law and adapted to the imperfections that now exist; but it will not be so in the eternal worlds. There will never be any such thing there as being from under their father's rule, no matter whether twenty-one or twenty-one thousand years of age, it will make no difference, they will still be subject to the laws of their Patriarch or Father, and they must observe and obey them throughout all eternity. [^42]

This order of heaven is a major reason for the order in heaven. Each honors his steward and his stewardship.

A similar arrangement should exist among the saints on earth. Said Paul, "But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God." [^43] Such a relationship can only apply to those who are members of the body of Christ—the true Church. Among the saints, a woman is justified in binding herself to her husband's law when he, in turn, is bound to Christ. However, such is not the case in the world at large where Christ is not acknowledged as "the head of every man." It follows, therefore, that husbands in worldly marriages have no divine right to exercise dominion over their wives. Ironically, those who insist that marriage should be a partnership between equals in which the wife enjoys autonomy along with her husband are correct—but not for the reasons they advance. Worldly marriages are between peers. Neither is justified in imposing his or her authority on the other because neither has any legitimate authority to impose beyond that granted by human law. By the same token, no man-made church has a divine right to speak for God or to impose its will upon others in his name. Historically, many churches, like many husbands, have exercised dominion either by employing threat, brute force or civil power. It is no mere coincidence that the traditional authority of both husbands and churches is being challenged today.

Paul's statement was not a generalization, nor was it timebound; it also applied to the eternal order of things. It is an allusion to the new and everlasting covenant of marriage within the new and everlasting covenant of the gospel. Under the patriarchal order of marriage, the father—the patriarch, the high priest in the home—holds the keys of the priesthood for his family. [^44] He presides. His position in the home is similar to that of a bishop over a ward, a president over a stake, the prophet over the Church or God over the universe. Baptism is a pledge of allegiance to the kingdom of God by which anyone becomes a citizen thereof. Ordination to the priesthood makes a man an officer of that kingdom and commits him to specific service under the authority of Christ. Likewise, in being sealed to a worthy husband, a woman commits herself to the law or guidance of her husband. Thus an unbroken chain of stewards and stewardships extends back into the eternities. Everyone has a secure and honorable place in the family organization. Everyone finds happiness and fulfillment under the law.

Woman, being the "weaker vessel," should be under the constant protection and guidance of the priesthood. [^45] Ideally, her father is her first guide and protector. He, in turn, gives her to her husband who becomes her second steward. Should she become orphaned or widowed, the male leader of the family should assume responsibility for her welfare. If there is no one available or qualified to do so, then the organized priesthood as represented by her bishop or some other responsible officer of the Church should, with her consent, become her guardian. [^46] Since most women have neither the physical strength nor the social and economic independence of men, they both require and are entitled to such consideration.

However, woman is not the "weaker vessel" when it comes to spirituality, intelligence, emotional stability and sheer physical endurance. Indeed, females tend to live longer and to face the stresses of life better than males. Woman's dependence stems largely from her role as a childbearer and, consequently, from her need to be sustained and protected in her motherhood. Caring for her children imposes restrictions upon her; thus her "weakness" lies more in her calling, than in her nature. Said President Joseph F. Smith:

There are people fond of saying that women are the weaker vessels. I don't believe it. Physically, they may be; but spiritually, morally, religiously and in faith, what man can match a woman who is really convinced? Daniel had faith to sustain him in the lion's den, but women have seen their sons torn limb from limb, and endured every torture satanic cruelty could invent, because they believed. They are always more willing to make sacrifices, and are the peers of men in stability, godliness, morality and faith. [^47]

Being especially threatened by change, women tend to be the preservers and the proponents of the status quo. They are conservative by nature because they have so much of genuine value to conserve. They are creators. It is against their nature to jeopardize or to destroy things as they are. Therefore, they are inclined to restrain the often hasty, ill-advised actions of the male whose vaunted ability to meet critical situations with calm reason is grossly exaggerated. Humans are much more creatures of reflex action and unintelligent habit than we care to admit. It is said that the world is yet to produce an authentic female philosopher. This is to woman's credit. She has sustained life while the philosophers philosophized, kings plotted, generals waged battle and soldiers died. War and immorality are fellow players in the game of murder. She has been the pawn of both. Time and again she has picked up the broken pieces and mended her world as best she could. She has replenished the earth every time the four horsemen have ravaged the land. She has maintained the continuity and the perpetuity of the race. In doing so, more often than not she has been at the mercy of men with little understanding or compassion. The principle of stewardship, of the strong safe-guarding the weak, has been woefully absent in most human societies.

Note that initially man's stewardship over woman was founded upon divine authority and personal worthiness, not usurpation or brute strength. Woman was justified in acknowledging him as her steward. In doing so, she did not disavow her Heavenly Father. God commands our love and obedience above everyone else; we never outgrow him. If a clear choice must be made between God and mate, it should be made in God's favor. [^48] Fortunately, Eve did not have to make such a choice, she and her husband were one in their devotion to the Lord. This is as it should always be. The ideal is for parents, husbands and wives to be united in all things under God. Each relationship then strengthens and reinforces every other one.

However, since mortals are not always united, the guiding principle is that we honor our immediate steward unless doing so would mean sustaining that person in unrighteousness. We owe no one our allegiance when they are out of harmony with God and the moral law.

It is not my general practice to counsel the sisters to disobey their husbands, but my counsel is—obey your husbands; and I am sanguine and most emphatic on that subject. But I never counselled a woman to follow her husband to the devil. [^49]

All things being equal, as long as a woman is under her father's roof she owes him her chief loyalty. When she marries, that loyalty passes to her husband. A woman should not attempt to have two stewards, two heads, anymore than a man should attempt to serve two gods. "No man can serve two masters"—especially when they are in clear opposition to one another.

True, we can give equal allegiance to the three members of the Godhead because a flawless unity exists among them. They act in concert. Human differences and imperfections, however, make it essential that we have but one immediate temporal steward. Double-minded men and women are unstable in many ways; they are prone to guile, duplicity and hypocrisy. [^50] A woman cannot have an eye single to both her husband and someone else. A two-headed woman is a monstrosity. Her husband is her rightful head as long as he is worthy to be so and/or as long as she elects to remain with him. Many marriages have been threatened—even ruined—when loyalty to parents or families took precedence over loyalty to mate. Husband and wife are to cleave to one another, not to their relatives however fine.

"And as you keep nothing from each other, so, on the contrary, preserve the privacies of your house, marriage state, and heart, from father, mother, brother, sister, aunt, and from all the world. You two, with God's help, build your own quiet world. Every third or fourth one you draw into it with you will form a party, and stand between you two. That should never be. Promise this to each other. Remember the vow at each temptation. You will find your account in it. Your souls will grow, as it were, to each other, and at last will become as one. Ah, if many a pair had, on their marriage-day, known the secret, how many a marriage were happier than, alas, they are!" [^51]

Mediation of the Priesthood

While the Lord was the immediate steward of Adam and Eve, each had direct communication with the other. It was a triangular association with God at the apex.

However, the Fall altered this arrangement; it became linear. God remained at the apex but the man stood between him and the woman.

Now there was a mediator between herself and her Father. Face to face communication was ended. The Lord told Moses, "So I drove out the man, and I placed at the east of the Garden of Eden, cherubim and a flaming sword, which turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life." [^52] Years passed. The dispossessed couple were grandparents before the Lord, speaking to them from the direction of the garden, (for they "saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence" [^53]) instructed them to begin offering up blood sacrifice. Finally, "after many days," Adam was taught the plan of salvation via the three-fold instrumentality of an angelic being, the Holy Ghost, and the voice of God. [^54]

Immediately following Adam's conversion and spiritual rebirth, he taught the Gospel of Jesus Christ to his wife: "And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, . . ." [^55] The joyful parents then made a futile attempt to share the message with their children. The manner in which saving knowledge passed from God to man (the priesthood), from man to woman, and from parents to children in the days of Adam established the pattern by which that knowledge has been transmitted ever since. No authoritative gospel dispensation has been vouchsafed to mankind in any other way.

Since Jesus Christ is the mediator of the new and everlasting covenant, all eternal things must be done in his name. However, in his absence he has authorized the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood to represent him among men. [^56] It functions as a mediator for the mediator. Just as it is true that no one can come unto the Father but by Christ, [^57] so it is true that no one can come unto Christ but by the Melchizedek Priesthood. "He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me." [^58] In accepting the rule of Adam, Eve was, in fact, honoring her Father and preparing herself to return to his presence. So it is with everyone who comes under the wings of the Holy Priesthood.

Our modern prophets have emphasized repeatedly the necessity of yielding obedience to one's file leader. This principle cannot operate at one level of heavenly government while being inoperative at another. Heber C. Kimball asked: "Is it not right for all men to be obedient to their superiors. And if so, is it not right for women and children to abide the same principle?" [^59] The law is no respector of persons. In truth, no woman of understanding wants to be headless:

The female sex have been deceived so long, and been trodden under foot of man so long, that a spirit has come upon them, and they want a place, and a name, and a head; for the man is the head of the woman, to lead her into the celestial kingdom of our Father and God. [^60]

Child to Adult

The Fall signaled a coming of age for Adam and Eve. Although they met on earth as full grown adults, it appears that they did not experience conscious sexuality until after becoming mortal. It was then that they left the ways of childhood forever. In this respect, their pre-Fall attitude toward their bodies corresponds to that of any very young child. For like such a child, their nakedness did not cause them any embarrassment. In our culture, this condition is quickly remedied as the child is "socialized." He soon learns that nakedness is "naughty." The natural order of things must yield to the discipline of propriety. Puberty brings increased awareness by exposing the heterosexual side of adulthood.

And so initially, "they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed." [^61] But upon eating the forbidden fruit, their organisms underwent a radical modification. [^62] Blood, the sign of death, replaced the spirit element which had formerly coursed through the veins. [^63] The two immortals had fallen to mortality. It was shortly thereafter that they first experienced self-consciousness. "And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked. And they sewed fig-leaves together and made themselves aprons." [^64] This act was prompted by a new understanding of the significance of their anatomical differences. While they had always known that those differences existed, like little children, they had both been indifferent to them and ignorant of why they existed. In covering themselves, Adam and Eve acknowledged the sacred—not shameful—character of their life-producing powers.

But if there was no shame attached to their nakedness, why did they "hide themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden"? And why did Adam say, "I was afraid, because I beheld that I was naked, and I hid myself?" [^65] The answer lies in the Lord's response, "Who told thee that thou wast naked?" In other words, who had told them that it was shameful to be naked? Indeed, who did tell the innocent pair of their impropriety? Who socialized them? Obviously, not God, his very question exonerates him. Then it must have been someone else, someone who also had contact with Adam and Eve. That someone was Satan, himself—the great accuser. [^66]

It was the father of lies who introduced sex education into the world. In doing so, as with too many modern "educators," he emphasized the purely physical dimension of the matter. He was not concerned with its spiritual foundations. He did not teach the innocents of the beauty and the wonder of their divine endowment. Rather, his objective was to shame them by making profane what was intrinsically the most sacred of powers. How young people are taught about themselves and their relationship to those of the complimentary sex makes all of the difference. Far more of today's instructions in this area are inspired by the devil than naive parents and teachers realize. By their fruits we know them. In response to Satan's malicious revelation, Adam and his wife improvised coverings for their nakedness. Indeed, there was far greater reason to shield themselves from the evil eyes of Satan and his associates, than from God or one another. It is so today.

In this instance, as in all other efforts by Satan to frustrate the Lord, his hidden purposes were achieved. Eve was a child-woman no longer. She was prepared to fill the measure of her creation. Thus, she had a new need in life, one that her Father could not meet. For this reason the Almighty decreed, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh." [^67] It was because they were male and female that they were to leave their parents and establish their own home. Otherwise, there was no justification for becoming "one flesh" since they would have been unable to procreate.

In establishing their own home and family, Adam and Eve were going on to perfection. Paul said, "When I was a child I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put away childish things." [^68] It was time for our first parents to do the same. While we rejoice in the ways of little children, those same ways are grotesque in older persons. So too, the continuance of Adam and Eve's child-like existence would have meant that "they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin." [^69] Had that immature condition been perpetuated (as most Christian theologians would have it) Eden would have become a kind of heavenly hell. We are on earth for the purpose of avoiding just such a fate. The Father sends his children away from home so that they can return as mature men and women. In doing so, he does not suffer that poignant sense of loss which comes to those who see their little children growing away from them one by one. There is no last child, no fading sight and sound of little ones for him. Heavenly parents rejoice in the knowledge that even as some of their offspring are passing on to adulthood, other bright faces are taking their places.

Desires to Husband

Although God pronounced a curse upon the serpent for its part in the transgression of Woman, a similar anathema was not pronounced against her. In spite of this, woman's position vis a vis man, together with her emotional dependence upon him, has been spoken of as a curse.

True there is a curse upon the woman that is not upon the man, namely, that "her whole affections shall be towards her husband," and what is next? "He shall rule over you." [^70]

In elaborating on this point, Brigham Young said:

I do not know what the Lord could have put upon women worse than he did upon Mother Eve, where he told her: "Thy desire shall be to thy husband." Continually wanting the husband. . . . I do not know that the Lord could have put upon women anything worse than this, I do not blame them for having these feelings. I would be glad if it were otherwise. Says a woman of faith and knowledge, "I will make the best of it; it is a law that man shall rule over me; his word is my law, and I must obey him; he must rule over me; this is upon me and I will submit to it," and by so doing she has promises that others do not have. [^71]

While the Lord did not refer to his judgment upon Woman as a curse, still President Young was essentially correct in maintaining that, in a manner peculiar to themselves, normal women are emotionally dependent upon men. Wrote Lord Byron: "Man's love is of man's life a part; it is woman's whole existence." In more extended lines he said:

Alas! the love of women! it is known to be a lovely, and fearful thing; for all of theirs upon that die is thrown: and if 'tis lost, life has no more to bring to them but mockeries of the past alone. [^72]

Female liberationists would doubtless respond, "Spoken like a true male chauvinist!" They would argue that the traditional manner in which females have been socialized and controlled inevitably rendered them more emotionally dependent upon men than they should have been. Thus, they regard this dependence as a learned behavior. However, the Lord has indicated that it is both reflective of woman's temperament and essential to her role in the plan of salvation. Jesus said, "For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." [^73] It is very likely that as more women place increasing value on those interests and opportunities which lie outside of the home, Byron's assessment of the female nature will become less and less valid as a generalization. If men can lay up treasures on earth rather than in heaven, women can place their affections on the world rather than on their husbands and families.

Although woman's organization and circumstance was such that she could center her life in her husband and her home, she is not compelled to do so. Her agency is equal to that of man; she can obey or disobey as she chooses. But, like man, while she is free to make the choice, she is not free to determine the consequences of her decision. As Brigham Young noted:

Many are disposed through their own wickedness "to do as I damned please," and they are damned. The volition of the creature is free, to do good or to do evil; but we are responsible to God for our acts, as man is responsible to man if he breaks the laws which man enacts. When we boast of our independence to act, it would be well for us to remember that we are bounded by these limits; if we transcend them and violate the laws of God and man, we shall sooner or later be made to suffer the penalty, without any reference to our choice whether we are willing to suffer that penalty or not. Hence, true independence and freedom can only exist in doing right. [^74]

The obligation to submit to the leadership of fallen man after having enjoyed the personal guidance of God is, undeniably, a descending. Yet, doing so will be the means of woman's very exaltation. If woman is "cursed" with love for man, man is likewise "cursed" with love for woman. To love is not to be cursed unless it is done at the price of righteousness and truth. The woman who is married to a worthy husband does not regard herself as being cursed. She is happy because she is needed, fulfilled and loved. The cursed woman is not an Eve, a Sarah, an Emma Smith, or any other woman wedded to a godly man. The cursed woman is she who is bound in her emotions to a man who is, himself, a slave of the world, the flesh and the devil.

If Adam was to "rule over" his wife, it was imperative that her affections be centered in him and him alone. That such could be the case, was assured by Woman's very nature. Therefore, God's words constituted a prophetic commandment, "Thy desires shall be to thy husband." It was meant to be so. If Eve was to respond to her husband's leadership as she had responded to her Father's, Adam would have to care for her and she for him. Indeed, without understanding and mutual affection, honoring the commandment to multiply would have been little more than an act between animals. The instinct to reproduce was implanted in all living things, but only in man was it to be fulfilled in a setting of spiritual oneness. This is the tie which binds mate to mate and parent to child. This, together with that unique intelligence which humans possess, transforms them into fathers and mothers in the highest sense of these terms. For the less the intelligence of the reproducing life forms, the less applicable are these terms to them. Love, light and truth find their ultimate expression in man. It is in the context of these three principles that the commandment to multiply was given. They lift the relationship of husband and wife above the animal plane of instinctual response or mere heartless submission to a divine fiat.

The Latter-day Saints regard the intercourse of the sexes both in time and in eternity, as regulated by sacred law given by our Father in heaven who has organized us male and female for a wise purpose in himself, and that purpose is made manifest in the first great command given to our first parents, namely, to multiply and replenish the earth. And the saying to the woman after her transgression as written in the book of Genesis, that her desires should be towards her husband and he should rule over her—the desires planted in the breast of the woman tending to draw to the opposite sex culminating in a union, is a wise dispensation of Providence for the accomplishing of the great end in view to encourage and stimulate them to multiply and replenish the earth, and take upon themselves the care, labors, anxieties and responsibilities attending the rearing of families. [^75]

Mutual affection makes the burdens of parenthood less burdensome. It is the chief preventative of boredom and the very spirit of heavenly government. For the rule of God is designed to be a rule of love for both the ruler and the ruled. No matter how virtuous and sincere all concerned might be, if they are devoid of affection for one another, the relationship—although proper—will lack warmth and spontaneity. To honor one's leader with lips and hands when the heart is far from him makes for a burdensome and imperfect allegiance. Duty to God, husband, wife, family, country, etc., is noble in principle. However, in the absence of genuine affection, it is usually characterized by the hard, hollow ring of sounding brass and tinkling cymbals. An emotionally—starved marriage has just that ring. One's duty may be done only because it is one's duty. Indeed, feelings of guilt at not loving one's mate (or one's God) may motivate us to almost obsessive, Pharisaic activity. The overly-solicitous mate, the too-perfect homemaker, the too-dedicated churchgoer, the too-precise keeper of commandments, etc.—all may hide a divided heart beneath the frenzy of "doing their duty." The frantic perfectionist in marriage or religion is weighed in the balances and found wanting in love. For love, like the Spirit of God, is as the invisible wind—blowing where it will. [^76] It is free, light, and refreshing. It brings those rains which soften the heart, enlighten the mind, and nourish the soul. Contrast the flexible, life-giving spirit of Jesus with the rigid, mortifying character of his antagonists. Those women who truly love their husbands—like those saints who truly love their Savior—find the yoke easy and the burden light. [^77]

Fortunate, indeed, is the woman who has found a worthy, compatible, bearer of the priesthood to be her companion. No, woman's curse is not that she is called upon to accept the righteous leadership of the priesthood, but that she is denied the opportunity of doing so. Man, not God, has put this curse upon her by his own failure to rise to his divine potential. The pains of a woman with self-understanding and spiritual sensitivity do not stem from being a female, but from being unfulfilled. She is the dove that left the ark only to find "no rest for the sole of her foot." [^78] She has a heart and mind to give but no one to receive it. She is as one who sought the true God in a land of idols, who sat by the rivers of Babylon weeping for a lost Zion. Such a woman may or may not be married. In either case she is conscious of a void in her life marked by loneliness and discontent.

Such a woman's needs as a woman cannot be met by turning to Christ. He is the Bridegroom of the Church as a body, not of its individual members, male or female. Woman is alone until she marries and becomes one flesh with her husband. She cannot become one flesh with God. Nor can that aloneness be overcome through some mystical union with her Savior. Such pathetic efforts at sublimating pentup needs only produce a sickness in the soul which opens one up to even more of the devil's machinations. Like must cleave to like. We come to Christ for salvation—not as men or women—but as sinners. "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus." [^79] Woman does not need man as man to obtain a place in the kingdom of God. However, she does need man if she is to be fulfilled as a woman and obtain eternal life.

What havoc Satan has wrought in the lives of thousands upon thousands of well-meaning women who have been duped into believing themselves the brides of Christ, even to the point of wearing wedding bands and assuming life-long vows of celibacy. Would God give contradictory universal commandments? Would he command woman to put her heart upon man and cleave to him in marriage only to have her renounce her womanhood in favor of a supposedly higher calling? Where in all the Bible is there a hint of such a thing other than in Paul's recommendation—which he clearly labeled as his opinion, not God's will—to the Corinthian saints? [^80] Even in that instance, the apostle's suggestion stemmed from his feelings about then-existing conditions. If Paul believed that the end of the world (or the age) was near, his recommendations rested upon a false assumption since, quite clearly, the world is still very much with us. If, on the other hand, Paul was not alluding to the end of the world but to the end of that particular gospel dispensation, his words reflect a passing situation. Being, admittedly, only personal opinion, they cannot rightly be employed in defending a doctrine alien and anti-thetical to the clear commandment of God.

Then too, Paul's words provide little aid and comfort to the Catholic position that Christ's church has been on the earth since the time of the apostles. For what did Paul mean by referring to "the present distress" or writing that "the time is short" and that "the fashion of this world passeth away"? [^81] If he was speaking temporally, the very existence of the world and the Catholic church belie his notions. If, however, he was alluding to things spiritual, his words are evidence of the very apostasy that negates the claims to authority of the greatest exponent of celibacy in the Christian world! Nowhere does Jesus suggest that celibacy was to be preferred over marriage. The Matthean passage employed by proponents of celibacy is misinterpreted. [^82] It is not to celibacy but to his entire statement on marriage that Jesus referred in saying, "He that is able to receive it let him receive it." [^83] The Savior's own mother, the holiest of mortal women, did not practice celibacy. Both Matthew and Mark are explicit in pointing out that she was the mother of at least four sons and two daughters in addition to Jesus. [^84] No woman who understands her divinely ordained role in mortality will deliberately choose the celibate life. She will, like Jephthah's daughter, "bewail her virginity" until the hour of her death. [^85]

The carnally minded woman, oblivious to the deeper aspects of her own being, does not appreciate such sentiments. If she thinks of her plight at all, it is largely in terms of those physical burdens and material limitations she encounters day by day. For her, success is a matter of life's luxuries, small vanities, triumphs and satisfactions. She neither expects nor desires more than flesh and the unaided human spirit have to offer. Like her male counterpart she is without God in the world. And like the publican, she loves those who love her—but only within the restricted limits of her own spiritual capacity.

She is the most unfortunate of women. She is self-cursed in that she is content to be co-owner of things as they are. The Lord is more ambitious for her than she is for herself. He wills to free her from all imperfection—including fallen man and his fallen world. Sadly, this is the last freedom most humans ever seek. Nevertheless, such freedom is attainable through Christ. [^86] Those women who do not choose the Lord's freedom will still be freed from all physical and emotional bondage to men. For in rejecting the Gospel of Jesus Christ, they disqualify themselves for eternal marriage. Therefore, in the resurrection, they will become forever alone. They will be independent of man, as man, in every way. As servants of the Lord, they will have the opportunity to develop their own talents and to pursue their own lawful interests without the "burdens" of wifehood and motherhood. [^87]

On the other hand, the woman who is faithful to all of the laws and ordinances of the Gospel is delivered from "the curse" in another way. She will be freed, not by rejecting the rule of her "Adam," but by sustaining him in his office and calling. She will be freed, not by ceasing to love her husband, but by being delivered from the temporal limitations of that love. [^88] She is delivered from her bondage to fallen man through a mutual metamorphosis: he becomes like unto God, her first steward, even as she is transformed into a heavenly wife and mother. [^89] Like Father, like son; like Mother, like daughter. The cycle is complete.

What we experience here, is but a school

Wherein the ruled will be prepared to rule.

The secret and the key, the spring, the soul

Of rule—of government, is self control.

Clothed with the beauties purity reflects

Th' acknowledg'd glory of the other sex,

From life's crude dross and rubbish, will come forth,

By weight of character—by strength of worth;

And thro' obedience, Woman will obtain

The power of reigning, and the right to reign. [^90]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Corinthians 11:11.
[^2] Mosiah 3:19.
[^3] Alma 41:11.
[^4] D&C 76:98-106.
[^5] See JD 20:201.
[^6] D&C 121:39.
[^7] JD 14:162.
[^8] Psalm 127:1.
[^9] TJS, p. 220. JD 3:283, 284.
[^10] See D&C 88:13, 14.
[^11] Ecclesiastes 1:14.
[^12] D&C 132:13.
[^13] See I Corinthians 11:11. Commenting on this passage, Orson Pratt said: "If a man be in the Lord he must not be without the woman and the woman must not be without the man." JD 14:243.
[^14] Brigham Young, JD 2:90.
[^15] D&C 131:1-4; see Ibid., 132:17.
[^16] See John 17:11, 21-23; D&C 93:20.
[^17] See Moses 6:57, 62; 2 Nephi 31:9-21.
[^18] See D&C 88:21, 22.
[^19] See D&C 132:7, 19.
[^20] Matthew 19:6.
[^21] George Q. Cannon, JD 26:253. See JD 1:58.
[^22] Matthew 16:18, 19; 17:1-13.
[^23] See Malachi 4:5, 6; D&C 2; 110:13-16.
[^24] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, Vol. II, pp. 84. Hereafter this work will be designated DS followed by the appropriate volume and page number.
[^25] See D&C 41:5; 58:31-33; 82:10; 130:21, 22; 132:5, 6.
[^26] Daniel H. Wells, JD 16:128.
[^27] For an excellent summary statement on this point see McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, pp. 331-332.
[^28] CR, September 30, 1961, p. 60. See TJS, p. 148.
[^29] See D&C 132:7.
[^30] Smith, DS 2:98. Italics original.
[^31] See 2 Nephi 9:41.
[^32] See D&C 128:18.
[^33] See Ephesians 5:27; Revelation 21:2.
[^34] See Moses 6:57; D&C 1:31; Alma 45:16.
[^35] 2 Corinthians 6:14, See JD 26:120.
[^36] See Alma 12:10, 11.
[^37] Matthew 23:13.
[^38] JD 22:241.
[^39] JD 8:209; See JD 5:92, 282, 283.
[^40] See TJS, pp. 147, 241.
[^41] See John 15:13-15; James 4:4; D&C 45:5; 93:45, 46.
[^42] Matthew 12:48-50.
[^43] Luke 14:26.
[^44] JD 8:199, 200.
[^45] D&C 88:40.
[^46] See D&C 88:63.
[^47] Matthew 5:23, 24.
[^48] B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1930. Vol. 1, p. 131.
[^49] See Matthew 6:12-15; 18:15-35; I John 4:20; D&C 64:8-12.
[^50] Elder H. W. Naisbitt spoke of love as "the only element that will bind together in its original purity the family circle". JD 26:119.
[^51] See Ephesians 3:17.
[^52] Pratt, The Seer, p. 154.
[^53] 1 Corinthians 13:10. See JD 5:315.
[^54] Moses 5:1.
[^55] Moroni 7:47. It was this type of love to which Paul referred in 1 Corinthians 13. See also 1 John, chapters 3 and 4.
[^56] See D&C 93:36, 37.
[^57] See JD 20:228.
[^58] D&C 84:46.
[^59] See John 17:9-11.
[^60] JD 23:285.
[^61] Moroni 7:48.
[^62] William Shakespeare, "Sonnett CXVI."
[^63] See Alma 34:17-29.
[^64] Marion G. Romney, CR, Sept. 30, 1961, pp. 60, 61.
[^65] This is one reason early childhood is the most important period of character development.
[^66] John Taylor, JD 19:167. George Q. Cannon said: "Our daughters should be taught to control their feelings and affections, and not let them go out without any regard to these circumstances to which I have alluded." JD 25:368.
[^67] George Q. Cannon, Ibid., p. 369.
[^68] See D&C 45:11-14; Hebrews 11:13-16.
[^69] Revelation 3:15-17.
[^70] See CR, October 5, 1947, p. 153.
[^71] See Moses 1:12-22; 4:1-4.
[^72] Isaiah 53:2.
[^73] I Samuel 16:7.
[^74] JD 5:92.
[^75] Brigham Young, JD 10:24.
[^76] Joseph Fielding Smith, "Elijah The Prophet And His Mission," p. 31, 32.
[^77] Brigham Young, JD 11:118. See JD 12:97.
[^78] Ephesians 5:22-24. Hugh B. Brown remarked: "This requirement of the wives to submit to their husbands presupposes righteousness on the part of the husbands." CR, October 1, 1954, p. 15.
[^79] Heber C. Kimball, JD 11:211.
[^80] D&C 25:14, 15.
[^81] See 2 Nephi 2:7.
[^82] JD 6:44. John A. Widtsoe observed: "It is undeniable that there are weak men as well as weak women, and it is equally true that such men are often attracted to and marry strong, capable women; and vice versa." PCG, p. 90.
[^83] Ibid., See CR, April 8, 1967, pp. 89, 90.
[^84] Brigham Young, JD 11:135.
[^85] JD 9:39, 40.
[^86] Celia A. Smith, "Woman's Influence," Young Woman's Journal IV (March, 1893), p. 281.
[^87] Joseph F. Smith, JD 16:247.
[^88] Brigham Young, JD 8:141. See 1:77. [^92]
[^89] 89. See JD 15:132.
[^90] See JD 5:28, 29, 115, 206-213.
