Rodney Turner, Woman and the Priesthood ( 1972)

IV

A Marriage In The Lord

Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord. [^1]

A divine ideal exists for every principle of truth. We approach that ideal only to the extent that we allow ourselves to be led by the Spirit of the Lord. God gives us the principle and we make of it what we will. Consequently, every marital enterprise inevitably mirrors the spiritual predispositions of the parties to it. Marriage, too, has its degrees of glory. It would be as fallacious to assume that all marriages are either good or bad as it would be to maintain that all governments are either democratic or despotic. The principle of marriage, like that of government, is of God; however, it does not follow that any given marriage—or government—is necessarily godly. Free agency makes for relativity in human affairs. We can plot the beliefs, conduct and institutions of men on continuums stretching from one extreme to the other. This enables us to evaluate all things by contrast and comparison. It will be helpful to consider a few basic deviations from the true order of marriage before attempting to describe a marriage in the Lord.

Worldly Marriages

Telestial Marriage

The natural man or woman is "an enemy to God" because he or she is devoid of any real concern for or commitment to his will. [^2] Their spiritual condition is succinctly described by the prophet Alma.

And now, my son, all men that are in a state of nature, or I would say, in a carnal state, are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; they are without God in the world, and they have gone contrary to the nature of God; therefore, they are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness. [^3]

Yet happiness is their objective and they live to obtain it in the here and now. Such men and women manifest a Ptolemaic disposition in a Copernican universe. Whether they are artists, entertainers, scientists, intellectuals, businessmen, hedonists, or what-have-you, everyone and everything else is subsidiary to their interests. Self-indulgence dominates the natural man syndrome.

Their reasons for marrying are many: an unhappy home life, boredom, money, career advantages, social status, etc. But whatever the reason, it is central to themselves. Theirs is a thing-oriented, utilitarian outlook on life. Marriage is valued only to the extent that it caters to their wants. They need a mate to do something for them: "feed me, house me, clothe me, satisfy me, make me happy." While they may profess love for their companion, it is usually peripheral to their own fulfillment. It is a dross-filled, self-serving emotion at best and a manipulative device at worst.

Heartbreak is almost always the lot of the husband or wife who is genuinely devoted to such a mate. The woman who puts her heart upon this type of man is to be pitied. Her very devotion dooms her to a shallow, futile existence. Yet she may live only to please the man in her life. Right or wrong, he is her god—her magnificent, but unworthy, obsession. Improvidence, drunkenness, brutality, infidelity—nothing can free her from her human bondage. She is a natural woman bound to and, therefore, the slave of a natural man.

Yet, time takes the measure of such marriages and when their original purpose has either been satisfied, frustrated or replaced with new interests and desires, they are—one way or another—repudiated. As with so many other things today, telestial marriages have a built-in, planned, obsolescence. Many are not designed to be more than a throw-away relationship—a paper towel, to be used and then tossed aside. The sophisticated exponents of such unions know them for what they are and contract them with no thought of permanency. In theatrical parlance, they sign for the run-of-the-play in full expectation of a limited engagement. The more naive participants in such marriages are not so crass in their assessment. Because they beguile themselves into believing that the marriage will do more for them than it possibly can, they expect it to last as a viable relationship longer than it will. Needless to say, children are almost always an unwanted by-product of such marriages and are more often than not the innocent victims of parental immaturity and selfishness. Although telestial marriages—like telestial beings, are quite variant in manifestation, godlessness is common to them all. [^4] Their numbers are increasing at an alarming rate.

Terrestrial Marriage

Just as terrestrial people are morally and spiritually superior to telestial people, so are terrestrial marriages superior to telestial marriages in terms of quality, satisfactions, and longevity. Terrestrial people are honorable people; they establish honorable marriages—good marriages. The love they express for one another, although imperfect, is genuine. Loyalty and fidelity to one's mate is the rule. Indeed, the deep and lasting devotion of Robert and Elizabeth Browning for one another typifies this aspect of terrestrial marriage. Ordinarily, children figure prominently in these marriages. They are welcomed and cherished. Consequently, Terrestrial marriages are characterized by strong familial ties. While religion is usually a prominent aspect of such unions, there are exceptions. Shared interests of a nonreligious type may serve both to vitalize and to sustain the relationship. What is important is that there are meaningful interdependencies and commonalities. The chief ingredients in a terrestrial marriage are respect for moral law, love, genuine compatability, and similar values and goals.

The conscious need for religion is partly a matter of one's upbringing and partly one's own spiritual proclivities. Since all are not equal in these factors, all do not have the same felt need for religion. Most people today do not include it in their definition of marital happiness.

However, a marriage of the highest quality cannot exist in the absence of sincere religious commitment. Without some conscious faith in things spiritual, a terrestrial marriage comes perilously close to becoming a telestial one. Any marriage is vulnerable to the extent that it is oriented to the things of this world. Only those men and women who are strongly motivated to live by the finest ethical and religious principles enjoy any valid security in their temporal unions. In this respect, those whose lives are Christ-centered are the most secure of all. Although terrestrial marriages may be very happy and rewarding, they are still inferior to the divine ideal. They cannot achieve perfection, nor can they endure beyond their mortal hour.

Modern Marriage

In emphasizing the virtual equality of the sexes, the so-called modern marriage is something of a reaction against the Victorian marriages of the nineteenth century. Today, marriage is emphasized as a "partnership" in which the husband and wife each hold fifty percent of the voting stock. Both are president of the company. Being a two-headed affair, the modern marriage is, in actuality, headless. Because both preside, neither leads. It is pure democracy. Such marriages are based upon false sociological theories as well as a fatal misunderstanding of the implications of the psychophysical differences between the sexes. These differences should dictate the valid roles of husbands and wives. In largely ignoring these differences, the modern marriage is essentially a contractual agreement between consenting adults in which they specify the limitations of their obligations to one another both qualitatively and quantitatively. It is understood that each is free to pursue his or her own destiny even though they share certain phases of their lives with one another. The wife has the same rights, privileges and opportunities possessed by the husband. In so far as circumstances will permit, each can do all that the other does and become all that the other becomes.

This type of marriage is encouraged by modern contraceptive methods which serve to produce an even greater sense of equality between the sexes by virtually freeing the female from unwanted pregnancy. The legalization of abortion is an additional equalizing factor. Now, the female can also enjoy sex for its own sake without the old fears marring the experience and without the risk of limiting her possibilities for self-expression. She can sow without the necessity of reaping.

Sadly, the more women imitate the ways of men, the less feminine they become. Modern marriage is a fraud, a sham, a lie. It will degenerate into something less than what it is even now. Actually, it has already begun to do so as legal marriage is replaced with "arrangements" that are even less binding than traditional common law marriages. Just how happy are modern marriages? The point is debatable, yet appearances suggest that there are a good many frustrated wives who sense a lack in their lives. "What is wrong? Why am I so miserable, so upset? Why do I feel incomplete, unsatisfied? What is missing?" The answer can be seen in their mirror: they haven't got a head. The piper will be paid but, unfortunately, little children and abandoned women will pay the most. When it comes to the wages of its sins, the modern marriage is not a fifty-fifty partnership.

Victorian Marriage

If modern marriage is sentimentalized democracy, Victorian marriage was stern autocracy. Whereas the modern marriage leaves the wife without a guide, the Victorian marriage subjected her to a tyrant. Both are extremes. Both are worldly in origin and unacceptable to the Lord. When maintained in the name of religion the Victorian marriage was a pharisaic charade. How grey, how austere, how full of pointless sacrifice it could be! In the Victorian scheme of things, a wife was much more the servant than the helpmeet. She was duty-bound to love, honor and obey her husband simply because he was her husband. His word was law; she was expected to be as submissive to it as the children she bore him.

Sex was an indelicate matter virtuous women tolerated in order to produce children for the master of the house. It was unclean, unfeminine, unfeeling. Yet, prostitution was a hypocritical fact of life in that staid society which required a husband to be a gentleman with his wife but allowed him to play the libertine with lesser females. [^5] This double standard continues today in many parts of the world where prostitutes and mistresses are quietly accepted as a matter of course.

The feelings of his children toward their stern parent were often a commingling of fear, hatred, and respect. He was the living embodiment of the awesome god so dear to the hell-fire sermons of evangelical preachers in every generation. Rigid controls produce duplicity in the ruled. In any situation where one is denied any real personal freedom, there is an inclination to obtain by guile what should be obtained by honest interaction. The idea that women must employ devious methods to obtain their rights stems from the fact that they have generally been the oppressed sex. The Victorian wife, being no exception, was likewise obliged to "stoop to conquer" her autocratic husband. The spirit of Victorian marriage motivates the popular notion that wives can best manipulate their husbands by being guileful and coquettish.

It should be understood that while the term, Victorian marriage, is descriptive of a type of marital relationship popularly identified with the prim rule of queen Victoria, it has always existed. While there is a definite sameness about most marriages in any given cultural setting, there are exceptions. In a simplistic society such as is found among savage tribes, such exceptions are rare. But as a society becomes more complex, these exceptions increase. Variations on the authoritarian marriage still dominate the marital scene throughout most of the world. However, industrialization is rendering the Victorian-style husband more and more of an anachronism in the technologically advanced nations where wives are becoming skilled wage earners. Those who achieve economic independence are seldom slow to demand personal sovereignty as well. Despotism can only rule where it controls the necessities of life. The dominating husband no longer does so; he is a victim of the very thing which has been the traditional source of his authority: material wealth.

Priesthood is power and authority. Satan endeavors to get men to abuse it. He is abetted in his efforts by human nature, for as the Prophet Joseph Smith observed:

We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion. [^6]

The tyranny Victorian men exercised over their wives and children becomes an even greater abomination when practiced under the guise of the priesthood. Such despotism is antithetical to everything Jesus, the Great High Priest, represented. Unhappily, due regard for a woman's feelings and desires has not always been shown by some holders of the priesthood. This was perhaps more the case in the past than today. Said President Young: "Men, as a general thing, do not know the dispositions of their wives and children, nor how to govern and control them; and it is certainly a pretty close, intricate, point." [^7] Such ignorance caused the love of more than one pioneer wife to grow cold toward her inconsiderate husband. She viewed him and his religion as so many dry bones in the valley of Jehoshaphat. Her only hope was that the resurrection would put some flesh on both.

Were the Lord to express himself on the marriages of this world, he well might say, "A plague on all of them." They are either too self-centered, too man-centered, too woman-centered, too child-centered, or too something else-centered. They are gentile. They are not God-centered. God the Father is the Great Patriarch of the human family. True marriage reflects his exalted station, being likewise patriarchal in nature. We now turn to it.

A Marriage In The Lord

"Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it." [^8] So wrote the psalmist, and so it is. Of himself, finite man is incapable of producing any lasting enterprise. All that he does is tainted by all that he is. The very word, "history", betrays his mortal limitations: he cannot hold on to the present, it is forever slipping through his fingers into the past. However, such is not the case with God. For him, there is no loss of time nor of the things which time has brought into being. He dwells in the sum of existence: "the past, the present, and the future were and are, with Him, one eternal now." [^9] Being the very fountainhead of life, God must be a party to our human associations if they are to take on the character of everlasting things. [^10] Apart from him, all is indeed "vanity and vexation of spirit." [^11] Truly, they labor in vain who labor without the Lord.

And everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection saith the Lord your God. [^12]

Unless the Lord is a direct party to the marriage covenant, it is doomed. The seeds of its own death are brought to the union by its mortal participants.

Only "in the Lord" can it be said that man is not without the woman nor the woman without the man. [^13] And, we might add, only "in the Lord" can it be said that the parent is not without the child nor the child without the parent. In the resurrection, those who are not one with the Lord are not one with anybody; they are alone. The degree to which we are able to establish a perfect union with the divine is the degree of our freedom, glory and joy. It is the degree to which we have overcome aloneness.

It is apparent, therefore, that marriage cannot be fully understood apart from God and godhood. And these are mysteries of which we know but little. Consequently, our perception of the subject of marriage is necessarily gained through a glass darkly.

But the whole subject of the marriage relation is not in my reach, nor in any other man's reach on this earth. It is without beginning of days or end of years; it is a hard matter to reach. We can tell some things with regard to it; it lays the foundation for worlds, for angels, and for the Gods; for intelligent beings to be crowned with glory, immortality, and eternal lives. In fact, it is the thread which runs from the beginning to the end of the holy Gospel of salvation—of the Gospel of the Son of God; it is from eternity to eternity. When the vision of the mind is opened, you can see a great portion of it, but you see it comparatively as a speaker sees the faces of a congregation. To look at, and talk to, each individual separately, and thinking to become fully acquainted with them, only to spend five minutes with each would consume too much time, it could not easily be done. So it is with the visions of eternity; we can see and understand, but it is difficult to tell. [^14]

Being most aware of this limitation, we will proceed.

Celestial Status

Many souls will be saved in the celestial kingdom without eternal marriage.

In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; And in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; And if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase. [^15]

Therefore, pertaining to salvation in that kingdom, four basic possibilities exist for a given married couple (see chart): a) neither mate will gain it, b) one mate will gain it (without exaltation) while the other does not, c) both mates will gain it but without exaltation or d) both mates will gain exaltation in the celestial kingdom via the new and everlasting covenant of marriage.

Obviously, a valid baptismal covenant with Christ is a necessary prerequisite to a valid eternal covenant with one's husband or wife. We can become one with our mate for eternity only because we have become one with the Lord for eternity. [^16] We must enter the circle of his family before we can establish our own family. To do so we must be born again into that circle through our acceptance of the plan of salvation with its attendant principles and ordinances. [^17] In other words, we must be saved in the celestial kingdom before we can be exalted therein. [^18] A marriage in the Lord is, therefore, dependent upon personal salvation in the Lord.

Priesthood Powers

A marriage becomes eternal—which is to say divine—in nature when it is contracted under the law of God and validated by the Holy Ghost through the instrumentality of the sealing powers of the priesthood as held by the presiding high priest of the Church. [^19]

Referring to Heaven's view of marriage wherein man and woman become one flesh both in spirit and in body, Jesus commanded, "What therefore God hath joined together [via the sealing powers of the Holy Priesthood], let no man put asunder." [^20] In point of fact, what God has joined together cannot be put asunder—insofar as eternity is concerned—by man.

As I have said, there is no power that can separate a virtuous man and woman who have been united by the power of the Holy Priesthood; no power can do it; they must do it themselves if done at all. These ties that bind us together will endure through time and eternity. [^21]

The authority to bind (or seal) is the authority to loose (or unseal). Lacking the former, we lack the latter as well. Jesus' promise to Peter of the keys of this binding—loosing authority was realized when Elijah the prophet bestowed that power upon the apostle during the episode on the mount of transfiguration. [^22] In 1836, Elijah returned and granted the very same keys to Joseph Smith in fulfillment of Malachi's closing prophecy. [^23]

The Lord gives the President of the Church the keys of the kingdom; he has the right to bind on earth and in heaven; he has the right to loose on earth and in heaven. If circumstances warrant it, he may cancel the sealing and the Lord would sanction it. [^24]

It has been assumed by some that the mere performance of a temple marriage guarantees eternal life and exaltation. Such is not the case. The blessings associated with the various ordinances of the priesthood are predicated upon our obedience to all of the laws of God. [^25]

There are many called Latter-day Saints who are anxious to obtain their endowments, washings, sealings and anointings, and baptisms for themselves and their dead, and who would think they were deprived of very great blessings if they could not have these privileges; and yet they act as though if they could only snatch these blessings from the hands of the servants of the Lord they would be all right, and they could do in other respects just as they please. They could neglect to pay their tithing and the observance of the commands of the Lord generally, and walk after their own vain imaginations all the days of their lives. What a fatal mistake is here! By your own works ye shall be judged, whether they be good or evil. A man may attain to all these ordinances, he may keep his path hidden in iniquity for a season, but the time will come when every evil doer will stand before the Lord in his own naked deformity, he will be stripped of his hypocrisy and subterfuge of lies. The gigantic superstructure of Satan, that has so long wielded influence on the earth, will be swept away, and in that day all who stand will do so by their own virtue and integrity. [^26]

No ritual can, of itself, assure us of any blessing of heaven. It is not enough to observe the "letter" of temple marriage—the "spirit" must be present as well if the ordinance is to be endowed with life. Consequently all ordinances performed by the priesthood must be sealed or validated by the Holy Ghost (the Holy Spirit of promise) if they are to be in force after death. [^27]

For example, the admonition to "receive the Holy Ghost" at the time of confirmation does not of itself assure one that gift. We are simply given the authorization to receive it; personal worthiness determines whether or not we actually do so. Elder Marion G. Romney observed:

Now, we have the Holy Ghost. Every one of us who are members of the Church has had hands laid upon our heads, and we have been given, as far as ordinance can give it, the gift of the Holy Ghost. But, as I remember, when I was confirmed, the Holy Ghost was not directed to come to me; I was directed to "Receive the Holy Ghost." [^28]

By the same token, a temple sealing must be ratified by the Holy Spirit before it is fully efficacious. [^29] Man proposes, God disposes. Were this not the case, unworthy persons could obtain the choicest blessings of heaven by the simple expedient of going through a ritual.

When a man and a woman, in all sincerity, enter into a covenant of marriage for time and all eternity (and after they have "overcome by faith," and are "just and true"), the Holy Ghost—who is the Spirit of Promise—bears record of or ratifies that sealing. In other words, he seals the promises appertaining to the marriage covenant upon them. . . . If one or both of these covenanting persons break that covenant by which they were sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, then the Spirit withdraws the seal and the guilty party, or parties, stand as if there had been no sealing or promise given. All covenants are sealed based upon faithfulness. [^30]

The Lord is the keeper of the gate of the straight and narrow way leading unto eternal life; he employs no servant there. [^31]

Equally Yoked

It is impossible for the Holy Spirit of Promise to seal (ratify) a marriage in which one mate is faithful to the covenant while the other is not. There must be "a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together" of all things in God. [^32] Just as the Church—the bride of Christ—must become "holy and without blemish" before it can be permanently sealed to him, so must every husband and wife become sanctified via their mutual obedience to the commandments if their marriage is to endure. [^33] In eternity all matrimony is holy matrimony between holy men and holy women. [^34] A marriage having one foot in heaven and the other on earth is unacceptable to the Lord. It cannot continue forever because the parties to it are unequally yoked.

Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? [^35]

Paul's warning against marrying those not of the faith is also applicable to those who are not valiant or who have apostatized from the faith. Indeed, such persons may be more spiritually blind than those who never entered into covenant at all. [^36]

Assuming that true repentance on an errant mate's part is not forthcoming, what is to become of a faithful saint under these circumstances? Paraphrasing the second Article of Faith, we believe that a man or woman will be punished for their own sins and not for a mate's transgressions. Individuals can do lasting harm only to themselves. Others may hinder their progress and cause them much suffering, but they cannot rob them of salvation. Consequently, an unworthy husband or wife cannot prevent a faithful companion from obtaining exaltation. We are reminded of the Savior's words to those who "shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in." [^37] Those who have been sealed to partners who will not honor their covenants will, in due time, be provided with the opportunity to select another companion and go on to perfection.

To be equally yoked implies much more than a surface commitment to the same religious system or to the same professed interests, ideals, values and goals. It involves an actual affinity of natures, of characters, of hearts and minds. The problem of joining dissimilar natures is analogous to that encountered in transplanting tissue or an organ from one person to another. The recipient's own body is inclined to reject the foreign substance and attempts to slough it off. Only by introducing powerful chemicals which serve as anti-anti-bodies can this resistance be overcome. Even so, the transplant may not be successful. Likewise, the permanently successful yoking of a man to a woman can only be achieved if both come under the regenerating influence of the Holy Spirit. For, as George Q. Cannon noted, "It is the spirit of God that unites heart to heart, that unites man and woman with bonds that are stronger than death—death cannot break them." [^38]

A true saint cannot be wholly bound in heart and mind to someone who does not share his or her commitment to God. Said Brigham Young:

I do not believe it possible, since I have been baptized into this Church, for a woman to be presented to me that I could love, were she not in the Church of Jesus Christ and did not love the Gospel. That is my feeling to-day, and I expect it to remain from henceforth and for ever. [^39]

The more one's spirit becomes united with the Spirit of God, the more difficult it becomes to give one's affections to an "infidel." Fidelity to the truth is the sword which sunders the children of light from the children of darkness. A God-oriented love is paradoxical. As it grows, one's desire to show mercy, compassion and concern for others increases while one's inclination to be bound in heart, mind and soul to those who do not share that love diminishes. [^40] Jesus ministered to unrepentant publicans and sinners, but he did not call them "friends." [^41]

Though blood may be thicker than water, spirit is thicker than blood. All lasting relationships spring from the spirit, not from the flesh. Informed that his earthly mother and brothers wished to speak with him, Jesus asked the rhetorical question, "Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?" Then, indicating his disciples, he answered, "Behold my mother and my brethren! For whosoever shall do the will of my father in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother" [^42] And, we might add, wife and husband. [^43]

This is in harmony with President Young's feelings:

Fathers, mothers, brothers, and sisters are no more to me than are any other persons, unless they embrace this work. Here are my fathers, my mothers, my sisters, and my brethren in the kingdom, and I have none outside of it, neither in any part of the earth, nor in all the eternity of the Gods. In this kingdom are my acquaintances, relatives, and friends,—my soul, my affections, my all.

I will carry this idea a little further, for the sake of those who are unmarried. Since I was baptized into this Church and kingdom, if all the female beauty had been simmered down into one woman not in this kingdom, she would not have appeared handsome to me; but if a person's heart is open to receive the truth, the excellency of love and beauty is there. How is it with you, sisters? Do you distinguish between a man of God and a man of the world? It is one of the strangest things that happens in my existence, to think that any man or woman can love a being that will not receive the truth of heaven. The love this Gospel produces is far above the love of women: It is the love of God—the love of eternity—of eternal lives. [^44]

This love is the touchstone of all other loves, serving to protect the Lord's people against its many counterfeits. It also provides both the way and the means of loving one's neighbor—be he parent, mate, child, friend, enemy or stranger—as he should be loved. Putting God first precludes any human being, or anything, becoming either our master or our slave. Love of God is the spiritual gyroscope which creates an intelligent balance in all inter-personal relationships. Possessing it, we are able to love every one without hurting or demeaning any one. This is the essence of love's integrity and, therefore, of its authenticity.

The issue in marriage, then, is affinity. We are expected to love our neighbors—even our enemies—but we are not required to become one with them. Oneness is a product of alikeness: only as we become like Christ—Christ-like—do we become one with him. So too, oneness in marriage is achieved only as the two natures coalesce. This is the human sealing which, to an extent, must precede the divine sealing.

For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own; justice continueth its course and claimeth its own; . . . [^45]

Such a claiming can be virtually instantaneous or it may take years. The rapidity with which it is accomplished is dependent upon the quality of the marriage. Doubt, fear, ignorance, sin and the dross in man's fallen nature are barriers which must be removed before a celestial marriage can come into being. This is why personal salvation via the sanctifying influence of the Holy Ghost is pre-requisite to the joint exaltation of husband and wife. We become free to love others only as we free ourselves of those negative factors which keep us alienated from God.

If feelings of bitterness, disappointment or frustration are present in a marriage, there can be no free flow of spirit between husband and wife. The union is unsealed. God cannot accept them because they have failed to accept one another. Under such conditions, the Holy Spirit would be imposing God's will on their wills were he to seal them up. The Lord comes to us only after we have come to him. [^46] Indeed, effective communion with God depends upon right relationships with his other children.

Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee, Leave there thy gift before the altar and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. [^47]

David Whitmer tells of an incident in the lives of Joseph and Emma Smith which bears out the Savior's words:

One morning when he was getting ready to continue the translation, something went wrong about the house and he was put out about it. Something that Emma, his wife, had done. Oliver and I went upstairs and Joseph came up soon after to continue the translation but he could not do anything. He could not translate a single syllable. He went downstairs, out into the orchard, and made supplication to the Lord; was gone about an hour—came back to the house, and asked Emma's forgiveness and then came upstairs where we were and then the translation went on all right. [^48]

God's acceptance of us and his forgiveness of our sins depends upon our acceptance of others and our forgiveness of their trespasses against us. [^49] If God will not justify barriers between brothers or neighbors, will he excuse them between wives and husbands? The burden of proof that any marriage should, in fact, be perpetuated into the eternities rests with the covenanting couple, not with the Holy Spirit. Only after they have demonstrated their mutual love for God and for one another will the Lord justify the ordinance by unconditionally sealing them up unto Eternal Life.

Thus love is a sealing power. It seals God to man, man to woman, parent to child, and saint to saint. [^50] All relationships must be "rooted and grounded in love"—which is to say, in Christ, if they are to endure. [^51] No ceremony, no ritual can seal a man to a woman unless they first seal themselves to one another through mutual affection. And this "sealing power" must flow "without compulsory means," it cannot be demanded or coerced. We may work at it, but as long as it is work, it is a compromise at best. We should aspire to the labor of love, not to a labor for love. A true mother does not have to work at feeling affection for the infant in her arms. Nor should husband and wife have to labor at loving one another. Mutual affection should grow between them like a living thing. Faith and love are inseparably connected principles. As we develop one, we develop the other. But before we can perfect them, we must possess them.

A mighty oak can develop from a small acorn but there must be an acorn. Likewise, a successful marriage need not begin in meteoric showers of poetry, music and high romance, but faith and love must be present in some degree if it is ever to be immortalized.

There is no evil in love; but there is much evil resulting from the want of love. No woman should be united in marriage with a man unless she have some love for him; and if she love him in a small degree, this is capable of being increased to perfection. [^52]

The realization of this perfection need not rob the marriage of its individuality. Even in perfection there is variety. Were this not so, heaven would be nothing more than a hall of mirrors in which every reflection was one's own! Personality would be swallowed up in the anonymity of a shared divinity. However, the human personality is sacred to God. He will not sacrifice it in the process of sanctifying it. Every celestial marriage will partake of the individuality of its partners. Every love will have a quality all its own.

Spiritual Consummation

The temporal order exists only because it is infused with life by its spiritual counterpart. This principle is equally valid in the creation of eternal relationships. Adam and Eve were mated in spirit before they were ever mated in flesh. A spiritual consummation preceded the physical consummation of their union. Being of one mind and one heart before becoming one flesh, they virtually eliminated the threat of later incompatibility. Frequently, it is more a case of wives and husbands being incompatible rather than becoming so. However, initially, the condition is obscured by physical, material, and emotional attractions and considerations. The irony is that the very factors which deceived them into believing that they were well mated in the beginning are often the same factors which later convince them that they are incompatible! When the facade falls in decay, they are brought face to face with the inner reality of their relationship. Which is to say, they discover what they really were to each other all of the time. However, not realizing what has happened, they think, "We don't love each other anymore." In truth, only a part of them was committed, and that part succumbed to the ravages of time. But when spirit and flesh are inseparably connected, the union of husband and wife is holy and, quite literally, soul-satisfying.

Obviously, then, the more unequal the spiritual commitment, the more unstable the union. Yet there are few marriages in which one partner is not more devoted than the other. The human condition being what it is, this is to be expected. Since an imperfect order can only produce imperfect men and imperfect social arrangements, the truly symmetrical personality or relationship is virtually non-existent in this world. "But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away." [^53] When wives and husbands are perfected in the resurrection, their love for one another will be total and, to that extent, equal. But for now we must be content with something less than the ideal! The fall has taken its toll; everything is skewed at least a little. Consequently, we should neither expect nor desire flawless symmetry in anything pertaining to mortality. Indeed, it is essential to the plan of salvation that we be tried with the imperfect order of things. The perfect God loved his imperfect brothers and sisters enough to lay down his life for them. Those who would emulate him, cannot repudiate others for their limitations without indicating themselves. The pure love of Christ vitalizes, blesses, forgives, sustains, and edifies. It lifts and bears the burdens of others. It could do none of these things were it not for human limitations and failings. Needs must exist before service can be given. Love seizes the opportunities life affords it. Love is non-competitive. Where it exists between husband and wife, each will strengthen and support the other. It is significant that when Adam began "to eat his bread by the sweat of his brow, as I the Lord had commanded him . . . Eve, also, his wife did labor with him." [^54] His burden became her burden. Such is the way of love. And if it has its way all the way, it will, in time, perfect everyone and everything it touches.

However, human love is, of itself, quite imperfect and limited in scope. It is an admixture of faith and doubt, knowledge and ignorance, wisdom and foolishness, strength and weakness. The sum of what we are dictates the quality of our love. God, being a perfected, holy man, can only love with a perfect, holy love. It is holy because it is unalloyed with any negative trait or factor; hence, it is known as "the pure love of Christ." [^55] It is altogether intelligent because it is in complete harmony with all that is light (spirit) and truth. [^56] But because men differ in spiritual development, its manifestations among them are quite varied. [^57] For example, while "the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world," [^58] the gift of the Holy Ghost is restricted to God's faithful sons and daughters.

Even Jesus had his "beloved" apostle. Nor did the Savior love the world at large as he loved his own disciples. [^59] The world did not permit him to do so; it would not receive him. President Joseph F. Smith, a most kindly man, said that he loved his enemies and would do good to them:

. . . but I do not love them with that affection with which I love my wife, my brother, my sister or my friend. There is a difference between the love we should bear towards our enemies and that we should bear towards our friends. [^60]

One having a celestial disposition has more love to give than can be received by those of a lesser spirit. Our Heavenly Father loves us more than we are capacitated either to accept or understand. Perhaps this is one reason why his work and glory is centered in his endless posterity. He needs an infinite outlet for his infinite love.

While the saints are admonished to aspire to the pure love of Christ, it is not self-attainable; it is an endowment from on high. [^61] When husband and wife possess it, they cannot fall out of love with one another unless one or both first falls from love. The lovers must change before the love can die. And this change must be fundamental. It must involve a fall from a celestial to a lesser spiritual state of being. Temporal circumstances alone cannot destroy a spiritually based union. Youth may pass, beauty fade, health be lost, worldly possessions slip away and life be taken, but the love will endure. Like the blue sky, it may be hidden for a time, yet it remains. Night passes, clouds roll on and we see again what was always there.

Even from a temporal standpoint alone, a marriage in which there is a true union of spirits—which is to say, of minds—can be one of life-long constancy and devotion.

Let me not to the marriage of true minds

Admit impediments. Love is not love

Which alters when it alteration finds,

Or bends with the remover to remove:

O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark,

That looks on tempests and is never shaken;

It is the star to every wand'ring bark,

Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.

Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks

Within his bending sickle's compass come;

Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,

But bears it out even to the edge of doom:—

If this be error and upon me proved,

I never writ, nor no man ever loved. [^62]

Unfortunately, such constancy is lacking in most premarital and marital associations because they are wrongly conceived from the first. Not only are they inverted in design in that they begin with the flesh rather than the spirit, but they become fixed in that condition. There is no upward movement, no ascending. The relationship remains earth-bound. It begins in dust; it ends in dust. Such affairs simply mirror the world at large which is inclined to assign first priority to those things which gratify the senses. In spite of Jesus' warning, the human race is prone to try to live by bread alone. Everything and everyone is a consumable commodity. Human beings are valued as things to be bought, sold, manipulated and otherwise used. In nothing is the inversion and stagnation of human relations more evident than in the area of sexual conduct.

It is not uncommon to hear of husbands beating and otherwise abusing their wives while still insisting upon their conjugal rights. Then there are those marriages which exist under a constant pall of quarrels, recriminations and general unhappiness, yet accompanied by habitual sexual activity. While it might be argued that such intimacies serve to keep these marriages going, it should be noted that they keep them going in circles—nowhere. Whether in or out of marriage, physical intimacy without spiritual compatibility partakes of the spirit of prostitution. The greater the alienation of minds, the more predominant that spirit becomes. The harlot and her companion differ more in degree than kind from those who are also devoid of any genuine feeling for or lasting commitment to the one with whom they become physically involved. Flesh, alone, kills; it is the spirit which gives life. When the marriage relationship has been spiritually consummated, the foundation for a celestial union has been laid.

Selecting A Mate

Few other decisions in life are so critical to spiritual success as the selection of a marriage partner. The right mate can do more to assist one in keeping the commandments than any other thing, save only the Holy Spirit. Therefore, once a man or woman have determined to live with an eye single to God, they should seek his guidance in finding a companion who will help them realize their righteous desires. God will counsel those who seek his counsel if their lives are in harmony with his will. [^63]

Now, I tell you that you can make every decision in your life correctly if you can learn to follow the guidance of the Holy Spirit. This you can do if you will discipline yourself to yield your own feelings to the promptings of the Spirit. Study your problems and prayerfully make a decision. Then take that decision and say to him, in a simple honest supplication, "Father, I want to make the right decision. I want to do the right thing. This is what I think I should do; let me know if it is the right course." Doing this, you can get the burning in your bosom, if your decision is right. If you do not get the burning, then change your decision and submit a new one. When you learn to walk by the Spirit, you never need to make a mistake. I know what it is to have this burning witness. I know also that there are other manifestations of guidance by the Spirit. [^64]

The heart should not be mindless. Intelligence is meant to dictate the who, the when and the how of "falling in love." It lies within the mind's power to control emotions before the heart is given free rein. Too many young people reach the affectional point of no return before they give any serious thought to their commitment. From then on, reason whispers while the heart shouts. It is a rare person who will surrender anything for logical reasons that was initially accepted for purely emotional ones. [^65] Marriage should only take place in the presence of two witnesses: the mind and the heart.

If I were a lady I should be careful whom I married: I should want to be pretty sure that the man tried to live his religion as revealed to us. Young folks generally marry because they love, sometimes because they are pretty. It is said that beauty is "only skin deep," and I believe it is so, it will shortly fade away. We should be reasonable on this subject, as well as on others; but when a person is love struck, there is no reason in them. We should never be struck very bad. We should love so that we could throw him off at any time if he does not do right. [^66]

This is wise counsel. The heart should not be given in a single burst of emotion, but line upon line, grace for grace as the loved one proves worthy of it.

Marriage is an act of faith that is only as valid as the evidences upon which that faith rests. The more our trust in others is predicated upon a discerning spirit in ourselves, the more justified that trust will be. Faith in the Lord should include faith in his providential care and in his willingness to assist his righteous daughters in both seeking and finding a fit companion.

Our daughters should seek, by all the faith that they can exercise before God, to obtain good husbands—husbands who will build them up instead of holding them down; who will strengthen their hands in the work of God, who will make them mothers of a righteous seed and posterity, with whom they can rejoice in the eternal mansions of our Father and our God; and no woman who has the faith of the Gospel within her, will want to bear a child to a man of whom she will be ashamed, and who cannot lead her into the presence of the Lamb. She will rather exercise faith before the Lord that God will give unto her a husband in whom she can trust, in whom she can have confidence, whose word will be as the word of God to her. And in the midst of the troubles, afflictions and trials that belong to this mortal existence, she will feel comforted by the knowledge that her husband is indeed a man of God, a man who will be true and faithful to her under all circumstances. This is a constant cause of strength and comfort to every woman, to know that she has wedded a man whom she can trust, upon whom she can rely, who will never fail her, that is, as far as human nature will permit a man to be free from infallibility. This is the course we should all take. [^67]

Those possessing deep spiritual inclinations sometimes err in selecting a mate and may, therefore, be burdened with unhappy marriages. Their misfortune stems from the disparity in religious commitment existing between themselves and their partners. Being more other-worldly than this-worldly in orientation, the spiritually-minded are very much in the minority; they are exceptional people. In identifying with the ancient prophets who sought for a day of righteousness and found it not, they, too consider themselves "strangers and pilgrims on the earth" rather than its eager denizens and property owners. [^68] Whereas most mortals can readily find others to marry whose tastes and dispositions are similar to their own, the spiritually motivated are hardpressed to find suitable companions. Like rare pearls, they are too few in number, too widely scattered and too hidden to be properly matched up without the greatest difficulty. However, a primary purpose for the latter-day gathering of Israel out of the nations is to facilitate this very matching. Even so, those with an astute, discerning nature, embark upon marriage only after the most careful forethought. Others, however, not yet really knowing themselves, or lacking their spiritual growth, naively marry with little consideration to the question of overall compatibility.

Paradoxically, the individual with a pronounced spiritual need may find more peace and contentment with someone who is indifferent to religious matters than with someone whose spiritual interests are only nominal and perfunctory. In other words, a spouse from "Babylon" may be less of a frustration and disappointment than one from "Laodicea." Why? Because the spiritual dichotomy in the former instance is more honest and clear-cut than would be true of the latter. Being so, false religious expectations will not exist nor will false hopes for a spiritual oneness arise. There will be no illusions, the relationship will be what it appears to be. Perhaps this is one reason the Lord berated the ancient saints of Laodicea for their spiritual indecisiveness.

I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth. Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: . . . [^69]

We reiterate, like-minded people can be happy only with their own kind. The prospect of finding the right wife or husband is far greater when one conscientiously strives to reflect the character of the marriage partner he or she is seeking. Since like attracts like, one who would have a companion with the potential for exaltation, must also be such a person. Those who desire the best, must be the best. What we are, dictates what we may possess. Indeed, maintaining the highest standards of virtue and commitment to God, serves to repel the overtures of those prospective marriage partners whose ideals and conduct would, like some moral gravity, tend to pull us down. This does not mean that one should demand a perfect mate. Few have lived in this world. And even if one came along, we would have to be perfect ourselves to recognize so rare a wonder (since it takes one to know one) or to be accepted in marriage by such an individual. We can be too demanding where mortals are concerned. The object, therefore, should not be a perfect mate, but one who has the potential and the desire to achieve perfection in and through Christ. We marry, not because we are perfect, but to become so. [^70]

Ordinarily, it is best not only to live, but to marry within one's means. Much unhappiness results from men and women reaching beyond their own unalterable limitations. Recall, the prince did not fall in love with Cinderella, the harassed scullery maid, but Cinderella the beautiful charmer who magically appeared at the royal ball. He chose a lovely girl who had been disguised in rags; he did not select one of her undeniably homely sisters with their undeniably big feet. It is one thing to rise to your potential and quite another to transcend it. So too, we should accept the facts concerning our own assets and liabilities and seek fulfillment in terms of those facts. The average person lacking such added endowments as money, talent or status, seldom attracts the handsome prince or the dazzling beauty. Most of those who dream of such a mate experience frustration, self-rejection, and heartbreak. Even those who do manage to marry above themselves pay a price for their "success." The old insecurities do not go away, indeed, they may become intensified. The plain woman with the handsome husband often experiences a gnawing fear of losing him to some attractive female predator. The untalented mate of an accomplished artist is seldom at ease among that mate's peers. And so it goes. Many young people subject themselves to needless pain and despair over their presumed inadequacies. Covetousness may be the life-blood of commerce, but it is the bane of the insecure personality. It is a creator of hells and of the devils who inhabit them. Satan himself is the product of a ruthless, unremitting envy which grants him no peace. [^71] Happiness results from filling the measure of one's own creation, not from possessing the measure of another's.

Too many young people allow purely physical and material factors to determine their choice of a mate. This is a grave error. The rising tide of marital disharmony, emotional breakdown, delinquency and divorce witness to the fruits of the popular fallacies associated with mate selection. We are victimized by deceitful priorities: beauty; money, charm, status, etc. The very qualities which led men to reject the Savior of mankind who "hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him." [^72]

Nor should we forget that we wed the soul—not just its "outward adorning." The core reality—the spirit—will remain after the flesh and the things thereof have faded away under the relentless battering of time. An eternal marriage must be based upon values which transcend mere temporal considerations. Samuel the prophet was greatly impressed with the physical appearance of Jesse's son, Eliab, but the Lord warned him:

. . . Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart. [^73]

Brigham Young put the matter a bit more bluntly:

A great many women are more nice than wise. If they can get a man with a pretty face, they think it is all there is about it. Some men think if they can get a woman that has a handsome face, that is all there is of it. But it is that woman that has a head and sensibility,—I do not care if her head is three feet long,—it has nothing to do with the character that lives in the body. It is the character that is in the man's house, the spirit that is in the man; it is the spirit that in in the woman and in the house that makes the woman and that makes the man. [^74]

Then too, it is well to remember that all mortal imperfections result from sin (the violation of law) and that when sin is finally vanquished in the resurrection, beauty of face and form will be the natural endowment of every celestial man and woman.

I think it has been taught by some that as we lay our bodies down, they will so rise again in the resurrection with all the impediments and imperfections that they had here; and that if a wife does not love her husband in this state she cannot love him in the next. This is not so. Those who attain to the blessing of the first or celestial resurrection will be pure and holy, and perfect in body. Every man and woman that reaches to this unspeakable attainment will be as beautiful as the angels that surround the throne of God. If you can, by faithfulness in this life, obtain the right to come up in the morning of the resurrection, you need entertain no fears that the wife will be dissatisfied with her husband, or the husband with the wife; for those of the first resurrection will be free from sin and from the consequences and power of sin. [^75]

While the Spirit is a guide for the faithful, it will not usurp man's agency or guarantee that all of the heart's desires will be granted in mortality. For many reasons, some are not given the opportunity to marry the man or woman of their choice. Social custom makes mate selection a particularly frustrating matter for most women since they are obliged to play the part of flower rather than bee. While this is no problem for those females possessing sought-after attributes, it presents serious difficulties for some of their less-favored sisters. Fear of lonely years of spinsterhood or of failing to keep the commandments have prompted many women to marry someone they did not love or who was morally and/or spiritually their inferior. While this is a decision each must make for herself, no faithful saint need feel obligated to marry in order to be assured of a companion in the life to come.

You good sisters, who are single and alone, do not fear, do not feel that blessings are going to be withheld from you. You are not under any obligation or necessity of accepting some proposal that comes to you which is distasteful for fear you will come under condemnation. If in your hearts you feel that the Gospel is true, and would under proper conditions receive these ordinances and sealing blessings in the temple of the Lord, and that is your faith and your hope and your desire, and that does not come to you now, the Lord will make it up, and you shall be blessed—for no blessing shall be withheld. [^76]

While the celibate life is an unnatural one, when sustained in it by one's fellow saints and by the Spirit of the Lord, it can be far more rewarding than a loveless marriage to an alien spirit.

There is not a young man in our community who would not be willing to travel from here to England to be married right, if he understood things as they are; there is not a young woman in our community, who loves the gospel and wishes its blessings, that would be married in any other way; they would live unmarried until they could be married as they should be, if they lived until they were as old as Sarah before she had Isaac born to her. Many of our brethren have married off their children without taking this into consideration, and thinking it a matter of little of importance. I wish we all understood this in the light in which heaven understands it. [^77]

A Wife In The Lord

Paul counseled the women of the Church to honor their husbands in their callings.

Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church: and he is the saviour of the body. Therefore as the church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands in every thing. [^78]

The true order of marriage, being founded upon the power and the authority of the Holy Priesthood, is patriarchal in design. The husband leads because he is the living embodiment of that priesthood which governs all things. A celestially-oriented wife understands this and fully sustains her worthy mate in his position.

If our wives would remember and keep faithfully the covenant they have made, they would observe the laws of their husbands, and teach their children to honor every law of God, and to love, honor, and obey their earthly father. If I keep my covenants, I shall be saved in the presence of God; if I violate them, I shall be damned; and so it will be with my family; and what applies to me in this respect will apply to all. [^79]

A covenant wife is a man's God-given helpmate; she is circumscribed by him as he is circumscribed by Christ. The family is like an eternal time piece made up of wheels within wheels—each moving at its ordained pace in its ordained place. Thus, each serves and is served by the other. But just as the movement of one wheel depends upon the movement of another, so does a wife's fulfillment depend upon the fulfillment of her husband. He, in turn, can only advance with the help of God, the great main spring of all progress. This principle lay behind the Lord's instructions to Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife:

Continue in the spirit of meekness, and beware of pride. Let thy soul delight in thy husband, and the glory which shall come upon him. Keep my commandments continually, and a crown of righteousness thou shalt receive. And except thou do this, where I am you cannot come. [^80]

The wise woman will do this, for it is a matter of enlightened self-interest. There is no more reason for a woman in Israel to chafe under this commandment than it is for a child to resist the guidance of loving parents. Pride is the number one killer of spirituality. It afflicts men and women alike at every level of society. May the Lord deliver us from it! It is the antithesis of all he stands for. It prevents the offering of a broken heart and a contrite spirit—which offering is the basic prerequisite to the blessings of the atonement. [^81]

On the other hand, willingness to sustain a leader who is less gifted or less knowledgeable than one's self is a mark of genuine humility. It is not difficult to bow before the superior attributes of another, this is the way of the world. But to honestly respect and support those whose endowments are seemingly less than one's own savors of godliness. Brigham Young decried the attitude of those who disdained their lawful stewards:

A feeling exists in the minds of many of this people that they would be glad to submit to their presiding Elder or Bishop, but they do not think that he was knowledge sufficient to lead them. Says a wife, "I would be glad to submit to my husband; but I wish I had a husband that I could look upon as my superior—that I could look up to and receive his words and counsel: that would be my highest delight. O that I had a husband capable of dictating me; but, alas! I have not." Go among some of the children, and they say, "I would be glad to mind my parents in all things, but I believe that I know more than they do." [^82]

The priesthood is greater than any man and is not bestowed upon men because of any presumed intellectual superiority over women. Wrote John A. Widtsoe:

In the Church no adjustment can be made. The Priesthood always presides and must, for the sake of order. The women of a congregation of auxiliary—many of them—may be wiser, far greater in mental powers, even greater in actual power of leadership than the men who preside over them. That signifies nothing. The priesthood is not bestowed on the basis of mental power but is given to good men and they exercise it by right of divine gift, called upon by the leaders of the Church. Woman has her gift of equal magnitude, and that is bestowed on the simple and weak as well as upon those who are great and strong. [^83]

A wife may be better educated, more gifted, and wiser than her husband. This is often a trial to her, but it is for her to manifest a spirit of meekness and to honor him in his station. In doing so, she leaves him without excuse should he then fail to magnify his calling.

. . . I have seen women who, I thought, actually knew more about the business of life than their husbands themselves did, and were really more capable of directing a farm, the building of a house, and the management of flocks and herds, etc., than the men were; but if men were to live up to their privileges this would not be the case; for it is their right to claim the light of truth and that intelligence and knowledge necessary to enable them to carry on every branch of their business successfully. [^84]

On another occasion President Young said:

Some mothers try to make father believe that a child five years old knows as much as the father. Another great cause of dissatisfaction is that so many women are such noble women, and know so much more than their husbands. They say, "This man is not capable of leading me." That is a positive proof to me that that man does not know his ability and calling. I will acknowledge that many women are smarter than their husbands. But when people are married, instead of trying to get rid of each other, reflect that you have made your choice, and strive to honour and keep it. [^85]

A man's wife should be his best and most trusted counselor. She is in a position to do more for his betterment than any one else on earth. It lies within her power to be his dearest friend or most devasting enemy.

Woman's influence is all powerful: a woman can influence a man to almost anything if she knows how to proceed. She can lead him to the lowest depths of degradation, or to the grandest heights of noble deeds. She can cause a man to forsake his principles and those things which he knows to be right and do what he knows to be wrong, and what he would do under no other circumstances; while on the other hand she can, by her influence and efforts, cause a man to rise step by step from the low places into which he has fallen, till he is capable of the noblest things. [^86]

A marriage "in the Lord" requires that a wife follow her husband only "in the Lord," for obedience to God takes precedence over obedience to any man.

We have got to learn to stand or fall for ourselves, male and female. It is true that we are taught in the principles of the Gospel that man is the head of the woman, and Christ is the head of the man; and according to the order that is established in the kingdom of God, it is the duty of the man to follow Christ, and it is the duty of the woman to follow the man in Christ, not out of him. But has not a woman the same volition that the man has? Can she not follow or disobey the man as he can follow or disobey Christ? Certainly she can, she is responsible for her acts, and must answer for them. She is endowed with intelligence and judgment, and will stand upon her own merits as much so as the man. [^87]

President Young put the matter in even stronger terms:

The woman that says, "I will follow my husband to hell," will have the privilege. The man that says, "I will follow a woman to hell, but what I will have her," will have the privilege of following her there. It is a disgrace to a Saint to love anything that he would not drop or forsake for his religion. Love your religion better than anything else. Love your God. Life everlasting is all in all to us. [^88]

The story of Thomas B. Marsh, the first president of the Council of the Twelve, is a case in point. His pride and jealousy coupled with his determination to support his errant wife regardless of the consequences led him to betray the Saints in Missouri in 1838. He was excommunicated. Bitter years followed. Then, in 1857, he returned to the Church a broken man and requested re-baptism. In the heat of the moment he had once said that he would sustain his wife's character even if he had to go to hell for it. [^89] His remarks upon returning to the Church prove that he had done just that. [^90] There is a point beyond which love for and loyalty to one's mate ceases to be a virtue. That point is reached when the first great commandment is denied in order to affirm the second.

The Lord is the only one we are commanded to love with all of our being. He, alone, is worthy of such complete devotion. Everyone else, including one's self, should be sustained only to the extent that they partake of the divine nature. Speaking of one who has been sealed up unto eternal life, President Young asked:

Now suppose that he gains the affection of a lovely woman and marries her, how much shall that righteous man love that woman? Shall he say, "I love this woman to such a degree that I will go to hell rather than not have her, I will do even this rather than lose my wife?" No, for you ought to love a woman only so far as she adorns the doctrine you profess; so far as she adorns that doctrine, just so far let your love extend to her. . . . When the wife secures to herself a glorious resurrection, she is worthy of the full measure of the love of the faithful husband, but never before. And when a man has passed through the vail, and secured to himself an eternal exaltation, he is then worthy of the love of his wife and children, and not until then, unless he has received the promise of and is sealed up unto eternal lives. Then he may be an object fully worthy of their affections and love on the earth, and not before. [^91]

While many will regard President Young's words as extreme, they are fully in accord with all that the Savior taught on this point and have the clear ring of truth about them.

In Summation

Whatever the reality of our lives, we must never forget nor surrender the divine ideal. Without it, we are lost. Without it we cannot know what we might be or what we might attain—therefore, we cannot know, in truth, what we are and what we have attained. If the ideal is painful to us, so much the better. The very discomfiture we feel witnesses to the truth of that ideal and to our own longing for it. Pain precedes all sincere repentance. Better a leper crying out in desperation to a passing Jesus than a leper huddled in hopelessness among other lost lepers. The Savior personified all that is divine and noble in mankind. How impoverished we should be without his testimony of the hidden potential in us all! The following is a brief summation of the writer's understanding of what is meant by a marriage in the Lord—a celestial marriage.

A marriage in the Lord is a God-ordained, God-sustained union between a man and a woman of like natures. It is as immortal as the spirits of the parties to it. Because of their mutual love for and commitment to Christ, they are prepared to sacrifice all that they possess for his sake, knowing that he has sacrificed all that he possessed for their sake. In doing so, they become joint-heirs with him in all that the Father possesses.

While mindful that obedience to the whole law of God entails the postponement of some of their personal desires and ambitions, they are happy to take up the cross of self-denial and walk by faith in an ultimate vindication. They made the choice that had to be made between one law and another, and one world and another. They do not look back. Because they seek that city whose builder and maker is God, they are able to rise above the temptations and cares of this world knowing that mortality is not the "be all and end all" of life. They realize that celestial marriage is an act of mutual consecration. In coming to it, each surrenders all and each strives to magnify the stewardship which they are individually given in return. Loving their companion as themselves, each endeavors to assist the other in successfully fulfilling his or her stewardship. They bear one another's burdens that they might be less burdensome.

Their happiness is joyful. It permeates their lives and the lives of their children. It touches all who come within their circle. They know that peace which passes all human understanding. Insofar as mortals can, they enter into the rest of the Lord. Death's separation only serves to further intensify their appreciation for and devotion to one another. Absence does make the heart grow fonder because their union was of the heart—the spirit—and not of the flesh alone. Their marriage will be a thing of beauty, joy, and holiness throughout eternal time.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] New English Bible, 1 Peter 3:3,4.
[^2] D&C 88:121. See Ibid., 59:15; 88:69.
[^3] TJS, p. 137.
[^4] Genesis 2:25.
[^5] Ibid., 3:7. See JD 9:168. The fact that Adam and Eve practiced modesty in one another's presence while still alone on the earth suggests that this principle should be observed in the privacy of the home as well as in public. Husbands and wives who habitually go about uncovered before one another and, far worse, before their children, violate this principle.
[^6] Ibid., 3:21. See JD 11:357.
[^7] See D&C 89:4.
[^8] See Alma 34:9; 42:10.
[^9] Titus 1:15
[^10] See 2 Nephi 28:19-21; Alma 30:60.
[^11] Alexander Pope, "Essay on Man," Epistle II, lines 217-220. The Library of Liberal Arts. Bobbs-Merrill Co., Inc. New York, 1965, p. 25.
[^12] See JD 12:299; 14:103; 15:39.
[^13] Immodest—even vulgar—beach and street wear is not infrequently seen on the male of the species as well. Immodesty is not only a female problem. See JD 14:21.
[^14] Isaiah 3:16, 17, 24.
[^15] Alma 31:28.
[^16] See Isaiah 53:6.
[^17] 1 Nephi 15:23, 24.
[^18] Alma 37:44
[^19] See D&C 88:21.
[^20] See CR, April 3, 1971, p. 47.
[^21] See D&C 93:30, 88:36-39.
[^22] Brigham Young, JD 9:220.
[^23] Alma 1:27. It is interesting to note how often the prophets associated the wearing of costly clothing with apostasy. See Luke 16:19; Revelation 18:16; 1 Nephi 8:27; Jacob 2:13; Alma 1:6, 32; 4:6; 31:27, 28; 32:2; 4 Nephi 24; Mormon 8:36, 37.
[^24] D&C 42:40. See JD 10:311.
[^25] See JD 6:212.
[^26] Brigham Young, JD 14:16, 17.
[^27] JD 11:305.
[^28] See JD 12:220, 221; 14:16-19; 15:161, 162; 18:129.
[^29] "A Style of Our Own," A Devotional Assembly address, February 13, 1951.
[^30] "Times & Seasons," Vol. III, No. 5, p. 799. June 1, 1842. [^55]
[^31] 2 Kings 2:23, 24.
[^32] Philippians 3:21.
[^33] Brigham Young, JD 12:201-202.
[^34] Brigham Young, JD 19:64, 65.
[^35] CR, April 5, 1957, p. 24.
[^36] See D&C 45:28-33, 64-71; 84:2-5.
[^37] See D&C 58:26-29; Moroni 7:5-11.
[^38] New English Bible. 1 Peter 3:3, 4. See 1 Timothy 2:9, 10.
[^39] John 8:29.
[^40] Luke 12:32.
[^41] See Romans 8:8; 15:3; 1 Thessalonians 4:1; Hebrews 11:5.
[^42] See 1 Corinthians 8-10.
[^43] 1 Corinthians 8:9, 9:19, 22; 10:32, 33.
[^44] 1 Corinthians 13:5.
[^45] 1 Corinthians 10:12.
[^46] John Greenleaf Whittier, "In School-Days," The Pocket Book of Popular Verse, ed. by Ted Malone (New York, 1945), pp, 273-274.
[^47] See D&C 59:6; 82:14.
[^48] D&C 36:6, See also Jude 23.
[^49] Revelation 3:5.
[^50] Ibid. 7:9.
[^51] Ibid. 7:13, 14.
[^52] Matthew 22:2-14.
[^53] See 2 Nephi 9:14; D&C 109:75, 76.
[^54] Brigham Young, JD 16:21. See JD 19:6.
[^55] Moroni 7:47. It was this type of love to which Paul referred in 1 Corinthians 13. See also 1 John, chapters 3 and 4.
[^56] See D&C 93:36, 37.
[^57] See JD 20:228.
[^58] D&C 84:46.
[^59] See John 17:9-11.
[^60] JD 23:285.
[^61] Moroni 7:48.
[^62] William Shakespeare, "Sonnett CXVI."
[^63] See Alma 34:17-29.
[^64] Marion G. Romney, CR, Sept. 30, 1961, pp. 60, 61.
[^65] This is one reason early childhood is the most important period of character development.
[^66] John Taylor, JD 19:167. George Q. Cannon said: "Our daughters should be taught to control their feelings and affections, and not let them go out without any regard to these circumstances to which I have alluded." JD 25:368.
[^67] George Q. Cannon, Ibid., p. 369.
[^68] See D&C 45:11-14; Hebrews 11:13-16.
[^69] Revelation 3:15-17.
[^70] See CR, October 5, 1947, p. 153.
[^71] See Moses 1:12-22; 4:1-4.
[^72] Isaiah 53:2.
[^73] I Samuel 16:7.
[^74] JD 5:92.
[^75] Brigham Young, JD 10:24.
[^76] Joseph Fielding Smith, "Elijah The Prophet And His Mission," p. 31, 32.
[^77] Brigham Young, JD 11:118. See JD 12:97.
[^78] Ephesians 5:22-24. Hugh B. Brown remarked: "This requirement of the wives to submit to their husbands presupposes righteousness on the part of the husbands." CR, October 1, 1954, p. 15.
[^79] Heber C. Kimball, JD 11:211.
[^80] D&C 25:14, 15.
[^81] See 2 Nephi 2:7.
[^82] JD 6:44. John A. Widtsoe observed: "It is undeniable that there are weak men as well as weak women, and it is equally true that such men are often attracted to and marry strong, capable women; and vice versa." PCG, p. 90.
[^83] Ibid., See CR, April 8, 1967, pp. 89, 90.
[^84] Brigham Young, JD 11:135.
[^85] JD 9:39, 40.
[^86] Celia A. Smith, "Woman's Influence," Young Woman's Journal IV (March, 1893), p. 281.
[^87] Joseph F. Smith, JD 16:247.
[^88] Brigham Young, JD 8:141. See 1:77. [^92]
[^89] 89. See JD 15:132.
[^90] See JD 5:28, 29, 115, 206-213.
[^91] 91. Brigham Young, JD 3:360, 361. See also 9:140; 22:125; CR, October 4, 1930, p. 79.
