Rodney Turner, Woman and the Priesthood ( 1972)

V

The Robe of Modesty

Your beauty should reside not in outward adornment—the braiding of hair, or jewelery, or dress—but in the inmost centre of your being, with its imperishable ornament, a gentle, quiet spirit, which is of high value in the sight of God. [^1]

Modesty is becoming to men and women alike. It is a sister of humility and should be her constant companion. Gentle women and gentle men—those of genuine breeding and refinement—practice modesty and restraint as a matter of course. This does not mean that they are rigidly precise in their decorum. To the contrary, modesty is no stranger to the blithe spirit. Freedom of happy expression is quite compatible with modest behavior. Indeed, without it, presumed modesty may be nothing more than prim conformity. Modesty requires a sense of humor if it is to be truly modest. The devil is the author of the common notion that high standards of conduct are anathema to the good life. The reverse is the case: the Lord's way is the only authentically happy way. Modesty is one of the bright flowers we find growing along that way.

In opposition to that flower is the pandemic weed of immodesty. This ugly plant is highly variegated. Characteristically, it is the antithesis of the temperate, the balanced and the beautiful. It caters instead to the extreme, the excessive and the unnatural. The gaudy, the over-done, the irresponsible—all are varieties of immodesty. This behavorial defect is commonly associated with one's dress, grooming, demeanor, and speech. However, the Lord also considers loud and excessive laughter inappropriate for his people.

Therefore, cease from all your light speeches, from all laughter, from all your lustful desires, from all your pride and light-mindedness, and from all your wicked doings. [^2]

Joseph Smith was characteristically of a naturally cheerful disposition, yet he did not approve of the unbecoming conduct of the Saints.

How vain and trifling have been our spirits, our conferences, our councils, our meetings, our private as well as public conversations—too low, too mean, too vulgar, too condescending for the dignified characters of the called and chosen of God, according to the purposes of His will, from before the foundation of the world! [^3]

Happiness does not require levity anymore than freedom requires intemperance. Indeed, in view of the times and the awesome responsibilities devolving upon the Church, levity is about as appropriate for the Saints as a square dance at a funeral. Immodesty is not limited to the foregoing, it is also manifest in such things as the ostentation of one's home or in an overweening pride stemming from affluence in material wealth, education, intellect, abilities, status, physical attractiveness, etc. Those who succumb to such conceit gild the lily of human dignity.

While pride and immodesty are often fellow travelers, feelings of inadequacy can also prompt the self-doubter to unseemly behavior. The aging woman may overdress, overgroom or otherwise turn herself into a caricature of lost youth in a desperate effort to deny the undeniable. The insecure man may assume a loud and overbearing manner in an effort to bolster his flagging ego. Some young people, emotionally unprepared to meet the demands of normal adulthood and naively assuming that a repudiation of the accepted trappings of the culture somehow places them above and beyond the status quo, bury their heads in rather extreme, even bizarre, styles of dress and grooming. While such immature behavior is to be regretted (since it wastes their time and energy on the trivia of life and makes them more vulnerable to deviate moral behavior), of itself, it need not be taken too seriously. For many young people, it is a matter of clinging on to childhood—playing dressup with their peers. Not having fully oriented themselves to reality, they feel a need to don one costume after another in the process of finding and accepting the one best suited to their part in the drama of life. There are many reasons for the foolish ways of mortals—some very pathetic. We should not be too judgmental of one another's foibles until we learn the why of them—perhaps not even then. With this understanding, we will consider the single phase of modesty relating to dress and its moral implications.

Origin of Modesty

When God placed Adam and Eve in the garden "they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed." [^4] But, as was previously noted, their subsequent fall brought them mortality and with it an awareness of the deeper implications of maleness and femaleness. They were as little children no more. They quickly made aprons of fig leaves (there being no cloth or like materials at the time) to partially cover themselves. [^5] Thus was modesty—a sense of personal decorum—introduced among men. Thereafter, the Lord instructed the man and his wife more perfectly in this principle and clothed them with durable coats made of animal skins. [^6] This suggests that Heaven's standard of propriety was both more constant and more comprehensive than that symbolized by the apron of leaves. A divine pattern of modesty had been given to fallen man which established the proper bounds and limitations for all human fashions. Those bounds and limitations have been violated again and again to the detriment of us all.

Nakedness was not inappropriate so long as the couple retained their child-like innocence in God's presence. But this condition no longer held; they were now two knowledgeable mortals facing, not God, but an alien world where spiritual predators waited to destroy them. Like the Word of Wisdom, the coat of skins was designed to be a safeguard against the evils and designs of conspiring men yet unborn. [^7] The Lord is far more concerned with protecting his people against the wickedness of men than the elements of nature.

If he deemed it important for so pure a couple—one living in total isolation—to practice modesty, how much more imperative it must be today! The more corrupting the times, the more essential it is that strong defenses be maintained against them. Whether it is due to ignorance, slothfulness or outright perfidy, many continue to play moth to the flame of indecency. Sophisticates argue that it is only prudery and evil-mindedness which prompts the call for modesty. The human body, they contend, is a beautiful creation of God which should be seen without shame or censure. These enlightened souls either do not know or do not believe that the race is fallen and corrupt. Indeed, there are few who are not relatively carnal, sensual and devilish. [^8] Most men do not view the body as the temple of the spirit; they see it as an instrument of titillation and gratification.

Those who quote Paul's words, "unto the pure all things are pure. . ." in defense of "freedom of expression" neglect to complete the apostle's statement: "but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled." [^9] Are not most humans unbelieving where the Gospel of Jesus Christ is concerned? It is precisely because our age is rife with uncleanness that women should cover their nakedness before men—and men before women. No, the body is not evil—but the world is. All things are not pure because all men are not pure. Heaven, not earth, is the only place where nakedness could be practiced without evil consequences.

The Flow of Moral Opinion

Satan is devilishly clever! He persuades men to believe that what does not embarrass them or disturb their consciences is thereby proven acceptable. Alexander Pope's couplet succinctly sums up the manner in which Satan leads the unwary "carefully down to hell." [^10]

Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,

As, to be hated, needs but to be seen;

Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face,

We first endure, then pity, then embrace. [^11]

In this way each generation justifies its conduct. Each delights in pointing out how earlier generations decried the changing fashions of their day only to finally accept and, indeed, often go beyond them.

The moralist is caricatured as a would-be-Jeremiah sounding the monotonous cry of "wolf" only to have the fearful creature eventually embraced for the innocent "lamb" it always was. The fact is, God's standards have been violated in different ways by each succeeding generation, cycles of fashion notwithstanding. But as fashions in dress or morals change, there is always a period of lag while what is passes and what will be assumes dominance. A rip-tide of opinion is created when the ebbing flow of the old order is met head-on by the surging force of the new. But it doesn't last. The old finally turns to join the flow of the new so that for a time the sea of human fashions presents a serene face to the moon of human folly. These tidal reversals are coming with ever-increasing rapidity; they are meeting with diminishing moral resistance and they are drawing mankind ever downward.

Immodest fashions have characterized many different cultures in human history. Nudity and near nudity have been practiced by savage and sophisticate alike with no thought of impropriety. But it is only since the first world war that women in so-called civilized nations have adopted the short skirt. Previously, the exposure of the ankle by women of refinement had been thought most daring; but to display the leg (or limb) was thought absolutely scandalous. [^12] Today, the wearing of form revealing attire is common practice. The fact that such styles are widespread does not excuse them. [^13] The argument of numbers is fallacious: forty million Frenchmen can be wrong. Morality is not a matter of majority opinion.

The very nature of our pluralistic society makes it impossible to use abstractions with any degree of precision. Being of many different minds, our words are subject to various connotations or nuances which do not always allow for clear understanding. Consequently, telling someone to be modest, or virtuous or chaste may have little value—another abstraction. We know what snow, rain, and ice is—but what is modesty, virture, chastity? Clearly, these terms do not mean the same thing even to people in the same culture, not to mention those in a different culture. If there is to be consensus as to their meaning, abstractions must be specifically qualified—defined.

American democracy is hardly the same as Russian or Chinese democracy, yet all three nations claim to be democratic. Abstractions are always the victims of rationalization. We tailor them to our own purposes. If the saints are to be one where modesty is concerned, they must be provided with a model of modesty. In wearing the coat of skins the Lord tailored for them, Adam and Eve provided such a model for their children. A modern "coat of skins" is needed today. Lacking it, far too many of us have gone back to wearing fig leaves.

Isaiah employed strong language in prophesying the immodest behavior of the daughters of Zion in our generation.

Moreover the Lord saith, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet: Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts. . . . And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of well set hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty. [^14]

Isaiah's words bring to mind Alma's denunciation of the hypocrisy of the Zoramites.

Behold, O my God, their costly apparel, and their ringlets, and their bracelets, and their ornaments of gold, and all their precious things which they are ornamented with; and behold, their hearts are set upon them, and yet they cry unto thee and say—We thank thee, O God, for we are a chosen people unto thee, while others shall perish. [^15]

One of the chief responsibilities of the shepherds of Israel is to guide the Lord's sheep along the right path in all important matters pertaining to their generation. Even with such guidance the sheep are prone to wander, but without it, they are sure to drift into the false paths of a world in darkness. [^16] Unhappily, too many of the flock assume that the very presence of alternative paths justifies them in selecting the one most to their own liking. They become their own shepherd. Such an attitude makes for a kind of moral and spiritual solipsism.

The word of the Lord has been described as a "rod of iron." [^17] It is not made of rubber. It cannot be twisted to one's liking, it cannot be fashioned into something else. His word has also been compared to the Liahonah—the sacred compass—which led Lehi's party through the wilderness.

For behold, it is as easy to give heed to the word of Christ, which will point to you a straight course to eternal bliss, as it was for our fathers to give heed to this compass, which would point unto them a straight course to the promised land. [^18]

Both of these metaphors emphasize the firm, unchanging nature of the law of Christ. [^19] Obedience to it must become as total as immersion in the covenant waters of baptism, it should be applied to everything in life, for what aspects of life are irrelevant to the issue of perfection? [^20] Although we may not wish to yield some facet of our behavior to the divine ideal, still, we cannot in all honesty deny that ideal. The Gospel standard is as independent of worldly fashions in behavior as it is of theological fashions in religion.

For truth is an absolute monarch. If honored, it conquers the democracy of relativism where men's ideas are given equal deference. It topples error's proud castles. At the same time, error exists only because truth exists. False religion is invaribly preceeded by true religion. It is the same in matters of dress, entertainment, music, art, literature, politics, economics, etc.. For each of them there was a divine standard long before there was a human deviation. There is a true and false, a right and a wrong for everything in any given system subject to divine law. [^21] Hence, it is God, not couturiers in Paris, artists in Rome, writers in London, or musicians in New York, to whom modern Israel should look for guidance in all things.

A divine ideal should dictate the basic design of the clothing we wear, the food we eat, the songs we sing, the dances we dance, the books we read, and—in fine—the lives we lead. For God approves the design of all things in the celestial world. His will is done there as it is to be done on earth during the millennial reign of Christ. If his design for temporal life is rejected, when shall the saints prepare themselves to accept his design for eternal life?

Thirty year's experience has taught me that every moment of my life must be holiness to the Lord, resulting from equity, justice, mercy, and uprightness in all my actions, which is the only course by which I can preserve the Spirit of the Almighty to myself. What is your experience? It is the same as my own. [^22]

A Fashion Of Our Own

Mormon, in commenting on the dress of the Nephite women in Alma's day wrote: "they did not wear costly apparel, yet they were neat and comely." [^23] Modern Israel has been commanded: "thou shalt not be proud in thy heart; let all thy garments be plain, and their beauty the beauty of the work of thine own hands . . ." [^24] This principle was stressed from the days of Joseph Smith. [^25] Again and again, the modern prophets have counseled the Saints to become independent of the world and to establish "a fashion of our own."

My discourse will have to be brief, and I am going to ask my sisters in particular to stop following these foolish fashions, and to introduce fashions of their own. This is the place, and this the time to make known the word of the Lord to the people. It is vain and foolish, it does not evince godliness, and is inconsistent with the spirit of a saint to follow after the fashions of the world. I wish to impress these remarks especially on the minds of my young sisters—the daughters of the Elders of Israel. Not but what our wives as well as daughters follow many fashions that are uncomely, foolish and vain. What do you say? "Shall we introduce a fashion of our own, and what shall it be?" [^26]

A Latter-day Saint fashion would be a light to the world. Nor would it call for drab sameness since each could and should style that fashion in a manner most suitable to themselves. The preservation of one's individuality is vital to personal happiness. The Lord knows this and delights in the endless variety of His creations. President Young understood this principle and pointed out that clothes, houses, gardens, families, etc., should reflect the Saint's own personality and creativity.

Thus a variety of talent would be brought forth and exhibited of which nothing would be known, if houses and dresses and other things were all alike. But let the people bring out their talents, and have the variety within them brought forth and made manifest so that we can behold it, like the variety in the works of nature. . . . Now let us develop the variety within us, and show to the world that we have talent and taste, and prove to the heavens that our minds are set on beauty and true excellence, so that we can become worthy to enjoy the society of angels, and raise ourselves above the level of the wicked world and begin to increase in faith, and the power that God has given us, and so show to the world an example worthy of imitation. [^27]

Such a course respects both God and man. For it would allow the Lord to exercise His agency in establishing the fashion most appropriate to His children while permitting them to exercise their agency in selecting their own style of that fashion!

However, many Saints are yet to catch the vision of President Young's counsel. Both he and his successors pled with the sisters in particular to assert their faith and their independence and become a light of fashion to the world. [^28] In carrying out President George Albert Smith's instructions to "preach modesty," Elder Spencer W. Kimball told the students of Brigham Young University: "We do not have to do anything we do not want to do. We can create our own styles and costumes." [^29] In spite of this, an undeniable decline in dress and other standards has taken place in obvious conformity with those of the world at large. The fact that so many Latter-day Saints are prepared to approximate the ever-changing styles of the general society is far more significant than how they do so. A lack of integrity toward any righteous principle is far more basic to morality than the diverse ways such a lack may be expressed.

From time to time, popular dress may actually conform to more acceptable standards of modesty, however, this is no credit to those whose accidental commitment to the principle was dictated by the style requirements of the moment. Modesty is an eternal principle, it should be constant, as valid in this world as it is in heaven itself.

Suppose that a female angel were to come into your house and you had the privilege of seeing her, how would she be dressed? . . . She would be neat and nice, her countenance full of glory, brilliant, bright, and perfectly beautiful, and in every act her gracefulness would charm the heart of every beholder. There is nothing needless about her. None of my sisters believe that these useless, foolish fashions are followed in heaven. Well, then, pattern after good and heavenly things, and let the beauty of your garments be the workmanship of your own hands, that which adorns your bodies. [^30]

The Lord's fashion would enable every female—from the little girl to the mature woman—to be attractively dressed without the excessive financial expense and sheer labor now required to maintain costly and elaborate wardrobes. Then too, the wearing of expensive and/or form revealing clothes may tempt the less richly endowed female to become envious and covetous. While immodesty may be the glory of the well disposed female, what of those who are less attractive? So-called sex appeal is deemed extremely important to the husband-seeking girl. Many a "plain Jane" has lowered her moral standards in order to compete with her more desirable sister. And what of the older woman—or the woman who may be suffering from some deformity such as varicose veins? Should she be required to choose between exposing her condition or being out of style with her sisters? If modesty were practiced today as it was by those in the past, everyone could present a neat and comely appearance before the world. Perhaps women would then be honored and cherished more for their true worth and beauty rather than those trappings which time eventually strips away.

Most men and women want to present as pleasing an appearance as possible. This is as it should be. We are children of God; we seek, consciously or otherwise, the divine ideal. However, there are some who feel that it is wrong to use cosmetics or other aids in an effort to improve one's appearance. They argue that God made men and women a certain way and they should not try to change it. Such is not the case. God did not make the race the way it is; all imperfection has come about through the violation of natural and moral law. God did not give any one a large nose, flat feet, poor complexion or any other physical defect. We may blame these things on heredity, diet, lack of proper exercise or anything else—but not on God. In discussing the divine objectives for the Word of Wisdom, Hyrum Smith wrote:

When God first made man upon the earth, he was a different being entirely to what he now is, his body was strong, athletic, robust, and healthy; his days were prolonged upon the earth; he lived nearly one thousand years, his mind was vigorous and active, and his intellectual faculties clear and comprehensive, but he has become degenerated; his life has dwindled to a span; Disease preys upon his system; his body is enervated and feeble; and his mental and intellectual faculties are impaired, and weakened; and man is not now that dignified, noble, majestic, honorable, and mighty being that he was when he first proceded from the hands of his maker . . . Everything has become degenerated from what it was in its primitive state; 'God made man pure, but he has found out many inventions;' his vices have become innumerable, and his diseases multiplied; his taste has become vitiated, and his judgment impaired; he has fallen—fallen—fallen, from that dignified state that he once occupied on the earth; and it needs a restorative that man has not in his possession—wisdom which is beyond the reach of human intellect;—and power which human philosophy, talent and ingenuity cannot control. [^31]

None want to be sickly or unattractive anymore than they want to live in a shanty. "What fools these mortals be!" The aged patriarch glories in his white locks, while his less fortunate brother considers a toupee! According to the anonymous author of Second Kings, even the prophet Elisha was offended by the taunts of some youths who cried after him: "Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head." Elisha then "cursed them in the name of the Lord"—with rather disastrous results. [^32] The apostle Paul (described by one early writer as "an ugly little Jew"), contrasted "our vile bodies" with those of resurrected beings. [^33] Poor mortals have a right to do what they can, within reason, to make themselves more attractive. Let them put on, take off, pull in, push out, cover over or hide under what they will—no one should take offense. It is altogether good for women to be neat and comely—and to teach their children how to be the same.

Let the sisters take care of themselves, and make themselves beautiful, and if any of you are so superstitious and ignorant as to say that this is pride, I can say that you are not informed as to the pride which is sinful before the Lord, you are also ignorant as to the excellency of the heavens, and of the beauty which dwells in the society of the Gods. Were you to see an angel, you would see a beautiful and lovely creature. Make yourselves like angels in goodness and beauty. Let the mothers in Israel make their sons and daughters healthy and beautiful, by cleanliness and a proper diet. Whether you have much or little clothing for your children, it can be kept clean and healthy, and be made to fit their persons neatly. Make your children lovely and fair that you may delight in them. [^34]

The foundation of modesty, as with all basic principles of life, should be laid in childhood. It is unrealistic to assume that modesty can be suddenly imposed on youth who have been accustomed to wearing abbreviated styles from the time they were little children. This fallacy is as much responsible for the difficulty encountered in teaching modesty to youth as any one single factor. If proper dress is worn from earliest childhood, it is less likely that modesty will ever become a serious issue thereafter. The early inculcation of a sense of decorum is to be highly prized; for there is something to be said for the gentle ways of the "Little Women" of bygone days. How far we have departed from them! But even then, the prophets were warning the very young against immodesty:

Little girls, permit me to ask you, Won't you be so kind and so good as to take those pins or the india-rubber cords out of the back of the skirts of your dresses, so that you will look comely. They make you look uncomely, to see your dresses drawn around you, showing your form. Mothers ought to be ashamed of teaching their children such things. Dress your children and yourselves in that comely, angelic manner that, were an angel to visit you, you would not feel ashamed. [^35]

The seeds of every form of virtuous conduct are meant to be planted in the rich soil of innocence. Modesty is no exception.

Indeed, modesty may have far more to do with the attitudes of youth toward temple marriage and the subsequent wearing of the garment than many parents realize. More than one young woman has declined a temple marriage rather than deny herself the wearing of the popular styles of both under and outer clothing. Elder Harold B. Lee echoed the warning of other leaders of the Church when he said:

Careless mothers who permit even in childhood or babyhood nudity or semi-nudity in dress are but sowing the seeds of disregard for standards of modesty which if taught and adhered to in her growing up years will prepare a daughter for entrance into the holy and sacred ordinances of the Lord. [^36]

Clearly, modesty should be thought of as a way rather than as a mere acquisition of life.

Paradoxically, the moral pluralism of our day makes a Latter-day Saint fashion quite feasible. We can employ the same freedom of expression in matters of taste and behavior that the world demands for itself. If the world claims the negative privilege of disobeying God and practicing every species of immorality, his "peculiar people" can claim with equal enthusiasm the positive privilege of serving him with all of their heart, might, mind and strength. Why must freedom always be thought of in terms of lawlessness? Liberty is a two-way street. The saints are as free to do what is right (letting the consequence follow) as the world is to do what is wrong! We are as free to practice outright modesty as we are to play the hypocritical game of semi-modesty. Those who are animated by a substantial degree of the Spirit of God use the liberty of the times to come as close as possible to the divine ideal. Those who employ that same liberty to get as far as they dare from that standard while still assuring themselves that they are not doing anything "wrong" are, at the very least, slothful servants. The Lord knows the thoughts and intents of our hearts; He cannot be deceived by feigned expressions of devotion.

Before the world coming of Christ occurs, the saints will build the New Jerusalem, a city of holiness uncontaminated by any form of immodesty. [^37] The spirit of that city, of Zion, ought to be developed among the Lord's people here and now. Although practical considerations preclude a complete break with the present order of things, what the saints can do, they should do. Then, while their efforts may be short of the mark, the Lord can accept their offering and bless them for it. But, O, what contempt he has for the grudging gift. [^38]

Because it harmonizes with all that is true and natural, genuine modesty is enhanced by its association with whatever is virtuous, lovely and praiseworthy. It increases in loveliness as it blends with the spiritually beautiful. The prophets understand this. Peter counseled the women of the Church:

"Your beauty should reside, not in outward adornment—the braiding of the hair, or jewelery, or dress—but in the inmost centre of your being, with its imperishable ornament, a gentle, quiet spirit, which is of high value in the sight of God." [^39]

Love and Modesty

Speaking of his Father, Jesus said, "I do always those things that please him." [^40] Perfect love produced perfect obedience. Jesus did not reason, argue, or debate the issues of life; he determined his course by one simple test: will it please the Father? We want to please those we truly love. Because their heavenly Father loved them, Jesus' disciples were comforted with the assurance: "Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." [^41] True disciples of Christ are anxious to please God, not themselves or the world. [^42] When a choice must be made, love should dictate what it will be.

The faithful saint will not want to do anything which will lead another into temptation. The argument is frequently heard that one has the "right" to behave in a certain way, that he or she is not doing anything "wrong." Paul answered this rationalization nearly two thousand years ago when certain saints at Corinth felt that they had the "right" to eat the flesh of animals slaughtered in connection with the rituals of the pagans. [^43] These saints saw nothing "wrong" with the meat even though some of their fellow members considered it spiritually unclean. In dealing with the issue, Paul expressed a principle which applies to every situation where exercising one's "rights" may jeopardize the well-being of another.

This principle is summed up in the following passages:

But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that are weak. . . . For though I be free from all men, yet have I made myself servant unto all, that I might gain the more. . . . To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. . . . Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the church of God: Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. [^44]

Clearly, no true follower of Christ will say or do anything which—though presumably not wrong—will needlessly weaken the faith or endanger the virtue of another. Charity—the pure love of Christ—"doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own." [^45]

Further, we should heed the apostle's warning against over-confidence as to our own security. He reminds us that thousands of those ancient Israelites who had committed themselves to Christ (Jehovah) were subsequently destroyed for immorality. "Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." [^46] Who is so secure in his or her own purity of soul as to be beyond all threat of sin? If there are any among us, they would be the last to sacrifice another on the altar of personal vanity.

When love rules, we avoid doing anything which will make it more difficult for others to keep the commandments. We do not knowingly subject them to temptation. For how can we pray "lead us not into temptation" when we are deliberately leading others into temptation? If need be, we lay down some aspect of our lives for our weaker "friends;" we do not exploit them. Men do not want their wives, daughters or other females to dress or behave immodestly. Women do not deliberately comport themselves in a manner to attract either envy or salacious attention. The spirit of competition is alien to the Spirit of Christ. Those who are true to that spirit have no desire to out-do or out-shine their fellows. Life is replete with inequities of every description. Insofar as we can, we should seek to minimize, not accentuate, them. We do not love our neighbor as ourselves if we rejoice in the fact that we are richer or healthier or younger or stronger or better educated or more talented or more influential or more attractive than someone else.

Whittier wrote a charming poem in which an aged man recalls the words of a childhood sweetheart who had excelled him in spelling:

"I'm sorry that I spelt the word:

I hate to go above you,

Because, "—the brown eyes lower fell,

"Because, you see, I love you!"

In his closing lines, the poet spoke a sad truth.

He lives to learn, in life's hard school,

How few who pass above him

Lament their triumph and his loss,

Like her,—because they love him. [^47]

When we love, we become joined in spirit with the object of that love. That is why we cannot help but seek our neighbor's interest along with our own. [^48]

The White Robe

Before man and woman left paradise and entered this fallen state, the Lord clothed them in sacred garments—the wearing of which symbolized, among other things, submission to his will. This "coat of skins" stands in opposition to the fashions of the world. For this reason, the saints have been admonished to "come forth out of the fire [the divine crucible], hating even the garments spotted with the flesh." [^49] Those who do so are heirs of salvation: "He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels." [^50] The sum of those claimed by the Savior constitutes the assembly of the redeemed seen in vision by John the revelator. [^51]

In that vision, one of the twenty-four elders was heard to ask, "What are these which are arrayed in white robes? And whence come they?" The answer was "These are they which came out of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb." [^52] They, and they alone, possess the "wedding garment" of the Lord. [^53] Having rejected the world and its fashions and faithfully worn the "coat of skins" in time, they have the glorious robe of righteousness and salvation placed upon them in eternity. [^54] Such is the ultimate blessing of modesty and obedience in all things.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] To menstruate 1. The custom of women. Jacob 2:28.
[^2] Sperm 2. Seed See Proverbs 31:10-31.
[^3] To be unfertile or sterile 3. To be barren See JD 2:322; 24:186. CR, April 6, 1921, p. 169; April 5, 1954, p. 71.
[^4] The uterus 4. The womb Jacob 2:25.
[^5] To have intercourse 5. To know one It is ironic that the problem did not originate with the "loathsome" Lamanites but with the "delightsome" Nephites. See Jacob 3:5-9.
[^6] To become pregnant 6. To conceive See Jacob 2:22-3:12.
[^7] Pregnancy 7. To be with child Jacob 2:7.
[^8] A baby 8. The fruit of the womb See D&C 1:35, 36; 38:11, 12; Moses 7:24, 25.
[^9] Jeremiah 6:15s See also D&C 112:23.
[^10] Mark E. Petersen, CR, April, 1969, p. 64.
[^11] CR, Oct., 1949, p. 194. See Cr, April, 1969, p. 13.
[^12] CR, April, 1969, p. 13.
[^13] See Ibid., pp. 54-57, 63, 64.
[^14] The widespread use of alcohol and drugs only adds to the incredible toll.
[^15] Genesis 49:4.
[^16] See Genesis 34.
[^17] Genesis 34:30.
[^18] Genesis 49:5-7.
[^19] James 1:13-15.
[^20] Those who use this rationalization are often guilty of self-deception; subconsciously they want to succumb to that which they pretend to resist.
[^21] See Luke 14:31-32.
[^22] See Genesis 39:1-20.
[^23] Genesis 39:9.
[^24] Genesis 39:12.
[^25] See 2 Nephi 3.
[^26] See Genesis 37:5-11. Joseph's dreams implied more than his rule over his family during their Egyptian sojourn; they pertained to the everlasting primacy of Joseph's posterity. See D&C 133:34; Jeremiah 31:9.
[^27] Proverbs 6:20, 27-35.
[^28] Genesis 39:4.
[^29] See 2 Samuel 11.
[^30] Adultery called for the death penalty. Leviticus 20:10.
[^31] See D&C 132:39; TJS, 339.
[^32] Bathsheba later bore Solomon.
[^33] 2 Samuel 12:10-12.
[^34] There is no substitute for obedience. See D&C 52:14-20; Matthew 7:21.
[^35] By Ahinoam and Abigail respectively. See 2 Samuel 3:2, 3 3:1.
[^36] See 2 Samuel 13.
[^37] Ibid., 13:12, 13.
[^38] Ibid., 13:15.
[^39] Ibid. 13:16.
[^40] JD, 11:268. See CR, April 6, 1947, pp. 119, 120.
[^41] 2 Samuel 18:33.
[^42] Psalm 51 is David's poignant plea for mercy.
[^43] See Judges 19-21; Genesis 19:1-11.
[^44] Judges 21:25.
[^45] Judges 19:30. The conduct of the Benjamites was more typical of the Cannanites who were given to acts of gross immorality and perversion in conjunction with their religious worship.
[^46] Romans 1:24-28.
[^47] Said David of Jonathan: "thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women." 2 Samuel 1:26. Speaking of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, John Taylor wrote: "In life they were not divided, and in death they were not separated." D&C 135:3. A special bond of affection seems to have existed between Jesus and John, the traditional apostle "whom Jesus loved." John 13:23. See also JD 4:277.
[^48] Moroni 9:9.
[^49] Jacob 2:28. The chastity of his sons is also of paramount importance to God.
[^50] See D&C 1:31; Alma 45:16.
[^51] See Moses 1:39.
[^52] See D&C 93:33, 34.
[^53] See TJS, pp. 181, 297.
[^54] See D&C 130:20, 21.
