Rodney Turner, Woman and the Priesthood ( 1972)

VI

Chastity: God's Delight

For I, the Lord God, delight in the chastity of women. And whoredoms are an abomination before me; thus saith the Lord of Hosts. [^1]

Woman is "one of the fairest gems of all God's creation." [^2] She is the epitome of everything virtuous, lovely and praiseworthy. And chastity is her crowning glory, her most precious possession. Its loss is one of the saddest things that can befall her. Death itself is a lesser thing by comparison. Indeed, more than one prophet has considered the death of his children preferable to their loss of innocence. [^3] Such an attitude is alien to these times; it reflects the spirit of a bygone era when chastity was a more closely guarded and highly prized endowment than it is now. These days call for more mercy than justice, more compassion than condemnation and more vigilance than unquestioning trust. It is an evil hour; virtue will not triumph by default.

The Wounding of Delicate Minds

One of the Lord's announced purposes in bringing Lehi's family to America was "that I might raise up unto me a righteous branch from the fruit of the loins of Joseph." [^4] But soon after the death of Nephi a plague of immorality broke out among his people for the first time. [^5] The Lord gave Jacob, Nephi's brother, the painful assignment of calling the erring men to repentence. [^6] Noting the presence of women and children, Jacob said,

And also it grieveth me that I must use so much boldness of speech concerning you, before your wives and your children, many of whose feelings are exceedingly tender and chaste and delicate before God, which thing it pleasing unto God; [^7]

The sensitive, even apologetic, manner in which the prophet introduced his message provides a striking contrast to the unseemly candor currently found in many books, magazines, plays, motion pictures and, yes, even classrooms. This deluge of profanity, pornography and promiscuity would lead one to believe that some malevolent agency is determined to drag us into the very vortex of hell. [^8] It has become a cliche to speak of the rapid deterioration of morals during the second half of the twentieth century. The assault on traditional Christian standards by a vocal and influential minority is no passing fad. The world is changing. For many reasons, it will never be the same again. Although these moral iconoclasts do not represent today's average person, they are in fact, the precursors of tomorrow's orthodoxy. Hopefully, most people will not accept the most extreme views of these sexual revolutionists, but if history can be trusted, there is no doubt but what society will be influenced by them. Indeed, it has been already.

We have witnessed the emergence of a seemingly amorphous but very real movement calculated to eliminate the sexual inhibitions of the rising generation. The moral disintegration of millions of young men and women is being accomplished before our eyes. This campaign is not only abetted by many artists, writers, publishers, producers and others associated with the various media, it is also supported by some scientists and educators as well. In the name of freedom, knowledge and education, consciences are being seared with the hot iron of brutal frankness and vulgar candor. In the name of scientific research every nuance of man's sexual nature is being probed down to the minutest detail—a profane examination of the temple of the human spirit. Nothing is sacred because nothing is divine; men are only animals with animal needs and drives; good mental hygiene calls for them to accept themselves as such.

Many classes in so-called sex education are nothing more than exercises in pornography. Being presented in a classroom setting, such instruction can be more damaging to the minds and morals of receptive children than anything they might learn in the streets. Some bonafide psychiatrists and psychologists—along with an army of non-professionals—have introduced programs aimed at ridding their clients of any moral or emotional blocks to a free and unrestrained expression of feelings and desires. The negative effects of these hedonistic programs are already apparent. Children are being robbed of their innocence before the due time, spiritual awareness is failing, emotions are becoming desensitized and our ability to be shocked—a first line of moral defense—is being destroyed.

Jeremiah's indictment of his generation comes to mind.

Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shall fall among them that fall: at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, saith the Lord. [^9]

We are on holy ground when we discuss the human body and the means by which life is organized. Unfortunately, the blatant candor of our times has robbed the subject of the sensitive treatment it merits. The nomenclature of the physiologist is stark and dehumanizing when contrasted with that used by the Lord and his prophets. Scripture provides us with a spiritual nomenclature for those things pertaining to human reproduction which can add needed dimension to any purely scientific treatment of the subject. While the language of science may be more precise in describing the physical aspects of sex, the language of the Lord lifts us above the flesh and reveals its soul. Contrast the following:

Language of Science Language of Scripture

While some technical terms must, of necessity, be used when teaching the young the nature and functions of the body, such instruction would be far more effective if the spiritual implications of these terms were also considered. When human maturation is taught in the context of the physical alone, it is a half-truth at best. Only when the subject is placed in its proper spiritual setting can it be rightly understood and appreciated.

When schools are prevented from teaching anything of a spiritual nature, they are thereby disqualified from teaching sex at all, for in its very nature, sex is spiritual and inseparably connected with the creative work of God. [^10]

In spite of all of the programs set up to teach the young about themselves, immorality and illegitimacy have never been more rampant. The truth may be that these programs have actually abetted this trend! Said J. Reuben Clark, Jr.:

Parents are grasping at straws in an effort to hold their children. The cry is raised that the Church needs a book on sex. But what should such a book tell? Already the schools have taught sex facts ad nauseam. All their teachings have but torn away the modesty that once clothed sex; their discussions tend to make, and sometimes seem to make, sex animals of our boys and girls. The teachings do little but arouse curiosity for experience. It is said these courses tell enough about the generation of human beings to enable the youth, largely, to escape parenthood. Books are written, courses are given about courtship and marriage. To what point? We have not too far to go to get to the heathenish abominations and practices in pre-Christian and early Christian times, against which the Lord again and again lashed out to ancient Israel and to early Christians. [^11]

The dangers cited by President Clark prompted the First Presidency to speak out against the introduction of sex education into the curriculum of the public schools:

We believe that serious hazards are involved in entrusting to the schools the teaching of this vital and important subject to our children. This responsibility cannot wisely be left to society, nor the schools: nor can the responsibility be shifted to the Church. It is the responsibility of parents to see that they fully perform their duty in this respect. [^12]

If the counsel of the First Presidency is not followed, the teaching of sex education will be left to the mercy and the morality of men and women of uncertain commitment to Christian ideals. In too many instances, this will mean the propogandizing of the innocent with the object in mind of making them sexual sophisticates. Already, familiarity with the purely physical dimension of sex has bred contempt in millions of young people for the law of chastity. Instructing the young in sexual matters in a moral vacuum has too often proven to be education for death. [^13] Such instruction is a part of the very ills it purports to cure. Its aim is to adjust the young to the world as it is, not to prepare them for the world as it should be.

It is primarily for parents—armed with correct knowledge and gifted with inspiration—to provide their children at the right time, in the right way, with the right amount of instruction in these matters. The very nature of the subject requires that it be custom-tailored to the individual child's nature and needs. Mass indoctrination can only do violence to the innocent. Such "education" is a bull in a china shop, a thoughtless rampage in the temple of the human spirit. Neither those who come to teach nor those who come to be taught can enter the house of the Lord without a recommend. Let those who have been called to instruct their own magnify that calling, not forgetting that there is no better way for the young to appreciate the sacredness of their own being than for those who instruct them in its mysteries to do so with wisdom and reverence.

The Price of Immorality

Only God knows what sexual immorality has cost the human race in spiritual well-being, social stability, family unity and personal happiness. [^14] The price is beyond human calculation. Strife, life-long guilt, ravaging disease and bitter lives have been left in its wake from time immemorial. The sad participants are not the only ones to suffer; our sins are almost always visited on those around us one way or another. Innocent infants conceived by diseased parents often suffer the fruits of their misconduct in the form of blindness, crippling, malformation and mental retardation. And even those who escape overt damage are often made to suffer emotional hurt because they were illegitimate, unwanted, even resented. Not infrequently such parents unconsciously impose their own guilt on the child by the strained and spiritless atmosphere of the home in which it is obliged to grow up. Accidental marriages resulting from accidental conception are seldom characterized by happy parents with happy children. Being built upon moral sand, the stresses and storms indigenous to life eventually take their toll and expose the misbegotten alliance for what it always was—a sin against truth. Only the presence of genuine repentance, love and devotion between the parties involved can mitigate the situation and sweeten what must otherwise be a bitter and tenuous union.

Jacob's Family

As the Old Testament so abundantly testifies, immorality has stalked Israel from its beginning. The blessings of Jacob upon the heads of his sons provide evidence of the patriarch's understanding of their individual characters; he knew them for what they were. Unlike many parents, Jacob did not make his children more than they were. Reuben, his firstborn, lost the birth right because of an incestuous affair with Bilhah, his father's concubine. Of him Jacob said:

Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch. [^15]

Further disgrace was heaped upon Jacob when his daughter Dinah was seduced by a young Canaanite, Shechem. [^16] Word of the incident reached Jacob who "held his peace" until his sons returned from their field labors. Dinah's full brothers, Levi and Simeon, were incensed: Shechem had wrought folly in Israel in committing fornication with Dinah—"which thing ought not to be done." Although it was finally agreed that their sister could marry the Canaanite, her brothers plotted against Shechem and murdered him and every male in his village. When Jacob learned of the massacre, he told Levi and Simeon: "Ye have troubled me to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land. . . ." [^17] It was this incident which prompted Jacob's last words concerning them:

Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a wall. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. [^18]

Joseph and Potiphar's Wife

Adam and Eve were not only forbidden to eat of the tree of mortality (knowledge), they were told not to touch it. Sin is born in the touching stage; if we are to avoid the bitter harvest of wrong doing, we must nip the initial thought or suggestion in the bud so that it cannot bear fruit in desire or action. [^19] Unfortunately many do not do this, they foolishly expose themselves to temptation when they are morally weak and vulnerable. The typical rationalization for doing so is that weaknesses can only be overcome by placing one's self in situations where temptation must be faced and resisted. [^20] Just the opposite is true. The time to deliberately confront temptation is when it no longer is temptation. Never meet any enemy in weakness. An enemy must either be defeated, surrendered to, compromised with, or run from. [^21] Discretion is the better part of valor where sin is concerned.

Joseph was a man of just such discretion. After entering the employ of the wealthy Egyptian, Potiphar, the handsome youth became an object of desire on the part of Potiphar's wife. [^22] With little or no hesitation, the idle woman commanded him to have relations with her. But Joseph refused, pointing out that her husband trusted him implicitly. He asked her, "How then can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?" [^23] But neither God nor her husband meant anything to the promiscuous woman; day after day she entreated the youth. His position was most untenable; she must have made his life miserable. We can but wonder at his own inner strugglings. Did he find her at all desirable? Was he tempted to succumb to her wiles? Or was the whole affair repugnant to him?

Finally, a day came when the two were alone in the house. She would not be denied. "And she caught him by his garment saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out." [^24] And he got him out! He did not touch the fruit of adultery. He did not play with sin. Nor did he stay to speak to her of virtuous principles or to teach her the Gospel, or to ask her if she had read any good books lately. He got him out! Hell having no fury like a woman scorned, the frustrated seductress accused Joseph of making improper advances, whereupon he was imprisoned for two years. Once more the great Jehovah overruled and Joseph thereafter became governor of all Egypt, a prophet, seer and revelator, [^25] and the father of the ruling house of Israel throughout the eternities. [^26] What blessings would have been lost had Joseph failed his God in that critical period of trial!

What devastation adultery produces when it occurs in a marriage between fundamentally decent people. Its memory hangs like a pall over the once happy home long after its flames have died away. Was it a sadder but wiser Solomon who counseled the following?

My son, keep thy father's commandment, and forsake not the law of thy mother: . . . Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned? Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burned? So he that goeth in to his neighbors wife; whosoever toucheth her shall not be innocent. Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry; But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; he shall give all the substance of his house. But whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding: he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul. A wound and dishonor shall he get; and his reproach shall not be wiped away. For jealousy is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. He will not regard any ransom; neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts. [^27]

How can the wrong of unchastity be undone? How can "the rage of a man" whose wife has been defiled, be satisfied? What will make things right again? In honoring God, Joseph honored himself and his master, Potiphar—the man who had "made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his hand." [^28] There would be no adultery if every man were as pure of heart and clean of hand as Joseph. He kept his father's commandment and did not forsake the law of his mother.

David and Bathsheba

One who forgot that eternal vigilance is the price of virtue as well as of liberty was David, Israel's great poet-king. His life provides a classic example of how illicit love affairs destroy once virtuous men and women. Such human bondage has seen honor, position, fortune, loved ones—even salvation itself—sacrificed upon the altar of unchecked passion. How many basically fine persons caught in a moment of carelessness, fatigue, depression, or loneliness have permitted their unguarded emotions to sweep them along into regretted behavior?

There is no sadder example in all scripture than that of David, the shepherd boy who became Israel's mightiest king. Gifted with a poet's soul, blessed with the charisma of a great leader, young David had been chosen by Jehovah himself to replace Saul as king of Israel. David was a man after the Lord's own heart. Only glory lay before him until a chance incident stepped in to alter his destiny forever. Walking upon his upper porch late one afternoon he saw a beautiful woman bathing herself. Upon learning her identity, he summoned her to his apartment and committed adultery with her. [^29] She later informed David that she had conceived by him. Fearing public disgrace and the law's judgment, [^30] David attempted to cover his guilt by making it appear that she had conceived by her husband, Uriah, a soldier in David's army. But Uriah's very fidelity to David caused the king's plan to fail. Desperate, David then arranged the murder of his loyal soldier by having him abandoned by his comrades on the battlefield. Sin begets sin; adultery fathered murder. It wasn't meant to be that way, but it had happened. The sweet singer of songs who penned the sublime words, "The Lord is my Shepherd" had by his conduct given the lie to those sentiments and lost his exaltation. [^31] And it was all for nothing! The crime was soon known throughout Israel; it is written in detail in the holy scriptures.

David married Bathsheba, but the son they conceived in adultery died soon after birth. [^32] From that time forth the family of David was torn with immorality and violence. The Lord's word through Nathan the prophet was fulfilled:

Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah th0e Hittite to be thy wife. Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of the sun. For thou didst it secretly; but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun. [^33]

Can kings do wrong? Does great artistic talent, genius of mind or services rendered to God or man set anyone apart and allow them to be a law unto themselves? David's fate provides us with the answer. [^34]

Amnon and Tamar

How often the love that is supposed to condone acts of immorality proves to be nothing more than the masked face of lust seeking to gratify its pernicious appetite. But at the time who is willing to admit this? It is only after consuming itself that the counterfeit nature of such emotions are exposed. Amnon and Tamar, two of David's children [^35] vividly illustrate this point. [^36] Young Amnon became obsessed with the desire to seduce his virginal half-sister, Tamar. By feigning illness he obtained his father's permission to have the unsuspecting girl wait upon him in his private apartments. With elaborate effort he finally managed to get Tamar alone in his room where he asked her to submit to fornication with him. Her wise response suggests that she actually favored Amnon as a husband but not as an illicit lover:

And she answered him, Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel; do not thou this folly. And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee, thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, speak unto the king: for he will not withhold me from thee. [^37]

But Amnon did not love the soul of Tamar; he only wanted the use of her body. Employing brute strength, he proceeded to rape the young virgin. Immediately upon spending his passion (as so often is the case) he turned on the shamed Tamar with angry spite.

Then Amnon hated her exceedingly; so that the hatred wherewith he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved. [^38]

The violated girl, having lost her virginity for all mortal time, pled with Amnon to claim her as his wife.

And she said unto him, There is no cause: this evil in sending me away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he would not hearken unto her. [^39]

But he would not! He wanted nothing more to do with her. His great "love" was proven nothing more than raw lust. Calling his servant, Amnon ordered, "Put now this woman from me, and bolt the door after her." Amnon's conduct brings to mind the words of Brigham Young:

Every virtuous woman desires a husband to whom she can look for guidance and protection through this world. God has placed this desire in woman's nature. It should be respected by the stronger sex. Any man who takes advantage of this, and humbles a daughter of Eve to rob her of her virtue, and cast her off dishonored and defiled, is her destroyer, and is responsible to God for the deed. If the refined Christian society of the nineteenth century will tolerate such a crime, God will not; but he will call the perpetrator to an account. He will be damned; in hell he will lift up his eyes, being in torment, until he has paid the uttermost farthing, and made a full atonement for his sins. [^40]

Absalom, Tamar's full brother, learned of the incident and after waiting two years revenged his sister by successfully plotting the murder of Amnon.

Although David loved Absalom dearly, he banished him from his presence as a persona non grata. In time, the alienated son—fearing that he would not be chosen as David's successor—conspired to seize the throne. His rebellion eventuated in his death at the hands of Joab, the king's general. Upon learning of his son's fate, David cried out in an agony of grief:

. . . O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son! [^41]

What tragedy came to the house of David, the shepherd lad, the sweet singer of songs! When did it begin? With Amnon's violation of Tamar? With Absalom's revenge? With his conspiracy against his father? Or did it begin one pleasant afternoon when David, walking alone upon the porch of his palace, first beheld Bathsheba, the beautiful wife of Uriah, the Hittite? [^42]

Homosexuality in Israel

The book of Judges tells of a certain Levite whose concubine returned to her father's house in Bethlehem. [^43] The Levite followed her and persuaded her to come back to him. On their way home they spent a night in Gibeah, a village belonging to the tribe of Benjamin. Certain men of the village, learning of the presence of the stranger, demanded that he be turned over to them for homosexual purposes. The Levite's host offered them his own daughter and his guest's concubine rather than that they should do "so vile a thing." Finally, the Levite gave his concubine to the men who ravished her until morning when she fell at the door of the man's house and died. When the Levite awoke, he found the poor creature, "and her hands were upon the threshold." Not knowing she was dead and with astonishing insensitivity he said, "Up, and let us be going." Subsequently he took her corpse and cut it into twelve pieces and "sent her into all of the coasts of Israel." The men of Israel were incensed and demanded that those responsible for the crime be delivered to them for death. But the Benjamites refused. A fratricidal war ensued in which the tribe of Benjamin was virtually decimated; only 600 men survived.

Then the tribes, not wanting Benjamin to die out, plotted to provide wives for the surviving 600. Having sworn an oath that their own daughters would not be given to any man of Benjamin, they attacked and destroyed the village of Jabesh-Gilead because it had not joined the tribes against Benjamin. The only survivors were 400 virgins who were then given to the men of Benjamin for wives. Israel then had the men who still lacked wives abduct a sufficient number of young women from the village of Shiloh during the annual grape festival when the girls came together to dance. The anonymous chronicler ends the account with the revealing words: "In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that which was right in his own eyes." [^44]

If the story of the Levite and his concubine seems a terrible one, it should be remembered that it was also terrible to the people of ancient Israel. All that heard it said, "There was no such deed done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this day. . . ." [^45] Israel was far from being that "peculiar people" the Lord wanted them to become, but it is to be wondered if they were not more sensitive to vileness and lewdness than is the case with many in our enlightened age. Crimes of equal debauchery are so commonplace in our society as to be hardly worthy of notice. We live in a day when homosexuality is not only practiced by an increasingly large number of men and women, but when it is defiantly justified by its practitioners and defended by certain social scientists and members of the clergy. That the writer of Judges should deal with one incident in such detail says something in favor of that much maligned people.

We can hardly overestimate the evil which results from the satanic doctrine that sexual gratification is an end in itself to be sought heterosexually or homosexually—within or without the bonds of marriage—at the rightful discretion of the individual. Male and female homosexuality is reaching epidemic proportions. What was once whispered of in secret is brazenly broadcast before the world. Not only are many of its practitioners not ashamed of their perversion, they express pride in it and demand its social and legal acceptance. The unspeakable vileness of the devils in hell (from whence all things profane and obscene originate) is paraded before us as a legitimate and morally acceptable mode of sexual conduct. Supposedly responsible religious and political leaders defend the practice even to the point of advocating the legalization of homosexual marriages.

Whereas sexual intimacy was long regarded (if not honored) as a concomitant of the marriage state alone, the number of men and women who are prepared to pay even lip service to that viewpoint is declining. It is being supplanted with the notion that since men are just animals, and since all animals have a natural sex drive, it may be appeased in any manner the animal desires. Those who defend either normal or abnormal immorality are undermining the very idea of male and female together with all that those terms were meant to connote.

We again emphasize that the primary external cause of mankind's follies is either its ignorance of or rejection of the true God. The apostle Paul, after showing that the practice of idolatry followed in the wake of the ancient world's apostasy from that God, wrote:

Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves: Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen. For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature: And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet. And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient; . . . [^46]

Who can doubt that a correct understanding of the character of God is the keystone of personal and societal morality?

The homosexual is most pitiable. Especially those who are trapped in a psychological nightmare from which they would awaken if only they could find the strength of will to do so. It is far easier to judge such a person than it is to understand them. But they need mercy—as do we all—and should be given all possible support. They are, in fact, deviating from a true principle. For it is intended that men should love men, and women, women. Indeed, a special bond of brotherhood has characterized the relationships of some great men. [^47] It is tragic when this righteous principle is defiled and perverted by Satan in his assaults against the integrity of the male and female natures of those who, for one reason or another, have misplaced their true identities.

WHY CHASTITY

A Father's Delight

Mormon described chastity and virtue as "that which was most dear and precious above all things." [^48] This is in harmony with the Lord's clear and uncompromising statement to the prophet Jacob:

For I, the Lord God, delight in the chastity of women. And whoredoms are an abomination before me; thus saith the Lord of Hosts. [^49]

Why does the Lord delight in their chastity? Does he comprehend a principle that we blind mortals fail to see? Undoubtedly so; still we may perceive some of the reasons for his high regard for female virtue.

For one thing, all women are literally his spirit daughters. They were conceived in the bonds of celestial marriage and brought forth by a holy wife and mother. The Father naturally rejoices in the purity of his children; for purity implies wholeness, unity and perfection. The Most High cannot accept or condone any degree of imperfection (sin) in himself or in any of those who would be one with him. [^50] He desires oneness with his family and delights in those principles which make it possible.

Also, it is the Father's work, glory and good pleasure to organize the primal intelligences of men so that they too can know the joy that is his. [^51] Woman is uniquely blessed in being privileged to assist—both spiritually and temporally—in this greatest of all enterprises. Celestial mothers provide spirit tabernacles for those "organized" intelligences; their mortal co-creators complete the labor by providing those spirits with physical bodies. Thus men are "added upon" by their mothers! Woman alone conceives the tiny germ of life. It is in her womb that the incredible miracle of organization occurs. Only she can bestow the grand key to a fulness of joy upon the waiting offspring of God. [^52] For the temporal body is all-essential; it is what universal birth and death are all about. Only those endowed with flesh and bone can hope to attain to the excellence of the Gods. To be denied a physical body is to suffer the punishment of Satan himself! [^53] To deny our waiting brothers and sisters this immortal blessing is to threaten them with his fate.

Then too, the Father is anxious that the pre-mortal purity of his daughters be perpetuated and added upon in their temporal estate so that they can emulate their heavenly mother in bringing forth righteous offspring of their own. It is a universal law that like begets like. Virtuous and wise mothers are best qualified to "train up" noble children. The example of virtue is far more potent than the precept of virtue. The spirit of a mother's own purity can distill itself like the dews of heaven upon the souls of susceptible children. They will drink of her unspoken goodness. This alone is cause enough for the young women of modern Israel to jealously guard their chastity. In doing so, they are expanding their hearts beyond the borders of mortal time and expressing love and concern for their unborn posterity.

Further, every blessing of God requires obedience to the law upon which it is predicated. [^54] Eternal life is the greatest of them all, [^55] but in order to qualify for it one must enter into the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. [^56] And in order for such a union to be eternally valid, it must be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. [^57] The Holy Spirit will not seal up unholy men and women—the law of chastity must be obeyed if the blessing of eternal marriage is to be realized. [^58]

Finally, God delights in the chastity of his daughters because He would spare them that special suffering and heartbreak that is the lot of womankind. Unchastity perpetrates a unique crime against the female nature that the male—being generally less committed in body, mind and heart—tends to escape. Sexual intimacy for those women who are not hardened in such things is an act of the soul. It is the giving of her whole being. The virtuous girl or woman who allows herself to be drawn into an immoral relationship—one that offends the Spirit of God—cannot escape without deep hurt. [^59] She will either be left with a bleeding, open wound and in agony of guilt and remorse, or else she will become emotionally scarred, unfeeling and bitter. In either case—or any variation thereof—something precious but intangible will have been lost. The relationship that was designed to unite and fulfill man and woman in the Lord has the opposite effect when entered into unlawfully: it becomes a crippler of lives, a destroyer of peace, a divider. The Father knows this. He knows that his way is the only way of lasting happiness. [^60] He delights in the chastity of his daughters because he wants them to walk in his way and find that happiness.

The Third Sin

Since chastity is so highly esteemed, it follows that its loss is a grave matter. And so it is; Alma told his errant son, Corianton,

Know ye not, my son, that these things are an abomination in the sight of the Lord; yea, most abominable above all sins save it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost. [^61]

The three sins cited by Alma share a common element: they violate the principle of life. The first repudiates God's infinite sacrifice. [^62] It is perpetrated by those who know by the power of the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Christ yet disclaim that truth. [^63] Such spiritual liars have "crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame." [^64]

The second is the destruction of life. A living soul is "put asunder" by forcing the spirit to abandon its lawful home. [^65] In bringing anyone's mortal estate to an end we assume a prerogative belonging only to God and to those whom he authorizes to exercise it in his behalf. [^66]

The third offense tampers with life. It strikes at the very nature and glory of God: the sacred power of procreation. It is this power which most clearly distinguishes those endowed with the gift of "eternal lives" from those angels who "cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity. . . ." [^67] Mortals are granted this power on a temporary basis so that they might provide bodies of flesh and bone for God's spirit offspring. This is a "talent"—a stewardship—for which there must be an accounting. If the talent is misused or repudiated, it may be taken from the offender forever. Unchastity is the third most serious sin because it is the third most damaging assault on the spirit of man. It is the soul against itself; the flesh and the spirit unite in a venture of self-destruction. The apostle Paul understood this and admonished the saints to:

Flee fornication. Every sin that a man doeth is without the body; but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body. [^68]

Yet we are not our own; we are bought with a price. [^69] The body belongs to God, not to the spirit which is presently occupying it. Indeed, we own nothing of self or the earth until it is sealed upon us in the resurrection.

Let us esteem all that we are permitted to possess as given to us of the Lord; whether it be gold, silver, goods, houses, lands, or wives and children, they are all the Lord's. These blessings are only lent to us. When we have passed this earthly ordeal and have proven to the heavens that we are worthy to be crowned with crowns of glory, immortality and eternal lives, then the Lord will say these are yours, but until then we own nothing. [^70]

Therefore, we have no right to misuse the body for it is not our property.

Unchastity is the illegal, unauthorized or perverse use of the physical body for sexual purposes. In most instances such acts are ends in themselves; the objective is pleasure for its own sake. Marriage alone endows men and women with the key of authority for entering into sexual relationships. When rightly done, the words of Hebrews applies:

Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: but whore-mongers and adulterers God will judge. [^71]

If we assume the intimate prerogatives of marriage without assuming its obligations, we are thieves and robbers. We are stowaways on the ship of matrimony, seeking the pleasures of the voyage, but unprepared or unwilling to pay the passage. Such irresponsible cruises are often taken at the expense of both the living and the unborn.

Every soul is entitled to the right to come into this world in a legitimate way—in the way the Father has willed that souls should come. Whosoever takes a course contrary to this is guilty of an almost irreparable crime. Is there any wonder, then, that the Lord places the violation of this covenant of marriage and the loss of virtue as second only to the shedding of innocent blood? Is there not, then, sufficient reason for the severity of the punishment which has been promised those who violate this eternal law? The demand for personal purity is made by the Church upon both men and women equally. There is no double standard of judgment. "If purity of life is neglected," President Joseph F. Smith said once, "all other dangers set in upon us like the rivers of waters when the flood gates are opened." [^72]

The fountainhead of life should be pure. Only holy men and women will retain procreative power in the resurrection. Their offspring will partake of their divine natures, being begotten without any physical or moral imperfection. Like will beget like. Orson Pratt wrote:

Could wicked and malicious beings, who have irradicated every feeling of love from their bosoms, be permitted to propogate their species, the offspring would partake of all the evil, wicked, and malicious nature of their parents. . . . It is for this reason that God will not permit the fallen angels to multiply: it is for this reason that God has ordained marriages for the righteous only: it is for this reason that God will put a final stop to the multiplication of the wicked after this life: it is for this reason that none but those who have kept the celestial law will be permitted to multiply after the resurrection: . . . for they alone are prepared to beget and bring forth offspring whose bodies and spirits, partaking of the nature of the parents, are pure and lovely, and will manifest, as they increase in years, those heaven-born excellencies so necessary to lead them to happiness and eternal life. [^73]

Fornication and adultery defile the fountainhead of life and rob both the living and the unborn of the richest blessings of chastity.

When a man takes to himself a woman that properly belongs to another, and defiles her, it interferes with the fountain of life, and corrupts the very source of existence. There is an offspring comes forth as the fruit of that union, and that offspring is an eternal being—how can it be looked upon? To reflect upon it, wounds the finest feelings of human nature in time, and will in eternity. For who can gaze upon the degradation of their wife, and the corruption of their seed, without peculiar sensations? [^74]

Such betrayals of the marriage covenant cannot help but taint the legitimate expressions of love within that covenant. The marital relationship is adulterated; confusion results. For this reason Paul admonished the ancient saints (who, in partaking of the sacrament, became spiritually "one flesh" with Christ) not to also partake of the meat of pagan rituals.

Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of a harlot? God forbid. What? know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is one body? for two, saith he shall be one flesh. But he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit. [^75]

Unchastity is an act of spiritual murder against those almost indefinable feelings which lend a righteous union its wonder, joy, and strength. [^76] It destroys that confidence which is the life-blood of all viable relationships and, as Moses Thatcher observed, "where confidence dies, there you may dig the grave of love." [^77]

For since we are, at any given moment, the sum of the past—it follows that in marriage we become the unique sum of two lives. If either of those lives have been marred by immorality, that marring becomes an unavoidable constituent of the marriage itself. It is, therefore, in the marital relationship that the fruits of unchastity are the most bitter. No other human association involves so complete and intimate an amalgam of hearts and minds or is subjected to so many stresses. The moral purity of husband and wife is a significant factor in meeting them successfully. President David O. McKay observed:

A chaste, not a profligate, life is the source of virile manhood. The test of true womanhood comes when the woman stands innocent at the court of chastity. All qualities are crowned by this most precious virtue of beautiful womanhood. It is the most vital part of the foundation of a happy married life and is the source of strength and perpetuity of the race. [^78]

The loss of virtue is most keenly felt when the need for virtue is the most compelling. One reason so many people see nothing wrong in many things the Lord brands sin is that the "wrong" becomes apparent only with the passage of time. It is in the reaping, not the sowing, that we determine the ultimate nature of all things. Nor can we expect to reap a harvest we did not sow. [^79] Past performance dictates present possibilities. We cannot change the past; we can only react to it.

The moving Finger writes; and, having writ,

Moves on: nor all your Piety nor Wit

Shall lure it back to cancel half a line,

Nor all your Tears wash out a word of it. [^80]

There are three occasions in the life of a spiritually sensitive young woman when past mistakes are most likely to cause her pangs of regret. The first occurs when she finds true love with the one who would claim her as his wife, only to realize that she cannot bestow upon him a woman's greatest gift: her untarnished virtue. [^81] Once virginity is given, it is given for all mortal time; no power on earth or in heaven can restore it. The second occurs when she kneels at the altar of the Lord. The shadow of things past may sweep across the moment to becloud what otherwise would have been a clear day of happiness. President David O. McKay beautifully described how that occasion should be.

The bridegroom kneeling at the altar has in his heart the dearest possession that a husband can cherish—the assurance that she who places her hand in his, in confidence, in marriage, is as pure as a sunbeam—as spotless as the snow newly fallen from the sky. He has the assurance that in her purity and sweetness she typifies divine motherhood. Now, young man, is not that complete faith and confidence worth everything else in the world? And equally sublime is the assurance the young girl has that the man she loves, to whom she gives herself in marriage, comes to her with that same purity and strength of character which she brings to him. Such a union will indeed be a marriage ordained of God for the glory of his creation. [^82]

But perhaps the most bitter-sweet moment of all occurs when she finally cradles her firstborn in her arms and realizes that she is a mother. She then sees the ultimate reason for chastity—it sleeps upon her breast.

Even though the ideal has not been realized, a truly repentant couple may still look forward to a happy and rewarding life together. Their very mistakes may draw them even closer, deepening their affections and reinforcing their determination to rise above the past. Such courageous marriages are sometimes more vital and productive of good than others which—although not tainted with unchastity—are devoid of those affinities which are the soul of any enduring union. Love can work wonders. It is God's balm of Gilead. It can heal broken hearts and bring peace to anxious minds. It can overwhelm yesterday's follies and free the repentant from the tyranny of the past. We must never forget that men are greater than their sins and that as deplorable as unchastity is, the power of love can transcend it. Men and women can triumph over their mistakes if only they love enough. But it must be remembered that God is the source of all true devotion. There can be no permanent mending of lives without him. Unchastity takes its awesome toll not only because it is a leprosy of the spirit, but also because so few of its victims will sincerely cry out to the one Physician who could heal them, "Unclean, unclean, Jesus, have mercy on us!" Christ can bless an insecure marriage. But if he is not invited into such a union, its inherent weakness will—like a stone cast into still waters—send out ripples of disharmony to mar its peace and threaten its existence.

A Breach of Promise

Every Latter-day Saint should feel committed to their future mate from childhood. They should regard any unchastity on their part as an act of infidelity against the one they will someday marry. The common practice of engaging in varying degrees of pre-marital intimacy is to be deplored. It is tantamount to love-play with another man's wife or another woman's husband. Young people consider this statement extreme until they are reminded that while they are engaged in such conduct, the likelihood is that their own future mate is doing the same! Both are spoilers. Each is failing to save the tender expressions of love for the coming of love. Each is living out of due time, out of step with virtue and happiness.

. . . I urge loyalty to your future companion. When harmony, mutual consideration, and trust pass out of the home, hell enters in. A memory of a simple indulgence in youth sometimes opens hell's door. Girls, choose a husband who has respect for womanhood! Young man, choose a girl who, in her teens, has virtue and strength enough to keep herself true to her future husband! Down the road of indulgence are too many good young girls, seeking vainly for happiness in the by-ways where people grovel but do not aspire. As a result their search for happiness is in vain. They grasp at what seems substance to find only ashes. [^83]

And each is forgetting that, as immortal spirits, they are as much in eternity now as they ever will be. It is myopic to assume that the law of chastity is only meant to safeguard mortal alliances. While there is no official doctrine on this point, it is conceivable that some troths were plighted in man's first estate. Some marriages may, indeed, have been "made in heaven." Observing the celestial union of their parents must have stirred deep longings in God's worthiest sons and daughters for a like relationship. They could hardly live in the presence of perfect love and not aspire to it. It is not unreasonable to suppose that hearts claimed hearts and pledges were given in anticipation of a later reunion. Many had their "great expectations." Unchastity is a breach of promises made before time began. For irrespective of any possible pledges of fidelity men and women may have made to one another, there is no doubt but that all promised to do the Father's will no earth as they had done it in heaven. Chastity is God's will for his children, whether in time or eternity.

Spirit of Chastity

Although usually associated with the body, unchastity is essentially a spiritual problem. For the body is amoral; it is the spirit which must will to be virtuous, it cannot look to its house of clay for any moral support. Thus sin is not an inevitable consequence of being mortal. Jesus demonstrated this. [^84] The spirit sins out of weakness, ignorance, fear, insecurity, loneliness, etc.—but not out of innate necessity. The "soul of man" comes into being when the spirit enters its fleshy tabernacle. [^85] Each is meant to bless the other. In the resurrection they will be "inseparably connected," becoming an integrated spiritual being. [^86] But in mortality the physical body is of the earth, earthy. It is the unperfected vehicle of expression employed by the spirit during its temporal sojourn. The relationship is that of master to servant. Salvation depends upon the spirit's ability—with God's grace—to rule that servant in righteousness. [^87] However, should their roles be reversed, the spirit—in yielding to the flesh—will lose its original purity and the soul then becomes "carnal, sensual and devilish." [^88]

Being welded to the flesh in the resurrection, an unrepentant spirit cannot return to God, for no unclean thing can dwell in the presence of the Man of Holiness. [^89] The blessing becomes a curse; wings become chains. The physical body which was designed to lift man to the glory of the Father becomes instead a prison house of death. [^90] Spirit and flesh will rise or fall together.

We have to fight continually, as it were, sword in hand to make the spirit master of the tabernacle, or the flesh subject to the law of the spirit . . . Did their spirits have their choice there is not a son or daughter of Adam and Eve on the earth but what would be obedient to the Gospel of salvation, and redeem their bodies to exaltation and glory. But there is a constant warfare between them, still they must remain together, be saved and exalted together, or neither of them will be saved and exalted with the salvation and the exaltation which the Gospel offers. [^91]

If chastity is to be taught as a positive ideal rather than as a proscription against human desire, it is helpful to explain this duality of the soul. Sexual desire is not evil, but it does need to be sanctified through the permeating influence of the spirit in man in union with the Spirit of God. Thus sanctified, it becomes one of those exalting principles of intelligence which will rise with the righteous in the resurrection. [^92]

There is no reason to suppose that conjugal relationships are limited to mortality. To the contrary, those associations which are most sacred and compelling in time are to be glorified and perpetuated in eternity. Parenthood cannot be divorced from the act which makes it possible. The sexual relationship is sacred precisely because it is an essential part of eternal marriage. Speaking of how God begot his children, Brigham Young declared:

He created man, as we create our children; for there is no other process of creation in heaven, on the earth, in the earth, or under the earth, or in all the eternities, that is, that were, or that ever will be. [^93]

Orson Pratt was explicit in maintaining that "sexual love" will not only continue but be magnified for those who are exalted in the resurrection:

When the sons and daughters of the Most High God come forth in the morning of the resurrection, this principle of love will exist in their bosoms just as it exists here, only intensified according to the increased knowledge and understanding which they possess; hence they will be capacitated to enjoy the relationships of husband and wife, of parents and children, in a hundred fold degree greater than they could in mortality. We are not capable, while surrounded with the weaknesses of our flesh, to enjoy these eternal principles in the same degree that will then exist. Shall these principles of conjugal and parental love and affection be thwarted in the eternal worlds? Shall they be rooted out and overcome? No, most decidely not. According to the religious notions of the world these principles will not exist after the resurrection; but our religion teaches the fallacy of such notions. [^94]

Life is feeling and response. A fulness of joy is not possible without a fulness of life. No one is so alive as God. He wants to share this aliveness with his children. Therefore, his creations are designed not only to sustain life but to enrich it:

Yea, all things which come of the earth, in the season thereof, are made for the benefit and the use of man, both to please the eye and to gladden the heart; Yea, for food and for raiment, for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul. [^95]

The virtuous life is truly the good life, the happy life, the abundant life—both now and in the world to come. There is no price too high, no sacrifice too great for its possession.

PROTECTING VIRTUEEve in a Fallen World

Children need to be educated in the principle of virtue much as they need to be taught good nutrition. Neither moral nor physical health should be left to chance. While Eve remained in the garden she could—with but one exception—freely eat the fruit of every tree; it was all good for food. Her well-being was assured almost automatically. Today, that happy state does not exist for the Father's little Eves. Having left their celestial garden, their's is a fallen and corrupt world filled with many, many forbidden fruits. Nor can they return to the tree of life, it has been taken away; thorns, thistles and noxious weeds cover the ground where it once stood. What, then, are these little Eves to eat? They must have something. Unfortunately, few of them will just naturally ferret out virtue and goodness.

For this reason we must "train up a child in the way he should go" unless we want a wild flower. [^96] Temporally speaking, righteousness is an acquired taste. The natural disposition of mortals is to yield to fleshy impulses and drives. [^97] Man is topsy-turvy; when he fell, he landed upside down. The forbidden fruit was the least desirable of all things in man's realm when he first walked with God. But having fallen from the Lord's presence, man seldom eats anything else! The sad irony of it all is that so many have come to prefer the fruits of spiritual death to those of the tree of life. [^98] This is why children must not only be guided to the most nourishing moral food available, but also taught a liking for it. Lacking such direction, most will—like Eve—succumb to the beguiling temptations of a world where forbidden fruits are "pleasant to the eyes" and sweet to the taste.

Awakening the Giant

The sexual nature of man is God-given and psycho-physically intrinsic to his whole being. God made us "male and female"; he is the author of sexuality in all of its dimensions. The so-called sex drive is only one of those dimensions. Being the most obvious and, for many, the most compelling, it tends to overshadow all others. Even divine law places particular emphasis on this drive. Sooner or later, one way or another, we must deal with it. Since it is a natural biological phenomenon, it cannot be purged out of one's system anymore than the need for food and rest can be overcome. It is all part of being mortal; we must accept it as an appetite to be reckoned with all of our lives. Nor should we want to be bereft of this drive. Life is not only made possible for others through its gratification, it is made richer and more complete for the honorable parents of that life as well. Both the begettors and the begotten are blessed. As with most things, the sex drive is a potential force for good or evil, but this is hardly a reason for repudiating it. Better to sanctify it to the glory of God and the happiness of man than to destroy it, thereby robbing life of both its purpose and future continuance.

Sexual fulfillment is a sleeping giant in the very young, but once awakened many years will pass before it begins to grow drowsy again. And, as in natural rest, some hapless souls have a harder time getting back to sleep than do others. They will toss and turn while struggling to control its urges. Regimens calling for proper associations, moral direction, rest, exercise, diet, activity, etc., meet with varying degrees of success. But, again, they do not eliminate the drive, they can only serve to control it. Those who are forced by circumstance to more or less permanently dam their sexual desires are especially burdened and merit especial help and consideration. The celibate life is an unnatural one; most adults are, of themselves, incapable of living it without being adversely affected in some way. [^99]

. . . God has implanted, for a wise purpose, certain feelings in the breasts of females as well as males, the gratification of which is necessary to health and happiness, and which can only be accomplished legitimately in the married state, myriads of those who have been deprived of the privilege of entering that state, rather than be deprived of the gratification of those feelings altogether, have, in despair, given way to wickedness and licentiousness; hence the whoredoms and prostitution among the nations of the earth, where the "Mother of Harlots" has her seat. [^100]

Our lovely daughters should be gently awakened from their sexual slumber by their virtuous and considerate husbands, not roused into wakefulness by the lust of an uncaring and uncommitted despoiler. It is for a devoted husband to come to his bride as the noble prince came to Sleeping Beauty. His kiss, not another's, should bring her to life and awareness. Ideally, all expressions and dimensions of intimate affection should begin with marriage, the divine setting for sexual love. When a young couple enter this phase of life together, they are equally yoked in the experience. Neither is ahead of or behind the other. They learn the nuances of married love together. One is not a naive novice while the other is a sophisticate in sex. They are not insecure with one another, wondering if their mate's pre-marital affairs with others were more exciting or more fulfilling. They begin together as they grow together in all of those dimensions of married love which serve to make the two as one.

Parents should act (not overreact) with intelligence and understanding in protecting their children from sexual stimulation and experimentation via questionable companions, improper sex education, music, books, magazines, television, movies, etc. However, the world being what it is, we cannot hope to isolate children from all of its diseases. Indeed, to attempt such a course could weaken their natural powers of resistance and render them even more vulnerable to the very illnesses parental oversolicitation sought to prevent! Neurotic fears on the part of parents may induce a prurient interest in sex on the part of children. A wise principle to follow in guiding children is to help them face and evaluate what cannot be avoided. Help them to see the world for what it really is by exposing the face behind the mask of what it appears to be. A proper "shot" of the offending organism can effectually innoculate a healthy spirit against the disease itself.

This done, parents should work and pray to keep their children from becoming involved in overt sexual activity. For once they are consciously introduced to it, they will find the shadow of that giant falling across their path forever after. Consequently, the conduct desired of the sixteen year-old should be taught the eight year old. It is the young child who should learn that early dating and car ownership will not be allowed. [^101] The time to discuss such issues is when they are not issues. Let the child grow up with an understanding of what will be expected of him or her in later years. Give them time to assimilate the future before it becomes the present.

Wings of the Priesthood

The Father never willed that his daughters should ever be alone or unguarded. The wings of the priesthood were meant to always cover them. However, the Lord has observed, "men do not always do my will." [^102] Untold millions of females of all ages have suffered greatly because of this. [^103] Still the ideal will yet be realized.

Initially, a girl has the right to look to her father for love, sustenance, guidance and protection. If he magnifies his fatherhood, he can play a vital role in her emotional preparation for adult life. A special bond of affection, understanding and respect will be forged between them which will have a stabilizing influence on her in the critical years of adolescence. For, ordinarily, fathers provide little girls with their first significant experiences with and understanding of the male temperament. Deep and lasting impressions for good or ill often result from those experiences. A woman's unconscious attitudes toward and reactions to men frequently stem from those childhood associations—or lack of them—with her father or some male surrogate. More often than not, her parent becomes the unrealized standard by which she measures other men. A positive father-daughter relationship can do much to insure a positive husband-wife relationship.

She will have been "trained up" to expect and demand courteous and honorable treatment from men. She will feel secure within herself as a person of worth. She will know that she is loved. She will be under no necessity of lowering her ideals or succumbing to tawdry affairs. A serene daughter makes for a virtuous girl and a happy wife. Brothers can reinforce a father's influence on his daughter. The kindness, consideration and respect shown their sister will further establish her good self image and aid in the development of a desirable feminine personality. Not only that, the righteous conduct of a girl's brothers becomes a standard to measure other young men by. Being accustomed to associating with males at their best, she will be less inclined to err in assessing the worth of friends and potential marriage partners. Having known the finest of men at home, she will be disinclined to associate with any but the finest of men away from home.

The presence of dissension between brothers and sisters should not be accepted as simply "normal" behavior. Normal behavior is for normal people; better things are expected of those who have committed themselves to Christ and claim to be led by his Spirit.

And ye will not have a mind to injure one another, but to live peaceably, and to render to every man according to that which is his due. And ye will not suffer your children that they go hungry, or naked; neither will ye suffer that they transgress the laws of God, and fight and quarrel one with another, and serve the devil, who is the master of sin, or who is the evil spirit which hath been spoken of by our fathers, he being an enemy to all righteousness. But ye will teach them to walk in the ways of truth and soberness; ye will teach them to love one another, and to serve one another. [^104]

Treating sisters or daughters with neglect, ridicule or abuse can engender attitudes of rejection, alienation and anxiety: the seed bed for much immoral behavior. [^105] No two girls react in just the same way to such mistreatment. There are those who in seeking to punish and humiliate their families deliberately involve themselves in illicit affairs. Others, hungry for affection and identity, also fall—only to be condemned for their misconduct by unloving loved ones. [^106] The family of one so betrayed is unjustified in putting the full burden of guilt on her. There is a beam in their own eye as well. For like it or not, the absence of love at home leads most young people to seek it elsewhere—legitimately and otherwise. Then there are those wounded souls who, in an effort to protect themselves from further hurt, turn inward—damming up their longings. But love is like a river; it was meant to flow. When it does not, emotional stagnation sets in to poison the human spirit. Personality maladjustments—some mild, some serious—are the result.

Psychologists maintain that emotional problems are sometimes the cause and sometimes the effect of sexual problems. Of course, there are very few men and women who are not emotionally flawed in some way. Under normal conditions, such psychological defects are no excuse for immoral behavior. Some men and women simply possess a wanton spirit and a disdain for moral law. However, serious emotional disturbances stemming from fear, loneliness, insecurity, etc. may lead to widespread and/or intensive acts of sexual impropriety. Feelings of rejection, of being unloved, and of personal worthlessness accounts for much immoral behavior. While such feelings do not justify wrong conduct, beating the offender down with the commandments is not the answer. Humans have needs which, when met, enhance their ability to keep the commandments. Ignoring these needs while berating them for their sins bespeaks the attitude of the pharisees, not of the Savior.

Complacent parents assume that all will be well with their children once their physical and material wants have been supplied and they have been "taught the gospel." Then, when one strays, they are at a loss to understand why. "Where did we fail; wasn't everything done for her?" In many instances the answer is no. Critical elements in the parent-child relationship may have been missing. The body can be provided with every essential nutrient except vitamin C and still develop scurvy. Although Jesus said that man does not live by bread alone, yet he fed the hungry multitude loaves and fishes. However, if after being properly nourished, a son or daughter still rebel against their parents, the sin will be upon their own heads. [^107] God himself could not save Lucifer and those who joined him in his unwarranted rebellion. The Lamans and Lemuels along with the prodigal sons of this world are left without excuse; their blood does not stain the garments of their faithful fathers and mothers.

The same basic problems besetting the general society are relatively present among the saints. Among the most compelling is that of the lone—and lonely—woman. Separation, divorce and death have left thousands of women without husbands. Many of these sisters are also mothers with young children. Many are of very limited financial means. Their needs are great. In counseling some of these women through the years, the writer has heard the same basic story again and again from young widows and divorcees: they are lonely, they do not always feel comfortable around those who do not share their plight, married women distrust them, there are virtually no worthy men their age available in the Church, and they are considered fair game by men who have but one object in mind. Indeed, no point is stressed more often than that of men—usually middle-aged bachelors and widowers—attempting to take advantage of their condition. The attitude of these women ranges from amused contempt through despair to outright indignation.

While the program of the Church meets the general spiritual and temporal needs of its members, it cannot correct all of the social inequities to which they may be subject. However, it does lie within the power of the saints as individuals to mitigate some of these inequities. They can, spiritually and emotionally speaking, feed the hungry, give a cup of cold water to the thirsty, clothe the naked, visit the sick and the imprisoned and welcome the stranger—the dissimilar—into their homes. [^108] In other words, they can do something "of their own free will" to alleviate the plight of those they call brothers and sisters whose circumstances impose an extra burden on their efforts to keep the commandments.

Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward. But he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned. [^109]

Most importantly, the men of the priesthood can rise to their calling as "Eve's" guardian and watch over her when she is left alone in this fallen world. She needs this consideration. She deserves it. And God will hold his sons accountable if she is denied it. There is abundant evidence that man's failure to love his neighbor as himself does not prompt God to intervene in behalf of the needy. If we do not feed the hungry and clothe the naked, they will go unfed and unclothed. "For ye have the poor always with you. . . ." [^110] It is for us to comfort them until their Deliverer comes. [^111]

The disparity between the lives of those who are safe, happy and secure and those who are not accounts for much human indifference. Genuine compassion is a rarity among individuals who have not experienced the trials of others. One reason Jesus entered the mortal state was that he might know how to be responsive to the plight of his fellow man.

Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. [^112]

Lacking Jesus' understanding and concern, many of his would-be disciples leave the needy to heaven, thereby practicing faith without works:

If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those thing which are needful to the body; what doth it profit? [^113]

As for religion being a safeguard against unchastity, we must admit that it sometimes leaves something to be desired. Being religious and learning about religion are two different things. Effective gospel teaching has four essential, prerequisites: a) the doctrine must be true, b) it must be relevant to the present, c) it must be taught with divine inspiration, [^114] and d) there must be a readiness to receive it. The human spirit is like a field in early spring: it has to be tilled and otherwise prepared before a crop can be planted in it. The gospel seed cannot flourish in hard, shallow, impoverished or unbalanced soil. We are far more likely to respond affirmatively to religious training when it rests upon a home life characterized by mutual affection, esteem and consideration. Nor is all religious training good. Negative learning can occur both in the home and in the church. Church attendance does not guarantee spiritual development anymore than going to college assures true education.

Too many Sunday school classes are little more than centers of irrelevance, boredom and levity where irreverence is inadvertantly taught with great effectiveness. Likewise, efforts at religious indoctrination through forced and spiritless home hours—being a contradiction of the real, day-to-day character of family life—only serve to expose the hypocrisy of such moralizing. More than one avowed atheist learned his disbelief at home from an obnoxious and overzealous father.

Whether at home or at church, the letter of religion can be spoken but the Gospel itself must be lived. If it isn't a living thing, it cannot be experienced. And if it is not experienced—directly or vicariously—it cannot be known. It is in knowing the truth that we become free—not knowing about it. Jesus made it abundantly clear that there would be those who would profess his name and be associated with his Church who would never come to actually know Him. [^115] The church, like the home, must look to its own conscience before it denounces its wayward sons and daughters. "Feed my sheep. Feed my lambs." Such was the Savior's commandment to those who are called as guardians of his fold. If the sheep stray into forbidden ways, the shepherds should first determine if they have failed to lead them to green pastures before sending the dogs after them. We cannot eat food we do not have—much less digest it. Nor will the reading of delicious recipes satisfy hunger. Is a cookbook an acceptable substitute for bread and milk? Love at home and in the church—our home away from home—coupled with intelligent moral example and direction, will do more to preserve the virtue and well-being of our youth than all the sermons on the evils of immorality ever given.

The right to lead implies the obligation to protect. It was previously noted that fathers, husbands and brothers should guard the moral and physical well-being of all woman kind. To fail to do so is reprehensible, but to actually abet the seduction and defilement of any female is a sin of the deepest dye. Said Brigham Young:

Shall I say that the women are short-sighted? I will say they are weak; I will say that it is in their nature to confide in and look to the sterner sex for guidance, and thus they are the more liable to be led astray and ruined. It is the decree of the Almighty upon them to lean upon man as their superior, and he has abused his privilege as their natural protector and covered them with abuse and dishonor . . . there are many who will continue to ruin every virtuous woman they can, buying the virtue of woman with money and deception, and thus, the lords of creation proceed from one conquest to another, boasting of their victories, leaving ruin, tears and death in their pathway; and what have they conquered? A poor, weak, confiding, loving woman. And what have they broken and crushed and destroyed? One of the fairest gems of all God's creation. [^116]

Nothing short of murder itself can be a greater offense against a man's priesthood. Being, by ordination, an agent and representative of Jesus Christ, the priesthood holder is under covenant to emulate him in every way. "Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." [^117] Jesus was a Savior and a sanctifier of women, not a destroyer and a defiler. The times call for priesthood vigilance over the chastity of every girl and woman. Irrespective of conditions in the world at large, every female should feel secure in her virtue "in our country."

I want to see it in our country that our young ladies in the company of our young men, in any place and under any circumstances, in the darkest hours and in the most unprotected situations, will feel as safe as if they were in their mother's bed chambers so far as anything wrong from the opposite sex is concerned. I would rather see men punished with death—which we believe is a law that should be put in force against any man who ruins woman—than that there ever should be a time in our country when corruption and wrongs of this character should run riot and be unchecked. Virtue lies at the foundation of individual and national greatness. No man can amount to much who is not a virtuous man, who is not strong in his virtue, I do not care who he is. He may be as talented as Lucifer; but if he is not a virtuous man his greatness will not amount to much. Virtue lies at the foundation of greatness. We mean to promote it and encourage it in the rising generation. [^118]

A giant step forward in the fight against immorality could be taken if the Saints were to unite in breaking free of the deadly social patterns and attitudes of the world around them. The dating habits of many youth impose unrealistic burdens of self-control on those who are weak and uncommitted. Speaking of the moral excellence of our youth, Spencer W. Kimball said:

But the devil knows how to destroy them. He knows, young fellows, that he cannot tempt you to murder or to commit adultery immediately, but he knows, too, that if he can get you to sit in your car late enough after the dance, or if he can get you to park long enough at the end of the lane, (because he has had thousands of years of experience) he knows that the best boy and the best girl will finally succumb, and will fall. He knows that they do have a limit to their resistance. [^119]

Too much freedom of action has been granted to many young people. They are shouldered with obligations of sexual restraint at the very time the drive is gaining in intensity. Not only this, they are inundated with sexual stimuli of every description and from almost every quarter. Early dating, late hours, immodest dress, unrestricted liberty of choice as to amusements and a generally permissive attitude on the part of parents has and is taking its toll. These things need to be renounced, not simply modified. For those who try to avoid a direct confrontation with sin invariably compromise with it. Many a youthful offender is a victim of unwise and unnecessary parental compromise of principles. "Here I stand."

Many parents and children belonging to small religious bodies have refused to compromise their standards. Their commitments are clear and unmistakable. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said for all Latter-day Saints. The trumpet some hear gives an uncertain sound so that their response to correct principles is equally indecisive. We cannot play the devil's game and win a victory for the Lord. If the Saints are to be even as he is, they must be willing to do even as he did. We must be willing to pay the price of virtue if we are to possess virtue. Double-mindedness, halting between two opinions, indecision, an unwillingness to be in the world without being of the world—these are at the heart of the problem of immorality in the Church today. With chastity, as with all else, partial commitment can only produce partial success.

Holiness to the Lord

The immortal spirit of every man is of God godly. Its very presence animates and hallows the temporal body. But for those who "put off the natural man" [^120] by coming unto Christ and being born again [^121] through the Holy Ghost, the body becomes a living temple, a house of the Lord. Paul reminded the Corinthian saints of this fact:

What? know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's. [^122]

Immorality in mind or body, thought or deed, defiles that temple and drives God out of our lives. The following was given in connection with the building of the Kirtland temple but it is equally valid for all those who aspire to the gift of the Holy Ghost.

And inasmuch as my people build a house unto me in the name of the Lord, and do not suffer any unclean thing to come into it, that it be not defiled, my glory shall rest upon it; Yea, and my presence shall be there, for I will come into it, and all the pure in heart that shall come into it shall see God. But if it be defiled I will not come into it, and my glory shall not be there; for I will not come into unholy temples. [^123]

To live without the gift of the Holy Ghost is to live without a bright hope of salvation. [^124] It is to be without that directing, sustaining and sanctifying influence that is the unique endowment of the saints of the Most High. It is to be without that special guide appointed to lead the saints through this fallen world and back into the presence of the Father. [^125] Without this gift we cannot go home again; it is impossible to qualify for celestial glory without it. It is the "unspeakable gift" [^126]—the key that unlocks the treasury of heaven and makes all other gifts attainable.

No temple of wood or stone is so precious as that which houses the human spirit. The former, if rendered unclean, can be resanctified with little difficulty; but it is not so simple a matter to cleanse and reconsecrate the latter when it has been defiled by unchastity. Across the temple of the spirit of every child of God should be emblazoned the words, HOLINESS TO THE LORD.

A time is coming when unchastity with its attendant train of evils will be largely a thing of the past. Faithful and wise parents will raise their children "as calves of the stall" who "shall grow up without sin unto salvation." [^127] There will be a return to Eden. The many forbidden fruits of this world will be destroyed in the glory of Christ's coming. For he will usher in the Lord's day, the day of righteousness, the millennial day. In the meantime, the saints are obliged to raise their families under wartime conditions—"for the enemy is combined." [^128] There have been and will yet be many casualties. Mistakes are made, errors in judgment do occur. No one is safe. Even our little children are targets for destruction. While Satan cannot tempt them until they become accountable before the law, [^129] still, he is able to attack them through those individuals who have allowed themselves to come under the Adversary's power. Young people are confronted with the trials and temptations indigenous to the hour. They need all of the example, affection, confidence, guidance and protection their parents and leaders can provide. They need to understand why the Lord delights in the chastity of his sons and daughters. But more than understanding, they need to share that delight with him.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] JD 26:14, 15. He was a member of the First Presidency from 1880 to his death in 1901. His statement is representative of many made by Church authorities through the years. See JD 5:91; 22:302; 23:66, 230, 231, 238; 24:11; 25:315, 316, 353, 354; 26:15.
[^2] JD 20:355.
[^3] RSM 3:367, 368, July 1916. When asked for a written response to the statements of Elder Smith and four other authorities who wrote on birth control in this issue, the First Presidency responded: "We give our unqualified endorsement to these articles, including that of Elder Joseph F. Smith, Jr., and commend the sentiments contained therein to members and non-members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints everywhere." Ibid., Vol. IV., No. 2, February, 1917, p. 68.
[^4] The Church has no official doctrine as to when the unborn spirit enters its earthly tabernacle. Some have taught that this occurs at "quickening." (JD 18:258.) Others, basing their argument on 3 Nephi 1:13, have suggested that the spirit enters the body at birth. It is possible that different spirits claim their bodies at different times. Or the spirit may come and go much as we might visit a home under construction before finally taking possession of it. President J. Reuben Clark speculated that the mother's own spirit may play a significant part in the formation of her unborn child's body.
[^5] The wanton killing of animals is also a sin for which men will be held accountable. See I. V., Genesis 9:11; D&C 49:21.
[^6] See Alma 39:6.
[^7] See Ibid. 24:10.
[^8] 1 Timothy 2:15. Asked President Joseph F. Smith: "Can she be saved without child-bearing? She indeed takes an awful risk if she wilfully disregards what is a pronounced requirement of God. How shall she plead her innocence when she is not innocent? How shall she excuse her guilt when it is fastened upon her?" Gospel Doctrine, 7th ed., p. 289.
[^9] JD 13:207.
[^10] JD 22:126.
[^11] Susa Young Gates, RSM, June, 1921, pp. 370-371.
[^12] JD 21:57.
[^13] See I Corinthians 1:11-13.
[^14] Excellent summaries of the teachings of the modern prophets on this subject are available in the various compilations of their sermons and writings. Those of Presidents Joseph F. Smith (Gospel Doctrine), David O. McKay (Gospel Ideals), and Joseph Fielding Smith (DS, Vol. II) are especially valuable.
[^15] Orson F. Whitney, RSM 3:367, July, 1916.
[^16] DS, 2:87.
[^17] Gospel Doctrine, 7th ed., pp. 278, 279. See also CR, October, 1965, p. 29 and RSM 4:318.
[^18] Letter of First Presidency (David O. McKay, Hugh B. Brown, N. Eldon Tanner) to mission, stake and ward leaders, April 14, 1969. See "Message of the First Presidency," CR, Oct. 3, 1942, p. 12.
[^19] JD 4:56.
[^20] Rudger Clawson, RSM 3:364, July, 1916.
[^21] George F. Richards, Ibid., p. 365.
[^22] Orson F. Whitney, Ibid., p. 367.
[^23] David A. Smith, Ibid., p. 435.
[^24] Hinckley, op. cit., pp. 207, 208.
[^25] Elder David O. McKay wrote: "Man, not woman, is the chief cause of this evil of race suicide now sweeping like a blight through the civilized nations." RSM 3:367, July, 1916.
[^26] Ether 12:6.
[^27] I Nephi 8:26-28.
[^28] TJS, pp. 196, 197. See JD 25:375.
[^29] D&C 93:33.
[^30] Brigham Young, JD 3:264.
[^31] RSM 3:366, July, 1916.
[^32] CR, October, 1949, pp. 194, 195.
[^33] CR, April, 1952, pp. 86, 87, See JD 26:314.
[^34] RSM, 3:367, July, 1916.
[^35] Harry Emerson Fosdick called this "psychological theft."
[^36] John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, Bookcraft, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1943, Chpt. 9 "Marriage and the Family," p. 247.
[^37] CR, Oct., 1943, p. 30.
[^38] CR, Oct. 1, 1965, p. 29.
[^39] Elder B. H. Roberts The Improvement Era, 31:184, January, 1928. Entire article merits careful study.
[^40] Widtsoe, op. cit., p. 248.
[^41] David O. McKay, CR, October, 1943, p. 31.
[^42] The sexual relationship is justified even though the wife is past the childbearing years or the couple are incapable of having children. We are judged not only by what we do, but also by what we would do if circumstances permitted. As King Benjamin explained, when the needy come to us for succor we should say in our hearts: "I give not because I have not, but if I had I would give." Mosiah 4:24. The Lord intended that women should rest from the labors of childbirth. In doing so, they are not expected to dam their emotional needs.
[^43] See Ephesians 5:31-33.
[^44] I.V., Matthew 16:25-27.
[^45] Quoted by David O. McKay, CR, April 6, 1947, p. 120.
[^46] Ether 12:27.
[^47] 2 Corinthians 12:9.
[^48] Ibid., 12:9, 10.
[^49] Galatians 4:19; John 15:1-8.
[^50] 1 Nephi 3:7.
[^51] Widtsoe, op. cit., p. 251.
[^52] RSM 3:367, July 1916. See JD 13:207, 208.
[^53] Hebrews 11:29; See TJS, pp. 347, 367.
[^54] JD 4:56.
[^55] Wilford Woodruff. JD 18:129. See Evidences and Reconciliations, p. 251.
[^56] DS 2:88. Italcs original
[^57] Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, Oct. 1965, p. 29.
[^58] Stephen L. Richards, CR, Oct., 1941, p. 108. See CR, Oct., 1942, p. 12 and Oct., 1951, pp. 112, 113.
[^59] RSM 3:435, Aug. 1916.
[^60] Elder Rudger Clawson, RSM, 3:364, July, 1916.
[^61] Widtsoe, op. cit., pp. 246, 248.
[^62] Journal of George Reynolds, Vol. IV, p. 264.
[^63] Rudger Clawson, RSM, 3:364, July, 1916.
[^64] Erastus Snow, JD 26:218.
[^65] Hinckley, op. cit., pp. 203-204.
[^66] The First Presidency, CR, October 3, 1942, p. 12. (Heber J. Grant, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., David O. McKay)
[^67] D&C 132:17.
[^68] 1 Corinthians 6:18.
[^69] 1 Corinthians 6:20.
[^70] Brigham Young, JD 9:136.
[^71] Hebrews 13:4.
[^72] Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October, 1965, p. 28. See also Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 1961 ed., p. 313.
[^73] Orson Pratt. The Seer, pp. 156, 157. See JD 13:186.
[^74] John Taylor, JD 1:232.
[^75] 1 Corinthians 6:15-17; See also Ibid., 10:16-21.
[^76] See Jacob 2:9; Alma 36:14. President David O. McKay referred to unchastity as "the prostitution of love." CR, October 5, 1951, p. 8.
[^77] JD 26:315.
[^78] CR, April, 1967, p. 8.
[^79] See Alma 41.
[^80] Edward Fitzgerald, Rubiyat of Omar Khayyam, LXXI. This is true from a human point of view; only the blood of Christ can remit any part of the past.
[^81] President J. Reuben Clark said, "Chastity is the costliest jewel a girl can bring her husband." Deseret News, Church Section, May 7, 1952.
[^82] Improvement Era, April, 1953, p. 222. President McKay noted: "Marriage is a failure when manhood is a failure." CR, April 6, 1958, p. 8.
[^83] David O. McKay, CR, April 6, 1956, p. 8. (Italics original). See CR, April 6, 1967, p. 8.
[^84] Fifth "Lecture On Faith," paragraph two.
[^85] See D&C 88:15. The uncreated essence of man is composed of highly refined spirit matter rather than the gross element comprising the temporal body. See D&C 93:33; TJS, pp. 352-355.
[^86] See D&C 93:33; Alma 11:45.
[^87] See D&C 88:26, 27.
[^88] See Moses 5:13; Mosiah 3:19; Alma 42:9, 10.
[^89] See Moses 6:67.
[^90] See D&C 93:35; 132:25; Matthew 7:13, 14.
[^91] Brigham Young, JD 9:287, 288.
[^92] 92. See D&C 130:18, 19.
[^93] 93. JD 11:122. See also, TJS, p. 373. The literal paternity of God is an established doctrine of the Church.
[^94] 94. JD 13:187; See 1:293; 4:143.
[^95] 95. D&C 59:18, 19.
[^96] 96. See Proverbs 22:6; 2 Nephi 4:5; D&C 68:25-28.
[^97] 97. See Moses 6:55; Mosiah 3:19; 16:3, 4; 27:25, 26; Ether 3:2.
[^98] 98. See 1 Nephi 8:4-28; Alma 36:41, 42; Revelation 22:2.
[^99] 99. Jesus counseled against it. Matthew 19:12. And Paul acknowledged that not all men had the self-control he possessed. 1 Cor. 7:5-9.
[^100] 100. George Q. Cannon, JD 13:195.
[^101] 101. It is generally unwise for girls to date until at least sixteen, even then the boy should be less than two years her senior. The rate of male versus female physical and social maturation is variable; being so, the danger of unchastity tends to increase with the age differential between a boy and a girl.
[^102] 102. See D&C 103:31.
[^103] 103. It is unwise for most young women to leave home for any length of time before marriage unless they are provided with very responsible supervision. Many girls from the "best" of homes make serious mistakes when finding themselves "on their own." Lacking experience, emotional maturity and genuine inner commitment to moral principles, they are unprepared for that much freedom.
[^104] 104. Mosiah 4:13-15.
[^105] 105. Jesus pointed out that we can kill someone's spirit by degrading or belittling them. Such treatment opens them up to despair and makes them vulnerable to sin. See Matthew 5:21-24.
[^106] 106. Orson Pratt wisely observed, "There is no evil in love; but there is much evil resulting from the want of love." The Seer, p. 154.
[^107] 107. See D&C 68:25.
[^108] 108. See Matthew 25:32-47.
[^109] 109. D&C 58:27-29.
[^110] 110. Matthew 26:11.
[^111] 111. See D&C 56:18, 19.
[^112] 112. Hebrews 2:17, 18. See also Alma 7:11, 12.
[^113] 113. James 2:15, 16. See also Alma 34:28, 29.
[^114] 114. See D&C 50:17-22.
[^115] 115. Joseph Smith's Inspired Version, Matthew 7:33, 25:11, hereafter abbreviated I.V., followed by the appropriate book, chapter and verse.
[^116] 116. JD 12:194, 195.
[^117] 117. 3 Nephi 27:27.
[^118] 118. George Q. Cannon, JD 24:224, 225.
[^119] 119. "A Style of Our Own," Devotional Assembly, (BYU, Provo, Utah), Feb. 13, 1951. See CR, October 6, 1951, p. 59.
[^120] 120. See Mosiah 3:19.
[^121] 121. See John 3:1-8; Mosiah 5:7; Alma 5:14.
[^122] 122. 1 Corinthians 6:19, 20; See also John 2:19.
[^123] 123. See Alma 41:11.
[^124] 124. D&C 97:15-17; See also Ibid., 94:8, 9.
[^125] 125. See 2 Nephi 31:17-21.
[^126] 126. See D&C 45:57.
[^127] 127. See D&C 121:26.
[^128] 128. Malachi 4:2; D&C 45:58.
[^129] 129. See D&C 1:35, 36; 38:11, 12.
