Rodney Turner, Woman and the Priesthood ( 1972)

IX

The Prophets And The Problem

For of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation. D&C 82:3

Contraception and abortion are sweeping across the world like a plague out of the dark ages. More and more, they are becoming medically safe, legally permissible and socially acceptable. Abortion, which involves millions of women annually, includes everything from the destruction of the fertilized ovum to the outright termination of the life of the embryo or fetus. Indeed, some abortions are virtual infanticides. Church authorities have not hesitated to employ the term murder when denouncing such acts. President George Q. Cannon said the following in 1884:

God has gathered a few people out from the nations of the earth, out of Babylon. But shall they partake of these influences? I say to you, my sisters, you teach your daughters against this accursed practice, or they will go to hell, they will be damned, they will be murderers, and the blood of innocence will be found upon them. A man that would sanction such a thing in his family, or that would live with a woman guilty of such acts, shares in the crime of murder. . . . Now just as sure as it is done, and people yield to it, so sure will they be damned, they will be damned with the deepest damnation; because it will be the damnation of shedding innocent blood, for which there is no forgiveness. . . . [^1]

John Taylor was no less forthright in denouncing foeticide and infanticide:

The standing law of God is, be fruitful and multiply; but these reformers are "swift to shed blood," even the blood of innocence; and with their pre-natal murders and other crimes, are slaying their thousands and tens of thousands with impunity, to say nothing of that other loathsome, disgusting, filthy institution of modern Christendom "the social evil," as well as other infamous practices. We must protest against foeticide, infanticide, and other abominable practices of Christendom being forced upon us, either in the shape of legislative enactment, judicial decision or any other adjunct of so-called civilization. [^2]

In a statement especially prepared for the Relief Society Magazine in 1916, Elder Joseph Fielding Smith viewed abortion and infanticide as twin evils!

Those who attempt to pervert the ways of the Lord, and to prevent their offspring from coming into the world in obedience to this great command, are guilty of one of the most heinous crimes in the category. There is no promise of eternal salvation and exaltation for such as they, for by their acts they prove their unworthiness for exaltation and unfitness for a kingdom where the crowning glory is the continuation of the family union and eternal increase which have been promised to all those who obey the law of the Lord. It is just as much murder to destroy life before as it is after birth, although man-made laws may not so consider it; but there is One who does take notice and his justice and judgment is sure. [^3]

Because life is at issue in both contraception and abortion, any unjustified effort to destroy it partakes of the spirit of murder—the unlawful ending of a human life. [^4] The more "human"—the more viable—that life, the more palpable is the act of taking it. Hence, the wrong increases as it ranges from contraception to embrycide, to foeticide, to outright infanticide.

It would not be just to assume that every one who has committed these offenses is equally culpable in the sight of God. Doubtless many women have had abortions who, had it not been for their false traditions and ignorance of divine law, would never have done so. The deadly teachings of false prophets have caused many otherwise decent women to go against their own creative instincts. [^5] Their sin ought to be judged in the dim light of their backgrounds. While those who "murdereth against the light and knowledge of God" cannot be forgiven under the atonement of Christ, those lacking such knowledge—being without law—may still obtain mercy. [^6] The best example in all scripture of this principle is that of a group of savages who, after being converted to Christ, obtained a hope of salvation in spite of their many murders. Speaking of their conversion, their leader, Anti-Nephi-Lehi, said:

And I also thank my God, yea, my great God, that he hath granted unto us that we might repent of these things, and also that he hath forgiven us of those our many sins and murders which we have committed, and taken away the guilt from our hearts, through the merits of his Son. [^7]

We can but hope that God will be equally merciful to those repentant women who, in their ignorance and often under great pressure from their husbands, lovers or families, have ended the fragile beginnings of an unborn child.

Because the gravity of the offense must be measured by the aforementioned factors, the penalties for taking or preventing life cited by the Lord's servants range from "the deepest damnation" on the one extreme to "disappointment by and by" on the other. The punishment will fit the crime. It is all sin and no amount of pharisaic reasoning will make it otherwise. But, again, some sins are more grievous than others and there are degrees of guilt in perpetrating them. It is God's prerogative to determine the individual's standing before his law. He does not judge enmasse. Each will have his day in heaven's supreme court. Justice and mercy will present their briefs and the verdict rendered will be infinitely right, being based upon one's knowledge, works, opportunities, capacities, motives and intentions. No one will have either cause or inclination to file an appeal.

There is something of a mystery in Paul's declaration that women "shall be saved in child-bearing, if they continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety." [^8] Motherhood seems to possess a special grace of its own which serves to somewhat idemnify a woman against the loss of salvation. George Q. Cannon maintained that because of her God-ordained dependence upon man "she is not held accountable to the same degree that men are." [^9] Yet she is accountable as a woman:

I say to my sisters, you expect to receive exaltation in the presence of God. Will you obtain it if you do not bring your will into subjection to the will of God? No. Will you be cast off? If you do certain things, you will. But I think the women of this Church would have to do a great many bad things before their God would cast them off entirely. The Lord may feel after them, He will bring them through circumstances such as will eventually purify them. But no woman can enter into the celestial kingdom any more than a man whose will is in opposition to the will of God. [^10]

We are judged in the context of our individual lives. Obviously, the Lord's requirements for women must differ somewhat from those for men to the extent that their natures, circumstances and callings differ. Only in recognizing these differences can God be truly just.

Birth Control

In spite of all that the prophets have said, there is still division and misunderstanding among the saints over the question of birth control. That it is widely practiced for purposes of "family planning" or "spacing" cannot be denied. Thus, it is apparent that some Latter-day Saints are being influenced by the thinking and conduct of the general society. As has happened so often before in the history of Israel's associations with the "Canaanites," the chosen people have come under the influence of their faithless neighbors. Times and attitudes change. In view of the permissive spirit of our day, the following by Susa Young Gates, then editor of the Relief Society Magazine, would strike many of this generation as being overly prim and naive:

Do you give countenance, by word or by example, to the deadly evil of so-called birth control, or limitation of offspring? These are crucial tests in this wicked day and age, and unless our lovely and beloved daughters can meet the test fairly and triumphantly they are not yet ready to bear upon their shoulders the symbolic emblems of spiritual service so long and faithfully worn by the mothers of the passing generation. [^11]

Unfortunately, some, being in sympathy with the mood of the times, are seeking Church approval in following the world down the well-worn path of least resistance. There have always been those whose concern was not how they might do more, but how they could do less. Pointing out that the Gospel requires a willingness to forsake all earthly interests, John Taylor said:

Now, this is where the hardship comes in and it also accounts for this eternal rubbing and bumping. "How much can't I do, and how little can I do to retain fellowship with the Church; and how much can I act selfishly and yet be counted a disciple of Christ? [^12]

However, there are many who sincerely want to do what is right but who have been confused by the conflicting counsel on "family planning" which they have received. Unfortunately, modern Israel is yet to see eye-to-eye on every principle. Like the divided branch at Corinth, we are some of Paul, some of Cephas, some of Apollos and some of Christ. [^13] This is inevitable when men ignore the teachings of the prophets and turn to their worldly disciplines for the answers to life's most important questions. [^14]

Wrote Elder Orson F. Whitney:

Birth control, under God's law, is a problem that solves itself. I have no faith in the sophisms of those who reject His law, and try to substitute therefor their own vain theories for sex regulation. The eugenists may mean well, but they don't know enough to lead the world out of the wilderness. [^15]

Speaking of those who deliberately "practice devices" to keep their families small, President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

Unfortunately this evil doctrine is being taught as a virtue by many people who consider themselves cultured and highly educated. It has even crept in among members of the Church and has been advocated in some of the classes within the Church. It should be understood definitely that this kind of doctrine is not only not advocated by the authorities of the Church, but also is condemned by them as wickedness in the sight of the Lord. [^16]

While it is true that some statements have been made by certain authorities which seem to justify artificial birth control for family planning, the writer is unaware of a single direct statement from any of the presidents of the Church supporting such conduct. To the contrary, they have consistently opposed the use of contraceptives except where the physical or mental health of mother or child was threatened. This exception would not affect five percent of all women.

Still, some maintain that the Church has taken no position on the issue and that the statements of various general authorities are simply their own opinions. This is incorrect on both counts. An official statement signed by the First Presidency of the Church was issued April 14, 1969. Then too, the pronouncements of those sustained as prophets, seers and revelators are, by definition, "the mind and will of the Lord" when they are inspired by the Holy Ghost and are in harmony with the scriptures and the teachings of the living prophet. If no counsel is to be accepted until it is issued by the First Presidency, what is the purpose of having other prophets and apostles—or, for that matter, general conferences? But aside from the right of the authorities to declare the Lord's will on all established doctrines, there is another consideration: the Lord may permit a practice which he does not condone. As in the case of divorce, God may allow his people to do something because of the hardness of their hearts which is displeasing to him and which robs them of precious blessings. If the Lord were to authorize his servants to permit the use of alcohol and tobacco, alcohol and tobacco would still be harmful to the body. Likewise, artificial birth control is spiritually, if not physically, harmful irrespective of the "stand" of the Church. It is intrinsically wrong.

The following statement by President Joseph F. Smith has been quoted with approval by many of the general authorities:

I regret, I think it is a crying evil, that there should exist a sentiment or a feeling among any members of the Church to curtail the birth of their children. I think that is a crime wherever it occurs, where husband and wife are in possession of health and vigor and are free from impurities that would be entailed upon their posterity. I believe that where people undertake to curtail or prevent the birth of their children that they are going to reap disappointment by and by. I have no hesitancy in saying that I believe that this is one of the greatest crimes of the world today, this evil practice. [^17]

The virtual incorporation of this statement into that of the First Presidency in 1969 is evidence of the unchanging unanimity of opinion of the highest authorities of the Church:

We seriously regret that there should exist a sentiment or feeling among any members of the Church to curtail the birth of their children. We have been commanded to multiply and replenish the earth that we may have joy and rejoicing in our posterity.

Where husband and wife enjoy health and vigor and are free from impurities that would be entailed upon their posterity, it is contrary to the teachings of the Church artificially to curtail or prevent the birth of children. We believe that those who practice birth control will reap disappointment by and by.

However, we feel that men must be considerate of their wives who bear the greater responsibility not only of bearing children, but of caring for them through childhood. To this end the mother's health and strength should be conserved and the husband's consideration for his wife is his first duty, and self-control a dominant factor in all their relationships.

It is our further feeling that married couples should seek inspiration and wisdom from the Lord that they may exercise discretion in solving their marital problems, and that they may be permitted to rear their children in accordance with the teachings of the gospel. [^18]

A comparison of these declarations suggests that the truth of the matter has been established in the mouth of two prophetic witnesses speaking more than fifty years apart.

Although the normal woman is theoretically capable of producing thirty or more children during her childbearing years, nature and social custom combine to reduce the actual number she will have to considerably less than half that figure. Also, the average varies from class to class and culture to culture. The poor tend to have more children than the rich, backward nations out perform the technologically advanced ones, etc. Broad averages are really quite misleading. Then too, women are not equally blessed with the physical endurance and emotional stability motherhood requires. Some have large families with the seeming ease of the accomplished artist while others apparently lack the skill and temperament to properly care for even two or three children. Only the Lord can accurately measure the varying capacities of men and women; only he knows what we are really capable of doing. Sometimes our supposed limitations are due more to the eradicable dross in our characters than to any functional deficiencies. In other words, the weakness is much more of the spirit than it is of the flesh. Still, there are women who for various legitimate reasons must limit their offspring.

Understanding this, the Lord's servants do not presume to suggest, much less dictate, the number of children any given woman should have. This decision can only be made by the couple themselves. However, to guide the saints in the implementation of that decision, the Lord's servants have counseled modern Israel to rely upon self-control, periodic continence and the processes of nature rather than resorting to the easy, undemanding, spirit-stifling use of contraceptives. In this way, and this way only, can the saints be a light to the world in this matter.

Of course one might follow the counsel of the prophets and still be recreant in their duty. The unwarranted prevention of life is indefensible no matter what method is employed. Then how many children should a Latter-day Saint couple have—assuming that the choice is theirs to make? Brigham Young's answer would be: "It is the duty of every righteous man and woman to prepare tabernacles for all the spirits they can. . . ." [^19] He was not alone in this belief.

Elder Rudger Clawson:

Woman is so constituted that, ordinarily, she is capable of bearing, during the years of her greatest strength and physical vigor, from eight to ten children, and in exceptional cases a larger number than that. The law of her nature so ordered it, and God's command, while it did not specify the exact number of children allotted to woman, simply implied that she should exercise the sacred power of procreation to its utmost limit. [^20]

Elder George F. Richards:

My wife has borne to me fifteen children. Anything short of this would have been less than her duty and privilege. Had we received and obeyed the doctrine of three or four children to the home, we would have cut ourselves short of blessings more valuable to us than all the wealth of this world would be, were it ours. We might never have known in this life what our loss had been, but it would have been just as great as we now see it, and sometime we would know as we now know. Then consider the joy and value of life to others. What of our eleven children born to us in excess of the four to which such as these magazine writers would limit us? Can the value of such a mission and service be estimated? Will not these our children and their husbands, wives and children, for generations after us, if they are duly appreciative, rise up and call us blessed forever and ever? [^21]

Elder Orson F. Whitney:

I believe in large families, though I am aware, of course, that it is easier to feed, clothe, educate and rear a few children than many. But these considerations, so conclusive to some minds, have never had weight with me, contemplating as I do the eternal rather than the mere earthly phases of marriage and procreation. [^22]

Bishop David A. Smith:

I bear testimony of God's mercy to me. I was married in my youth and started with nothing but enough furniture to comfortably fill two little rooms which were rented, and with an income of $30 a month. I may belong to the poor and ignorant class, but I am grateful to Him to whom we must all look for final judgment, for His mercies, for my father, his family, and for the wife and nine children the Lord has given me. [^23]

Elder Melvin J. Ballard:

May none of the mothers of this Church slight nor neglect those anxious ones, but open the door and give to those worthy sons and daughters of our Father the glorious privilege of coming to earth to obtain glory, honor, blessing, immortality, and eternal life in the presence of the Father, with the sanctified and the redeemed. Let not the mothers of the present nor those of the future, be swerved from the right path by any environment or circumstance that seems to mitigate against the performance of this duty. Let not poverty bar the way, for if poverty had been a consideration on the part of the mothers of the past, many of us would not be here. [^24]

The ideal is one thing, man's ability to attain it another. Married couples must decide for themselves how close to that ideal they are willing and able to come. In doing so, they should call forth all of the faith and the integrity at their command. And whatever the decision, husband and wife should make it together, they should be united in it. Division on family size can lead to serious marital difficulties. It is unwise for the wife to attempt to carry the admitted burdens of motherhood without the support of her husband. She needs his cooperation and is entitled to it. If he will not give it, the responsibility for the consequences will largely be his. [^25] She should not act in defiance of her husband's will in a matter which so clearly calls for mutual commitment and support.

However, it is as unjust for a man to deny his wife children as it would be for her to deny him the right to a vocation or to honor his duties in the priesthood. The husband who dams his wife's desire for children dams himself. He cannot be true to his calling as a son of Abraham if he denies her right to be true to her calling as a daughter of Sarah. Marriage is meant to fulfill the natures and callings of men and women, not frustrate them. Such men run the grave danger of having the "talent" taken from them as well as seeing their faithful wives given to those who have respected the unalienable right of women to have the children they desire. Every gift the Lord bestows upon us is given conditionally until we demonstrate our appreciation of it. Only then can we claim it for our own. In connection with the above masculine failing is that of castigating one's wife—or co-partner—for conceiving. Such an infantile attitude is contemptible. The burden of responsibility for the act and its consequences must be borne by both parties to it unless some form of coercion was involved.

Why Birth Control Is Practiced

Why do men and women trample the gift of parenthood under their feet? There are many reasons. Selfishness is the one most frequently cited by the prophets. This human failing is so obvious and so far-ranging in its effects on the attitudes and conduct of men and women as to make elaboration at this point unnecessary. The writer is convinced that many Latter-day Saints could and would surmount this weakness were it not for another factor: lack of understanding. Conflicting voices at almost all levels of Mormon society have given the trumpet of truth an uncertain sound "What is right? Who are we to believe?" Such are the questions many youth are asking of their teachers and leaders today. Certainly, they cannot "govern themselves" if the "correct principles" they are taught are contradictory.

Then too, the world at large and a surprisingly large number of those in the Church simply do not grasp their part in the great plan of salvation. Their vision is myopic when it comes to seeing beyond this brief segment of eternal time. Because their understanding is limited, their feelings are contracted and their commitments are less than total. Not all of those in the Church who are aware of the doctrinal arguments against birth control have a personal testimony of those arguments. Having ears, they hear not. The truth has not been internalized in them; it hovers above their hearts in the summits of the mind. Reason enables us to know, in part, about the truth, but it can never provide us with the truth. We cannot know any principle we do not live. As Moroni observed: "ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." [^26] In the doing is the knowing.

Some practice birth control because they have been taught that it is wrong or unseemly to have large families. They fear man rather than God. The taunts of those who dwell in the large and spacious building of Lehi's vision are too much for them. [^27] Others fear the unknown, forgetting that it does not exist for God. If, with his knowledge of the future, the Father is not afraid to send his children into this world, and they are not afraid to come, why should we fear? He fully understands that many will be born under less than optimum conditions.

Many a pioneer woman brought forth only to bury the infant somewhere along the trail west of Nauvoo. If ever women had the right to avoid childbearing, it would seem to have been those stalwart souls. Yet they did not falter. They endured what had to be endured, trusting that the important thing was not that their little ones had died, but that they had lived. Real tragedy does not lie in death, but in the denial of life. Notwithstanding its pain to the living, the Prophet Joseph Smith considered early death something of a blessing.

The Lord takes many away, even in infancy, that they may escape the envy of man, and the sorrows and evils of this present world; they were too pure, too lovely, to live on earth; therefore, if rightly considered, instead of mourning we have reason to rejoice as they are delivered from evil, and we shall soon have them again. . . . All children are redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and the moment that children leave this world, they are taken to the bosom of Abraham. The only difference between the old and young dying is, one lives longer in heaven and eternal light and glory than the other, and is freed a little sooner from this miserable wicked world. Notwithstanding all this glory, we for a moment lose sight of it, and mourn the loss, but we do not mourn as those without hope. [^28]

The terrible conditions under which millions of spirits enter mortality strongly suggests that they consider no circumstance too hard, no suffering too great if only they can claim a physical body and, thereby, assure themselves of that fulness of joy made possible by the resurrection. [^29] Spirits will take any body.

The spirits which are reserved have to be born into the world, and the Lord will prepare some way for them to have tabernacles. Spirits must be born, even if they have to come to brothels for their fleshly coverings, and many of them will take the lowest and meanest spirit house that there is in the world, rather than do without, and will say, "Let me have a tabernacle, that I may have a chance to be perfected." [^30]

Barriers

Apart from parenthood, marriage has no eternal validity. In other words, marriage is not warranted in the life to come if its benefits are limited to husband and wife. It must serve others as well; it must be productive of life. When it is not, it loses its essential reason for being. Pre-marital relations and the unwarranted use of contraceptives in marriage have two things in common: both are self-serving and both are offensive to God. When the seed of life is illicitly planted or unjustifiably destroyed, the union is despiritualized, God is shut out and the act is stripped of its sanctity. We cannot tamper with the fountain of life without offending its Source. In writing of those who favored small families, Elder David O. McKay said:

Such parents may be sincere, even if misguided; but in most cases the desire not to have children has its birth in vanity, passion and selfishness. Such feelings are the seeds sown in early married life that produce a harvest of discord, suspicion, estrangement, and divorce. All such efforts, too, often tend to put the marriage relationship on a level with the panderer and the courtesan. They befoul the pure fountains of life with the slime of indulgence and sensuality. Such misguided couples are ever seeking but never finding the reality for which the heart is yearning. [^31]

Men and women are permitted the privilege of sexual fulfillment because they are willing to accept its concommitant responsibilities. President J. Reuben Clark has said:

As to sex in marriage, the necessary treatise on that for Latter-day Saints can be written in two sentences: Remember the prime purpose of sex desire is to beget children. Sex gratification must be had at that hazard. You husbands: be kind and considerate of your wives. They are not your property; they are not mere conveniences; they are your partners for time and eternity. [^32]

That conjugal rights cannot be separated from conjugal responsibilities including due respect for a wife's autonomy over her own body is further attested to by President David O. McKay:

. . . Let us instruct young people who come to us, first, young men throughout the Church, to know that a woman should be queen of her own body. The marriage covenant does not give the man the right to enslave her, or to abuse her, or to use her merely for the gratification of his passion. Your marriage ceremony does not give you that right. [^33]

He also declared: "In the realm of wifehood, the woman should reign supreme." [^34]

The Lord is a harvester of life. Contraception permits us to sow without reaping. [^35] This violates the principle of justice. The use of contraceptives has been specifically denounced by Church authorities on many occasions. The following are representative statements. Wrote John A. Widtsoe:

Birth control as generally understood implies the use of physical or chemical means to prevent conception. A large number of these devices, known as contraceptives, are on the market. None of them is certain to accomplish the purpose desired. Besides, any contraceptive is unnatural and interferes in one way or another with the physiological processes of life. All of them are in varying degrees injurious to those who use them, especially to women. That may be safely contended. The ill effects may not be felt at once, but in time will overtake the parents to their detriment. [^36]

From President David O. McKay:

Seeking the pleasures of conjugality without a willingness to asume the responsibilities of rearing a family is one of the onslaughts that now batter at the structure of the American home. Intelligence and mutual consideration should be ever-present factors in determining the coming of children to the household. When the husband and wife are healthy, and free from inherited weaknesses and disease that might be transplanted with injury to their offspring, the use of contraceptives is to be condemned. [^37]

From President Joseph Fielding Smith:

I regret that so many young couples are thinking today more of successful contraceptives than of having a posterity. They will have to answer for their sin when the proper time comes and actually may be denied the glorious celestial kingdom. [^38]

The use of contraceptives cannot help but detract from the sacredness of the relationship.

Prevention, both by mechanical and chemical means endangers the health of women who indulge it, impairs vitality, shatters nervous energy and deteriorates the race. The moral effect of such methods of living is nothing less than disastrous. It brutalizes and makes a shame of sexual pleasure itself, and kills the sentiment of love which alone refines the act to endearment. It ministers to the gross desire for sexual promiscuity; for with a felt security, through knowledge of a preventative nature, from consequences that would expose infidelities to the marriage covenant, temptations to fornications and adulteries are greatly multiplied, and the moral tone of a community greatly lowered if not destroyed. [^39]

The possibility of subtle character modifications was also recognized by Elder Widtsoe:

Moreover, since birth control roots in a species of selfishness, the spiritual life of the user of contraceptives is also weakened. Women seem to become more masculine in thought and action; men more callous and reserved; both husband and wife become more careless of each other, and increasingly indifferent to the higher duties and joys of living. [^40]

Thus the practice may be both a cause and an effect of psychological or spiritual barriers between husband and wife. Some couples who remain together for reasons other than mutual devotion do not want any tangible tie to bind them together. Not really caring for one another, they avoid the ultimate testimony of married love—a child. Many an unwanted child has suffered severe emotional damage in being rejected by one or both parents who viewed it as a living reminder of the despised mate.

On the other hand, there may not be any deep-seated antipathy between husband and wife, they may be simply bored with each other and, therefore, reluctant to further cement the marriage with a child. Needless to say, boredom is the sure sign of a dying—if not dead—romance. Love and boredom are as antithetical as faith and doubt. The practice of contraception is increasing along with the rise in marital disharmony, desertion, separation, and divorce. While a causal relationship is yet to be established for these facts, it appears that those marriages in which the risk of unwanted children has been all but eliminated via contraception and/or abortion are characterized by instability.

The principal reason for marriage is to rear a family. Failure to do so is one of the conditions that causes love to wilt and eventually to die. [^41]

A marriage is no stronger than the spiritual, emotional, and physical ties which bind it together. As society cuts and eliminates more and more of these ties, we can anticipate a steady decline in the duration and quality of more and more marriages.

Something precious is lost when a couple build a contraceptive wall between themselves. The act becomes a contradiction. For how can the ultimate expression of marital love be damned at the very moment of its consummation? Indeed, in its completeness, consummation is not a thing of the moment—it is eternal. Only when an immortal soul lies in its mother's arms has there been a perfect consummation. It is the willingness of husband and wife to allow for this possibility which hallows the act. [^42]

When the pure love of Christ flows between a man and his wife who somewhat understand the mystery of "one flesh," they do not want any walls, any barriers to stand between them. [^43] They desire complete consummation. Anything, whether tangible or intangible, whether of the mind or of the body which might frustrate that goal is cast aside. They consider their full acceptance of both the privileges and the responsibilities of their union to be an act of faith and, therefore, an act of love. Such love leaps walls. It risks. It does not doubt. It does not fear. Indeed, it wants to prove itself by the sacrifices it is willing to make and the uncertainties it is prepared to face.

The Spirit of Restraint

If the law of Christ was less demanding, it would be more popular with the masses. But this cannot be, its function is to make saints of natural men and women. This process involves sacrifice and self-denial. The metaphor Jesus employed in making this point was the cross.

If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. And now for a man to take up his cross, is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments. Break not my commandments for to save your lifes; for whosoever will save his life in this world, shall lose it in the world to come. [^44]

The issue is ever the same: man's will versus the will of the Lord. Practicing self-denial is not the natural thing to do. The natural thing is to cater to one's appetites and passions. The saint must consciously resist that propensity. Keeping the commandments thus becomes a trial of the will. We must rule all things, not be ruled by them. Said Brigham Young:

You cannot inherit eternal life, unless your appetites are brought in subjection to the spirit that lives within you, the spirit which our Father in heaven gave. I mean the Father of your spirits, of those spirits which he has put into these tabernacles. The tabernacle must be brought into subjection to the spirit perfectly, or your bodies cannot be raised to inherit eternal life; if they do come forth, they must dwell in a lower kingdom. Seek diligently, until you bring all in subjection to the law of Christ. [^45]

The sex drive must be controlled by the will of the spirit as much as wealth, power, or any other thing. Being married no more justifies unrestrained sexual activity than being rich justifies extravagance. Indeed, our ability to control the rights, privileges, and means we enjoy is at the very crux of the issue of salvation. Temperance is as essential in the marital relationship as it is in any other phase of life. Marriage, too, has its proper bounds and limitations.

While it is true that we poor mortals are weak, it is not the Lord's intention that we should remain so or that we should use our weaknesses as an excuse for living beneath our divine potential. Consider these words of the Lord to Moroni:

I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. [^46]

Who can doubt this? No man or woman has achieved sanctification without the strengthening arm of the Almighty.

When Paul besought the Lord to deliver him from what was apparently a physical weakness of some kind, he was told: "My grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness." [^47] The humble apostle accepted his "thorn" and, apparently carried it to the grave—not with moanings and groanings, but triumphantly:

Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong. [^48]

The Savior promised the Twelve that he would not forsake them. He knows that we cannot live the divine ideal without his support. Indeed, lacking it, every commandment may seem a "thorn in the flesh" to someone. The Master has not left his own either comfortless or powerless. If, to use Paul's metaphor, Christ is formed in us via the sanctifying influence of the Holy Ghost, we are endowed with the same spiritual power which enabled Jesus to overcome the world, the flesh, and the devil. [^49] Nephi observed: "the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." [^50] This includes the commandment to multiply and replenish the earth. With God's help we can do what we ought to do. The world is forced to go its own way because the Lord's way is an impossible way without his sustaining power. That power can be ours if we are not of little faith.

Gospel doctrine should make every Latter-day Saint married couple eager for the privilege and obligations of parenthood. And they should have the faith and trust that the Lord will provide the means for obeying his law. [^51]

It is often argued that the more a couple love one another, the more difficult it is to avoid sexual intimacy. If this is true, there must be a great deal of love in our sex obsessed world today! However, the converse is the case: sex is most imperative when love is least present. Physical intimacy has become a substitute for genuine devotion. The rampant hedonism of our day is both a cause and a result of the withdrawal of the Spirit of God from the world. As it diminishes, men and women will inevitably look more and more to the physical order for comfort and satisfaction. Since the spirit and the body are the soul of man, when the spirit is stifled and its needs denied, the flesh will assume dominance. This condition is analogous to that of the person who, in losing his sight, concentrates on improving his ability to touch, hear, and smell. Knowing this, Satan tries to push us to one extreme or the other: fanatical asceticism or blatant animality. Yes, we will cling to something—if not love, then lust, if not spirit, then flesh, if not God, then the devil.

Will power is really spirit power. Our ability to govern ourselves in righteousness is equal to the degree of mastery which the spirit enjoys over its earthly tabernacle. The more strength and nourishment the spirit receives from the Spirit of the Lord, the greater our will power. Jesus was able to overcome every temptation because he was filled with the Spirit. We previously noted that since God is love, the Spirit of God is the spirit of love. Therefore, in receiving the Spirit, we are also receiving the pure love of Christ. This love not only motivates those possessing it to keep the commandment to multiply, it also enables them to exercise self-control in doing so. Therefore, the husband who loves his wife with the pure love of Christ will never impose himself on her. Their relations will be by mutual consent and with regard for her health and well-being.

Since the natural consequences of intercourse are more immediate and more lasting for the wife than for her husband, it is for her to decide when she is prepared to accept them. There is a due time for everything; only she can know when the time to bear a child has come. When it is born, she should be allowed an adequate period to renew her body and regain her strength before relations are resumed and before entering upon another pregnancy. Said Elder Orson F. Whitney:

During certain periods—those of gestation and lactation—the wife and mother should be comparatively free to give her strength to her off-spring; and if this involves some self-denial on the part of the husband and father, so much the better for all concerned. [^52]

Both husband and wife must exercise self-control if this is to be done without recourse to some form of contraception other than that provided by the menstrual cycle. This may appear unfair to those women who are subject to irregular cycles. However, the admitted inequities of nature's method of birth control are, presumably, to be borne along with all of the rest of life's inequities until a better day comes. In all likelihood, menstrual irregularities were unknown in the beginning and came about over a period of time through the violation of God's laws of health and hygiene. If so, the sins of the mothers of past ages have been visited on their daughters living today. But again, are we to free ourselves of the natural consequences of the race's past sins by resorting to new sins? Or is there a better way? Paul's way was to go to the Lord with his weakness and obtain the strength to transcend it.

One reason many are called and few are chosen is that they fail the test—which is to live celestial principles in a telestial setting. Insofar as circumstances permit, we are expected to do the eternally natural thing under unnatural conditions. Just as a kite rises only as it is pulled against the wind, so do we achieve the end for which the commandments are but the means, only by resisting the path of least resistance—the way of the world. However, we can take heart from the fact that those things which call for sacrifice and sheer grit in mortality will be accomplished with ease and unmitigated joy in eternity. But first we must demonstrate our love of righteousness by practicing it in adversity. Doing the easy and the convenient thing proves nothing, for it does not call for effort, self-denial or any strength beyond our own. Only after we have been tried successfully in the refining fires of human weakness and worldly opposition can we abide the eternal burnings of celestial glory—for "our God is a consuming fire." [^53]

A Missionary Calling

As mortals, we stand at a junction of eternity. As Latter-day Saints, we can do the seemingly impossible: we can simultaneously travel the three main highways forming that junction—the way of the living, the way of the dead, and the way of the unborn. We travel the highway of the living when we take the Gospel of Jesus Christ to the nations and gather the scattered sheep of Israel into the fold of the Church and kingdom on earth. We travel the highway of the dead when we search out their records and perform the ordinances necessary for their salvation. And we travel the highway of the unborn when we bring them into our families where they can be raised in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. This enables us to practice prevention rather than cure, for we gather some of the Father's choice sons and daughters into the kingdom before they are lost and scattered among the nations. President Brigham Young taught:

. . . there are multitudes of pure and holy spirits waiting to take tabernacles, now what is our duty?—to prepare tabernacles for them; to take a course that will not tend to drive those spirits into the families of the wicked, where they will be trained in wickedness, debauchery, and every species of crime. It is the duty of every righteous man and woman to prepare tabernacles for all the spirits they can. . . . [^54]

The same view was expressed by President Wilford Woodruff:

Another word of the Lord to me is that, it is the duty of these young men here in the land of Zion to take the daughters of Zion to wife, and prepare tabernacles for the spirits of men, which are the children of our Father in heaven. They are waiting for tabernacles, they are ordained to come here, and they ought to be born in the land of Zion instead of Babylon. [^55]

And by President Joseph Fielding Smith:

If these iniquitous practices find their place in our hearts and we are guilty, then when we arrive on the other side—and discover that we have deprived ourselves of eternal blessings and are accused by those who were assigned to come to us, because, as President Young has said, they were forced to take bodies in the families of the wicked—how will we feel? Moreover, may we not lose our own salvation if we violate this divine law? [^56]

The situation of the unborn is comparable to that of passengers on a sinking ship. The more souls a rescue vessel can find, the fewer will drown or be left adrift in lifeboats or forced to cling to flotsam in the cold and deadly waters of the open sea. It is the failure to really hear the testimonies of the modern prophets that causes some to be remiss in having more children. But those saints blessed with spiritual acuity will bring as many souls aboard the good ship Zion as they possibly can. They will eagerly "throw out the life line."

Doing so is another way of fulfilling the admonition of Brigham Young as reemphasized by President David O. McKay: "Every member a missionary." What better way to honor that charge than to assure the unborn of a safe and righteous harbor upon their earthly landfall. It is written that great shall be our joy if we save one soul in the kingdom of God. Would not that joy be even greater if that soul were our own child? On the other hand, what sorrow we will know if that soul comes unto its own and its own receives it not!

Now I wish to ask a question: How will a young married couple feel when they come to the judgment and then discover that there were certain spirits assigned to them and they refused to have them? Moreover, what will be their punishment when they discover that they have failed to keep a solemn covenant and spirits awaiting this mortal life were forced to come here elsewhere when they were assigned to this particular couple. [^57]

Those who come to understand something of the love that is in God and who share in its selfless wonder, can no more resist its will than they can live apart from its source. Like Enoch, whose heart under the influence of the Holy Spirit "swelled wide as eternity," they will suffer the little children to come unto them as often and as long as human circumstances guided by the intelligence of heaven will permit.

President Stephen L. Richards in a sensitive and penetrating observation said:

To warn of a great danger I must speak of it more specifically. I do so most reverently. If it shall please the Lord to send to your home a goodly number of children, I hope, I pray, you will not deny them entrance. If you should, it would cause you infinite sorrow and remorse. One has said that he could wish his worst enemy no more hell than this, that in the life to come someone might approach him and say, "I might have come down into the land of America and done good beyond computation, but if I came at all I had to come through your home and you were not man enough or woman enough to receive me. You broke down the frail footway on which I must cross and then you thought you had done a clever thing." [^58]

Some feel that their deepest hurts were inflicted by the children they brought into the world, and no one can deny that many parents have suffered profound disappointments in this regard. However, no matter how painful such wounds, they are only mortal and will pass away with every other mortal thing. Life is meant to be bitter-sweet. Those who attempt to have it otherwise, will find its ending the bitterest of all. Contrasting the faithless with those who bring forth unto God, Bishop David A. Smith wrote:

For as the first grow more selfish and more covetous, which often causes the severing of the marriage bond or the entering into it for the mere sake of form, the latter class become more self-sacrificing, their hearts become more tender, and they possess a greater love and sympathy for the children of God. Their lives are not void with emptiness for they are living for others. Their lives are filled with joy and happiness, for they know that they are trying to fulfill the purpose of their creation. Their sorrows are not the sorrows filled with bitterness, but sorrows which tend to mellow them in the eyes of God. [^59]

Lasting sorrow does not stem from the acts of others, but from our failings toward ourselves. The saddest words of tongue or pen pertain to those things that might have eternally been. No, it is not the children parents received that will forever cause them pain—it is the missing child who waited for a claiming that never came.

Blessed is the man and blessed is the woman to whom no sin is imputed in the marriage relation, but who carefully observe the law of their natures, and keep the commandments of God. To them the future will bring no regrets, and they will not be troubled by an accusing conscience or keen and abiding anguish of the soul. [^60]

Conclusion

Elder John A. Widtsoe wrote: "As a rule, women who have large families are healthy throughout life . . . Large families are the most genuinely happy. That is the verdict of human experience." [^61] The writer, whose mother bore ten children, fully concurs. While statistical proof may not be available on this point, there is certainly no real evidence to the contrary. No one can seriously suggest that the smaller the family, the happier, the less lonely, and the less selfish the child.

Those who are endowed with a patriarchal or matriarchal spirit need children. George Reynolds was the father of thirty-two children by three wives. At the death of his first child at sixteen months, he wrote: "Home seems very lonely without a baby." [^62] We need each other. The universe is vast and awesome. How cold and forbidding it would be without friends and loved ones. And life is uncertain. Death may thin the shallow ranks of the small family and leave the parents "without the ministrations of loved ones to smooth their pathway down to the grave." [^63]

While "man proposes, God disposes." Those who wish to pre-determine the time and number of their offspring are assuming several things: a) that they will not be separated by death or other circumstances, b) that they can conceive a child any time they choose to do so, c) that their children will not fall victim to disease or accidental death and, d) that God will always be willing to send them one of his children. These assumptions are not warranted by the nature of mortality. The creation of life is essentially a spiritual enterprise. It is for the flesh to be submissive to the spirit, not the spirit to the flesh.

I know it is supposed by some that the power of increase is inherent in us and in all living things, and in all plants, but I do not view it in that light. I view the temporal organism as the instrument and not the creator itself; it is only the instrument by which it is worked out and accomplished; that the principle of life and eternal increase pertains not to the flesh nor to the grosser elements of this earth, but it is the spiritual power that has emanated from a nobler sphere that has come out from God, or that had its exitence previously in a first estate. [^64]

The Old Testament notion that God could cause a woman to be barren is considered a naivete by our sophisticated generation. Those who tempt the Lord by expecting him to wait upon their convenience may find that their ancient fathers and mothers were not so naive after all. More than one couple who delayed having a family has learned, to their bitter regret, that they delayed too long. Now, they would give all that they have, all that has crowded life out of their lives, in exchange for one child they could call their own.

Melvin J. Ballard, who was the youngest of eleven children born to a mother whose sacrifices for her family won her their undying gratitude, declared:

. . . All the honor and glory that can come to men or women by the development of their talents, the homage and the praise they may receive from an applauding world, worshipping at their shrine of genius, is but a dim thing whose luster shall fade in comparison to the high honor, the eternal glory, the ever-enduring happiness that shall come to the woman who fulfills the first great duty and mission that devolves upon her to become the mother of the sons and daughters of God. [^65]

When this brief day draws to its close and we take a parting look at our material wealth, our honors, our worldly pleasures and successes—at all those things that once mattered so very much—we will find them mute and unfeeling at our passing. For the most part, one's demise provokes little more than a comment at someone's breakfast table. It remains for those dearest to us to truly lament our passing. Only they can preserve our name and our presence in the land. Only they will continue to care long after we have vanished from their sight. Children are the work and the glory of the Saints—their immortality and eternal life.

The Lord has told us that it is the duty of every husband and wife to obey the command given to Adam to multiply and replenish the earth, so that the legions of choice spirits waiting for their tabernacles of flesh may come here and move forward under God's great design to become perfect souls, for without these fleshly tabernacles they cannot progress to their God-planned destiny. Thus, every husband and wife should become a father and mother in Israel to children born under the holy, eternal covenant.

By bringing these choice spirits to earth, each father and each mother assume towards the tabernacled spirit and towards the Lord himself by having taken advantage of the opportunity He offered, an obligation of the most sacred kind, because the fate of that spirit in the eternities to come, the blessings or punishments which shall await it in the hereafter, depend, in great part, upon the care, the teachings, the training which the parents shall give to that spirit.

No parent can escape that obligation and that responsibility, and for the proper meeting thereof, the Lord will hold us to a strict accountability. No loftier duty than this can be assumed by mortals. [^66]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Amasa Lyman, JD 7:343, 345.
[^2] President David O. McKay, CR, April 4, 1964, p. 5.
[^3] See 2 Nephi 2:26; Helaman 14:30.
[^4] Julius Caesar, Act I, scene 2.
[^5] Mark 7:18-23.
[^6] See 3 Nephi 15:4, 5; John 8:58; I Corinthians 10:4.
[^7] Deuteronomy 24:1-4.
[^8] The following is an example of a certificate of divorce: "I N. have put away, dismissed, and expelled thee N. who heretofore wast my wife. But now I have dismissed thee, so that thou art free, and in thy own power, to marry whosoever shall please thee; and let no man hinder thee. And let this be thee a bill of rejection from me according to the Law of Moses and Israel.
[^9] Matthew 19:3-9. Adultery was defined as illicit sexual intercourse involving either betrothed or married persons. Under Levitical law, the penalty for this sin was death. Levit. 20:10. Consequently, when the ancient Israelites "put away" their wives it was presumedly for reasons other than immorality. However, since the death penalty was not in vogue among the Jews in Jesus' day, an aggrieved husband could only free himself of an unfaithful wife by issuing her a bill of divorce. See Deuteronomy 22:13-28; Matthew 1:18.
[^10] Hebrews 13:4.
[^11] Orson Pratt, The Seer, pp. 47, 48. See DS, 2:81 and JD 16:173-177, 256; 17:151-153; 18:47-51.
[^12] See Matthew 22:23-28; Luke 20:27-33.
[^13] Luke 20:34-36. See D&C 132:8-17.
[^14] Malachi 2:14-16. Revised Standard Version.
[^15] See Moses 1:39; D&C 132:63.
[^16] DS, 2:80-84. Italics original. See also CR, April, 1961, pp. 48-50.
[^17] Scholars theorize that Matthew's exception is an interpolation designed to make Jesus' teaching more palatable to the later church. However, while neither Luke, Paul nor, possibly, Mark were present when the Savior gave these instructions, Matthew was an ear-witness to them. Not only this, of the four, only Matthew was one of the Twelve. Then too, the absence of material from one account does not necessarily invalidate its presence in another. Textual variations are very common and may stem from a given Gospel writer's desire to emphasize a particular aspect of the Lord's teachings.
[^18] He included the disputed passages in his restatement of the sermon on the mount to the Nephites, and in a revelation to Joseph Smith. See 3 Nephi 12:32; D&C 42:74-77.
[^19] Matthew 5:32. See Ibid., 19:9; D&C 42:74, 75.
[^20] Mark 10:11, 12.
[^21] Luke 16:18. Luke, who is noted for his compassionate interest in womankind, stigmatized both husbands while remaining silent as to the wife's culpability.
[^22] I Corinthians 7:10, 11.
[^23] D&C 42:74, 75. See also 3 Nephi 12:32.
[^24] This is implicit in the Law's requirement that the seducer of an unbetrothed virgin marry her and "not put her away all his days." Deuteronomy 22:29.
[^25] See Deuteronomy 22:13-21.
[^26] Deuteronomy 22:21. The validity of this principle is further supported by a modern revelation to the effect that the plural wives of Joseph Smith "who are not pure, and have said they were pure, shall be destroyed, saith the Lord God." D&C 132:52.
[^27] Matthew 5:18.
[^28] See John 8:7; Deuteronomy 22:22.
[^29] It was not the taking of another wife, but the unwarranted "putting away" of one which constituted adultery. Polygamy was practiced among the Jews both before and after Jesus' day. He never condemned the principle as such. The ancient patriarchs practiced plural marriage by divine command. See Romans 7:1-3; 1 Corinthians 7:39; D&C 132:34-39, 61, 62.
[^30] Adultery was not a fait accompli until the separation ended in remarriage. The sin lay in the adulteration of the original union, not in separation as such. See I Corinthians 7:11.
[^31] See Matthew 19:10.
[^32] See John 8:1-11. Note that although the adulterous pair were caught "in the very act," only the woman was brought to judgment.
[^33] It is generally thought that Mark's version allows either mate to initiate the divorce action because he adapted the Savior's teachings to the Greco-Roman situation of his readers in which women did exercise that privilege. For example, Herodias divorced her husband, Herod Philip in Rome in order to marry his half-brother, Herod Antipas.
[^34] Plural marriage does not violate the principle of "one flesh." The nature of eternal marriage is such that while a woman may be sealed to but one man, a man may be sealed to several women. The relationship of Christ (the head) to the Church (the body) exemplifies this truth. For while there is but one Bridegroom, one Beloved Son, there are many brides and many sons of God. See Matthew 25:1; Ephesians 5:23, 24; Hebrews 2:10; 3 John 3:1-3. See JD 6:356; 13:39.
[^35] An abandoned wife is as justified in seeking a second husband as an orphan is in seeking foster parents. Being "the weaker vessel," she does not sin in remarrying if she was wrongfully put aside or if her husband is deceased. See Romans 7:1-3, I Corinthians 7:8, 9, 27, 28.
[^36] See D&C 132:44, 61-63.
[^37] Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April, 1961, p. 50.
[^38] Matthew 5:21-48.
[^39] Ibid., 5:27, 28.
[^40] For an excellent summary of the dimensions of infidelity, see Spencer W. Kimball, CR, October 6, 1962, pp. 56-60.
[^41] Ezekiel 16:8. See entire chapter.
[^42] Jeremiah 3:6.
[^43] Ezekiel 16:26.
[^44] Jeremiah 3:9. See also Isaiah 1:21; Hosea 2; D&C 88:94.
[^45] See Matthew 5:21, 22; Alma 36:14.
[^46] Oscar Wilde, "The Ballad of Reading Gaol." The Pocketbook of Verse, p. 306.
[^47] Jeremiah 3:20.
[^48] John 14:22, 24.
[^49] See D&C 64:34.
[^50] See 1 Corinthians 7:3-5.
[^51] How many Christians experience this sort of "marriage" to Christ!
[^52] The heart justifies or condemns our actions. A false offering is rejected by God even though it outwardly meets all of the requirements of a true one. See Moroni 7:5-10.
[^53] Such matters as personal grooming, personality development, homemaking skills, etc. are both justifiable and desirable and are not to be confused with these deceptive practices.
[^54] See Matthew 15:8; Isaiah 29:13; Joseph Smith 2:19.
[^55] See Matthew 23.
[^56] See Romans 3:4.
[^57] I Peter 2:19-25. See JD 22:102; 25:325.
[^58] See Romans 8:17, 35-39.
[^59] See Matthew 10:34-36.
[^60] Ephesians 6:5-8. Brigham Young said that "the woman that bears wrong . . . patiently . . . will be crowned with a man far above her husband. . . ." JD 17:160. John Taylor said: "When the books are opened, every one will find his proper mate. . . ." JD 1:232.
[^61] See Jeremiah 18:1-6; Romans 9:21; JD 2:151.
[^62] Matthew 16:19; 18:18; D&C 132:45, 46.
[^63] Ibid 10:34-38; Luke 14:26, JD 1:234.
[^64] Leviticus 16:1-10.
[^65] D&C 68:25.
[^66] D&C 84:40.
