Rodney Turner, Woman and the Priesthood ( 1972)

X

A House Divided

And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand.

Mark 3:25.

When a marriage begins with great expectations, the failure to realize them is a matter of keen disappointment. It could not be otherwise. Joy and sorrow have a common origin. The home is potentially the source of our greatest happiness and, therefore, our greatest pain. A soul-satisfying home life bespeaks an inner peace with God and man. The strength derived therefrom enables one to face the world with confidence and equanimity. We can labor with serenity in hell itself if only we can return to heaven at the end of the day. Home should be that heaven. Indeed, the glory of one's home is prophetic of the glory of one's heaven in the life to come.

Here is where heaven must have its beginning—where its foundation must be laid, not only for our present happiness, but for its eternal perpetuity. . . . Seek to make your heaven in your home; seek to develop its perfections there; seek to develop its truthfulness there. Why? Simply because you cannot make it anywhere else. It is not possible, because home is the nursery where all the constituent principles of heavenly bliss and glory are to be developed. Why, then, think of finding them in your wanderings over the face of the earth, when home is the only place where they are to be found, and where they must be developed. [^1]

When those principles are developed, all else is placed in right perspective. For the home is the center of life, not something peripheral to it. All that we do and are outside of it is secondary in importance to what we do and are within its gates. For this reason, "No other success can compensate for failure in the home." [^2] When this failure becomes excessive, familial antagonisms and dissensions erupt into outright warfare. Too often the end result is not repentance and peace but family disorganization via desertion, separation or divorce.

In spite of the great amount of time and energy expended on research into the causes of marital failure, very few of the presumed experts in the field ever get beyond the primary and secondary symptoms associated with the failure. Economic problems, sexual incompatibility, cultural and religious differences, emotional and social immaturity, etc., etc.—all of which describe without explaining—are commonly cited as causes of divorce and family breakdown. However, the ultimate cause lies beneath and beyond them all in the very heart, the immortal nature of the individual himself. As well might we argue that the reason a ship ran aground and sank with all hands was because the helmsman got drunk in order to blot out bad news from home as to argue that the popular "causes" of marital disharmony are in fact, the inevitable causes. While one man might do as the distraught helmsman did, another would not have so reacted. It was the man not the provocation, that was to blame. God wills that man should act upon things and that things should be acted upon. [^3]

We are meant to rule circumstances; circumstances should not rule us. As Cassius observed, "The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves, that we are underlings." [^4] Men rule the stars, the stars do not rule men. If circumstances inevitably dictate the course of human action, freedom is an illusion. When we allow factors external to ourselves to rule us, we do so because we are either weak, wilfull, ignorant or inept.

No, it is not the things external to us which are the ultimate causes of marital disharmony. Like the winds which sweep the surface of the sea into stormy unrest, they do not last forever nor can they significantly affect its on-going tides or intrude upon the quiet of its depths. But shallow hearts, like shallow waters, are easily upturned and divided. The heart of all of our problems continues to be the heart of man. [^5] Then, should the family ever be divided? Should the home ever be abandoned? Is divorce ever justifiable? Let us consider the Savior's teachings relative to these questions.

What God Has Joined

In fulfilling the Law of Moses, Jesus revived principles long obscured beneath an overburden of rabbinic interpretation. No one was better qualified to do this than he, for he was Jehovah, the giver of the Law. [^6] Knowing that the "letter" of the scribes had killed the spirit of the commandments, Jesus breathed life back into them by restoring their lost import.

The statement in the Law upon which the Jews based their justification of divorce is as follows:

When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that she find no favor in his eyes, because he hath found some uncleanness in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house. And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another's man's wife. And if the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his house; or if the latter husband die, which took her to be his wife; Her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for that is abomination before the Lord: and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance. [^7]

The ambiguity of the phrase, "some uncleanness in her," led to much debate among the various rabbinical schools, of which those of Hillel and Shammai were especially prominent. While Hillel maintained that husbands had the right to put away their wives for even trivial faults, Shammai insisted that only adultery was a defensible cause. The Pharisees sought to embroil Jesus in the issue:

The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause? And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female, And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh? Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. They said unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away? [^8] He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so. And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery. [^9]

Note that before answering their specific query, Jesus dealt with the transcending principle behind it. The incarnated Jehovah was not to be ensnared in myopic rationalizations over legal technicalities; he was far more concerned with the nature of marriage than the grounds for divorce. Therefore, he looked beyond things as they were to the truth of things as they were meant to be. He did this by recalling the first marriage on earth, that of Adam and Eve—two immortal beings. Having been performed by the Most High, it was no mere social contract, but an unbreakable union. Contracts are limited agreements between two or more parties who forever remain separate and distinct from one another; true marriage is the deathless bonding of two harmonious personalities. Thus Jesus concluded: "What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder." In truth when a man and a woman are "joined together" by the powers of heaven, man cannot put them asunder.

However, in this world, men marry and are given in marriage by other men; God is not a party to their actions. Therefore, man can—and does—terminate those marital arrangements of his own devising. Different societies frame different laws pertaining to the intimate association of the sexes. Such arrangements are legal and moral by human standards; the children born of these covenants are legitimate. To this extent, the words of Hebrews are applicable, "Marriage is honorable in all, and the [marriage] bed undefiled. . . ." [^10] However, if God is not a party to these unions, the contracting parties have no lasting claim either on one another or on any children produced by them. They will be "put asunder" either by divorce or death.

Orson Pratt contrasted the marriages of this world with those contracted under the authority of the priesthood:

Where man usurps authority to officiate in the ordinance of God, and joins together the sexes in marriage, such unions are illegal in the sight of God, though they may be legal according to the laws and governments of men . . . Point out to us a husband and wife that God has joined together from the second century of the christian era until the nineteenth, if any can. Such a phenomenon cannot be found among Christians or Jews, Mahometans, or Pagans. . . . Marriages, then, among all nations, though legal according to the laws of men, have been illegal according to the laws, authority, and institutions of Heaven. All the children born during that long period, though legitimate according to the customs and laws of nations, are illegitimate according to the order and authority of Heaven. Those things which are performed by the authority of man, God will overthrow and destroy, and they will be void and of no effect in the day of the resurrection. All things ordained of God and performed and sealed by his authority, will remain after the resurrection. . . . [^11]

We cannot make the Lord an ex post facto member of the wedding. If he did not perform the ceremony (via his authorized servants on earth), it is a purely man-made affair subject to man-made attitudes and laws. This was the case with the marital arrangements of the Sadducees who, because they erred—"not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God"—ridiculed both eternal marriage and the resurrection which made it possible. [^12] Of all man-made alliances Jesus said:

The children of this world [in contradistinction to those not of this world] marry, and are given in marriage. But they [among those of this world] which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that [immortal] world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage: Neither can they die anymore: for they are equal unto the angels [who are also immortal but unmarried]; and are the children of God [not his mature sons and daughters]; being the children of the resurrection. [^13]

Jesus Repudiates Divorce

Jesus cited the union of Adam and Eve as the perfect example of God's will for every marriage—the divine prototype. In light of this ideal, what conceivable reason would there be for entertaining the possibility of divorce? Divorce, like death, stems from the absence of the life-sustaining qualities inherent in God. A marriage whose builder and maker is the Lord must be everlasting since he is everlasting. Divorce is as alien to the nature of a marriage in the Lord as death is to the nature of a glorified, resurrected being. The violation of the principle of marriage via the practice of divorce does not invalidate God's original intent in the least. Marriage is what the Lord designed it to be, not what men make it. God's "cause" in uniting the male and the female transcended "every cause" men might advance for putting them asunder. For although divorce was an accepted practice long before the days of Jesus, yet, as he pointed out to the Pharisees who sought to justify it by appealing to Moses, "from the beginning it was not so." The Lord God never willed divorce anymore than he willed any other negative thing. He builds for life, not for death—for eternity, not for time. The Lord does not plan failure although he does plan for failure.

Being legalists, the Pharisees assumed that anything the Law allowed could be done with impunity. Jesus' suggestion that one could be law-abiding and still stand condemned before God was a startling departure from traditional rabbinic thought. Like so many others, the Pharisees mistook permission for condonation. They failed to appreciate the fact that the Lord had accommodated his law to the imperfections of his people. Thus, putting away one's wife was technically "lawful" but morally wrong. It did not originate with Jehovah and his law, but with man and his weakness. In rejecting their ritual offerings, the Lord strongly denounced the practice of divorce among the Jews of the fifth century B.C.:

Because the Lord was witness to the covenant between you and the wife of your youth, to whom you have been faithless, though she is your companion and your wife by covenant. Has not the one God made and sustained for us the spirit of life? And what does he desire? Godly offspring. So take heed to yourselves, and let none be faithless to the wife of his youth. "For I hate divorce," says the Lord the God of Israel, and covering one's garments with violence, says the Lord of hosts. So take heed to yourselves and do not be faithless." [^14]

Marriage is the very foundation of God's everlasting labors wherein he continues to bring to pass the organized existence of the family of mankind. [^15] If marriage is but a temporary expedient, then the family is equally transitory. And if the family has no enduring validity, then God himself is void of lasting purpose and significance. Divorce is antithetical to the very work and glory of God. True, Moses permitted his people to practice divorce but, as Jesus observed, he did so because of "the hardness of your hearts." The Lord permits divorce, but he does not condone divorce.

While those who obtain a civil divorce and (if applicable) a cancellation of sealings are free to remarry, the issue of quilt or innocence is another matter. President Joseph Fielding Smith has declared:

If all mankind would live in strict obedience to the gospel, and in that love which is begotten by the Spirit of the Lord, all marriages would be eternal, divorce would be unknown. Divorce is not part of the gospel plan and has been introduced because of the hardness of heart and unbelief of the people. . . . There never could be a divorce in this Church if the husband and wife were keeping the commandments of God. . . . When divorce comes to those who are married in the temple it has come because they have violated the covenants and the obligations they have taken upon themselves to be true to each other, true to God, true to the Church. If they will continue to live in that faithfulness, if they will have love in their hearts for each other, respect each other's rights and not one attempt to take an advantage unduly of the other but have the proper consideration, there will be no failures. . . . Marriage according to the law of the Church is the most holy and sacred ordinance. It will bring to the husband and the wife, it they abide in their covenants, the fulness of exaltation in the kingdom of God. When the covenant is broken, it will bring eternal misery to the guilty party, for we will all have to answer for our deeds done while in the flesh. It is an ordinance that cannot be trifled with, and the covenants made in the temple cannot be broken without dire punishment to the one who is guilty. [^16]

Scriptural Grounds for Divorce

Some scholars maintain that Jesus did not allow for divorce for any cause whatsoever. They point out that Matthew's qualifying phrase, "saving for the cause of fornication" is unsupported either by Mark, Luke or Paul. [^17] However, a study of all pertinent passages suggests that Matthew's "exception" is in reality only a more comprehensive statement of the Savior's views on the subject. [^18]

Matthew

But I say unto you, That who- soever shall put away his wife saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery. [^19]

Mark

And he saith unto them, Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another, committeth adultery against her. And if a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to another, she committeth adultery. [^20]

Luke

Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery. [^21]

Paul

And unto the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, Let not the wife depart from her husband; But and if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband: and let not the husband put away his wife. [^22]

In considering these passages, we must remember that Jesus came to fulfill the law as he had given it—not as it was being interpreted by the Pharisees. Under the law, adultery was punishable by death; divorce was automatic. However, the prescribed penalty was not enforced in that day. It was therefore, unnecessary for Jesus to specify adultery as a grounds for divorce—no one disputed it.

But were there other acceptable grounds? Jesus' answer was yes, fornication. But was not fornication in marriage adultery? It was. Consequently, the Aramaic term Jesus used did not refer to infidelity in marriage but to infidelity before marriage. The King James translators, unlike their modern counterparts, correctly selected the specific term, fornication, rather than the imprecise term, unchastity or unfaithfulness, to convey the Lord's meaning. That Jesus did regard fornication and adultery as two separate and distinct forms of infidelity is affirmed not only by Matthew but also in a latter-day revelation to Joseph Smith:

Behold, verily I say unto you, that whatever persons among you, having put away their companions for the cause of fornication, or in other words, if they shall testify before you in all lowliness of heart that this is the case, ye shall not cast them out from among you; But if ye shall find that any persons have left their companions for the sake of adultery, and they themselves are the offenders, and their companions are living, they shall be cast out from among you. [^23]

It is apparent that adultery and fornication do not have interchangeable meanings in this passage. Putting away their companions (whether husband or wife) "for the cause of fornication" is in contradistinction to leaving their companions "for the sake of adultery."

Whereas the Jews regarded the issuance of a bill of divorce the end of a marriage, Jesus maintained that its dissolution could, in God's eyes, only result from fornication or adultery. These sins constitute spiritual divorce. In other words, unchastity, not legal action, is the essence of divorce. Adultery was an act of divorce because it violated the union of man and woman after the fact of marriage. On the other hand, fornication—pre-marital unchastity—was also an act of divorce because it defiled a potential union before it existed. [^24] Thus, illicit sex, either before or after marriage, is a sin against marriage. The Law recognized this fact and permitted a husband to disown a wife if he discovered that she was not a virgin at the time of marriage. [^25]

Then they shall bring out the damsel to the door of her father's house, and the men of her city shall stone her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought folly in Israel, to play the whore in her father's house: so shalt thou put evil away from among you. [^26]

In allowing a man to put away his wife "for the cause of fornication," Jesus was simply unholding the Law of Moses. He himself had insisted that "not one jot or one tittle shall in nowise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled." [^27] He never opposed the law's demands, only the hypocrisy of its practitioners. For example, he did not deny that, under the law, an adulteress should be stoned, but he did challenge her accusers to find a man innocent enought to lead out in the deed. [^28] Jesus exposed the poor woman's judges for the hypocrites they were. To accuse her was to accuse themselves; they knew this. Those who were so anxious to uphold the law's claim on the adulteress, turned from it fearing its claim on themselves. Even as mankind had to wait four millennia for perfect mercy to be incarnated, so must it yet wait a season for perfect justice to descend from heaven. Still, though muted, that justice once walked the earth between those extremes which so often assume its throne and presume to speak in its behalf. For in upholding the law pertaining to adultery, and in declaring fornication the only other acceptable basis for divorce, Jesus rejected both Shammai and Hillel—taking a position between their two extremes.

Adultery Via Divorce

Jesus shocked friend and foe alike in maintaining that, from God's viewpoint, adultery was a consequence as well as a cause of divorce. Chief responsibility for the offense rested with the one who struck the fatal blow against the original union. A man was justified in divorcing a wife who, in committing fornication or adultery, had—in effect—divorced him. She struck the blow with her own hand. Her husband's bill of divorce was, therefore, nothing more than the legal death certificate attesting to the marriage's demise. On the other hand, the husband who put away a faithful wife struck the fatal blow by virtually forcing her into an adulterous second alliance. Consequently, any marriage he contracted thereafter would be an offense against his abandoned wife. [^29] In summation, adultery was committed by: a) the woman who remarried during her first husband's lifetime, [^30] b) the man who married a divorced woman and, c) the husband who unjustifiably divorced a wife and then married someone else.

Jesus' teaching on this subject has been deemed harsh and repressive by some. Indeed, the initial reaction of his own disciples was that it was better to remain unmarried rather than be so bound to a wife. [^31] However, the Savior of men was also the champion of women. In affirming his Father's will, Jesus asserted the right of women to be secure as wives and mothers and, implicitly, the right of children to be cared for by their own parents. No longer were wives to be considered mere property which could be discarded and exchanged at at the whim of their husbands. To appreciate the Lord's position, we must be mindful of the status of Jewish women at that time. The majority were fairly well-treated by their husbands, most of whom prized and honored a good wife. The family was all-important so that, morally speaking, the Jewish nation had no peers among the surrounding gentile nations. Still, there were injustices. For example, whereas a married woman would be branded an adulteress for becoming involved with any man—married or not—a married man went uncondemned so long as he restricted his assignations to unmarried women. [^32]

Then too, under the Law, only the husband could issue a bill of divorce, a wife was helpless to free herself. [^33] Ordinarily, this certificate freed the wife to remarry. However, in Jesus' mind this did not alter the fact that her doing so violated the original union. In every instance where Jesus employed the term, adultery, it was in connection with an unauthorized third person becoming involved in the "one flesh" relationship of a man and his wife. [^34] It was the betrayal of God's intent "from the beginning" that marriage should be an unbroken bond between a man and a woman which Jesus denounced. Therefore, all parties to the action were tainted by it: the first husband for unjustly casting his wife aside, the wife for marrying another while her husband yet lived, and the second husband for taking another man's wife. Thus the shadow of betrayal fell across both subsequent marriages.

The issue was not law, but reality. Adultery contaminates the union of husband and wife via the unsanctioned introduction into it of a third party. It is the pollution of the marital relationship through the admixture of an alien, divisive personality. Viewed in this light, the question of culpability is extraneous to the issue. Jesus was concerned with the spiritual implications of adultery, not its legal definition.

Indeed, there are circumstances in which one might be virtually forced to enter into an adulterous, though legal, relationship. For example, necessity imposed remarriage on female Jewish divorcees who lacked the economic means to support themselves and their children. [^35] This is why Jesus maintained that "putting away one's wife" for reasons other than her own infidelity would "cause her to commit adultery." Worse still, failing to obtain a second mate, many destitute women resorted to beggary or prostitution for survival. Is it any wonder Jesus repudiated the notion that a man could capriciously abandon a wife?

Still, a woman's plight did not alter the fact that remarriage during her husband's lifetime partook of the spirit of adultery against the original union. It might be justified by both God and man, but it was a reality. For example, the transgression of Adam was imposed upon him by the necessity of remaining with Eve so "that man might be." It was justified. However, he did disobey a commandment and he did fall. The fact of the matter was one thing, the guilt or innocence stemming from the fact another. Jesus' teaching is clear: the intimate relationship of man and woman is meant to be an integral part of their unbreakable union. It is adultery to defile that union. Consequently, both premarital and marital unchastity differ only in degree, not kind. For this reason, the Church makes no practical distinction between them.

It should be stressed that because the sealing power of the priesthood includes the divine authority to bind and to loose, to seal and to unseal, adultery is not imputed to the innocent victims of divorce who have been freed to remarry by that authority. Sin is not impugned to one who is justified by the Lord in either marrying or remarrying. [^36] However, guilt does attach itself to one who, having been sealed by the authority of the Priesthood, obtains a civil divorce and then remarries without a prior cancellation of sealings:

I think I can say here safely and truthfully that no judge in this world in any court of the land can annul a marriage for time and all eternity. He may separate the husband and wife by legal enactments so far as this world is concerned, but he cannot separate that husband and wife so far as the next world is concerned. Only the President of the Church has authority to cancel sealings, and when the man and his wife lose their faith and go to the courts and get a separation, and then go out and marry according to the laws of the land, they are not culpable before the law of the land, but they are before the kingdom of God and what the Savior says here in this revelation [Matt. 19:9] is absolutely true: . . . . [^37]

Spiritual Infidelity

Recognizing the dual nature of man, Jesus emphasized the dual nature of the commandments. [^38] For example, Jesus taught that adultery was spiritual as well as physical in character.

Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery: But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. [^39]

Obviously, then, infidelity is not limited to one's overt behavior, any division of mind or heart is a degree of infidelity. [^40] When such division is deep and long-lasting where one's mate—or one's God—is concerned, it is, in effect, the spiritual counterpart of adultery.

It is for this reason that the prophets defined ancient Israel's worship of other gods as fornication and adultery. In a particularly moving account of Jehovah's first claiming of Israel, Ezekiel writes of how the Lord brought life and salvation to her:

Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness; yea, I sware unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, saith the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. [^41]

Thereafter Israel "played the harlot" as it were, "upon every high mountain and under every green tree." [^42] She "committed fornication with the Egyptians" [^43] and "adultery with stones and with stocks." [^44]

Such treachery violates the mind to mind, heart to heart bond between husband and wife much as unchastity violates their flesh to flesh union. It is profound alienation of affections—spiritual infidelity—a hydra-headed creature of many guises. It usually expresses itself in oblique rather than direct ways. For example, whereas one could take life with a gun, the deed might be accomplished more subtly by employing ridicule, mental torture, gossip, falsehoods, etc. [^45] There are numerous ways of destroying a human being which do not require the shedding of blood. Jesus was murdered before he was crucified.

Yet each man kills the thing he loves,

By each let this be heard,

Some do it with a bitter look,

Some with a flattering word,

The coward does it with a kiss,

The brave man with a sword! [^46]

So too, infidelity can be expressed in outright adultery or by less obvious methods which may not only elude the conscience, but actually cause the faithless one to feel self-vindicated: "After all, is it anything more than just due for my companion's inadequacies and offenses?" Perhaps so. Men and women do fail one another; offenses do come. The vital issue is how we respond to those offenses. Infidelity is the hypocrite's way, not the Lord's way. Better an honest sword, than a deceptive kiss. In a summation of Israel's spiritual infidelity, Jehovah lamented:

Surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so have ye dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel, saith the Lord. [^47]

Love not only serves to seal up a man and a woman in a valid union, it seals out everything and everyone alien to that union. Jesus told the Twelve: "If a man love me, he will keep my words. . . ." [^48] Love is its own imperative. We cannot love the Lord and not keep his commandments. Whether toward God or one's mate, infidelity always stems from the fact that—for whatever reason—commitment of heart and mind have been weighed in the balances and found wanting. [^49]

Husbands may express their alienation by failing to properly provide for their families, by undue attention to their vocations or hobbies, by desertion, coldness, drunkenness, or brutality, by indifference to their calling as fathers and spiritual leaders in the home, by a general unwillingness to guide, sustain and support their wives in their labors, etc. Wives are inclined to reveal their disaffection by either careless or obsessive homemaking, by either refusing to bear and properly care for children or by excessive attention to them, by denial of conjugal rights, [^50] by a flirtatious spirit, by fault-finding and derision—especially before children—or by unjustifiably pursuing a career or some other time-consuming interest outside of the home, etc. There is much overlapping of these factors of alienation between men and women; neither sex has a corner on the market. Note too, that infidelity can be reflected in extremes. Too much of one thing, too little of another; always an imbalance; always a distortion of values. Thus men violate God's commandment given through Adam to watch over, bless and sustain their wives, and women, in turn, fail to obey the commandment given to Eve and her daughters to center their lives and affections in their husbands, their children and their homes. It is all infidelity, regardless of the guise it may wear. As such it partakes of a divided heart, double-mindedness—marital duplicity.

Planned hypocrisy is sometimes advocated as a cure for those marriages characterized by monotony and boredom. [^51] The question is, should one feign the fruits of love? [^52] Should a wife resort to feminine wiles? Should she view her husband as a fortress to be overthrown by woman's ancient weapons? Should she practice guile as a means of manipulating him? In other words, should she use herself in ways which will enable her to use him? Advocates of this devious approach to human relationships are very popular today. Manipulative propaganda is not new; sophistry had its beginnings with Satan in the pre-mortal world. It was his chief weapon in the war in heaven and remains a favorite tool of liars everywhere. False prophets of marital happiness find many "silly women" who much prefer the easy lie to the hard truth. And the truth is that manipulative techniques have and always will be used in the absence of sincere devotion. Artificial affection—like artificial fruit—may, at first glance, appear genuine, but it is only illusory. It is devoid of life, and, consequently, cannot nourish the soul. With time, it gathers dust and is eventually discarded.

Love has its own instinct. Not even a puppy has to be taught how to express it. Wives who feel that they must learn certain "techniques" before they can effectively relate to their husbands apparently do not realize how close to the spirit of harlotry they have moved. [^53] Famous courtesans were skilled in the nuances of sexual love, yet they knew little or nothing of love itself. A wife who must be instructed in the "proper technique" for speaking, responding, reacting and otherwise relating to her husband is a pathetic caricature of a woman in love. If her husband is beguiled by such behavior, he is either very naive, very self-centered or very stupid . . . probably all three.

Through Isaiah, Jehovah chastised those who "draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoreth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me." [^54] No sin drew sharper or more frequent rebuke from Jesus than that of hypocrisy. Feigned love, loyalty or righteousness was an abomination in his sight. [^55] This disease of the spirit followed him throughout his ministry. It challenged him, misunderstood him, rejected him, ridiculed him, betrayed him, kissed him, denied him, lied about him, struck him, spat upon him, judged him, flogged him, washed its hands of him, and, when it could do no more, crucified him.

There can be no marriage in the Lord if the parties to it are lacking in personal integrity. Guileful behavior may temporarily serve one's purposes, but it will fail in the end. Integrity—wholeness of character—should manifest itself in all that we do. A true disciple of Jesus Christ will act with integrity toward his country, his church, his employer, his neighbor, his family or his dog. The virtue—or lack of it—of others will not dictate his conduct. He will strive to be true—as God is true—although every one else is false. [^56]

Personal integrity is the key to resolving those dilemmas associated with particularly stressful circumstances. For example, how should we conduct ourselves when oppressed? Do we owe others our fealty when they do not fully respect our rights as human beings? Is it wrong to protect one's self with a measure of guile when conditions not of our making nor to our liking are imposed upon us? Specifically, how should a wife act toward an abusive, unworthy husband? Is it a case of fighting fire with fire, of an eye for an eye, or is there a better way of dealing with the situation?

As in most things, Jesus' approach to life is our best guide. The humble, compassionate and generous deeds of Jesus have been duplicated in the lives of many noble people. The Christ-like thing has been done time and again—but not consistently. It is not so much what Jesus did which sets him apart from others as it is the consistency with which he did it. His disciples lacked his consistency because they lacked his integrity. No circumstance caused him to compromise his standards. He overcame the world because he was true when it was false. So too, those who would emulate the Master must strive to maintain their integrity in all circumstances—good and bad. Right conduct is not meant to be a matter of convenience, but a way of life. And it is bought with a price: self-denial, sacrifice, persecution, rejection, misunderstanding, etc. A hallmark of the true disciple is his ability to do right in the midst of wrong, to accept punishment without rancor—not because he is guilty, but in spite of being innocent.

Consider the counsel of the apostle Peter to the Church in his day.

For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps. Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously: Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. [^57]

Men and women who would become one with Christ must do so in all things. We cannot expect to share in his glory if we are unwilling to share in his pain. [^58] Commitment to Christ saves us from some trials only to bring others upon us. No one can be in the world while not of it and escape persecution. [^59] Is Christ to be crucified and his prophets stoned while the saints go unscathed?

A woman who has entered into a covenant with Christ is a saint first and a wife second. Her covenant with the Lord, not her marriage vows, should be the ultimate determinant of her conduct. Indeed, she is a better wife because of her covenant. She can be even more faithful in adversity, not less so. She can be armed with a spiritual power which will enable her to transcend adverse situations. If anyone had the right to be disloyal, it would be a slave whose servitude was imposed upon him. Yet the apostle Paul counseled those slaves who had become free men in Christ to use their new-found hope as an incentive for even more faithful service to their masters.

Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ; Not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart; With good will doing service as to the Lord, and not to men: Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall be receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. [^60]

In other words, they were no longer merely slaves, they were Christian slaves—men and women who served an earthly master well because their heavenly Master asked it of them. They did not do it to please men, but to please God. Their integrity as saints would not allow them to behave in any way but Christ's way. So too, the wife whose husband is less than he ought to be cannot be untrue to him without dishonoring her Lord and herself. She will sustain her husband in truth—without guile—because she cannot dishonor herself as a saint.

The Sword of Truth

Life does not always allow for clear choices between good and evil. In some instances, the issue is not doing what is right, but knowing what is right. Many a poor soul has been impaled on the horns of this dilemma. The best thing to do in any given situation can only be determined after all of its nuances and ramifications have been considered. Even then, the final decision may be wrong. Fortunately, humanity is still made of clay; we have not yet been cast in the bronze of immortality. The Potter can still correct any flaws stemming from our sins and weaknesses if we will permit him to do so. [^61] He is the truth which will eventually free us of our mistakes and their temporal consequences if we will but approach him in all humility and honesty of heart.

Pretense—maintaining appearances for appearances sake—meant nothing to Jesus. He was a realist. Although he taught that divorce was contrary to the will of heaven, He nevertheless allowed for it under certain circumstances. God permits divorce in fact; he does not condone it in principle. Forbidding divorce on any grounds whatsoever is both unscriptural and immoral. The Lord would not have given the Church the authority to bind and to loose if such were the case. [^62] What hypocrisy to claim that thieves and murderers may repent and enter heaven but that those who err in choosing a mate must be condemned to a lifetime of marital hell. Is a woman the prisoner of her husband regardless of how he may abuse her just so long as he does not commit physical adultery? Such a restricted view would allow the practice of all manner of soul-destroying tyrannies with seeming impunity. Human judgment is fallible—especially when we are young and inexperienced. Mistakes are made. Nothing is gained by perpetuating a relationship which is hopelessly wrong. Truth is divisive. Christ came, not with the olive branch of universal peace, but with the sword of truth. [^63] Peace follows the truth, it cannot precede it. An enduring relationship—whether with God or man—cannot be coerced; it must be achieved without compulsory means—being founded upon the natural harmony of its component parts.

In most instances, those who have committed themselves to Christ can achieve that harmony if only they will be patient and long-suffering, which is to say, if only they will love deeply enough, long enough. Actually most couples are far more alike than they care to admit. More often than not, they criticize weaknesses in their mate which they, themselves, possess, but resent. Thus each becomes a scape-goat for the other. It is a futile enterprise: both are sent bleating into the wilderness carrying the mate's sins and, therefore, carrying his or her own. [^64] Many marriages could be saved if only the parties to them would develop a greater sense of honesty and humility and then season these qualities with an active sense of humor.

They owe this to their children. For marriage is a covenant with the unborn. The obligations of parenthood are inherent in those conjugal associations that make it possible. There is no way under heaven for parents to divorce themselves from their responsibilities toward the children they bring into the world. Their stewardship cannot be blithely handed over to someone else. Many parents are much too cavalier in this regard. The sins committed by children in consequence of parental failure will be upon the heads of the parents, not their surrogates. [^65] Who can measure the harm done when parental selfishness robs children of the guidance and affection to which they are entitled? Characteristically, the very young are quick to forgive; it is hard for them to understand why their parents are lacking in this quality. Children should no more be required to choose between their father and mother than the saints should be asked to choose between one prophet and another. It is designed that children should serve a marriage and, in return, be served by it. They justify both its existence and its perpetuation. They should not be robbed of their childhood. They should not be driven into the world of adult realities before the due time. Nor should they be obliged to lay the foundation of their own marriages on the insecurities of a broken home. The home belongs to the family. Like a ship, it should be abandoned only when and if the safety and shelter it affords its passengers is outweighed by the dangers of remaining aboard.

Although divorce compounds the hurts of parents and children alike, in a given situation it must be weighed against the damage the marriage itself is producing. The spiritual and emotional scarring which comes with living in a home characterized by nameless obscenities, insecurities, strife, brutality, drunkenness, etc.—or even by the subtle, but pervasive, atmosphere of restrained hatred and infidelity—can be far worse than that resulting from a swift severing of an unholy alliance. Children can endure a great deal if they feel that they are loved. If they do not, it makes little difference whether the loneliness of being unloved is experienced with or without one or both parents. Most children are blessed with an emotional resiliency and a truth-accepting disposition beyond that of older people. When provided with an honest statement of the facts, the young are inclined to accept them. Idealistically, every home should be a sample of heaven on earth. Realistically, few are. Most marriages can survive and most families can be relatively happy with something less than heaven. Divorce is unjustified in these instances. But where a home bespeaks, not heaven—or even earth—but hell itself, it is not home and should be cast into the bottomless pit along with the devil and his angels.

Divorce is becoming increasingly a phenomenon of the middle-aged, as well as the very young. The passing of the last child into adulthood seems to expose a weakness, an emptiness in the marital relationship of a growing number of couples. For too many, the tie that binds is not love, but duty—especially duty toward children. When, presumably, that duty has been discharged, many couples are no longer willing to remain together. Certainly children can do much to cement and sustain a marriage. Without them, many marriages would be discarded before the parties to them had time to successfully adjust for the long voyage. However, it is not children, but the bond between husband and wife as such which is the ultimate basis of a lasting marriage. If that bond is non-existent or seriously flawed, children usually do little more than patch over the cracks of parental division. Indeed, children may become unwitting pawns in a marital chess match; or, being privy to the truth, they may also enter the "war game" and play one parent against the other. The principle of divide and conquer has many applications.

The nature of rule, command or leadership imposes obligations on those in authority that are above and beyond those reciprocal duties incumbent upon their subjects or followers. Unequal power produces unequal responsibilities. it is a matter of noblesse oblige: the more influential the person, or the greater their knowledge, or the more dependent others are upon them, the more essential it is for them to honor their trust. For example, God bestows the priesthood with an oath and a covenant "which he cannot break, neither can it be moved." [^66] His very integrity as God is bound up in his oath. Paul said: "Let God be true, but every man a liar." [^67] Though men are free to be faithful or unfaithful to their covenants, a similar choice does not exist for God. Again, the earth faithfully fulfills the measure of her creation in spite of the despoilations of her ungrateful children. And the roots of a tree remain steadfast when its branches flail at the wind. So too, a government is expected to uphold constitutional law even though some citizens commit acts of sedition. Likewise, parental responsibility does not end simply because juvenile delinquency begins. Children leave parents, parents should not disown children. God does not forsake men; men forsake him. A disgruntled citizen may leave his country for a cause that would not warrant his country sending him into exile. People apostatize from the Church for more numerous reasons than those for which they might be excommunicated. Thus, the dependent person is freer to end a relationship than the one he or she is dependent upon.

Consequently, a husband, having accepted the role of guide and protector of his wife, is obligated to be more patient and long-suffering with her than she might choose to be with him. In practical terms, this means that a wife is at greater liberty to leave her husband than he is to leave her. A man is not justified in abandoning his wife unless she first breaks the marriage covenant through some serious act of disloyalty. Human weaknesses and imperfections should not be equated with infidelity—virtually the only legitimate ground for a husband initiating divorce proceedings.

As God hates putting away, husbands among this people can put their wives away only for causes mentioned in the holy writ; but wives, on the other hand may claim freedom and support on other and more numerous grounds. [^68]

While a woman may obtain her freedom on more numerous grounds than could her mate, her culpability in doing so is another matter. She should be very sure that circumstances warranted her action since she, in leaving him, must bear the greater responsibility for the divorce itself.

Therefore, it behooves a woman to be very sure that she is not using divorce as an escape from the frustration of her own unrealistic expectations.

John A. Widtsoe recounted an incident in the life of President Young which bears on this point:

The day journal of Brigham Young records that one day a sister came to him and said: "My husband is not good to me. I want a divorce." The journal goes on further to say that President Young talked with her about an hour, from ten to eleven in the morning. The journal gives the exact time. Then, when they had finished, he turned to the woman, and he said: "Sister, I have heard your story. I am not going to give you a divorce." As you know, Brigham Young was a friend to the cause of women. He felt that they had the first right of choice. "I will not give you a divorce," he said. "Go home and be good to your husband, and don't expect heaven on earth."

There is a tremendous lesson in that last phrase: "Don't expect heaven on earth." [^69]

More often than not, those who demand heaven on earth do not find it in this life or qualify for it in the life to come.

However, when a woman deems her situation unbearable, she has her God-given agency. She should not be accused of sin in ending a hopeless marriage. Indeed, divorce may be an act of repentance. Although Paul admonished the Christian slave to be honorable in his servitude, the apostle did not deny him the right to free himself if the opportunity arose. [^70] By analogy, we should be loyal citizens so long as the state protects us in our unalienable rights. When the state ceases to do so, we may continue to give it our loyalty, but it has no right to demand that loyalty. [^71] God has denied no one the right to revolt against tyranny. Nowhere has he said that continual submission to bondage and oppression is required of us if we are to escape the onus of sin. To so submit may earn heaven's praise, but refusing to do so will not call down heaven's censure. [^72]

What is important is that however we act, it is with integrity. Whether we remain a slave, an abused wife, or an oppressed citizen, or whether we renounce our former fealty and strike for freedom—our conduct, right or wrong, should be honorable. A divided heart—double-mindedness—can only produce feigned love, loyalty and obedience. Such hypocrisy robs us of integrity without freeing us from servitude. All are betrayed in that wretched state: the hated master, the compromised slave, and the Lord.

Therefore, other than outright fornication or adultery, what other circumstances might warrant divorce? President David O. McKay cited some of the more obvious ones:

Unfaithfulness on the part of either or both, habitual drunkenness, physical violence, long imprisonment that disgraces the wife and family, the union of an innocent girl to a reprobate—in these and perhaps other cases there may be circumstances which make the continuance of the marriage state a greater evil than divorce. But these are extreme cases—they are the mistakes, the calamities in the realm of marriage. [^73]

That there are limits to what a woman is expected to endure was also the contention of Elder Moses Thatcher:

The allegiance of a wife in this Church is not due to an unfaithful, deceiving or cruel husband. And he who regards his wife as the creature of his sinful pleasure, made and given to gratify his fallen nature is unworthy of a wife or to be the father of children. [^74]

If a marriage is dragging a woman down to the point where her very salvation is in jeopardy, divorce may be her only recourse. It is one thing to go to hell to save sinners and quite another to remain there with them. Jesus did the former, not the latter.

How often is it the case among us, that women desirous of salvation are compelled to leave their husbands that become drunken, that become apostates, that become careless and indifferent, that do something or other that forfeits their standing in the Church of Christ? And then what is to become of such women? According to our faith no woman should be connected with a man who cannot save her in the Celestial Kingdom of God. What I mean by this is: if a man apostatizes and breaks covenants and loses his standing in the Church of Christ, he is not in a fit condition to save himself, much less to lead his wife aright. He cannot lead her in the path of exaltation, because he has turned aside from that path; he has gone into another path. If she follow him, she will follow him to destruction; she will take the downward road. She will never find, while following him, and he in that condition, the path of salvation. [^75]

Many converts left their fathers, mothers, wives, husbands and even children for the Gospel's sake. This is not a desirable sacrifice, but it is one which circumstance sometimes makes necessary.

Many women in our community have left their husbands; many men have left their wives and children; young boys have left their parents and brothers and sisters, and young girls have come away, and left all. They had friends, homes, plenty, parents, brothers and sisters; yet when the spirit of the Gospel came upon them they were so enamored with it, and it gave such light, knowledge and intelligence, that they were willing to forsake all, and follow with the Latter-day Saints for life eternal. This is the case with quite a portion of our community. We all, then, started for life and salvation, and we still have no other object. [^76]

Such sacrifices are not wrong, for in speaking of those who had "forsaken all" Jesus said:

And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, shall receive a hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life. [^77]

President Joseph F. Smith recognized the fact that not all marriages should be perpetuated.

If a man and woman should be joined together who are incompatible to each other it would be a mercy to them to be separated that they might have a chance to find other spirits that will be congenial to them. We may bind on earth and it will be bound in Heaven, and loose on earth and it will be loosed in Heaven. [^78]

Incompatibility is a valid ground for divorce if it stems from a basic and unalterable disharmony of natures. Its heights and depths must be honestly surveyed, however, lest acute differences be confused with chronic ones or a passing rude blast be taken for a prevailing wind. [^79] But if the incompatibility is profound and unchangeable, it should be faced. Remaining with a false religion will not transform it into a true one. We can only repent of it by apostatizing from it. When fundamentally dissimilar natures are joined together, time and truth will eventually sever them apart. No false alliance can endure.

Forgiveness and Divorce

However, before taking the drastic step of divorce, one should make very certain that it is a false alliance. Those who err in the decision to marry, can err in the decision to divorce. Therefore, when threatening differences arise in a marriage the Lord's counsel should be followed:

Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican. Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. [^80]

Obviously, one can be loosed from a mate (or an enemy) and still love them and, therefore, forgive them their trespasses. Neither love nor forgiveness necessitates the continuation of a relationship which can only produce further harm.

But we do not love to associate with our enemies, and I do not think the Lord requires us to do it. If He does He will have to reveal it, for I cannot find it anywhere revealed. . . . We should keep ourselves aloof from the wicked; the dividing line should be distinctly drawn between God and Belial, between Christ and the world, between truth and error, and between right and wrong. . . . Now, here is the law of God upon the subject; it is the word of the Lord: "Come out from among them and be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing." What affinity can we have for them? Let them alone, let them go their own way. Help them to all the happiness that it is possible for them to obtain in this world; for it will be all that they will ever get, unless they repent of their sins, and forsake their wicked ways. [^81]

The essence of forgiveness is the absence of punitive action for past offenses. Forgiveness does not necessarily restore former trust or require the resumption of former relationships. An employer may refuse to file charges against a dishonest worker and yet not retain him in his employ. A woman may forgive her husband for his repeated acts of brutality against her and still divorce him. The Prodigal Son was accepted back, but he did not regain the inheritance which he had squandered. [^82] Perfect forgiveness includes the blotting out of past offenses so that it is as though they had never happened. [^83] This is known as the remission of sins and is possible only through the atonement of Christ. So that while the remission of sins is an aspect of the forgiveness of sins, the two are not always synonymous. Mortals are expected to forgive the offenses of others, but only God can fully remit sin so that it does not jeopardize one's future relationship with Him.

Witholding punishment is the first mile of forgiveness required of every would-be saint. The second mile is walked when the offender is welcomed back as a friend and a brother. This, however, is as dependent upon his repentance as it is upon the injured party's forgiveness. To the degree that circumstances will permit, the spirit of remission should enliven every act of forgiveness. The best robe, a ring on the finger, the fatted calf—these are three tokens of God's awesome love for us, three reminders of the grand objective of human contrition and divine compassion.

Therefore, before legally declaring one's mate to be "as an heathen man and a publican", there should be a mutually-agreed-upon separation to allow tempers to cool, emotions to calm and truth to prevail. God himself delays his judgment of mankind until the last possible moment. He, too, has been obliged to separate himself from his children. However, he is doing everything possible—even to sacrificing his Beloved Son—to effect a reconciliation. Can we do less? How patient Jehovah has been with his errant wife! Every reproof has been followed by assurances of deathless devotion.

Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me. [^84]

Although Israel sinned against Jehovah, yet he has not given her a bill of divorcement.

Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away. [^85]

While men and women may be justified in divorcing an unfaithful mate, they are not required to do so. Mercy can season justice. Indeed, the whole tenor of the plan of salvation is that it must do so. Even when it comes to the treatment of an adulterous mate, the Lord is our Shepherd, pointing the way and setting an example others may follow:

They say, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? but thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the Lord. [^86]

It is because Jehovah loves Israel with a pure love that he is able to be so long-suffering. Infidelity is a shattering assault against married love. Those who can find it in their hearts to forgive an unfaithful, but repentant, mate are to be commended. Truly, theirs is a "work of faith, and labor of love, and patience of hope." [^87]

Faith, hope and charity are inseparable companions; if one is lost, all are lost. The Gospel is a message of reconciliation to God and our fellow man via "these three." [^88] We are false disciples of the Master if we do not do all in our power to fulfill the Gospel's goal in our own lives. We must put off the natural man and become as little children, being meek and of a gentle disposition even as Jesus declared himself to be. [^89] This produces a paradox: we become less inclined to judge or to forsake others and yet more qualified to do so. The Lord chastises those he loves, but he does not abandon them. [^90] Only when his children fully reject his love does he lose hope for their salvation. [^91] So too, while some are forced to make judgment, they should first make certain that the beam is out of their own eye. It is not wrong to judge, but it is wrong to judge wrongfully. [^92]

Divorce is an act of judgment. Those who cry out for mercy for their own sins and short-comings are miserable hypocrites if they then demand justice for the sins and failings of others. [^93] We shall, indeed, be judged as we judge. Consequently, the decision to divorce should not be based upon minor irritations, frustrations and differences. We are all poor, finite creatures, struggling with varying degrees of understanding and success for a place in the sun. We marry fallible, imperfect human beings, we are unjustified in forsaking them simply because they prove to be a bit more imperfect than we bargained for. Neither trivial differences nor the loss of physical beauty, health, wealth, status, or any other features of marriage's first blooming justify divorce. Time's wrinkles must be accepted as part of life's wholeness. Nor can we smooth away the years with a new relationship at the expense of the old. A true marriage is "rooted and grounded" in God. As long as the parties to it are joined to him, they will be joined to one another.

We men of the priesthood who have knelt at the sacred altar and on that altar clasped the hand of a sainted companion and have entered an eternal triangle, not a companionship of two, but of three—the husband, the wife, and God—the most sacred triangle man and woman can become a part of. But my heart sinks in despair when I witness so many who have and are withdrawing that hand from one another. They don't do that until they first divorce God from that triangle, and after divorcing God, it is practically impossible for them to stay together side by side. [^94]

When all is said and done, the overriding justification for ending what was meant to be an everlasting union is the inability of husband and wife to achieve a viable degree of oneness of heart and mind with God—and with themselves. Hardness of heart (the want of love) and blindness of mind (the want of truth) are the essential causes of virtually all inter-personal estrangement. Because of them, many of our Heavenly Father's children will be "divorced" from his presence forever. Because of them, relatively few men and women will create that holy bond which is the key to eternal life and exaltation. There does come that moment when judgment must be laid "to the line, and righteousness to the plummet." [^95]

Footnotes

'Reuben, the son of Jacob, witness.

'Eliezer, the son of Gilead, witness. . . .'"

See Dummelow, J. R., A Commentary on the Holy Bible by Various Writers. New York Macmillan. 1946. pp. 688.

Paul counseled against hasty divorce in pointing out that the believing mate might save the unbelieving one. See I Corinthians 7:12-16; D&C 74.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 93:29; TJS pp. 352, 353.
[^2] Acts 10:34; D&C 1:35; 38:26.4
[^3] 1 Nephi 17:35.
[^4] Obviously, the sexes cannot be absolutely equal as such while still being different "Equality" is an almost meaningless term except where God and his law are concerned. Said President J. Reuben Clark: "Now, I am trying to get out of all this only he one fundamental thought—we were not all equal at the beginning; we were not all equal at the Grand Council; we have never been all equal at any time since, and apparently we never shall be." CR, October, 1956, p. 84.
[^5] See 1 Corinthians 12; D&C 46; Moroni 10.
[^6] See Exodus 15:20.
[^7] See Judges 4, 5.
[^8] See 2 Kings 22:14; 2 Chronicles 34:22 2 Chronicles 34:22.
[^9] Luke 2:36-38.
[^10] JD 5:87. See also 5:34. Speaking of the hymn, "O My Father," Wilford Woodruff said: "That hymn is a revelation, though it was given unto us by a woman, Sister Eliza R. Snow." Millennial Star, 56:229, April 9, 1894.
[^11] Wilford Woodruff, "Deseret Weekly," 45:545. October 9, 1892.
[^12] History of the Church, 4:602. See "Woman's Exponent," 7:91, November 15, 1878.
[^13] TJS 224, 225. See also 229.
[^14] Brigham Young, JD 13:155. See 18:71.
[^15] Millennial Star, 15:130. While a female may annoint with oil and lay on hands in the prayer of faith, she cannot do so in the name of or by the authority of the Holy Priesthood, anymore than an unordained male could do so.
[^16] John Taylor, "Woman's Exponent," 5:148-9.
[^17] Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 6, 1921, p. 199.
[^18] See JD 3:15.
[^19] D&C 46:8.
[^20] The law of Moses, Jesus' teachings on divorce and Peter and Paul's writings on marriage, distinguish between the sexes as to their duties and responsibilities. Said Brigham Young: "When we speak of law and of the transgression of law, we refer to the law of God to man." JD 8:222.
[^21] However, disembodied female spirits may appear to living persons—usually family members—in order to comfort and inform them on personal matters.
[^22] They may receive personal revelation for themselves and their own families.
[^23] Women are permitted to serve as missionaries under the direction of the priesthood. They serve at their own request and only after reaching legal age.
[^24] See CR, October 4, 1963, p. 29.
[^25] John Taylor, JD 1:224. See CR, Oct. 4, 1963, p. 29.
[^26] Hebrews 5:1-10.
[^27] Said President Charles W. Penrose: "Sisters have said to me sometimes, 'But, I hold the priesthood with my husband.' 'Well,' I asked, 'what office do you hold in the priesthood?' Then they could not say much more. The sisters are not ordained to my office in the Priesthood and there is authority in the Church which they cannot exercise; it does not belong to them; they cannot do that properly any more than they can change themselves into a man." CR, April 6, 1921, p. 198. See Ibid., p. 24.
[^28] Pres. J. Reuben Clark said that wives and mothers possess "a function as divinely called, as eternally important in its place as the Priesthood itself." RSM, 33:801, December, 1946.
[^29] John Taylor, JD 20:359. See JD 17:119, 22:316.
[^30] Alma 29:6.
[^31] Speaking of woman's power to organize matter into tabernacles suitable for the Father's spirit progeny, J. Reuben Clark said: "This was her calling; this was her blessing, bestowed by the Priesthood." RSM, 33:801, December, 1946.
[^32] D&C 88:13.
[^33] Acts 17:25, 28.
[^34] For a sensitive description of the mother's role in organizing life, see President J. Reuben Clark, RSM 33:801, December, 1946.
[^35] Indeed, their part is vital! "Thus to the full stature of manhood and womanhood, mother guides, incites, entreats, instructs, directs, on occasion commands, the soul for which she built the earthly home, in its march onward to exaltation. God gives the soul its destiny, but mother leads it along the way." J. Reuben Clark, RSM, 33:803.
[^36] Galatians 4:19.
[^37] See JD 6:275; 15:137; 25:34.
[^38] "From that day, when Eve thus placed first among her blessings the power to bear children, the greatest glory of true womanhood has been motherhood." J. Reuben Clark, RSM, 33:801.
[^39] Brigham Young, JD 17:119, 120.
[^40] See Abraham 2:10.
[^41] See D&C 98:16.
[^42] Isaiah 51:1, 2.
[^43] Brigham Young, JD 1:69. See also 4:277; 9:37; 11:215.
[^44] Durham, G. Homer. The Discourses of Wilford Woodruff [Bookcraft, Salt Lake City, 1946], p. 269.
[^45] Heber C. Kimball, JD 4:277.
[^46] CR, October 5, 1952, p. 100.
[^47] Brigham Young, JD 18:263.
[^48] Joseph F. Smith, Young Woman's Journal 3:143.
[^49] See John 10:12.
[^50] See CR, October 4, 1963, pp. 34-40; October 7, 1951, pp. 110-112.
[^51] The First Presidency, CR, October 3, 1942, p. 12.
[^52] D&C 68:25.
[^53] Brigham Young, JD 1:66, 67. The entire discourse is worthy of careful study. See also 15:12.
[^54] Brigham Young, JD 8:62.
[^55] CR, Oct. 6, 1951, p. 58.
[^56] Brigham Young, JD 9:38. See 1:246.
[^57] See JD 11:338.
[^58] Brigham Young, JD 14:287.
[^59] Brigham Young, JD 11:215; TJS, 321.
[^60] The First Presidency, CR, October 3, 1942, pp. 12-13.
[^61] See Genesis 3:10.
[^62] Moses 4:15.
[^63] See JD 3:266; 11:262.
[^64] Matthew 25:14-30.
[^65] Heber C. Kimball, JD 4:252. See JD 25:162-63.
[^66] See 2 Nephi 4:5-9; Jeremiah 31:29, 30.
[^67] See JD 4:155.
[^68] Elder Erastus Snow. JD 5:291.
[^69] See D&C 121:34-40.
[^70] Ephesians 5:25-33.
[^71] JD 4:155.
[^72] See JD 18:273.
[^73] See D&C 38:12.
[^74] See D&C 101:1-9, 75; 103:1-10; 105:1-10.
[^75] D&C 105:10.
[^76] D&C 105:31, 32. Said Orson Pratt: "Do you suppose that the Lord will suffer any unclean thing to be in that army? Not at all, for his angels and he himself are to go before us. God will not dwell in the midst of a people who will not sanctify themselves before him." JD 15:363.
[^77] I.V., Genesis 14:30-32.
[^78] Ether 12:29-31. See Moses 7:13; D&C 45:66-70.
[^79] D&C 121:36.
[^80] D&C 121:46. See JD 20:258-63.
[^81] Joseph F. Smith, JD 23:285, 286.
[^82] See Luke 15:3. The ring and the fatted calf are symbolic of heaven's love, not of its blessings.
[^83] See Isaiah 1:18; Psalm 103:12; D&C 58:42; Mormon 9:3-6.
[^84] Isaiah 49:15, 16.
[^85] Isaiah 50:1.
[^86] Jeremiah 3:1.
[^87] I Thessalonians 1:3.
[^88] See I Corinthians 13:13.
[^89] See Matthew 11:29; 18:1-5; Mosiah 3:19.
[^90] Hebrews 12:6, 7; D&C 101:4, 5.
[^91] See 2 Nephi 33:9; D&C 1:33.
[^92] See D&C 107:30, 31; Matthew 7:1-5. The Inspired Revision of Matthew 7:2 reads, "Judge not unrighteously, that ye be not judged; but judge righteous judgment."
[^93] See Matthew 18:21-35. D&C 64:8-12.
[^94] Matthew Cowley, CR, October 3, 1952, p. 27.
[^95] Isaiah 28:18.
