Rodney Turner, Woman and the Priesthood ( 1972)

XI

Woman And The Priesthood

Woman is co-eternal in her being with that Father who gave her organized existence as one of his daughters. [^1] He holds her in equal esteem with his sons, for "God is no respector of persons." [^2] Heaven knows but one aristocracy and that is the aristocracy of righteousness. "Behold, the Lord esteemeth all flesh in one; he that is righteous is favored of God." [^3] The basic laws by which the blessings of heaven are obtained apply with equal force to both sexes. The woman who fills the measure of her creation is as approved, successful and happy as any man can hope to be. Woman is spirit of man's spirit and bone of his bone. To the extent that she shares a common origin and divinity with him, she is one with him.

Thus, the sexes were created relatively equal and should remain so as both grow and develop toward perfection. [^4] However, the preservation of this equality is assured only when men and women share a mutual commitment to God and to one another. For their equality is not sameness. Indeed, the divine potential possessed by each sex is made possible by their very dissimilarities. It is the blending of these complementary natures which transforms the melodies of existence into a symphony of life. The "harmony of the spheres" is not limited to those worlds which brighten the universe. That harmony is made possible by the greater harmony which exists between those men and women—those persons—by whom and for whom those worlds exist.

Gifts of the Spirit

As a person, a woman can enter into a valid covenant with Jesus Christ thereby obtaining a remission of her sins and a hope of salvation in the celestial kingdom. The gift of the Holy Ghost can be hers together with one or more of the gifts of the Spirit. [^5] These gifts are freely given to all who earnestly seek them according to their faith and diligence—subject only to the discretion of the Holy Ghost.

For example, the gift of prophecy—of inspired utterances—have been enjoyed by many women. One such woman was Miriam, the sister of Moses. [^6] Another was Deborah, one of the judges in ancient Israel. [^7] And Huldah, who lived in the days of Isaiah. [^8] A fourth was Anna, the aged widow from the tribe of Asher, who was present when Mary and Joseph brought their infant son to the temple. She thereafter "spake of him to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem." [^9] Heber C. Kimball declared that when the saints are truly united "the same Spirit and power will rest upon our sisters as it did upon Mary, Elizabeth, and Anna, and thousands of others." [^10] Indeed, many women in modern Israel have enjoyed the gift of revelation and prophecy.

Oh, Ye Latter-day Saints, you talk about revelation and wonder if there is any revelation. Why bless your souls, say nothing about the apostles and elders around me, these mountains contain thousands upon thousands of devoted women, holy women, who are filled with the inspiration of Almighty God, and these sons and daughters partake of the inspiration of their mothers, as well as of their fathers. . . . [^11]

That the gifts of the Spirit were to be enjoyed by women as well as men was the clear teaching of Joseph Smith. In meeting with the "Female Relief Society" he "gave a lecture on the priesthood, showing how the sisters would come in possession of the privileges, blessings and gifts of the priesthood, and that the signs should follow them, such as healing the sick, casting our devils, etc., and that they might attain unto these blessings by a virtuous life, and conversation, and diligence in keeping all the commandments. . . ." [^12] In that lecture the Prophet defended the idea that women could bless the sick and otherwise call upon the Spirit. In her synopsis of his remarks, Eliza R. Snow wrote:

No matter who believeth, these signs, such as healing the sick, casting out devils, etc., should follow all that believe, whether male or female. He asked the Society if they could not see by this sweeping promise, that wherein they are ordained, if it is the privilege of those set apart to administer in that authority, which is conferred on them; and if the sisters should have faith to heal the sick, let all hold their tongues, and let everything roll on. . . .

Respecting females administering for the healing of the sick, he further remarked, there could be no evil in it, if God gave his sanction by healing; that there could be no more sin in any female laying hands on and praying for the sick, than in wetting the face with water; it is no sin for anybody to administer that has faith, or if the sick have faith to be healed by their administration. [^13]

This teaching was confirmed by Brigham Young:

It is the privilege of a mother to have faith and to administer to her child; this she can do herself, as well as sending for the Elders to have the benefit of their faith. [^14]

In 1852, Elder Ezra T. Benson told the saints: "The priests in Christendom warn their flocks not to believe in 'Mormonism'; and yet you sisters have power to heal the sick, by the laying on of hands, which they cannot do." [^15]

However, it must be emphasized that the priesthood presides and has been specifically commissioned to bless the sick and afflicted members of the Church. It is in the absence of the priesthood that women are justified in independently exercising their own faith in seeking a healing blessing from the Lord.

When your husbands are absent you sisters should ask God's blessing that he should lead you in the paths of life, and further, you should lay hands on your sick children and rebuke diseases in faith and power, and God will be near you. . . . [^16]

It should be noted that such ministrations are properly confined to children and other women; only the priesthood is authorized to bless all:

As I say, there are occasions when perhaps it would be wise for a woman to lay her hands upon a child, or upon one another sometimes, and there have been appointments made for our sisters, some good women, to anoint and bless others of their sex who expect to go through times of great personal trial, travail and "labor;" so that is all right, so far as it goes. But when women go around and declare that they have been set apart to administer to the sick and take the place that is given to the elders of the Church by revelation as declared through James of old, and through the Prophet Joseph in modern times, that is an assumption of authority and contrary to scripture, which is that when people are sick they shall call for the elders of the Church and they shall pray over and officially lay hands on them.

It is the prayer of faith that saves the sick . . . So can people out of the Church, and so they have done. Having faith in God, they have asked God in the name of Jesus Christ to heal the sick by the laying on of their hands, and some of them have got well, and a good many others have died, like it is with all of us. [^17]

Thus, faith should be an ever-ready source of divine support for every man, woman and child.

While most women today have ready access to the ministrations of the priesthood, their pioneer sisters were often left to manage for themselves while their men-folk were away, sometimes for months and years. Consequently, those women relied upon the gifts of the Spirit—especially healing—in caring for their families. This is doubtless one reason why these gifts were, comparatively speaking, so common among them. However, there has never been a time when the wives and mothers of the Church needed the aid of the Holy Ghost more than today. Indeed, the lack of such gifts as faith, wisdom, knowledge and discernment, etc., can only diminish the ability of fathers and mothers to guide their children in this perilous period. For these are the last days—the days of "wickedness and vengeance" when the saints are going to need all of the divine assistance they can get. Who can say with certainty what the future will bring? [^18] It is not impossible that some of the women of the Church may yet, like their pioneer counterparts, be called upon to round up their shoulders and carry some of the burdens normally borne by their fathers and husbands. It is a wise woman who magnifies her own spiritual potential by earnestly seeking after the "best gifts." [^19]

Woman's "Priesthood"

Since women have enjoyed so many spiritual gifts and played such significant parts in the unfolding drama of the Lord's people, two questions arise. The first has to do with the fact that comparatively little scripture is directly concerned with them. Men dominate both ancient and modern revelation. There are a few stories—notably in the Old Testament—in which women figure prominently, but other than these, references to them are quite spotty. There are a number of reasons for this. For one thing, scripture is the work of men; although quoted, women had no direct part in producing the various books. But more importantly, the very nature and purpose of scripture dictates its male orientation. For its central theme is the salvation of mankind, and the chief responsibility for declaring it devolves upon men rather than women. This, because man has been designated the direct and immediate respresentative of the Lord on earth.

As we have seen, this does not mean that women are denied direct personal revelation or the gifts of the Spirit. But it does mean that there is a proper channel of authority reaching back to God which makes for the orderly management of human affairs. It remains for the priesthood to convey to women those commandments of the Lord which are appropriate to their callings. Grave harm has been done to women when certain passages of scripture have been misapplied to them. Some pertain to men alone while others pertain to women alone. For example, the Lord's instruction to the man, Adam, differed from those given to the woman. Eve. The general tendency to make a blanket application of all scripture to both sexes is based upon a misunderstanding of their respective roles. [^20]

Heaven, itself, bears witness to the proper roles of men and women. God does not send his daughters on errands to this world until it is time for them to acquire mortal bodies. And when they set them aside in death, they do not venture forth again until the resurrection. [^21] Claims of females, such as the Virgin Mary, appearing from heaven with messages for a church or for the world are false. The voice of the priesthood is a male voice; nowhere in all scripture is there record of any female being heard speaking in behalf of God. The Lord does not send women to do the work of men; it is not for women to receive instructions for the Church and kingdom and priesthood of God. [^22] The message of salvation is a priesthood message delivered by male messengers to male prophets. It is all under the direction of the Godhead—three male deities. It is revealed through the instrumentality of the Holy Ghost, an unembodied spirit man. It is validated by the atoning sacrifice of the Son of God and it is the responsibility of men to take the good news of salvation into all the world. [^23] Woman's primary role is in the home just as man's is in the fields—the world. Each has proper labors to perform and a proper place in which to perform them. If women do the work of men and men do the work of women the result is confusion, strife, insecurity and a loss of basic identities.

The second question is: "Why can't women hold the priesthood?" In other words, why can't women exercise the same prerogatives and perform the same ordinances granted to men? [^24] The answer lies in the character of the priesthood itself. In an ultimate sense, priesthood is the sum of all divine authority and power as it exists in the Most High. Only the Gods have absolute priesthood; men receive it line upon line in connection with their various offices and callings. These positions define the proper bounds and limitations of their activity. Should a man attempt to either exceed or avoid his responsibilities, he would jeopardize his own salvation. Legal authority is, therefore, central to priesthood:

The question, "What is priesthood?" has often been asked me. I answer, it is the rule and government of God, whether on earth, or in the heavens; and it is the only legitimate power, the only authority that is acknowledged by Him to rule and regulate the affairs of His kingdom. When every wrong thing shall be put right, and all usurpers shall be put down, when he whose right it is to reign shall take the dominion, then nothing but the Priesthood will bear rule; it alone will sway the sceptre of authority in heaven and on earth, for this is the legitimacy of God. [^25]

It is the unique responsibility of men to act as God's agents or legal administrators in representing him on earth. Only those called as was Aaron have the right to declare God's will to men and to commit him to covenants with them. [^26] It is this authority which a woman cannot "hold." [^27] Her "priesthood" callings are not elder, bishop, seventy or apostle—but wife, mother, teacher and comforter. These are at least as important and demanding as any of those exercised by men. [^28] In honoring these callings, she becomes a true "helpmeet" of "Adam" in his labors in the field. She does this, not by sharing his immediate burdens and responsibilities, but by freeing him to labor with an eye single to God even as she should be freed of those concerns which would prevent her from having an eye single to her husband. Woman's God-ordained "callings" are uniquely adapted to and reflective of her feminine qualifications. It is in magnifying them that she magnifies her "priesthood" and her husband's priesthood.

Do they hold the priesthood? Yes, in connection with their husbands and they are one with their husbands, but the husband is the head. And women are so constituted that they are much better prepared to feel after the welfare of families than men are. They can sympathize with the sisters, for they are one with them. I remember a certain lady said to me in talking about some things, "You never was a grandmother." "No." said I, "I never was? I never had that experience." "Well, then, you cannot enter into the feelings of a grandmother." No, and I never was a wife, and therefore I could not enter into the feelings of a wife. But a wife can enter into a wife's feelings and into a mothers' feelings and they can sympathize with the sisters, and pour in the oil and wine and they can teach the sisters correct principles, teach them cleanliness, kindness and sisterly sympathetic feelings. They are doing this to a great extent, therefore I say God bless the sisters. They are one with us in seeking to promote the welfare of Israel. [^29]

A woman should no more covet the duties of her husband than he should covet the office and calling of his appointed leaders. It is for each to do his or her part as that part is designated by the Lord. Like Alma, we should feel to say: "Now, seeing that I know these things, why should I desire more than to perform the work to which I have been called?" [^30]

The spirit of envy and competition is alien to the Spirit of Christ. It is especially inappropriate where the priesthood is concerned. It is, perhaps, a greater sin for a woman to covet a man's priesthood than it would be for her to covet anything else. And there is no need for her to do so. Eternal marriage unites their "priesthoods" in one, making them a shared blessing.

For priesthood is not only a divine power of attorney by which men on earth act, lead and rule in God's behalf, it it also the means by which all things are organized and controlled. If the sick are healed, if the dead are raised, if mountains are moved, if the winds are stilled or life is begotten, it is by virtue of this power. to the extent that anyone organizes or controls matter, he or she is drawing upon the principle of priesthood. [^31] However, it is only when such things are done in harmony with and by the direct authority of the Lord that they can be said to be acts of the Holy Priesthood. The Spirit of the Lord pervades the universe and is the "power of God" by which he organizes, controls and sustains all things. [^32] Consequently, every existing form of life must acknowledge that it is "in him we live, and move, and have our being." [^33]

Both men and devils can and do use their God-given agency to control the elements, but they do not exercise the priesthood in doing so. Still, they employ a degree of its power in everything they do—whether good or evil. The distinction is, that while the priesthood is infinite and eternal, the power of men and devils is finite and temporal. Men grow in the principle of priesthood only as they grow in its attributes, powers and authorities so that the epitome of priesthood is God. He has shared a small portion of his power with all men. How they use it will determine how much priesthood they will possess in eternity.

In nothing is the complimentary relationship of priesthood men and women more wonderfully manifest than in the organizing and perfecting of an intelligence. The first phase of this greatest of miracles is carried out by our Eternal Parents whose efforts constitute the pattern to be followed by their mortal counterparts. In doing so, each has both a leading and a supporting role to play in the eternal drama. Thus, while priesthood men share in the begetting of life, they cannot bear it. Only women have the power to bring the conception to fruition and actually organize a body for its waiting spirit. [^34] Men do not hold this aspect of divine authority.

Similarly, while women may assist, [^35] the actual begetting of spiritual life is the immediate responsibility of the priesthood. In other words, the rebirth by which any soul becomes a son or a daughter of Christ, is the direct result of the labors performed by priesthood men in connection with the saving ordinances of the Gospel. Thus Paul could speak of: "My little children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you." [^36]

And so, woman and the priesthood work together. She bestows bodies of flesh and bones upon her sons and daughters which enable them to obtain a fulness of joy. And the priesthood, in turn, provides the means by which these souls are born again into the family of God. More than that, the priesthood which initiated the process by which life is organized, will perfect the joint creative labor of man and woman. For by virtue of the keys of the resurrection, the priesthood will redeem those tabernacles of clay, which the women of the earth prepared for their children, and clothe them with immortal glory! [^37]

How can any woman with understanding feel that her calling is beneath her? [^38] The wise wife and mother in Israel is grateful for her vital role in the plan of salvation. She honors her husband in his station, no matter how humble it may be. She teaches her children the dignity of work no matter how menial it may appear to others. She knows that "Well done, thou good and faithful servant" is for door-keepers as well as for prophets. Being lowly in heart, she does not fill her sons with notions of high office—the devil's disease—but simply with the desire to act well their part. How a woman regards her own calling directly influences how she will look upon those of her husband and sons. The wives and mothers among the saints do have priesthood. They have been given a work to do. Its faithful performance will be rewarded beyond their fondest dreams.

Now, brethren, the man that honors his Priesthood, the woman that honors her Priesthood, will receive an everlasting inheritance in the kingdom of God; but it will not be until this earth is purified and sanctified, and ready to be offered up to the Father. But we can go to work now and live as near as we can like the family of heaven, that we may secure to ourselves the blessings of heaven and of earth, of time and of eternity, and life everlasting in the presence of the Father and the Son. This is what we want to do. Remember it, brethren and sisters, and try to live worthy of the vocation of your high calling. You are called to be Saints—just think of and realize it, for the greatest honor and privilege that can be conferred upon a human being is to have the privilege of being a Saint. The honor of the kings and queens of the earth fades into insignificance when compared with the title of a Saint. You may possess earthly power, and rule with an iron hand, but that power is nothing, it will soon be broken and pass away; but the power of those who live and honor the Priesthood will increase forever and ever. [^39]

A Mother In Israel

Whether born under the covenant or gathered out of the world, a faithful mother in Israel has become a daughter of Abraham via the new and everlasting covenant of the Gospel. [^40] In doing so, her heart is turned to her ancient fathers as theirs is turned to her. [^41] She has obeyed the counsel of Isaiah:

Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged. Look unto Abraham your father and unto Sarah that bare you: for I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him. [^42]

The Holy Ghost has become her companion, guiding and directing her in all that she does. Her children are begotten unto the Lord and are, themselves, blessed with his Spirit even from the womb.

Never cease a day of your life to have the Holy Ghost resting upon you. Fathers, never cease to pray that your wives may enjoy this blessing, that their infants may be endowed with the Holy Ghost, from their mother's womb. [^43]

The advantage of being so endowed stems from the fact that a child's education begins before it is born:

I consider that the mother has a greater influence over her posterity than any other person can have. And the question has arisen some time: "When does this education begin?" Our prophets have said, "When the spirit life from God enters into the tabernacle." The condition of the mother at that time will have its effect upon the fruit of her womb; and from the birth of the child, and all through life, the teachings and the example of the mother govern and control, in a great measure, that child, and her influence is felt by it through time and eternity. [^44]

As Christ is the vine and his saints the branches, so are parents the vine and their children the branches. If the vine is filled with the Spirit, that lifepower can then flow from them to their offspring.

When wives become one with their husbands, when there is no evil interruption, children will be begotten, born and reared under greatly improved influences. The Holy Ghost will rest upon and dwell with the parents, and their offspring will be mighty and godlike. I would not given much for a man nor a woman that does not enjoy the fellowship of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. If I do not have the Holy Ghost, I shall not produce the fruit that is designed by the holy order of matrimony. Mary, the mother of Jesus, was a pure woman, and was ordained and designed to bear the Son of God, because no woman in her sins was worthy of performing that work. How long will it be before we will have children filled with the Holy Ghost from their birth, who will grow up steadfast in the truth, even sons and daughters of God? [^45]

A celestially-oriented home is a temple of temples, in which, as President Stephen L. Richards explained, parents "are called to officiate in a transcendentally beautiful and vital service."

As a priest and priestess in the temple of the home, it is their high privilege to receive the spirit children of our Eternal Father into mortality; then to nurture, train, and lead these chosen ones coming to their home back into the eternal presence whence they came. It takes but a moment to say this sentence; it takes a lifetime to fill the mission of parenthood. It is a glorious mission when it is accepted and fulfilled. It is a tragic experience when it is resented. Women of the kingdom find the supreme joy of their lives in their families despite the sacrifices and self-denial entailed in their care and training. They are taught, and they believe that the highest blessings of heaven will be realized through the projection of their homes into eternity. [^46]

If a woman is saved in child-bearing, she is exalted in child-guidance. From time immemorial, the dominant role of the mother in the moral and spiritual development of the child has been both recognized and honored.

It is the mother's influence that is most effective in moulding the mind of the child for good or for evil. If she treat lightly the things of God, it is more than likely her children will be inclined to do the same, and the Lord will not hold her guiltless when he comes to make up his jewels; he will disown all such when he comes to claim his own, and will say, Go hence, I never knew you. [^47]

President Young's views were shared by President Joseph F. Smith:

The influence of women is far more potent than [that] of man. The influence of the mother is far more deep and lasting than any that can possibly be exerted; that of the father is nothing like equal to it. [^48]

She is the most influential person in the child's life not only because she is with the child more than anyone else, but more importantly, because she is with the child in a special way. She is no hireling servant, she is the true shepherd. [^49] She was once prepared to lay down her life for her little lamb. That lamb should not be forced to follow a stranger. The Good Shepherd of all mankind has set the example for motherhood. He has ever sought to gather his sheep to himself. He never willed to be separated from his flock. When circumstances required, faithful servants were appointed to watch over them in his absence.

Mother belongs at home during the formative years of her child's life. No amount of sophisticated reasoning can free her of the obligation to be available whenever she is needed. And she is needed when she is needed, not simply when she chooses to be available. The popular argument that it is the quality of the relationship, not the amount of time involved in it which is most important is to say the least, specious. Motherhood is not an either-or proposition. One might as well argue that a hundred calories of good nourishing food is more important to good health than two thousand calories made up of starches. Starvation on the one hand versus malnutrition on the other hardly makes for a satisfactory choice in either case!

There is a "due time" for everything. A mother cannot teach her little ones the lessons of life they need to learn in infancy and childhood if she is absent from them during the bulk of their waking hours. If they are to be learned quickly and well, these lessons must be taught in the natural context of each day's events. It is in the ongoing relationships associated with a child's early development that provides a mother with the natural teaching aids she needs to train up her child in the way it should go. An hour or so at night spent with a child may seem to be sufficient for its well-being, but it cannot replace the moment to moment association God intended that human mothers should provide their small children. A price will be paid—by the parents and by the malnourished child. We are only now beginning to appreciate the psychological damage hidden neglect has inflicted on children in this culture. The moral and spiritual harm done them while perhaps less rapid in its manifestation is potentially of even greater duration and effect.

In the early days of the Church, every prophet beginning with Joseph Smith warned the Saints against allowing their children to be taught by gentile unbelievers. Eventually, this counsel was ignored and others were allowed to educate them. Now conditions have worsened to the point where some Latter-day Saints are foolishly entrusting even their very young children to public agencies. [^50]

This divine service of motherhood can be rendered only by mothers. It may not be passed to others. Nurses cannot do it; public nurseries cannot do it; hired help cannot do it—only mother, aided as much as may be by the loving hands of father, brothers, and sisters, can give the full needed measure of watchful care. The mother who entrusts her child to the care of others, that she may do non-motherly work, whether for gold, for fame, or for civic service, should remember that "a child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame." (Prov. 29:15.) [^51]

If we turn our children over to the care of those who know not God, what a precious opportunity to mold that tender clay is lost! For while others can provide a child's basic physical and psychological needs, they cannot nourish its spirit. Children do not live—cannot live—by bread alone! They will never grow up without sin unto salvation until they receive that special endowment of love, guidance and example which only a true mother and a true father in Israel can offer. Loving the Lord with all one's heart requires consecration—not tithing. A tithe of a mother's time and and attention is not enough; she must—insofar as she can—practice consecration toward her little ones if she, and they, are to be free of the blood and the sins of this generation. [^52]

A mother in Israel knows that she is the first and the most important teacher her child will ever have. The infant clay, being soft and pliable, will never again be quite so responsive to the hands of any mortal potter. Home is the greatest school of all, and mother its greatest teacher. Thus the primary responsibility for the basic education of a child rests with her. The following statement by President Young is representative of the views of all of the prophets of the Lord:

It depends in a great degree upon the mother, as to what children receive, in early age, of principle of every description, pertaining to all that can be learned by the human family. . . . I can see mothers pay attention to everything under heaven, but the training up of their children in the way they should go, and they will even make it appear obligatory on the father to take care of the child at a year old. . . . I will tell you the truth as you will find it in eternity. If your children do not receive impressions of true piety, virtue, tenderness, and every principle of the holy Gospel, you may be assured that their sins will not be required at the hands of the father, but of the mother. Lay it to heart, ye mothers, for it will unavoidably be so. The duty of the mother is to watch over her children, and give them their early education, for impressions received in infancy are lasting. You know, yourselves, by experience, that the impressions you have received in the dawn of your mortal existence, bear, to this day, with the greatest weight upon your mind. It is the experience of people generally, that what they imbibe from their mothers in infancy, is the most lasting upon the mind through life. This is natural, it is reasonable, it is right. I do not suppose you can find one person among five hundred, who does not think his mother to be the best woman that ever lived. This is right, it is planted in the human heart. The child reposes implicit confidence in the mother, you behold in him a natural attachment, no matter what her appearance may be, that makes him think his mother is the best and handsomest mother in the world. I speak for myself. Children have all confidence in their mothers; and if mothers would take proper pains, they can instil into the hearts of their children what they please. You will, no doubt, recollect reading, in the Book of Mormon, of two thousand young men, who were brought up to believe that, if they put their whole trust in God, and served Him, no power would overcome them. You also recollect reading of them going out to fight, and so bold were they, and so mighty their faith, that it was impossible for their enemies to slay them. This power and faith they obtained through the teachings of their mothers. The character of a person is formed through life, to a greater or less degree, by the teachings of the mother. The traits of early impressions that she gives the child, will be characteristic points in his character through every avenue of his mortal existence. [^53]

"But few women have a realizing sense of the immortal, invisible, and powerful influence they exert in their sphere." [^54] The greatest social tragedy of our times may well prove to be the exodus of millions of women from that sphere into the world of men. They, and those who abet them, will have to answer for their crimes against their children and their children's children. What does it profit any man or any woman to gain all that the world has to offer, if they do so at the expense of the souls of the innocent?

A child's first world is primarily its mother's world. She is all things to her offspring, acting as both father and mother much of the time. The practical fact of the matter was summed up by President J. Reuben Clark:

Now, brethren, at best we are somewhat clumsy at leading and directing our children. We are away from home, of necessity, a great part of the time, our thoughts are along other lines, we have to battle for our existence, for the livelihood of our families. Those of us who hold Church positions are absent in the evenings, in addition to the days that we spend getting our livelihood. I repeat, we are a little bit clumsy. And so to the sisters of the Church, the mothers of the Church, they whom the Lord has designed and planned should be the immediate instrumentality of perpetuating the race and of bringing spirits to this earth, providing bodies of them, to them we must primarily look for the rearing of our children. [^55]

However, as the years pass and life's basic lessons are learned, it is designed that the weight of responsibility should shift more and more to the father. His role as provider and protector is expanded to more directly include that of educator and guide pertaining to the world beyond the hearth. Addressing himself to the sisters, President Young counseled:

Teach your children; for you are their guardians, to act as father and mother to them until they are out of your care. The teachings and examples of our mothers have formed, to a great extent, our characters and directed our lives. This is their right, when they act by the power of the Priesthood, to direct the child until it is of a proper age, and then hand it over to the husband and father, and into the hands of God, with such faith and such love of virtue and truth, and with such love of God and its parents, that that child can never suppose that it is out of the hand and from under the control of the parent. Do not call it "mine." Let your maxim be, "This is not mine," whether you have one child or a dozen. "It is not mine, but the Lord has seen fit to let me bear the souls of the children of men. It is from my Father and God, and I will do my duty and hand it over to him," and have that faith that the child can never wring itself out of the hands of a good father and mother—can never stray away,—no, never. That is the privilege of mothers. It is you who guide the affections and feelings of the child. It is the mothers, after all, that rule the nations of the earth. They form, dictate, and direct the minds of statesmen, and the feelings, course, life, notions, and sentiments of the great and the small, of kings, rulers, governors, and of the people in general. [^56]

A mother in Israel is a missionary in the best sense of the word. Her influence not only extends to her own family, but to all of those who will be blessed through her by virtue of the faithful lives of her children. [^57] When both she and her husband have done all that they could do for their children by way of helping them grow up righteous men and women, the burden of responsibility shifts to them.

Let us do our duty to our children, train them in the way they should go, give them the benefit of our experience, teach them true principles and do all we can for them, and when they reach years of maturity, if they walk in evil ways, we may mourn and bewail their follies, but we shall be guiltless before God so far as they are concerned. [^58]

All such parents can take comfort in these words by President Young:

Let the father and mother, who are members of this Church and kingdom, take a righteous course, and strive with all their might never to do a wrong, but to do good all their lives; if they have one child or one hundred children, if they conduct themselves towards them as they should, binding them to the Lord by their faith and prayers, I care not where those children go, they are bound up to their parents by an everlasting tie, and no power of earth or hell can separate them from their parents in eternity; they will return again to the fountain from whence they sprang. [^59]

A true mother in Israel is like no other mother on earth! She loves the Lord with all of her heart, might, mind and strength. She loves her children as herself—for they are herself. She is filled with intelligence. The Spirit of God, of revelation, accompanies her in her daily labors. She knows by that Spirit how to love, to teach, and to guide her children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Being an Israelite, she knows that she is an exile from Zion who is obliged to raise her children in Babylon. Consequently, she endeavors to infuse her children with the spirit of Zion, of the pure in heart. She teaches them the ways of the Lord as opposed to the ways of the world. She helps them interpret that world in the light of God's word and to correctly choose between temporal wrong and eternal right. Her example is as the thunders of Sinai. Her precepts are written upon the tablets of her heart in imperishable letters of truth. Therefore, her children know by word, by deed and by Spirit that she is a prophetess to her own. Trained up by such a mother, and sustained by a father of like character, what justification would any child have for departing from the ways of righteousness all of his days?

Motherhood is near to divinity. It is the highest, holiest service to be assumed by mankind. It places her who honors its holy calling and service next to the angels. To you mothers in Israel we say God bless and protect you, and give you the strength and courage, the faith and knowledge, the holy love and consecration to duty, that shall enable you to fill to the fullest measure the sacred calling which is yours. [^60]

Adam, Where Goest Thou?

Adam's transgression caused him to experience a new emotion—fear. That fear caused him to hide himself from the presence of the Lord. [^61] Most of his sons have done the same. Man, who was given stewardship over all things, has largely abdicated his responsibilities toward womankind, brute creation and the earth itself. The question God addressed to his son some six thousand years ago might well be repeated today: "Where goest thou?" [^62] Indeed, where is "Adam" going? The answer is to be found in the many mansions of eternity: he is going in all directions. However, those men who do the works of father Adam will follow him into the very presence of God where they will be crowned with glory and eternal lives. They will have progressed from a state of dependency, of sonship, to that of patriarchal rule over their own posterity. [^63]

But before they can be granted such dominion, they must prove their fitness by being faithful over a few things. Such is the lesson of the parable of the talents. [^64] Among the "few things" the Lord has entrusted to the care of the men of modern Israel, the most important are: their own bodies, the Holy Priesthood, the Gospel of Jesus Christ—with its principles, ordinances and gifts—and their sisters, daughters, wives and children. The men of the priesthood will stand or fall in terms of their stewardships over these "talents."

Your wives are given to you as a stewardship to improve upon in building up and establishing the kingdom of God, and your children are given to you as a stewardship. Where did their spirits come from? Did they come from you? No; they came from God. Who is the Father of those spirits? God, and he will require them of you, and those spirits have also got to give an account to their Father from whom they came; they have got to render up an account. Thus you see, that you have to render an account of your wives and children, of your substance, and everything that pertains to this earth, and you cannot avoid it, without suffering a loss. [^65]

For the priesthood is magnified through these talents more than any others. Unfortunately, too many holders of the priesthood do just that—they only hold it, they do little or nothing with it. They bury it. Priesthood must be fully exercised to be fully magnified. To do this, it must infuse every facet of life. Or, more correctly, every facet of life must be correlated with and by the priesthood. Clearly, priesthood is not priesthood any more than love is love until and unless it is given form and expression. The priesthood, like love, must have an object. God is love because he loves something. So too, the priesthood is priesthood only when it is acting upon or responding to some material reality—be it organizing an earth, carrying the gospel to the nations, ministering to the sick or counseling an errant child. In other words, potential priesthood does not become actual priesthood until it is directed toward some object or purpose. It is the failure to so employ it that constitutes the "slothful servant."

Initially, the responsibility for carrying out God's will is a male responsibility. Failure to do so is fundamentally a male failure. A woman's ability to faithfully serve the Lord depends upon the treatment she receives from her father, brothers, husband and other males. If they have been righteous in their conduct toward her, she is obliged to respond in kind. On the other hand, if they have betrayed their stewardships, she will be thrown into confusion and disorder. Bad leaders make for rebellious and disorganized followers. When we are provided with proper guidance and protection, we have no cause to sin—the guilt becomes our own.

The behavior of a parent, husband, leader or ruler does influence the conduct of a child, wife, follower or subject. If the fountainhead is pure, there is good reason to expect the waters flowing from it to be pure as well. At least any impurity subsequently found in those waters will not be attributable to that fountainhead. However, if it is impure, how can its waters be uncontaminated? It is for this reason that Christ, the fountainhead of eternal life, is a living indictment of those who claim discipleship under him, yet are, themselves, impure. And it is for this reason that those who have been made impure by the sins and traditions of their fathers will be saved. [^66] Scripture is primarily designed to instruct God's stewards in their stewardships. When fathers, husbands, prophets and priests are pure before the Lord, noble children, faithful wives and a righteous Israel will stand beside them.

Had Adam failed to honor his stewardship, Eve would have been denied the guidance, support and protection her Father intended she should have. Priesthood and manhood are inseparably connected in the Father and those sons who become like him. A whole man is a fatherhood man even as a whole woman is a motherhood woman. The man who does not magnify his priesthood in the home throws an unnatural burden on the motherhood of his wife. A chain reaction results: the sins of the father are visited on his wife and children. Had Christ failed to fulfill his stewardship, his apostles and prophets could not have effectively fulfilled theirs. In large measure, the success of the lesser is dependent upon the fidelity of the greater. The failure of fatherhood is the chief reason for the failure of motherhood. [^67] Similarly, delinquent children are more often than not the product of parents who—for whatever reasons—failed to magnify their callings as such.

Show me disobedient children, and I will show you disobedient parents, the world over. Where there are disobedient and rebellious children in the midst of Israel, tell me who their father and mother are, and I will point out to you disobedient, rebellious, disaffected parents; and if there is a woman in any family whose children dishonour their father, I will show you a woman that dishonours her husband and shows him disrespect, from which the children take their example. [^68]

Priesthood is the authority and power to organize, sustain, direct, redeem and sanctify. These operations are as valid in terms of the home as they are in terms of a planet or a galaxy. The microcosm is, ultimately, the macrocosm. This is why those who prove faithful over a few things will be made rulers over many things. Many are called and few are chosen to retain the priesthood in eternity because their hearts are set upon the things of the world rather than upon the work and the glory of that God they purport to represent. [^69] A true priesthood father is like no other father on earth. His children recognize the difference between him and other men. His priesthood is a light to his family and, therefore to the world. Men and women can provide all of the essential ingredients of good parenthood as defined by social scientists without being members of the Church. Both the gospel and the holy priesthood must make a difference for there to be a difference!

A "good" husband respects his wife's right to her own identity. He is pleased when she expresses her feminine desires, interests and ways. Insofar as he can, he helps her carry her daily burdens. He is courteous, considerate and appreciative. He knows that she has needs which leap the walls of home and go bounding off across the fields. The inner woman is a young girl—a blithe spirit. She cannot live without sunshine, flowers and spring winds. Nor can any really happy marriage. But in addition to these vital things, a priesthood husband blesses his family with spiritual guidance and power. He is the vehicle through which sanctification comes to his companion. Paul compared the role of such a husband to his wife with that of Christ to the Church:

Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it; That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, That he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish. So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church: For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the church. Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife see that she reverance her husband. [^70]

Jesus personified the true man, the true husband. Being filled with the Spirit, he could minister in Spirit and in truth. The Christ-like man will emulate him and strive to lift his family to God. Said Lorenzo Snow:

The men who are sitting here this day ought to be, when in the presence of their families, filled with the Holy Ghost, to administer the word of life to them as it is administered in this stand from sabbath to sabbath. When they kneel down in the presence of their wives and children they ought to be inspired by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, that the husband may be such a man as a good wife will honor, and that the gift and power of God may be upon them continually. They ought to be one in their families, that the Holy Ghost might descend upon them, and they ought to live so that the wife through prayer may become sanctified, that she may see the necessity of sanctifying herself in the presence of her husband, and in the presence of her children, that they may be one together, in order that the man and the wife may be pure element, suitable to occupy a place in the establishment and formation of the kingdom of God, that they may breathe a pure spirit and impart pure instruction to their children, and their children's children. [^71]

Holy men are men filled with the Holy Ghost. Good husbands and fathers become holy husbands and fathers as they honor their covenants and magnify their priesthood—in themselves, their homes, the Church and the world at large.

The Lord's Army

The men of the priesthood are the Lord's army. [^72] It has won mighty victories and suffered stinging defeats during the course of its operations on this planet. Its ranks have known patriots of the noblest order and traitors of the deepest dye—on the one hand, Enoch and Daniel, on the other, Cain and Judas. Jesus Christ is its commander-in-chief, the Great High Priest under whom all of the faithful prophets and apostles have served since the beginning of time. In these last days, Joseph Smith was appointed its first and chief officer. It remained for him to organize anew the army of Israel. This, he did and it has been engaged in continuous battle with the forces of error ever since. But while "the enemy is combined," a comparable unity of purpose has not characterized the Lord's army. [^73] It was this weakness which explains the expulsion of the saints from Missouri beginning with the mobbings of July, 1833. [^74]

It soon became obvious that modern Israel was not yet worthy to claim its promised land and establish its holy city. Before the saints could "build up the waste places of Zion," they needed to "be taught more perfectly, and have experience, and know more perfectly concerning their duty, and the things which I require at their hands." [^75] The Lord's army had to become as holy as the priesthood they bore.

But first let my army become very great, and let it be sanctified before me, that it may become fair as the sun, and clear as the moon, and that her banners may be terrible unto all nations; That the kingdoms of this world may be constrained to acknowledge that the kingdom of Zion is in very deed the kingdom of our God and his Christ; therefore, let us become subject unto her laws. [^76]

This recognition of and allegiance to the kingdom of God will come about through the faith and diligence of those men comprising the army of Israel. Faith is the key to power. Only as men exercise it in conjunction with their authority does the priesthood become a living force. Men deceive themselves if they suppose that the fulness of the priesthood is obtained by the mere act of ordination. The awesome power of Enoch and Melchizedek was predicated upon their faith in and devotion to the Lord.

For God having sworn unto Enoch and unto his seed with an oath by himself; that every one being ordained after this order and calling should have power, by faith, to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry up waters, to turn them out of their course; To put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every band, to stand in the presence of God; to do all things according to his will, according to his command, subdue principalities and powers; and this by the will of the Son of God which was from before the foundation of the world. And men having this faith, coming up unto this order of God, were translated and taken up into heaven. [^77]

That faith is an imperative where the priesthood is concerned is also attested to by Moroni:

. . . O Lord, thy righteous will be done, for I know that thou workest unto the children of men according to their faith; For the brother of Jared said unto the mountain Zerin, Remove—and it was removed. And if he had not had faith it would not have moved; wherefore thou workest after men have faith. For thus didst thou manifest thyself unto thy disciples; for after they had faith, and did speak in thy name, thou didst show thyself unto them in great power. [^78]

God is no respecter of persons. It was as necessary for Jesus to have faith in order for him to fulfill his missions as it was for Joseph Smith or any other servant of the Lord. Such faith is both a cause and a result of obedience to the principles of life and salvation. It is the spirit of the priesthood, filling it with life and power. It distinguishes between the many who are called and the few who are chosen. Those, like Jesus, who perfect this faith do not simply hold the priesthood or exercise the priesthood—they are the priesthood. Can God be distinguished from his attributes? Are they not as one? Can any man become as God unless he internalizes the Holy Priesthood which has been bestowed upon him? Those who are never chosen fail to do this. They view the priesthood as a thing wholly apart from themselves. Thus, they act in its authority, but not in its power. Being doubleminded, having a divided loyalty, "they do not learn this one lesson":

That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness. [^79]

It is the inseparable connection between the powers of heaven and the authority of the priesthood which justifies a man in assuming presidency over his family and fellow saints. Even then it remains for them to give him their sustaining vote. However, true saints will follow the leadership of a righteous man. What a compelling thing is love! What a power is faith! What a comfort is humility! How marvelously were these divine qualities combined in Jesus, the Great High Priest of us all!

The husband, the father, the teacher, the leader whose soul is knit to the Master's as a branch is joined to the vine need never apply coercion. The magnetism of his own virtue, like a mighty sun, will draw men, women and children to him in everlasting orbits of loyalty and devotion. He will rule the only way a man can rule: by an affinity of hearts and minds. Having magnified his Priesthood, he is magnified by it. It is sealed upon him with this promise:

The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever. [^80]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 3:2.
[^2] Moses 3:9. JD 14:231.
[^3] Revelation 2:7; 22:2; Psalms 1:3; Proverbs 3:18.
[^4] J. Reuben Clark, RSM, 33:804.
[^5] See D&C 6:20.
[^6] See D&C 76:56, 59; 132:19,
[^7] See Judges 4, 5.
[^8] See 2 Kings 22:14; 2 Chronicles 34:22 2 Chronicles 34:22.
[^9] Luke 2:36-38.
[^10] JD 5:87. See also 5:34. Speaking of the hymn, "O My Father," Wilford Woodruff said: "That hymn is a revelation, though it was given unto us by a woman, Sister Eliza R. Snow." Millennial Star, 56:229, April 9, 1894.
[^11] Wilford Woodruff, "Deseret Weekly," 45:545. October 9, 1892.
[^12] History of the Church, 4:602. See "Woman's Exponent," 7:91, November 15, 1878.
[^13] TJS 224, 225. See also 229.
[^14] Brigham Young, JD 13:155. See 18:71.
[^15] Millennial Star, 15:130. While a female may annoint with oil and lay on hands in the prayer of faith, she cannot do so in the name of or by the authority of the Holy Priesthood, anymore than an unordained male could do so.
[^16] John Taylor, "Woman's Exponent," 5:148-9.
[^17] Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 6, 1921, p. 199.
[^18] See JD 3:15.
[^19] D&C 46:8.
[^20] The law of Moses, Jesus' teachings on divorce and Peter and Paul's writings on marriage, distinguish between the sexes as to their duties and responsibilities. Said Brigham Young: "When we speak of law and of the transgression of law, we refer to the law of God to man." JD 8:222.
[^21] However, disembodied female spirits may appear to living persons—usually family members—in order to comfort and inform them on personal matters.
[^22] They may receive personal revelation for themselves and their own families.
[^23] Women are permitted to serve as missionaries under the direction of the priesthood. They serve at their own request and only after reaching legal age.
[^24] See CR, October 4, 1963, p. 29.
[^25] John Taylor, JD 1:224. See CR, Oct. 4, 1963, p. 29.
[^26] Hebrews 5:1-10.
[^27] Said President Charles W. Penrose: "Sisters have said to me sometimes, 'But, I hold the priesthood with my husband.' 'Well,' I asked, 'what office do you hold in the priesthood?' Then they could not say much more. The sisters are not ordained to my office in the Priesthood and there is authority in the Church which they cannot exercise; it does not belong to them; they cannot do that properly any more than they can change themselves into a man." CR, April 6, 1921, p. 198. See Ibid., p. 24.
[^28] Pres. J. Reuben Clark said that wives and mothers possess "a function as divinely called, as eternally important in its place as the Priesthood itself." RSM, 33:801, December, 1946.
[^29] John Taylor, JD 20:359. See JD 17:119, 22:316.
[^30] Alma 29:6.
[^31] Speaking of woman's power to organize matter into tabernacles suitable for the Father's spirit progeny, J. Reuben Clark said: "This was her calling; this was her blessing, bestowed by the Priesthood." RSM, 33:801, December, 1946.
[^32] D&C 88:13.
[^33] Acts 17:25, 28.
[^34] For a sensitive description of the mother's role in organizing life, see President J. Reuben Clark, RSM 33:801, December, 1946.
[^35] Indeed, their part is vital! "Thus to the full stature of manhood and womanhood, mother guides, incites, entreats, instructs, directs, on occasion commands, the soul for which she built the earthly home, in its march onward to exaltation. God gives the soul its destiny, but mother leads it along the way." J. Reuben Clark, RSM, 33:803.
[^36] Galatians 4:19.
[^37] See JD 6:275; 15:137; 25:34.
[^38] "From that day, when Eve thus placed first among her blessings the power to bear children, the greatest glory of true womanhood has been motherhood." J. Reuben Clark, RSM, 33:801.
[^39] Brigham Young, JD 17:119, 120.
[^40] See Abraham 2:10.
[^41] See D&C 98:16.
[^42] Isaiah 51:1, 2.
[^43] Brigham Young, JD 1:69. See also 4:277; 9:37; 11:215.
[^44] Durham, G. Homer. The Discourses of Wilford Woodruff [Bookcraft, Salt Lake City, 1946], p. 269.
[^45] Heber C. Kimball, JD 4:277.
[^46] CR, October 5, 1952, p. 100.
[^47] Brigham Young, JD 18:263.
[^48] Joseph F. Smith, Young Woman's Journal 3:143.
[^49] See John 10:12.
[^50] See CR, October 4, 1963, pp. 34-40; October 7, 1951, pp. 110-112.
[^51] The First Presidency, CR, October 3, 1942, p. 12.
[^52] D&C 68:25.
[^53] Brigham Young, JD 1:66, 67. The entire discourse is worthy of careful study. See also 15:12.
[^54] Brigham Young, JD 8:62.
[^55] CR, Oct. 6, 1951, p. 58.
[^56] Brigham Young, JD 9:38. See 1:246.
[^57] See JD 11:338.
[^58] Brigham Young, JD 14:287.
[^59] Brigham Young, JD 11:215; TJS, 321.
[^60] The First Presidency, CR, October 3, 1942, pp. 12-13.
[^61] See Genesis 3:10.
[^62] Moses 4:15.
[^63] See JD 3:266; 11:262.
[^64] Matthew 25:14-30.
[^65] Heber C. Kimball, JD 4:252. See JD 25:162-63.
[^66] See 2 Nephi 4:5-9; Jeremiah 31:29, 30.
[^67] See JD 4:155.
[^68] Elder Erastus Snow. JD 5:291.
[^69] See D&C 121:34-40.
[^70] Ephesians 5:25-33.
[^71] JD 4:155.
[^72] See JD 18:273.
[^73] See D&C 38:12.
[^74] See D&C 101:1-9, 75; 103:1-10; 105:1-10.
[^75] D&C 105:10.
[^76] D&C 105:31, 32. Said Orson Pratt: "Do you suppose that the Lord will suffer any unclean thing to be in that army? Not at all, for his angels and he himself are to go before us. God will not dwell in the midst of a people who will not sanctify themselves before him." JD 15:363.
[^77] I.V., Genesis 14:30-32.
[^78] Ether 12:29-31. See Moses 7:13; D&C 45:66-70.
[^79] D&C 121:36.
[^80] D&C 121:46. See JD 20:258-63.
