Rodney Turner, Woman and the Priesthood ( 1972)

EPILOGUE

The Lord's course is one eternal round. [^1] Within its encompassing orbit, the paths of all men twist and turn and likewise end where they began. Pertaining to this world, it all began in Eden when Adam offered his first sacrifice—his own spiritual life—a sacrifice made on behalf of his wife as well as the untold billions of spirits awaiting fleshly tabernacles. He willingly accompanied the Woman into exile from the presence of the Lord.

While it was foreordained and central to a grand theological design, Adam's sacrifice, like that of the Lamb of God, was no less real, no less painful. Adam did not possess the hindsight with which we now so glibly philosophize about his fatal decision.

When he accepted the forbidden fruit from his wife's hand and joined her in mortality, she incurred a debt of gratitude toward the Priesthood which she acknowledged by her humble acceptance of God's judgment upon her. And in honoring her husband as her temporal lord, in placing her womanly affections upon him alone, and in becoming the mother of all living, she laid down her life for others as Adam had laid down his life for her.

Those women who do the works of Eve become, in fact, her eternal daughters. In emulating their ancient mother, they help to lift whatever curses and limitations the Fall has inflicted upon them.

Man and woman find salvation together. They must close the circle of eternal progression if they are to regain the presence of God. Therefore, symbolically speaking, they must return to Eden. The garden is still there, waiting for them; it remains in that spiritual sphere in which it was created. [^2] But Satan will not be on hand to threaten them with sin and death. And the cherubim will be gone; no sword will bar the way to the tree of life. Nor will there be any forbidden fruit; the tree of knowledge will have become an immortal ornament of the garden of the Lord. [^3]

And Eve, with perfect understanding and unmitigated love, will share the fruits of Eternal Life with him who was faithful to her unto death. All debts will be fully paid—Woman's debt to the Priesthood for its efforts in her behalf, and the Priesthood's debt to Woman for her indispensible part in its eternal labor: the immortality and eternal life of man.

And then the priesthood will wish to proclaim their debt to these their helpmeets without whom the Priesthood could not have worked out their destiny. And the Priesthood shall bow in reverence and love unbounded before these mothers who did the service the Priesthood could not do, and thank and praise them for bearing their children. . . . [^4]

Woman and the Priesthood will enter the presence of the Father to go no more out. They will return, not the child-like innocents they once were, but as mature, resurrected beings filled with light, truth, and glory. Legions of earthly sons and daughters will accompany them and, with songs of everlasting joy, be reunited before the blazing throne of the Eternal Patriarch. The family of Man will be home.

The original triangular and linear relationships of God, man and woman will be perfected and augmented by a celestial circle.

Husband and wife, exalted parents in their own right, will continue to honor their Heavenly Father and Mother in that everlasting land of promise—the triangle. And Woman, although a reigning majesty, will nevertheless continue to acknowledge the Priesthood of her divine companion even as he continues to obey the Gods who made his own exaltation possible—the line. This Patriarchal Order will produce a perfect union, not of persons, but of hearts, minds and glories—the circle.

Thus, all everlasting associations (as represented by the three symbols) will blend into the one, perfect order of Heaven!

Husbands, wives, fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, children—all will be encompassed within the love of God. [^5] Pride, jealousy, covetousness, competition, and their many companions will have been banished forever. Curses, real and imaginary, will be no more. Perfection will cleave to perfection with a resultant fulness of joy becoming the equal endowment of every faithful man and woman. Possessing the power of eternal lives, they will beget a posterity as vast as the stars of heaven or the sands upon the seashore. Their family will be their kingdom—theirs to love, to bless, and to rule under the Most High God worlds without end. [^6]

Footnotes

Footnotes in hidden need taken out.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 3:2.
[^2] Moses 3:9. JD 14:231.
[^3] Revelation 2:7; 22:2; Psalms 1:3; Proverbs 3:18.
[^4] J. Reuben Clark, RSM, 33:804.
[^5] See D&C 6:20.
[^6] See D&C 76:56, 59; 132:19,
