Isaac and Rebekah were to be married in the covenant. Because they were marrying in the covenant, they would be sealed by the holy priesthood and married to each other for eternity. Isaac and Rebekah knew that if they married in the covenant and lived righteously, they would receive many wonderful blessings.

Isaac and Rebekah sound much like men and women you know who marry in the covenant by being sealed in the temple. The difference is that Isaac and Rebekah lived during Old Testament times, and they did not even know each other before becoming engaged.

Isaac’s father, Abraham, knew how important it was for Isaac to marry in the covenant. For this reason, Abraham sent his servant to search for the woman who had the same religious beliefs as Isaac and who was chosen by God for Isaac to marry. The Lord helped Abraham’s servant find Rebekah. She agreed to marry Isaac. (See Gen. 24.)

When you are married in the covenant, the Lord promises you the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (see Gen. 22:17–18). One of these blessings is that you and your family, through priesthood power, can be sealed together forever.

When you grow up and go to the temple, you will learn more about the blessings of salvation and the great plan of happiness. You will make covenants. If you keep your covenants, Heavenly Father will bless you with “the greatest of all the gifts of God,” which is eternal life (see D&C 14:7).

Remove page 15 from the magazine, and cut along the dotted lines. Put the puzzle together. Then turn the puzzle pieces over, and put the puzzle together again. In the temple, we learn how to fit the many parts of the gospel together to obtain exaltation.

1.  Invite four adults to tell about prophets who received revelation in the temple. Have them explain what was revealed and how it was revealed in the following instances: (1) Samuel—1 Sam. 3:1–20; (2) Joseph Smith—D&C 110, 137; (3) Spencer W. Kimball—Official Declaration 2; (4) Lorenzo Snow—Primary 1 manual, lesson 26. Emphasize that the temple is the house of God and we can receive personal revelation there. Cut several copies of the ninth article of faith into separate words. Divide the Primary into groups of about five children. Have each group put the words in order as you repeat the article of faith. As each group completes the activity, have them say the article of faith with you until they have memorized it.

2.  Read John 14:26. Explain some of the ways the Holy Ghost can reveal or help us remember things. Explain that we can receive personal revelation in the temple and other places as well and that personal revelation may be received as a result of praying, reading the scriptures, and keeping the commandments. Display simple pictures of the outdoors, a jail, a mountain, and a room in a house. Divide the children into four groups, and have the groups rotate to each picture. Have adults talk about the following revelations: outdoors—Enos (see Enos 1:1–5), Joseph Smith (see JS—H 1:14–19), or Mary Fielding Smith (see Primary 5 manual, lesson 42); jail—Joseph Smith (see D&C 122); mountain—Moses (see Ex. 3:1–6; Ex. 24:12–25:8); room—Joseph F. Smith (see D&C 138), Lehi (see 1 Ne. 1:5–8), or Mary (see Luke 1:26–38). Sing songs or hymns as the children move between pictures.
