The October 2006 issue of the Liahona may seem a little different.

A special issue for new members, the October 2006 edition of the Liahona will speak directly to those who have recently joined the Church.

Elder Jay E. Jensen, Executive Director over the Church magazines, said: “The Lord said that ‘the worth of souls is great in the sight of God’ (D&C 18:10). This truth speaks volumes about our new brothers and sisters whom we welcome as new members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We love each one and want to help strengthen them and to speak directly to their common questions in this special issue.”

A welcome from a living prophet, President Gordon B. Hinckley; what a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles wishes every member knew; direction for how to fit into the framework of the Church—all these topics and more are included in the magazine, written especially with new members in mind.

For long-time members, it may seem strange to receive an issue addressed to new members, but long-time members play a vital role in nurturing new members. This issue can strengthen all members and help them be more aware of the challenges faced by new members.

Some of these challenges include accepting a new lifestyle, trying to meet new people, and making difficult changes. New words, meetings, and teachings can be overwhelming to new members, who may not have the support of friends and family in their decision to join the Church. This issue will be a forum for these concerns.

Within its pages, terms are defined, testimonies are shared, and difficult questions are answered, such as “How do I answer friends and family who question my decision to join the Church?” and “Now that I’ve been baptized, where do I go from here?”

The issue will retain all of the magazine’s usual departments, including the First Presidency Message, Visiting Teaching Message, Sharing Time, and Latter-day Saint Voices, yet each article will contain a special message for new members. Many converts will share how they overcame the challenges and difficulties they experienced as new members. The issue will also include an introduction to the Church magazines and suggestions for getting the most out of them.

“Conversion is a process through which every member must pass, regardless of how he or she came into the Church,” said Elder Jensen. “We hope the Church magazines, and this special issue in particular, will help members deepen their commitment to gospel living and encourage them to become and stay fully engaged in the Church so that they may enjoy all that the gospel has to offer.”

The Church offers this issue to all members with the encouragement to become familiar with its content. Members who wish to give a gift subscription to a new member—or anyone else—can contact their local distribution center.
