Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

1

Search the Prophecies of Isaiah: A Commandment

On two different occasions, the resurrected Lord and Savior admonished the Nephites to search the prophecies of Isaiah which they had before them (see 3 Ne. 20:11; 23:1). On the second occasion, he made it a commandment unto them to "search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah" (3 Ne. 23:1).

The significance of this commandment is highlighted by the fact that, as far as the record goes, Isaiah was the only book among the writings of the ancient prophets which the Savior specifically commanded the Nephites to search. That the commandment was to be extended to the latter days, and especially to the readers of the Book of Mormon, is shown by the Savior's charge to the Nephites to record his words so that they could go forth unto the Gentiles: "Therefore give heed to my words; write the things which I have told you; and according to the time and the will of the Father they shall go forth unto the Gentiles" (3 Ne. 23:4).

Jesus further declared that those who would hearken to his words (which included the commandment to search Isaiah) -- and would repent and be baptized--would be saved (see 3 Nephi 23:5a). Is our salvation dependent upon our diligence in heeding the commandment to search Isaiah? This possibility has been suggested by Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

If our eternal salvation depends upon our ability to under stand the writings of Isaiah as fully and truly as Nephi understood them--and who shall say such is not the case!-- how shall we fare in that great day when with Nephi we shall stand before the pleasing bar of Him who said: "Great are the words of Isaiah"? (Ensign, Oct. 1973, p. 78.)

The Savior followed his specific admonition to search Isaiah with a general admonition to "search the prophets, for many there be that testify of these things" (3 Nephi 23:5b). An inference from this instruction is that various other prophets had also testified of the things of which Isaiah had written, but that none of them had spoken so thoroughly "as touching all things concerning my [Christ's] people which are of the house of Israel" [3 Ne. 23:2) as had Isaiah.

Jewish tradition regards Isaiah as the chief prophet of his period. With the above statement, the Savior seems to broaden that distinction. perhaps even to the entire period of the prophets from Samuel to Malachi.

The Nephite prophets also considered Isaiah to be an extremely important prophet. They included over 30 pages of Isaiah's writings in the current 522-page edition of the Book of Mormon, despite the difficulty of engraving on metal plates (see Jacob 4:1) and the restriction of including even less than "a hundredth part" of the available material in their abridgment (see Jacob 3:13). This illustrates the priority which the Book of Mormon compilers gave to the words of Isaiah. While approximately one-third of the biblical writings of Isaiah are quoted in the Book of Mormon, the prophet Moroni admonished his future readers to search also the rest of the prophecies of Isaiah (see Morm. 8:23). This extends the Savior's commandment to include the entire book of Isaiah, not just those parts recorded in the Book of Mormon. Thus the readers of the Book of Mormon have been admonished and even commanded by the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Nephite prophet who was given stewardship over the ancient plates, to search the prophecies of Isaiah.

The Book of Mormon contains three basic reasons for searching the prophecies of Isaiah. Two of these reasons were given by the Savior in justification of his statement, "Great are the words of Isaiah." The first one was that "he spake as touching all things concerning my people which are of the house of Israel; therefore it must needs be that he must speak also to the Gentiles" (3 Ne. 23:2). While the Savior was among the Nephites, he declared that much of what Isaiah and other prophets had written concerning the house of Israel was yet to be fulfilled:

Behold, I do not destroy the prophets, for as many as have not been fulfilled in me, verily I say unto you, shall all be fulfilled.

And because I said unto you that old things have passed away, I do not destroy that which hath been spoken concerning things which are to come.

For behold, the covenant which I have made with my people is not all fulfilled; but the law which was given unto Moses hath an end in me. (3 Ne. 15:6-8.)

After identifying various groups of the house of Israel and declaring his visits or intended visits among them, the Savior told of the gospel's being taken to the Gentiles. He said that through the Gentiles the house of Israel would again be brought to a knowledge of him. He also spoke of the day when the Gentiles would sin against his gospel, at which time the gospel would be taken from them and he would remember his covenant unto Israel. He said further that if the Gentiles would repent, they would be numbered among the house of Israel; otherwise they would be trodden under foot by Israel (see 3 Ne. 16:4-16). The Savior also stated that the Father had commanded him to give the land of the Americas unto "this people" (who were descendants of Joseph) as their inheritance (see 3 Ne. 15:12-13). When these things came to pass, said Jesus, the words of the prophet Isaiah would be partially fulfilled (see 3 Ne. 16:17-20).

On the second day of his ministry among the Nephites, the Savior declared again that the Father's covenant unto Israel would be fulfilled in the day when Isaiah's prophecies were fulfilled. He then outlined how these promises would be brought to fulfillment. both on the American continent. which was the land given to Joseph, and in the land of Jerusalem; he quoted freely from Isaiah's writings to substantiate this outline (see 3 Ne. 20:11-22:17 It was at the conclusion of these teachings, wherein the Savior had quoted from the prophet Isaiah, that he gave the commandment to search Isaiah's prophecies.

Nephi, the son of Lehi, confirmed his father's words concerning the house of Israel and the Gentiles in the latter days (see 1 Ne. 15:7-18) by quoting to his brothers the words of Isaiah: "And I did rehearse unto them the words of Isaiah, who spake concerning the restoration of the Jews, or of the house of Israel; and after they were restored they should no more be confounded, neither should they be scattered again" (1 Nephi 15:20a).

Jacob, the brother of Nephi, also bore testimony that Isaiah spoke concerning all of Israel, and he encouraged his people to liken Isaiah's words unto themselves: "And now, the words which I shall read are they which Isaiah spake concerning all the house of Israel; wherefore, they may be likened unto you, for ye are of the house of Israel. And there are many things which have been spoken by Isaiah which may be likened unto you, because ye are of the house of Israel." (2 Ne. 6:5.)

Therefore. a major reason for searching Isaiah's prophecies, as declared by the Savior and confirmed by Nephi and Jacob, is that Isaiah spoke concerning all the house of Israel and the covenants unto them which were to be fulfilled in the latter days. As the fulfillment of these covenants was to center around the Lord's dealings with the Gentiles, we can see that we are living in the very day when Isaiah's prophecies concerning Israel are coming to pass. The modern-day apostle Orson Pratt, after quoting and commenting on several of Isaiah's prophecies, stated: "We have read these words of the ancient Prophet, in order that the Latter-day Saints may call to mind how completely the Lord is fulfilling every jot and every tittle... of that which he caused to be spoken, by the power of the Holy Ghost, through his ancient Prophets" (JD, 18:153).

The Savior provided a second justification for his declaration concerning the greatness of Isaiah's words: "And all things that he spake have been and shall be, even according to the words which he spake" (3 Ne. 23:3).

Jacob, the brother of Nephi, bore a similar testimony of the certainty of Isaiah's prophecies as he spoke unto the people of Nephi: "And now, behold, I would speak unto you concerning things which are, and which are to come; wherefore. I will read you the words of Isaiah. And they are the words which my brother has desired that I should speak unto you. And I speak unto you for your sakes, that ye may learn and glorify the name of your God." (2 Ne. 6:4.)

In equating Isaiah's words with "things which are, and which are to come," Jacob is also equating them with the Lord's definition of truth as given to the Prophet Joseph Smith (see D&C 93:24). That Isaiah was noted for speaking and writing truth is confirmed by the Jewish historian Josephus:

... he was, by the confession of all, a divine and wonderful man in speaking truth; and out of the assurance that he had never written what was false, he wrote down all his prophecies, and left them behind him in books, that their accomplishment might be judged of from the events by posterity. (Flavius Josephus, Josephus: Complete Works, trans. William Whiston [Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregel Publications, 1972], Antiquities of the Jews, 10.2.2.)

To those who seek truth--especially the truths concerning the fulfillment of the Lord's covenants with the house of Israel--the words of Isaiah are an authentic and excellent source of knowledge. The Savior's divine stamp of approval regarding the authenticity of these writings should motivate one to search the prophecies of Isaiah.

The third reason given in the Book of Mormon for searching the words of Isaiah is that he bore testimony of Christ. The Savior declared to the Nephites that the law and the prophets (which would have included Isaiah) truly testified of him (see 3 Ne. 15:10). And Nephi looked to Isaiah as the primary source to persuade his people to believe in Christ:

And I did read many things unto them which were written in the book of Moses; but that I might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer I did read unto them that which was written by the prophet Isaiah; for I did liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning.

Wherefore I spake unto them, saying: Hear ye the words of the prophet, ye who are a remnant of the house of Israel, a branch who have been broken off; hear ye the words of the prophet. which were written unto all the house of Israel. and liken them unto yourselves, that ye may have hope as well as your brethren from whom ye have been broken off ....(1 1 Ne. 19:23-24.)

Later. Nephi quoted again from the words of Isaiah. In a preface to this quotation, he declared that Isaiah had seen the Redeemer, even as Nephi and Jacob had, thus establishing God's words by three witnesses.

And now I, Nephi, write more of the words of Isaiah, for my soul delighteth in his words. For I will liken his words unto my people, and I will send them forth unto all my children, for he verily saw my Redeemer, even as I have seen him.

And my brother, Jacob, also has seen him as I have seen him; wherefore, I will send their words forth unto my children to prove unto them that my words are true. Wherefore, by the words of three, God hath said, I will establish my word. Nevertheless, God sendeth more witnesses, and he proveth all his words. (2 Ne. 11:2-3.)

Nephi's desire to use the words of Isaiah is perhaps best explained by the Prophet Joseph Smith's teachings about the knowledge given to one who receives the Second Comforter:

The visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have a perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; and this is the state and place the ancient Saints arrived at when they had such glorious visions--Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle of Patmos, St. Paul in the three heavens, and all the Saints who held communion with the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn. (TPJS, p. 151.)

Nephi wrote that his soul delighted in proving to his people that Christ would come, as typified by the law of Moses and "all things which have been given of God." His soul also delighted in the covenants which the Lord had made to his fathers; in the grace. justice, power, and mercy of "the great and eternal plan of deliverance from death" which Christ would carry out; and in proving to his people that "save Christ should come all men must perish." Therefore, he wrote the words of Isaiah that others might also rejoice in the same knowledge of Christ which he had (see 2 Ne. 11:4-8).

Abinadi bore witness to the wicked priests of King Noah that Moses and "even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began" had "spoken more or less" concerning the coming of Jesus Christ.

Have they not said that God himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth?

Yea, and have they not said also that he should bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, and that he, himself, should be oppressed and afflicted? (Mosiah 13:34-35.)

To support this witness, Abinadi quoted to them what is now designated chapter 53 of Isaiah (Mosiah 14).

As stated on its title page, the purpose of the Book of Mormon is to convince "the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD." Of the 425 separate verses of Isaiah which are quoted in the Book of Mormon, 391 say something about the attributes or mission of Jesus Christ. While many of the other passages in Isaiah also testify of Christ, those used by the Book of Mormon prophets exemplify why they and the Savior quoted freely from Isaiah in support of their overall objective. These passages also demonstrate a major reason why we should search the prophecies of Isaiah--so that they can testify to us of Jesus Christ.

Thus, the words of Isaiah should be studied today because the Lord has commanded us to search them diligently. This commandment was given because of the greatness of Isaiah's words in outlining the fulfillment of God's covenant with Israel in the latter days, in declaring words of truth which shall all be fulfilled, and in testifying of the attributes and mission of the Lord Jesus Christ.
