Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

2

How to Understand Isaiah

Nephi, the son of Lehi, recognized that Isaiah was a difficult book for his people to understand (see 2 Ne. 25:1), even though they had left Jerusalem only 100 years or so after Isaiah concluded his writings. Nearly 2,600 more years have passed since that time, so if it was hard for Nephi's people (who carne from the same geographical area and lived in the same general time period as did Isaiah) to understand the words of the ancient prophet, it would seem they must be even more difficult for us to understand today. However, the passage of time is not the only thing which makes Isaiah hard to understand. To come to an understanding requires that we diligently search Isaiah's words, as the Savior commanded. To search is to carefully and thoroughly examine in an effort to discover. To search is also to inspect or explore possible places of concealment.

Nephi provided a three-pronged formula for comprehending Isaiah's writings: (1) understand "the manner of prophesying among the Jews"; (2) be "filled with the spirit of prophecy"; and (3) live in the days when the prophecies of Isaiah are fulfilled (see 2 Ne. 25:1, 4, 7). Applying one or more of these approaches will help us in searching the words of Isaiah, and we can thereby gain understandings although it will probably come "line upon line" and "precept upon precept," as Isaiah defined the process of receiving revelation (see Isa. 28:10).

UNDERSTAND THE MANNER OF PROPHESYING AMONG THE JEWS

Nephi said that Isaiah was hard for many of his people to understand because "they know not concerning the manner of prophesying among the Jews" (2 Ne. 25:1). Nephi's people might have known more on this subject, but he had not taught them many things concerning the Jews, "for their [the Jews'] works were works of darkness, and their doings were doings of abominations" (2 Ne. 25:2). His reluctance to teach concerning the Jews was probably a preventive measure to avoid introducing similar works and abominations among his people. Nevertheless, Nephi himself understood Isaiah's words, and the Jews to whom these words were addressed also knew their meaning (see 2 Ne. 25:5-6).

Nephi indicated that other people could understand Isaiah by being taught "after the manner of the things [prophecies] of the Jews" (2 Ne. 25:5). However, preventing the introduction of abominations and works of darkness among our people today would still seem desirable. Through the Book of Mormon, we can learn the message of Isaiah without having those works of darkness introduced. We have the advantage of Nephi's interpretive commentary upon various passages of Isaiah, which help he gave in such a manner that he knew "that no man can err" (2 Ne. 25:7). Nephi's commentary was based upon his knowledge of "the regions round about" Jerusalem and "the judgments of God, which hath come to pass among the Jews" (2 Ne. 25:6). This suggests that a study of the geography of the land, as well as the history of the people and their manner of writing, would also help us today in understanding Isaiah. Knowledge of the geography and history could be obtained from the scholars of the world, but these scholars do not necessarily know of the judgments of God which have come upon the Jews. However, the words of Nephi and others who quoted and commented upon Isaiah's writings, recorded in the Book of Mormon, would reveal the judgments which came upon the Jews. This would be especially true of the Savior's teachings which were based upon Isaiah's writings. The Book of Mormon text quotes 425 separate verses of Isaiah (21 of these are duplicated. making a total of 446), and it provides many verses of explanation. The quoted passages are taken from 24 of the 66 chapters in Isaiah; 19 chapters are completely quoted, and 2 other chapters are nearly complete. All this material is a great source for shedding light on the words of Isaiah. In fact, the Book of Mormon is the best single commentary available on the book of Isaiah. In the words of Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

The Book of Mormon is the world's greatest commentary on the book of Isaiah.

And may I be so bold as to affirm that no one. absolutely no one, in this age and dispensation has or does or can understand the writings of Isaiah until he first learns and believes what God has revealed by the mouths of his Nephite witnesses as these truths are found in that volume of holy writ of which he himself swore this oath: "... as your Lord and your God liveth it is true." (D&C 17:6; Ensign Oct. 1973, p. 81.)

One reason why the Book of Mormon is such an excellent resource to help us understand Isaiah is that it preserves a better text. This text of Isaiah was taken from the brass plates of Laban and copied onto the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated; it is at least five hundred years older than the oldest manuscript of the Isaiah text available today. The discovery of the Dead Sea texts of Isaiah was very significant because it moved the date of earliest Isaiah manuscripts from A.D. 900 (the Masoretic text) to about 100 B.C., the date of the Dead Sea Scroll texts. The plates of brass from which Nephi copied the text of Isaiah would have been recorded by at latest 600 B.C, when Lehi and his party left Jerusalem. This places the Book of Mormon text of Isaiah within 100 to 150 years of the time of the original writing, making it closer to the time of the original writing than any other Old or New Testament manuscript. Therefore, this text is probably more accurate than any other account of Isaiah, so retentions in the Book of Mormon text should be given prime consideration.

A second reason why the Book of Mormon is so valuable in helping us understand Isaiah is that it provides a number of commentaries on his writings. These commentaries are necessary because the book of Isaiah is written much as were the parables of Jesus, so that those who would diligently search the prophecies of Isaiah would know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, while those who failed to search them would not have these mysteries revealed unto them (see Matt. 13:10-17). It does not seem just a coincidence that the Savior quoted from the prophet Isaiah to describe those who would not understand his parables (compare Matt. 13:14-15, Isa. 6:9-10).

Another source to help us understand "the manner of prophesying among the Jews" is the Doctrine and Covenants. As Joseph Smith received revelations from the Lord Jesus Christ, those revelations were often phrased in the language of the prophets. The Lord stated in his Preface to the Doctrine and Covenants (section 1) that his purpose in giving commandments to Joseph Smith and others was that they might proclaim them to the world, "that it might be fulfilled, which was written by the prophets" (D&C 1:18). The language of the ancient prophets is used throughout the revelations recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, showing us the relevance of the prophets to our own day and also helping us understand the message of those prophets. At least sixty-six different quotations from the book of Isaiah are used in the Doctrine and Covenants, and several of these are used more than once. There are possibly other phrases based on Isaiah. but those sixty-six can be positively identified (see Appendix D). There are phrases, and often whole verses, which show the context and meaning of the Isaiah text. They are taken from thirty-one different chapters of Isaiah, ranging from chapter 1 through chapter 66. A comparison of these passages with the book of Isaiah should also help us understand Isaiah better.

There is still another source to which one may look to understand "the manner of prophesying among the Jews." The apostles of the New Testament era left their testimony to the world, and in witnessing of the Savior and his gospel they frequently called upon the words of Isaiah to substantiate their teachings. Forty-two different passages from the book of Isaiah are quoted in the New Testament; some were quoted by the Savior himself, and others by such men as Peter, Paul, and John. Many of these passages are repeated, providing a total of at least fifty-four instances in which passages from Isaiah are quoted or commented upon to give us insight into their meaning. There are also several other passages which may be quotations, paraphrases, or expressions about the text of Isaiah (see Appendix D). The forty-two passages mentioned above are quoted from twenty-five of the sixty-six chapters of Isaiah in the current Bible; they range from the beginning to the end of his writings, thus giving Isaiah a broad coverage. These, too, are a great source for an understanding of the words of Isaiah.

Before leaving this subject of understanding the manner of prophesying among the Jews, we must give a word of caution. Nephi said that he "did liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning" (1 Ne. 19:23; see also 19:24 and 2 Ne. 6:4-5). To "liken" a scripture to a different situation than that in which it originated is not always to learn the original message of that scripture. To correctly interpret a scriptural passage is to learn its original meaning; thus biblical criticism endeavors to find the original texts and meanings of Old and New Testament writings. There is a distinction between the interpretation of a scripture and some personal application of the same scripture to show a principle or lesson. It should also be pointed out that we learn from the Book of Mormon that scriptures can sometimes have a dual interpretation--that is, some prophecies were originally intended to apply to two or more different times, places, or situations.

In summary, there are three excellent sources to help us learn "the manner of prophecying among the Jews" and thus learn the meaning and message of the words of Isaiah. These sources--the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the New Testament--provide quotations and commentaries from forty-two of the sixty-six chapters in the current text of Isaiah. There are also allusions and paraphrases from eight of the other twenty-four chapters. Thus Isaiah is broadly commented upon by these three sources. No more reliable or enlightening sources are available, and Latter-day Saints would do well to search these scriptural commentaries along with the book of Isaiah itself to obtain a deeper and fuller understanding of the great words of Isaiah.

BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT OF PROPHECY

The second part of Nephi's formula for understanding the words of Isaiah is to be "filled with the spirit of prophecy." The spirit of prophecy and of revelation comes through searching the scriptures and through much prayer and fasting (see Alma 17:2-3). As we live worthy of this blessing, and as we examine carefully and thoroughly every word, phrase, sentence, verse, paragraph, and chapter in the scriptures, the Spirit will bear witness of their meaning and application to our lives (see John 5:39. also 2 Ne. 32:2-5).

Latter-day Saints also have the inspired words of modern-day prophets and apostles to help them interpret the writings of Isaiah. In a revelation given in November 1831, the Lord declared that he had called Elder Orson Hyde to expound "all scriptures" unto those he taught. and that this was to be "an ensample unto all those who were ordained unto this priesthood." The Lord further declared that, as the priesthood holders were to go forth expounding all scriptures, "whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture" (D&C 68:1-4). Thus, Latter-day Saints have the advantage of over 150 years' worth of the teachings of modern prophets and apostles who have expounded the scriptures and have given new scripture unto the world.

Furthermore, the Prophet Joseph Smith was divinely called to declare God's word to this generation, and his writings and teachings should be considered scripture (see D&C 5:10). The book Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, a compilation of many of the doctrinal teachings of Joseph Smith, contains at least thirty-five quotations, paraphrases, and commentaries on the text of Isaiah. These come from twenty-one different chapters in the biblical text, and many are very helpful in understanding these ancient writings (see Appendix F). Other references could be cited, but suffice it to say that we should also study the words which holy men of God have given us in modern times as we try to come to an understanding of the words of Isaiah. Again, it should be emphasized that each individual has the responsibility. as well as the opportunity, to learn for himself through the spirit of prophecy. The Prophet Joseph declared that "the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them" (TPJS, p. 149).

KNOW OF A SURETY WHEN THEY COME TO PASS

The third part of Nephi's formula for understanding the words of Isaiah is an important one, and one which is sometimes overlooked when we read Nephi's admonition. He declared that "in the days that the prophecies of Isaiah shall be fulfilled men shall know of a surety, at the times when they shall come to pass" (2 Ne. 25:7). One evidence of this is the fulfillment of a prophecy in chapter 29 of Isaiah concerning a sealed book being taken to a learned man. Who would ever have known the interpretation of this passage before Martin Harris took a copy of a few characters from the Book of Mormon plates, and the interpretation thereof, to Professor Charles Anthon (see JS-H 1:63-65)? Non-LDS scholars are still pondering the meaning of this chapter. There are many other such prophecies of Isaiah which are understood today, but were not understood in the days of Nephi or at any time since until the events themselves came to pass. Further, there are yet many passages in Isaiah which are not wholly understood, because the events foreseen have not yet happened. It is helpful, therefore, to know which of the events that he spoke of have taken place, and which are yet to come.

The words of Isaiah are hard to be understood, but one can come to an understanding by knowing the manner of prophesying among the Jews, by being filled with the spirit of prophecy, and by living in the day when the prophecies of Isaiah are fulfilled. Applying this formula given by Nephi will bring the modern reader to proclaim with the Savior, "Great are the words of Isaiah."
