Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

4

The Vision of Judah and Jerusalem

Isa. 2-4

Before Nephi recorded these chapters of Isaiah upon his plates. he told us he did it so "that whoso of my people shall see these words may lift up their hearts and rejoice for all men" (2 Ne. 11:8). Three chapters of Isaiah are required to present his vision of Judah and Jerusalem. Parts of chapters 2 and 3 paint quite a dismal picture, but chapter 4 describes the final glorious condition of "the branch [or church] of the Lord."

Although Isaiah notes that he saw things concerning Judah and Jerusalem (2:1), his vision includes references to three different peoples and two different lands. He speaks of Judah in the land of Jerusalem, of the "daughters of Zion," and of the "branch of the Lord" in the land of Zion. The prophet Joseph Smith declared, "The prophets have spoken and written upon it [Zion]; but I will make a proclamation that will cover a broader ground. The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land. When elders shall take up and examine the old prophecies in the Bible, they will see it." (TPJS, p. 362.) Thus, the "daughters of Zion" refer to those who inhabit the Americas.

The "branch of the Lord" spoken of by Isaiah consists of those who are "escaped of Israel" (those of Israel who will have escaped the judgments which are to come upon the world in the last days). He speaks of these as being from the daughters of Zion and from Jerusalem. Therefore, the three peoples include the inhabitants of Jerusalem in general, the inhabitants of Zion in general, and the specific group from Zion and Jerusalem who constitute the beautiful and glorious branch of the Lord. The two lands include the land of Jerusalem and the land of the Americas.

Justification for Isaiah's including people not of Judah and not living in Jerusalem in a vision of Judah and Jerusalem is shown in the Savior's words regarding Isaiah: "For surely he spake as touching all things concerning my people which are of the house of Israel; therefore it must needs be that he must speak also to the Gentiles" (3 Ne. 23:2). Just as it was necessary to speak to or about the Gentiles to show all things concerning the house of Israel. it was also necessary to speak to or about Zion to show the ultimate destiny of Judah. An understanding of that ultimate destiny of both branches of Israel will cause all of Israel to "lift up their hearts and rejoice for all men," fulfilling Nephi's purpose for including Isaiah's words in his writings.

The vision centers around the restoration of the gospel, the second coming of Christ, and the ushering in of his Millennial reign, but it also includes prophecies concerning Judah in Isaiah's own day. Since it is a vision of Judah and Jerusalem. this would be expected. Perhaps a detailed outline of the vision will help us see it as a unit.

1.The Lord will judge among nations and bring peace (2:2-5).

a.The mountain of the Lord's house will be established in the tops of the mountains, and all nations will flow to it (2:2).

b.Many people will go to the house of the God of Jacob to be taught (2:3).

c.Out of Zion will go forth the law (2:3).

d.The word of the Lord will go forth from Jerusalem (2:3).

e.All nations will cease making weapons of war and will be at peace (2:4).

f.The house of Jacob is invited to come and walk in the light of the Lord (2:5).

2.The Lord has forsaken his people, the house of Jacob, and they will be brought down (2:6-22).

a.They seek after the philosophies and learning of men (2:6).

b.Their hearts have turned to material things (2:7).

c.They worship idols, the works of their own hands (2:0).

d.They are lifted up in pride (2:9).

e.The wicked hide because of their fear of the Lord (2:10-11).

f.The day of the Lord will come upon all people everywhere and cause them to forsake their idols (2:12-18).

g.The wicked will flee to the caves and the mountains because of fear (2:19-21).

h.The people are admonished to stop following after man (2:22).

3.Jerusalem will fall because its inhabitants have rebelled against God (3:1-15).

a.The Lord will take away their economic prosperity (3:1).

b.He will take away their great leadership (3:2-3).

c.Children, babes, and women will rule over Judah and oppress them (3:3-4, 12).

d.Judah will resort to family leadership, but men will refrain from leading (3:6-7).

e.Immorality even as in Sodom will cause their destruction, but the righteous will be saved (3:9-11).

f.Because their leaders will cause them to err, the Lord will bring judgment upon their leaders (3:12-15).

4.Zion will also be smitten (3:16-4:1).

a.Social conditions will bring the Lord's judgments (3: 16-17).

b.Religious conditions will bring the Lord's judgments (3:18-24).

c.A great war will kill off the men, leaving seven women to one man (3:25-4:1).

5.The branch of the Lord will be beautiful and glorious in that day (4:2-6).

a.The Lord will cleanse Zion and Jerusalem (4:2-4).

b.He will protect every dwelling place and assembly of Zion (4:5-6).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

All three of these chapters are quoted in their entirety in the Book of Mormon, and there are several significant retentions in the text preserved in Nephi's quoting from the plates of brass. There are also several passages from the Doctrine and Covenants and the New Testament and commentaries by modern Church authorities which help us better understand this vision.

Isa. 2:2-3. The word "that" in verse 2, italicized by the King James scholars because they were unsure of the correct translation, is rendered "when" in the Book of Mormon and in the JST.

And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. (Isa. 2:2.)

And it shall come to pass in the last days, when the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it. (2 Ne. 12:2.)

This is a very significant retention from the plates of brass, as it specifies the time when the Lord would commence to establish the two nations of Israel in Zion and Jerusalem, which would lead to the ushering in of the Millennium.

While many Latter-day Saints believe that the establishment of "the mountain of the Lord's house" in the tops of the mountains represents the Salt Lake Temple, verse 2 has a broader application. The Zion of North and South America was labeled by some Old Testament prophets as the "everlasting hills" or the "ancient mountains" (see Gen. 49:26; Deut. 33:15). This would suggest that Isaiah's prophecy relates to the whole continent, not just Salt Lake City. The first temple built in the "everlasting hills" in this dispensation was the Kirtland Temple in 1836, and the Lord appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in that temple on 3 April 1836 (see D&C 110).

President Charles Penrose taught that the Savior's second coming will occur in three phases: (1) his appearances in the temples of Zion, unbeknown to the rest of mankind; (2) his appearance to the distressed and nearly vanquished sons of Judah; and (3) his appearance in glory to the world (see MS, 10 Sept. 1859; as reprinted in IE, May 1957, pp. 326-27). Actually, there have already been several appearances of the Lord in his temples, since a temple is his holy house. Elder Harold B. Lee once stated: "I know that this is the Lord's work, I know that Jesus Christ lives, and that he's closer to this Church and appears more often in holy places than any of us realize excepting sometimes to those to whom he makes personal appearance. I know it and the time is hastening when he shall come again to reign as Lord of Lords and King of Kings." (Talk delivered at MIA June Conference, 29 June 1969, as printed in Living Prophets for a Living Church [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 1973]. p. 119.)

Further, in answer to the Prophet Joseph Smith's yearning prayer--"When will Zion be built up in her glory, and where will thy Temple stand, unto which all nations shall come in the last days?" (see section heading for D&C 57)-- the Lord designated the land of Missouri as the place of the city of Zion, and Independence, Missouri, as the center place for the temple unto which all nations should come (see D&C 57:1-3). Since the building of the New Jerusalem is to mark the gathering of all the tribes of Israel and the work of the Father in gathering his people from all the nations of the earth (see 3 Ne. 21:22-29), the building of the temple in Jackson County, Missouri, seems to be the final fulfillment of the prophecy of Isaiah that the mountain of the Lord's house would be established in the tops of the mountains. Thus Isaiah's prophecy commences with the building of the Kirtland Temple and extends to the future building of the temple in Independence, Jackson County, Missouri.

In a broader sense, the establishment of the kingdom of God occurred earlier, on 6 April 1830. and was the commencement of the fulfillment of the prophecy in Isa. 2:2-3. The temple could not be built until the kingdom was established. According to Oliver Cowdery, the angel Moroni quoted Isa. 2:1-4 to Joseph Smith in September 1823 as one of the prophecies which was about to be fulfilled (MA, Apr. 1835, p. 110). President Harold B. Lee once quoted D&C 115:4-5 and said this clearly implied that the coming forth of the Church in this dispensation was the beginning of the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy (see CR, Apr. 1973, p. 5). Similarly, Elder Theodore M. Burton stated that the prophecy in Isa. 2:2-3 was related to Daniel's prophecy of the establishment of the indestructible kingdom of God in the last days (see CR, Apr. 1971, p. 108).

However, the temple in Salt Lake City is the major forerunner of the temple in Independence, Missouri, and is the ensign lifted unto the nations until the time of the temple in Missouri. According to President Harold B. Lee, Elder Orson Pratt declared that the coming of the pioneers to the tops of the mountains was the beginning of the fulfillment of the prophecy in Isa. 2:2-3: "With the coming of the pioneers to establish the Church in the tops of the mountains, our early leaders declared this to be the beginning of the fulfillment of that prophecy. Orson Pratt, one of the members of the Twelve, delivered an oration on that occasion, in which he declared that this was the beginning of the fulfillment of the prophecy that out of Zion should go forth the law and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Ensign, Nov. 1971, p. 15; President Lee quoted Micah 4:1-2, which is virtually identical with Isa. 2:2-3.) Elder S. Dilworth Young declared that Joseph Smith's prophecy about the Saints going to the Rocky Mountains was a fulfillment of Isa. 2:2 (CR, Apr. 1974, pp. 88-89). And Elder LeGrand Richards has repeatedly taught that the Salt Lake Temple was the very one which Isaiah saw (see CR, Apr. 1967, p. 22; CR, Oct. 1970, pp. 61-62; CR, Apr. 1971, p. 143).

Isaiah's prophecy clearly designates two headquarters for the righteous children of Israel in the latter days: Zion and Jerusalem (see DS, 1:176). While the establishment of the Church in 1830 commenced the fulfillment of this prophecy, as shown above, the building of the temple in Salt Lake City was also a sign for the beginning of the Jerusalem headquarters. This was to be a slow process, but its commencement did closely parallel the movement of the Mormon pioneers to the West. The Salt Lake Temple was completed in 1893, after forty years of labor which was periodically interrupted. The Zionist Federation, an organization established to motivate the return of the Jews to Palestine, began in 1896, and its first conference was held in Basel, Switzerland, in 1897 (see ST, pp. 6-7). Just as the temple had been many years in the building, so had this movement of the Jews been under way for many years. In fact, the journey of Eider Orson Hyde (under the direction of the Prophet Joseph Smith) to dedicate Palestine for the return of the Jews was undoubtedly one of the early beginnings. It is of interest to note that Elder Hyde was sent a short time after the Kirtland Temple was completed. (The dedication took place on the Mount of Olives on 24 October 1841; see HC, 4:454-59.) With the establishment of both headquarters, the Church members were to gather to Zion and the Jews to Jerusalem: "Let them, therefore, who are among the Gentiles flee unto Zion. And let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house." (D&C 133:12-13.) In the early days of the Church, however, Jews who were converted to the gospel were to gather in Zion rather than Jerusalem (see TPJS, p. 180).

Isa. 2:3. While verses 2 and 3 are usually treated as one prophecy, there are some unique aspects of verse 3 which may be related to a later time than the establishment of the temple. Of course, the settlement of the Saints in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains brought people from many nations, but subsequent converts to the Church brought thousands more to those valleys from all over the world to "walk in his paths," as Elder LeGrand Richards has taught (see CR, Oct. 1962, p. 109). Elder Mark E. Petersen has also written of the influx of immigrants to the Rocky Mountains as a fulfillment of this prophecy. He also refers to the tourists who visit Salt Lake Temple Square and the Church general conferences as further fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy that many people would say, "Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord." (See Why the Religious Life [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1966], pp. 200-201.)

In verse 2, Isaiah says that "the Lord's house shall... be exalted above the hills." Elder Petersen has pointed out that all of the various translations of the Bible emphasize the "temple hill," and that most temples are built on eminent sites (see Why the Religious Life, pp. 305-7). Isaiah also said people would come to the house of the Lord to learn of his ways and "walk in his paths." Elder Gordon B. Hinckley has taught that as Latter-day Saints live the standards of the gospel, others will find the strength to follow their example and will do as Isaiah says (see CR. Oct. 1974, pp. 144-45). Elder Harold B. Lee once asked that the Lord continue to pour out his knowledge upon the Church and its members and all honorable people of the earth, that Christ might be the ensign to the world as prophesied by Isaiah (see CR. Apr. 1966, p. 68).

Elder Mark E. Petersen has identified the general conferences of the Church as a fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy that "out of Zion shall go forth the law," especially as these conferences are broadcast to the world by radio and television (see Why the Religious Life, pp. 200-201, 305-7). However, President George Albert Smith taught a broader concept as he dedicated the Idaho Falls Temple. He taught that the "going forth" of the "law" is the establishment in the world of governments similar to "our constitutional form of government." In referring to this dedicatory prayer, President Harold B. Lee later said:

I have often wondered what that expression meant, that out of Zion shall go forth the law. Years ago I went with the brethren to the Idaho Falls Temple, and I heard in that inspired prayer of the First Presidency a definition of the meaning of that term "out of Zion shall go forth the law." Note what they said: "We thank thee that thou hast revealed to us that those who gave us our constitutional form of government were men wise in thy sight and that thou didst raise them up for the very purpose of putting forth that sacred document [as revealed in Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 101] ....

"We pray that kings and rulers and the peoples of all nations under heaven may be persuaded of the blessings enjoyed by the people of this land by reason of their freedom and under thy guidance and be constrained to adopt similar governmental systems, thus to fulfill the ancient prophecy of Isaiah and Micah that '... out of Zion shall go forth the law and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.'" (IE, Oct. 1945, p. 564; Ensign, Nov. 1971, p. 15.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith also equated the "law" with the theocracy of God which will rule during the Millennium, as described in verse 4 (see TPJS, pp. 248-52). This great principle was alluded to by President Joseph Fielding Smith when he said that the word of the Lord would go forth from Zion and Jerusalem, not only to the members of the Church, but to all nations when the kingdom of God is fully established (see DS, 1:176). Elder Orson Pratt interpreted Isaiah's reference to "the law" as follows: "'Out of Zion shall go forth the law,' says the prophet. What law? A law to regulate the nations, a law teaching them how to be saved, a law informing the kings and emperors and the nobles of the earth how they can save themselves, and how they can save their dead." (JD, 14:350.) These interpretations combine the political and spiritual aspects of the law.

Isa. 2:4. This verse clearly depicts the judgments of God which will usher in the millennial reign (see Elder Bruce R. McConkie, CR, Oct. 1967, p. 43).

Isa. 2:5. The Book of Mormon supplies the second half of the original verse, which has been lost from the Bible translations.

O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord. (Isa. 2:5.)

O house of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord; yea, come, for ye have all gone astray, every one to his wicked ways. (2 Ne. 12:5.)

This retention shows that there would be a complete apostasy upon the earth before the time of the establishment of the mountain of the Lord's house. Therefore, the people of Jacob are invited to walk in the light of the Lord which would be taught in his holy house.

Isa. 2:9. The Book of Mormon retention of the word "not" in two different places in this verse makes it read sensibly.

And the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbleth himself: therefore forgive them not. (Isaiah 2¡¤9.)

And the mean man boweth not down, and the great man humbleth himself not, therefore, forgive him not. (2 Ne. 12:9.)

There are some interesting apologies offered by various commentators in the Christian world. trying to justify the presentday Bible readings.

Isa. 2:10.

Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty. (Isa. 2:10.)

O ye wicked ones, enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for the fear of the Lord and the glory of his majesty shall smite thee. (2 Ne. 12:10.)

The Book of Mormon phrase "O ye wicked ones" clearly identifies those who will be seeking to hide in the rocks and the dust for fear of the Lord and his glory. Both Paul (see 2 Thes. 1:7-9) and John the Revelator (see Rev. 6:15-16) foretold this same event. A similar situation existed following the Savior's ministry among the Jews, as he had prophesied (see Luke 23:22-30), but in that case the Jews hid for fear of the Romans during their conquest of Jerusalem in A.D 70.

Isa. 2:12.

For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up; and he shall be brought low: (Isa. 2:12.)

For the day of the Lord of Hosts soon cometh upon all nations, yea, upon every one; yea, upon the proud and lofty, and upon every one who is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. (2 Ne. 12.12

In the Book of Mormon, retention of the phrase "soon cometh upon all nations, yea" replaces the italicized "shall be" in the KJV. This phrase establishes the time when this prophecy will he fulfilled--the day the Lord will appear in glory to the entire world.

Isa. 2:13.

And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan, (Isa. 2:13.)

Yea, and the day of the Lord shall come upon all the cedars of Lebanon, for they are high and lifted up; and upon all the oaks of Bashan; (2 Ne. 12:13.)

The Book of Mormon retention of the phrase "Yea, and the day of the Lord shall come" replaces the introductory "and" in the KJV, further verifying the time period.

Isa. 2:14.

And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up, (Isa. 2:14.)

And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills, and upon all the nations which are lifted up, and upon every people; (2 Ne. 12:14.)

The 2 Nephi reading retains two phrases, "upon all the nations" and "upon every people," more clearly showing the universal nature of the Lord's coming in glory.

Isa. 2:16. The late Dr. Sidney B. Sperry, who should be credited for helping members of the Church understand Isaiah, made the following comment about this verse:

In 2 Ne. 12:16 (cf. Isa. 2:16) the Book of Mormon has a reading of remarkable interest. It prefixes a phrase of eight words not found in the Hebrew or King James versions. Since the ancient Septuagint (Greek) Version concurs with the added phrase in the Book of Mormon, let us exhibit the readings of the Book of Mormon (B.M.), the King James Version (K.J.), and the Septuagint (LXX) as follows:

B.M. And upon all the ships of the sea, and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures.

K.J. ............................. And upon all the ships of Tarshish and upon all pleasant pictures.

LXX And upon every ship of the sea, ............................. and upon every display of fine ships.

The Book of Mormon suggests that the original text of this verse contained three phrases, all of which commenced with the same opening words, "and upon all." By a common accident, the original Hebrew (and hence the King James) text lost the first phrase, which was, however, preserved by the Septuagint. The latter lost the second phrase and seems to have corrupted the third phrase. The Book of Mormon preserved all three phrases. Scholars may suggest that Joseph Smith took the first phrase from the Septuagint. The prophet did not know Greek, and there is no evidence that he had access to a copy of the Septuagint in 1829-30 when he translated the Book of Mormon. (The Voice of Israel's Prophets [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1965], pp. 90-91.)

Isa. 2:19, 21. The Book of Mormon retains two phrases. "shall come upon them" and "shall smite them," in each of these verses.

And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord. and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth ....

To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. (Isa. 2:19, 21.)

And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for the fear of the Lord shall come upon them and the glory of his majesty shall smite them, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth ....

To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for the fear of the Lord shall come upon them and the majesty of his glory shall smite them, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. (2 Ne. 12:19, 21.)

The first retention seems insignificant, but the last shows that all attempts to hide will be fruitless. The reversal of majesty and glory seems insignificant. The previous commentary on 2:10 is also applicable here, since the phrase "for the fear of the Lord and the glory of his majesty" is used in all three verses.

Isa. 3:4. A possible identification of the "children" who were to rule over the house of Judah is drawn from the Prophet Joseph Smith's explanation of John the Baptist's scathing pronouncement to the Pharisees and Sadducees that "God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham" (Matt. 3:9). Joseph Smith identified the "stones" as the Gentiles (see TPJS, p. 319). Perhaps the same designation could be applied here; historically, the Jews have been scattered among the Gentiles, who have ruled over them.

With regard to the "babes" who would rule over them, it should be remembered that Jacob had blessed Judah with the political leadership of all the house of Israel until the birth of Christ (see Gen. 49:8, 10). This leadership, of course, should have been exercised through the priesthood, as shown by the Prophet Joseph Smith in commenting upon the dominion given to Adam (see TPJS, p. 157). For "babes" (or "children," if the word does not refer to the Gentiles) to rule over Judah, they would rule without the priesthood. The fulfillment of this prophecy can be seen in the following tabulation of the reign of the seven kings who ruled from the death of Isaiah to the destruction of Jerusalem by Babylon in 589 B.C (Book of Mormon dating):

ttt KingAge When AppointedYears of ReignBiblical Label of Character

Manasseh1255Evil (2 Kgs. 21.1-2

Amon222Evil (2 Kgs. 21:19-20)

Josiah831Right (2 Kgs. 22:1-2)

Jehoahaz233 mos.Evil (2 Kgs. 23:31-32)

Jehoiakim2511 (3 yrs. as puppet king in Babylon)Evil (2 Kgs. 23:36-37)

Jehoiachin18 (2 Chr. 36:9 says 8 yrs)3 mos. (under Babylon)Evil (2 Kgs. 24:8-9)

Zedekiah2111Evil (2 Kgs. 24:17-19)

Note that these kings were appointed between the ages of eight and twenty-five, and all but one were labeled "evil" in the Bible. The priesthood was not conferred until age thirty (see Num. 4:3) Num. 8:24 lists the age as twenty-five, but this may have referred to a preparatory five-year period). Num. 3:1-13 says the priesthood was reserved for the Levites, but Joseph Smith taught that King David held it (TPJS, p. 339).

Isa. 3:5-7. The only retention of significance in the Book of Mormon is in verse 6, the last phrase of which states "and let not this ruin come under thy hand."

When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand: (Isa. 3:6.)

When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father, and shall say: Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let not this ruin come under thy hand-- (2 Ne. 13:6.)

The KJV has lost the word "not," which points to a desire to escape the coming ruin. This is apparently similar to the situation which came upon the wicked Nephites four years before the Savior visited them. The people divided one against the other and separated into tribes according to families, kindreds, and friends, not as a righteous patriarchal division but as an attempt for survival. (See 3 Ne. 7:1-14.)

Isa. 3:9. People reflect what they are in their countenances, and the people of Judah could not hide their sins of immorality, which were even as the sins of Sodom. People also reflect their positive spiritual conditions; Alma described the born-again person as one who has received the image of Christ in his countenance (see Alma 5:14). Elder Marion D. Hanks used this passage in Isaiah to show that iniquities separate people from the Spirit (CR, Oct. 1973, p. 16), which would of course leave a countenance of evil upon their faces.

Isa. 3:11. The Book of Mormon retains the phrase "for they shall perish" in place of "it shall be ill with him," much of which was italicized by the King James translators.

Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for the reward of his hands shall be given him. (Isa. 3:11.)

We unto the wicked, for they shall perish; for the reward of their hands shall be upon them! (2 Ne. 13:11.)

The sterner punishment is more consistent with other scriptures regarding the destruction of the wicked at the Second Coming (see, for example, D&C 101:23-24).

Isa. 3:12. This verse refers to women ruling over Judah. Note that nothing derogatory is said about leadership by women per se, but obviously they would not be ruling with the priesthood. During Judah's dispersion among the Gentiles, there were undoubtedly many women who ruled over them, and in modern times Golda Meir served as modern Israel's prime minister.

Isaiah's statement about "children" oppressing Judah and causing them to err was used by Elder Ezra Taft Benson as a warning to the women of the Church against the sinful practices of birth control and abortion (see CR, Oct. 1970, p. 21).

Isa. 3:15. President Harold B. Lee cited this passage in explaining the need for strong central authority in the Church to organize means to help the weak and provide for emergencies (see CR, Oct. 1971, p. 58). Isa. 3:16-24.The term "daughter of Zion" probably has more than one meaning, and must be interpreted in context each time it occurs in the scriptures. President Joseph Fielding Smith interprets the dress styles of our modern day as a fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy (AQ, 5:172-74). The dictionary definitions of "haughty," "wanton," and "mincing" suggest that Isaiah could easily have been referring to the inhabitants of the Americas, the Zion spoken of by the Old Testament prophets. The haughty are defined as those who are proud of self and scornful of others. Wanton is defined as undisciplined, unmanageable, lewd. Mincing is defined as short. feminine steps or as plain speech. These definitions could apply to the attitudes and practices of many inhabitants of the Americas.

Many of the words in verses 18 through 23 may refer to religious garb of modern-day sectarians. These verses were designated in the chapter outline as a description of the religious conditions of Zion, and verses 16 and 17 as a description of the social conditions. These conclusions are based on the uses of those words according to modern dictionaries.

Isa. 4:1. The JST and the Hebrew Bible place this verse in the previous chapter. where it fits the context much better. This condition will result from the war described in 3:25-26. While this verse has been interpreted by some as a prophecy of plural marriage in the Church, a close examination will show that it refers to the world, not the Church. The offer of marriage as described by Isaiah is not in keeping with the law of plural marriage as revealed in the Doctrine and Covenants. The proposal to marry (or merely live together) is made here by the woman. Under the Lord's law, the man would initiate the marriage (see D&C 132:58-61). The women described by Isaiah volunteer to remain economically independent rather than make the man responsible for their care while they multiply and replenish the earth, as under the Lord's law (see D&C 132:63 and Jacob 2:30). The innate desire of the woman to be a wife and a mother is noted in the phrase "to take away our reproach." To be childless was considered a reproach in ancient Israel (see Luke 1:25 and Gen. 30:23).

Isa. 4:2-4. The beautiful and glorious "branch of the Lord" will not become such until after it is cleansed. The Doctrine and Covenants (112:23-26) declares that the Lord will commence his cleansing at his own house. General Moroni also taught that the Lord had said the "inward vessel" must be cleansed first (see Alma 60:23).

Isa. 4:5-6. The Book of Mormon retains the words "of Zion" near the end of verse 5:

And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence. (Isa. 4:5.)

And the Lord will create upon every dwelling-place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day and the shining of a flaming fire by night; for upon all the glory of Zion shall be a defence. (2 Ne. 14:5.)

This is consistent with the beginning of the verse, and it suggests the protection of Zion and her stakes in a day when the world is in turmoil. For a fuller description of that time, see D&C 45:63-75 and 84:2-5; the latter of these passages identifies the cloud as "the glory of the Lord." Note that there is more than one place for the assembly or gathering of the Saints. This is consistent with the Lord's admonition to stand in "holy places" when bloodshed, famine, plague, and other calamities sweep the earth (see D&C 87:6-8). It is also consistent with the following prophecy given by Joseph Smith:

The time is soon coming, when no man will have any peace but in Zion and her stakes.

I saw men hunting the lives of their own sons, and brother murdering brother. women killing their own daughters, and daughters seeking the lives of their mothers. I saw armies arrayed against armies. I saw blood, desolation, fires. The Son of Man has said that the mother shall be against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother. These things are at our doors. They will follow the Saints of God from city to city. Satan will rage, and the spirit of the devil is now enraged. I know not how soon these things will take place; but with a view of them, shall I cry peace? No; I will lift up my voice and testify of them. How long you will have good crops, and the famine be kept off, I do not know; when the fig tree leaves, know then that the summer is nigh at hand. (TPJS. p. 161.)

According to Oliver Cowdery, when the angel Moroni appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith in September 1823, he quoted Isa. 4:5-6 as one of the prophecies which was soon to be fulfilled (MA, Apr. 1835, p. 110). President Harold B. Lee quoted D&C 115:4-6 as a prophecy of the time when members of the Church would gather to the stakes of Zion (rather than a specific place in the land of Zion) as a refuge from the storm and wrath which would be poured out upon the whole earth (see CR, Apr. 1973, p. 5).

Elder Orson Pratt taught that the cloud which Isaiah said would protect Zion and her stakes will be literal and will be even as the cloud which watched over Moses and the children of Israel:

I believe this building is called a Tabernacle, and it will accommodate from twelve thousand to fifteen thousand persons, and it is a tolerably cool place for the people in the heat of summer, especially to be a shade in the day time from the heat, and for a place of refuge and a covert from storm and from rain and tempest. I do not think that storms or tempests would affect a congregation that might be assembled in the Lord's Tabernacle; but I wish particularly to call your attention to the preceding verse--"The Lord shall create upon every dwelling-place of Mount Zion, and upon all her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flame or pillar of fire by night."

I do not see any cloud covering this house, or the congregation that is before me. What is the reason? The time has not yet come. The time is to come when God will meet with all the congregation of his Saints, and to show his approval, and that he does love them, he will work a miracle by covering them in the cloud of his glory. I do not mean something that is invisible, but I mean that same order of things which once existed on the earth so far as the tabernacle of Moses was concerned, which was carried in the midst of the children of Israel as they journeyed in the wilderness.

Did God manifest himself in that tabernacle that was built according to the pattern which he gave unto his servant Moses? He did. In what way? In the day time a cloud filled that tabernacle. The Lord intended his people to be covered with the cloud continually, and he intended to reveal himself unto them, and to show forth his glory more fully amongst them; but they sinned so much in his sight that he declared-- "My presence shall not go up with this people, lest I should break forth upon them in my fury and consume them in a moment." Because of their wickedness he withdrew his presence. and his glory in a great measure was taken from them; but still Moses was permitted to enter the tabernacle, and to behold the glory of God, and it is said that he talked with the Lord face to face--a blessing which God did intend to bestow upon all Israel had they kept his law and had not hardened their hearts against him.

But m the latter days there will be a people so pure in Mount Zion, with a house established upon the tops of the mountains, that God will manifest himself, not only in their Temple and upon all their assemblies, with a visible cloud during the day, but when the night shall come, if they shall be assembled for worship, God will meet with them by his pillar of fire; and when they retire to their habitations, behold each habitation will be lighted up by the glory of God,--a pillar of flaming fire by night.

Did you ever hear of any city that was thus favored and blessed since the day that Isaiah delivered this prophecy? No, it is a latter-day work, one that God must consummate in the latter times when he begins to reveal himself. and show forth his power among the nations. (JD, 16:82.)
