Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

5

The Parable of the Vineyard

Isa. 5

This chapter appears to be a continuation of chapters 2 through 4, but is treated separately here because it can be read as an independent unit. It is one of the few parables in the Old Testament and uses imagery similar to that which Jesus used in several parables during his ministry among the Jews. The interpretation of the parable, also given by Isaiah, definitely identifies the vineyard as the house of Israel and the pleasant plant as the men of Judah. Such parables as the laborers in the vineyard (Matt. 20:1-16), the two sons (Matt. 21:28-32), the wicked husbandman (Matt. 21:33-44; Mark 12:1-11; Luke 20:9-18), the barren fig tree (Luke 13:6-9), and the true vine (John 15:1-8) all use the same imagery.

There is also a resemblance to the allegory of Zenos, which is recorded in the Book of Mormon (Jacob 5) and probably was once in the Old Testament record (see Rom. 11:17-24). Both concern the whole house of Israel.

Isaiah's parable is followed by six warnings which seem related to the downfall of northern Israel, apparently given as a warning to Judah so she would be left without excuse. However, the warnings are also extended to the latter days, when the Lord will gather the righteous from the wicked unto Zion and Jerusalem. Following is a brief outline of the chapter:

1.The parable and the interpretation are given (5:1-7).

a.The parable likens Israel to a vineyard (5:1-6).

b.The interpretation is explained (5:7).

2.The six warnings are given (5:8-25).

a.A warning is given against socialism (5:8-10).

b.A warning is given against alcoholism (5:11-17).

c.Israel is warned against gross dishonesty and a distorted value system (5:18-19).

d.She is warned against a perverted moral code (5:20).

e.There is a warning against pseudo-intellectualism (5:21).

f.A warning is given against false and misleading advertising (5:22-23).

3.The Lord's hand is stretched out in judgment upon his people (5:24-25).

4.The ensign (Book of Mormon) is lifted to the nations (5:26-30).

a.The messengers will come with speed (5:26-28).

b.The prey will be carried away safely (5:29).

c.Darkness will remain upon the land deserted by the righteous of Israel (5:30).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

The entire chapter is quoted in the Book of Mormon with several retentions in the text, only a few of which are significant. There is only one reference in the Doctrine and Covenants which relates to Isaiah chapter 5. There are several enlightenments upon the text given by modern-day Church authorities.

Isa. 5:1. The Book of Mormon introduces the parable with the words "and then" in place of the KJV "now." This modification identifies the time period of chapter 5 as the same period spoken of in chapters 2 through 4. Both of these sections of Isaiah use the current situation in Isaiah's day as a basis for prophesying of the future.

Isa. 5:2. The tower built in the midst of the vineyard could have been the temple built by Solomon. This inference is drawn from the latter-day parable concerning another tower (temple) which was to be built upon a "very choice piece of land" (Jackson County, Missouri) but has not yet been built (see D&C 101:43-62). (For this interpretation of the tower-temple, see Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, rev. ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1967], p. 647.)

Isa. 5:3-4. The declaration "what could have been done more to my vineyard" is the same phrase used by the master of the vineyard in the allegory of Zenos (see Jacob 5:47). Although Zenos refers to the whole vineyard, and not just the "pleasant plant" of Judah as designated by Isaiah, both conditions show that the Lord gives full opportunity within the framework of man's agency, wherein man must choose and do his part.

(Note: The commentary for 5:8-23 is offered in light of Nephi's admonition to liken the scriptures unto ourselves [see 1 Ne. 19:23]. These warnings refer to conditions similar to those which caused the destruction of Judah and Israel, and which will likewise bring the destruction of the wicked at the Second Coming.)

Isa. 5:8-10. Most commentators say this warning was given against the land grabbers of Isaiah's day. However, a careful analysis of the text. especially as translated in the Book of Mormon, implies a much broader concept than the obtaining of land by a few rich or aspiring individuals.

Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field. till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!

In mine ears said the Lord of hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant. Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of an homer shall yield an ephah. (Isa. 5:8-10.)

Wo unto them that join house to house, till there can be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!

In mine ears, said the Lord of Hosts. of a truth many houses shall be desolate, and great and fair cities without inhabitant.

Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of a homer shall yield an ephah. (2 Ne. 15:8-10.)

In the Book of Mormon text, the joining of "house to house" was a situation which would block the establishment of Judah or the house of Israel, for "there can be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth." This phrase and the joining of house to house both imply a form of central control. Referring to Isaiah's day and also as a warning to our own day, it appears that Judah was forfeiting her individual freedoms to a central government which was controlling the property. The result would be that Judah could not be "placed alone" but was to be scattered among the nations of the earth, which happened. (The Book of Mormon, for some unknown reason, leaves out the KJV phrase "that lay field to field".)

The Lord has always sought to gather his people, but when they have not hearkened to his commandments he has scattered them and left them desolate instead (see Hel. 7:17-19; 3 Ne. 10:4-7; Matt. 23:37-38). The result of the scattering of ancient Israel was that many "great and fair cities" were left desolate, "without inhabitant" (verse 9). Furthermore, the agricultural production of the area almost ceased, as Isaiah warned (verse 10). The yield of "ten acres of vineyard" was prophesied to be only "one bath" (81/4 gallons) and that of "the seed of an homer" (the equivalent of ten baths) only "an ephah" (the dry-measure equivalent of a bath). Thus the established vineyards would not be productive, as they would yield only one-tenth of the seed planted.

There is still a greater warning in these verses, however. In every dispensation the Lord has given the same commandment revealed to the Saints of this dispensation, to "seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion" (D&C 6:6). As Zion can be established only upon the law of consecration and stewardship (see D&C 78:1-7), and as consecration and stewardship must be based upon private ownership and individual initiative (see D&C 42:30-32; 51:1; 78:14), individual freedoms and the private ownership of property must be carefully protected. The land of America was preserved for these very purposes (see 3 Ne. 21:4). Zion cannot be established in a socialistic society where individuals own nothing.

Isa. 5:11-17. The alcoholic is often identified as one who begins to drink "early in the morning," while the so-called social drinker has a drink in the evening before dinner or with a gathering of friends. The music which is usually associated with the alcoholic beverages is not that which invites the Spirit of the Lord, nor do those who operate drinking establishments regard the Lord's work or even his presence m the universe. Verse 13 notes the universal effect alcohol has in bringing captivity upon a nation. Both the honorable men (the leaders) and the multitude (the constituents) lose the knowledge of God and his work. Famine and thirst for the word of God (also described in Amos 8:11-12) come upon the land, causing those who depart this life for the next to swell the numbers in hell. However, God's judgments will destroy these iniquitous places and leave the isolated cities to become grazing lands for sheep.

Isa. 5:18-19. The gross dishonesty and distorted value system accepted by some in our day labels a man a thief for petty stealing, but regards unscrupulous business deals involving thousands or millions of dollars as just good business. Such people justify their actions by asking for empirical evidence of the Lord's coming or of the validity of his teachings which condemn their actions.

Isa. 5:20. Proponents of the so-called new morality teach that marriage is unnecessary and that premarital sex is not only allowable but desirable. Such teachers declare that those who would keep the law of chastity are under a disadvantage in marriage, thus calling evil good and good evil. In addition to chastity, many other standards of morality are also questioned. Elder Spencer W. Kimball once said that the infidelity of our day, and the movies, books, and magazines which glamorize the unfaithful husbands and wives and make them heroes and heroines, reminded him of this verse in Isaiah (see CR, Oct. 1962, p. 56).

Isa. 5:21. This verse seems to refer to the pseudo- intellectualism of our day, wherein people rely solely upon their own wisdom instead of the Lord's (compare 2 Ne. 9:28-29). President N. Eldon Tanner cited this verse as a warning to the present day (see CR, Oct. 1968, p. 49).

Isa. 5:22-23. The false and misleading advertising of our day fits Isaiah's description. Famous athletes, movie stars, and other celebrities are paid large sums of money to endorse products which may well be harmful. Such advertising leads people away from righteousness.

Isa. 5:26. An ensign is a standard or a pennant to be seen by others. In 2 Ne. 29:2. the latter-day ensign is identified as the words of Nephi's seed, the Book of Mormon (compare D&C 115:5, 45:9). The word "hiss" has a connotation somewhat different from the present-day meaning. In the Book of Mormon, it is used to identify the going forth of the gospel to the ends of the earth (see 2 Ne. 29:2).

Isa. 5:27-28. Elder LeGrand Richards has identified these verses as a description of the modern means of transportation which would carry the Lord's messengers to every nation:

Since there were no such things as trains and airplanes in that day, Isaiah could hardly have mentioned them by name, but he seems to have described them in unmistakable words. How better could "their horses' hoofs be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind" than in the modern train? How better could "Their roaring... be like a lion" than in the roar of the airplane? Trains and airplanes do not stop for night. Therefore, was not Isaiah justified in saying: "none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken"? With this manner of transportation the Lord can really "hiss unto them from the end of the earth." that "they shall come with speed swiftly." ( A Marvelous Work and a Wonder [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1967], p. 236.)

Elder Richards later used these verses to show that Israel would be gathered with speed (CR, Oct. 1975, pp. 77-78). President Joseph Fielding Smith interpreted these verses the same way (see DS, 1:146). Elder Orson Pratt referred to the immigrants' coming to Salt Lake by railroad in two or three days, instead of the ninety or one hundred days it took before the railroad, as an example of Isaiah's prophecy being fulfilled (see JD, 16:84).

Isa. 5:29-30. While verses 26 through 28 seem to describe the messengers sent to the nations, verses 29 and 30 describe the "prey" leaving these lands. The prey are those of Israel, missionaries or members, who, because of the persecution and tribulation which come against them and the turmoil in the land, will be fleeing to Zion for safety. This seems to be describing the fulfilling of the times of the Gentiles, when the gentile nations will completely reject the gospel. The gospel may be taken from these nations on an individual basis rather than from all of them at once (see Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. rev. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, Inc., 1967], p. 722). l. The gospel may be taken from these nations on an individual basis rather than from all of them at once (see Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. rev. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, Inc., 1967], p. 722). 47

Lines a. The parable likens Israel to a vineyard (5:1-6).

Lines b. The interpretation is explained (5:7).

Lines2. The six warnings are given (5:8-25).

Lines a. A warning is given against socialism (5:8-10).

Lines b. A warning is given against alcoholism (5:11-17). c. Israel is warned against gross dishonesty and a distorted value system (5:18-19).

Lines d. She is warned against a perverted moral code (5:20).

Lines e. There is a warning against pseudo-intellectualism (5:21).

Lines f. A warning is given against false and misleading advertising (5:22-23).

a. The messengers will come with speed (5:26-28). b. The prey will be carried away safely (5:29). c. Darkness will remain upon the land deserted by the righteous of Israel (5:30).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

The entire chapter is quoted in the Book of Mormon with several retentions in the text, only a few of which are significant. There is only one reference in the Doctrine and Covenants which relates to Isaiah chapter 5. There are several enlightenments upon the text given by modern-day Church authorities.

Isa. 5:1 . The Book of Mormon introduces the parable with the words "and then" in place of the KJV "now." This modification identifies the time period of chapter 5 as the same period spoken of in chapters 2 through 4. Both of these sections of Isaiah use the current situation in Isaiah's day as a basis for prophesying of the future.

Isa. 5:2 . The tower built in the midst of the vineyard could have been the temple built by Solomon. This inference is drawn from the latter-day parable concerning another tower (temple) which was to be built upon a "very choice piece of land" (Jackson County, Missouri) but has not yet been built (see D&C 101:43-62). (For this interpretation of the tower-temple, see Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, rev. ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1967], p. 647.]

Isa. 5:3-4 . The declaration "what could have been done more to my vineyard" is the same phrase used by the master of the vineyard in the allegory of Zenos (see Jacob 5:47). Although Zenos refers to the whole vineyard, and not just the "pleasant plant" of Judah as designated by Isaiah, both conditions show that the Lord gives full opportunity within the framework of man's agency, wherein man must choose and do his part.

(Note: The commentary for 5:8-23 is offered in light of Nephi's admonition to liken the scriptures unto ourselves [see 1 Ne. 19:23]. These warnings refer to conditions similar to those which caused the destruction of Judah and Israel, and which will likewise bring the destruction of the wicked at the Second Coming.)

Isa. 5:8-10. Most commentators say this warning was given against the land grabbers of Isaiah's day. However, a careful analysis of the text, especially as translated in the Book of Mormon, implies a much broader concept than the obtaining of land by a few rich or aspiring individuals.

Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!Wo unto them that join house to house, till there can be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!In mine ears said the Lord of hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant.In mine ears, said the Lord of Hosts, of a truth many houses shall be desolate, and great and fair cities without inhabitant.Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of an homer shall yield an ephah. (Isa. 5:8-10.) Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of a homer shall yield an ephah. (2 Ne. 15:8-10.)

In the Book of Mormon text, the joining of "house to house" was a situation which would block the establishment of Judah or the house of Israel, for "there can be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth." This phrase and the joining of house to house both imply a form of central control. Referring to Isaiah's day and also as a warning to our own day, it appears that Judah was forfeiting her individual freedoms to a central government which was controlling the property. The result would be that Judah could not be "placed alone" but was to be scattered among the nations of the earth, which happened. (The Book of Mormon, for some unknown reason, leaves out the KJV phrase "that lay field to field".)

The Lord has always sought to gather his people, but when they have not hearkened to his commandments he has scattered them and left them desolate instead (see Hel. 7:17-19; 3 Ne. 10:4-7; Matt. 23:37-38). The result of the scattering of ancient Israel was that many "great and fair cities" were left desolate, "without inhabitant" (verse 9). Furthermore, the agricultural production of the area almost ceased, as Isaiah warned (verse 10). The yield of "ten acres of vineyard" was prophesied to be only "one bath" (81/4 gallons) and that of "the seed of an homer" (the equivalent of ten baths) only "an ephah" (the dry-measure equivalent of a bath). Thus the established vineyards would not be productive, as they would yield only one-tenth of the seed planted.

There is still a greater warning in these verses, however. In every dispensation the Lord has given the same commandment revealed to the Saints of this dispensation, to "seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion" (D&C 6:6). As Zion can be established only upon the law of consecration and stewardship (see D&C 78:1-7), and as consecration and stewardship must be based upon private ownership and individual initiative (see D&C 42:30-32; 51:1; 78:14), individual freedoms and the private ownership of property must be carefully protected. The land of America was preserved for these very purposes (see 3 Ne. 21:4). Zion cannot be established in a socialistic society where individuals own nothing.

Isa. 5:11-17. The alcoholic is often identified as one who begins to drink "early in the morning," while the so-called social drinker has a drink in the evening before dinner or with a gathering of friends. The music which is usually associated with the alcoholic beverages is not that which invites the Spirit of the Lord, nor do those who operate drinking establishments regard the Lord's work or even his presence in the universe. Verse 13 notes the universal effect alcohol has in bringing captivity upon a nation. Both the honorable men (the leaders) and the multitude (the constituents) lose the knowledge of God and his work. Famine and thirst for the word of God (also described in Amos 8:11-12) come upon the land, causing those who depart this life for the next to swell the numbers in hell. However, God's judgments will destroy these iniquitous places and leave the isolated cities to become grazing lands for sheep.

Isa. 5:18-19. The gross dishonesty and distorted value system accepted by some in our day labels a man a thief for petty stealing, but regards unscrupulous business deals involving thousands or millions of dollars as just good business. Such people justify their actions by asking for empirical evidence of the Lord's coming or of the validity of his teachings which condemn their actions.

Isa. 5:20. Proponents of the so-called new morality teach that marriage is unnecessary and that premarital sex is not only allowable but desirable. Such teachers declare that those who would keep the law of chastity are under a disadvantage in marriage, thus calling evil good and good evil. In addition to chastity, many other standards of morality are also questioned. Elder Spencer W. Kimball once said that the infidelity of our day, and the movies, books, and magazines which glamorize the unfaithful husbands and wives and make them heroes and heroines. reminded him of this verse in Isaiah (see CR, Oct. 1962, p, 56).

Isa. 5:21 . This verse seems to refer to the pseudo-intellectualism of our day, wherein people rely solely upon their own wisdom instead of the Lord's (compare 2 Ne. 9:28-29). President N. Eldon Tanner cited this verse as a warning to the present day (see CR, Oct. 1968, p. 49).

Isa. 5:22-23. The false and misleading advertising of our day fits Isaiah's description. Famous athletes, movie stars, and other celebrities are paid large sums of money to endorse products which may well be harmful. Such advertising leads people away from righteousness.

Isa. 5:26 . An ensign is a standard or a pennant to be seen by others. In 2 Ne. 29:2, the latter-day ensign is identified as the words of Nephi's seed, the Book of Mormon (compare D&C 115:5, 45:9). The word "hiss" has a connotation somewhat different from the present-day meaning. In the Book of Mormon, it is used to identify the going forth of the gospel to the ends of the earth (see 2 Ne. 29:2).

Isa. 5:27-28 . Elder LeGrand Richards has identified these verses as a description of the modern means of transportation which would carry the Lord's messengers to every nation:

Since there were no such things as trains and airplanes in that day, Isaiah could hardly have mentioned them by name, but he seems to have described them in unmistakable words. How better could "their horses' hoofs be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind" than in the modern train? How better could "Their roaring ... be like a lion" than in the roar of the airplane? Trains and airplanes do not stop for night. Therefore, was not Isaiah justified in saying: "none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken"? With this manner of transportation the Lord can really "hiss unto them from the end of the earth," that "they shall come with speed swiftly." ( A Marvelous Work and a Wonder [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1967], p. 236.)

Elder Richards later used these verses to show that Israel would be gathered with speed (CR, Oct. 1975, pp. 77-78). President Joseph Fielding Smith interpreted these verses the same way (see DS, 1:146). Elder Orson Pratt referred to the immigrants' coming to Salt Lake by railroad in two or three days, instead of the ninety or one hundred days it took before the railroad, as an example of Isaiah's prophecy being fulfilled (see JD, 16:84).

Isa. 5:29-30 . While verses 26 through 28 seem to describe the messengers sent to the nations, verses 29 and 30 describe the "prey" leaving these lands. The prey are those of Israel, missionaries or members, who, because of the persecution and tribulation which come against them and the turmoil in the land, will be fleeing to Zion for safety. This seems to be describing the fulfilling of the times of the Gentiles, when the gentile nations will completely reject the gospel. The gospel may be taken from these nations on an individual basis rather than from all of them at once (see Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. rev. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, Inc., 1967], p. 722).
