Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

6

Isaiah's Call to the Ministry

Isa. 6

This chapter is generally considered to be the first revelation given to Isaiah, although it is not the first chapter. This opinion is based on Isaiah's recounting in this chapter of his call to the ministry through a personal vision of the Lord. This being true, verse 1 also dates the beginning of Isaiah's ministry in the year that King Uzziah died (758 or 740 B.C.; see chapter 14 for a discussion of chronological differences). A symbolic description of the Lord, Isaiah's calling and his mission, and a prophecy of the future are outlined in the overview below.

a. The seraphim are above the throne of the Lord (6:2-3).

b. The posts of the door and the house are described (6:4).

a. Isaiah recognizes his need to be cleansed (6:5).

b. The seraphim pronounce him cleansed (6:6-7).

c. The Lord calls and Isaiah responds (6:8).

a. He is to proclaim truth to "this people" (6:9-10).

b. He is to go forth until the land is desolate (6:11-12).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

This chapter is quoted in its entirety in the Book of Mormon, with several slight differences but only two significant retentions. Several New Testament and Doctrine and Covenants references help us see the meaning of this chapter. Verses 9 and 10 are referred to six times in the New Testament. Surprisingly, chapter 6 has seldom been quoted or commented on by modern-day Church leaders.

Isa. 6:1-4. John the Revelator, whose mission was similar to Isaiah's, described his vision in the same figurative terms (see Rev. 4:2, 8). In describing John's revelation, the Prophet Joseph Smith told us that the eyes and the wings represent the light and knowledge of God and his power to move and act (see D&C 77:2-4). Isa. 6:2 and D&C 38:1 undoubtedly refer to the angelic hosts of heaven (the suffix im is plural masculine in the Hebrew). Rev. 15:8 identifies the smoke which filled the house as being from the glory of God.

Isa. 6:5. Isaiah's awareness of his uncleanness or unworthiness to be in the presence of God is not a unique experience. Peter felt this unworthiness when he recognized the divinity of the Savior, even when the Lord was not attended by glory (see Luke 5:4-9). Moses acknowledged his nothingness following his vision of the earth and its inhabitants (see Moses 1:9-10). The subjects of King Benjamin fell to the earth and pleaded for the atoning blood of Christ to cleanse them from their carnal state when the king taught them of the Savior's atonement (see Mosiah 4:1-2).

Isa. 6:6-7. The live coal would be analogous to the cleansing of the Holy Ghost referred to by Moroni in the Book of Mormon (see Moro. 6:4).

Isa. 6:8 . Isaiah's volunteering exemplifies the great desire one feels to serve the Lord when one comes under the influence of his Spirit. Peter was determined to follow Christ wherever he went, even to the laying down of his own life (see John 13:36-37). It is true that he later denied the Savior, as Christ had prophesied: but after the Holy Ghost came upon Peter, he did lay down his life for Christ.

Isa. 6:9-10 . The Book of Mormon helps us with these two difficult verses. It indicates that the people to whom Isaiah was sent would fail to understand his message of their own accord.

And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. (Isa. 6:9.) And he said: Go and tell this people-Hear ye indeed, but they understood not; and see ye indeed, but they perceived not. (2 Ne. 16:9.)

The "making fat" of the hearts of the people seems to refer to Isaiah's being called to make the truth so plain that they would have to accept it or harden their hearts against it. This was how the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart in Egypt, according to Brigham Young and Willard Richards:

God has promised to bring the house of Israel up out of the land of Egypt at his own appointed time; and with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, and great terribleness (Deut. xxvi, 8.) He chose to do this thing that His power might be known and his name declared throughout all the earth, so that all nations might have the God of heaven in remembrance, and reverence his holy name; and to accomplish this it was needful that He should meet with opposition to give Him an opportunity to manifest His power; therefore He raised up a man, even Pharaoh, who, He foreknew, would harden his heart against God of his own free will and choice, and would withstand the Almighty in His attempt to deliver His chosen people, and that to the utmost of his ability; and he proved himself worthy of the choice, for he left no means unimproved which his wicked heart could devise to vex the sons of Abraham, and defeat the purposes of the Most High, which gave the God of Abraham an opportunity to magnify his name in the ears of the nations, and in sight of this wicked king, by many mighty signs and wonders, sometimes even to the convincing of the wicked king of his wickedness, and of the power of God, (Exod. viii: 28, etc.) and yet he would continue to rebel and hold the Israelites in bondage; and this is what it meant by God's hardening Pharaoh's heart. He manifested Himself in so many glorious and mighty ways, that Pharaoh could not resist the truth without becoming harder; so that at last, in his madness, to stay the people of God, he rushed his hosts into the Red Sea and they were covered with the floods. (HC, 4:263-64.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith changed the verses in Exodus which state that the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart to read that Pharaoh hardened his own heart, but here we see that Pharaoh did it against the obvious truth of the Lord. The last half of Isa. 6:10 may be misread that the Lord does not want the people to be converted and healed. The real meaning of the last part of the verse, as it is fully quoted in the New Testament, is a declaration that the people did not want to understand, lest they should be converted so that the Lord could heal them.

And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not.Saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive:And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive:Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. (Isa. 6:9-10.) For the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. (Acts 28:26-27.)For this people's heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. (Matt. 13:14-15.)

In other words, these people did not want to know the truth. They enjoyed living in sin and did not want to be converted and to change their life-style. Paul further verifies this by stating "that the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and that they will hear it" (Acts 28:28).

Isa. 6:13 . The Book of Mormon retains two words which give a more complete understanding of this verse:

But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof. (Isa. 6:13.) But yet there shall be a tenth, and they shall return, and shall be eaten, as a teil-tree, and as an oak whose substance is in them when they cast their leaves; so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof. (2 Ne. 16:13.)

This is clearly a prophecy that, although the cities of Judah will be destroyed and the inhabitants scattered, a remnant of that "holy seed" will return to inhabit the land. Further light is shed upon the phrase "shall be eaten" by a marginal reading in the KJV: "when it is returned, and hath been broused." This has reference to a purging of those who are to be scattered. Isaiah's analogy of a tree's being pruned by animals eating the leaves, and by the natural casting off of the dead leaves, indicates that the tenth to return will be of a new generation.
