Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

7

The Immanuel Prophecy

Isa. 7

Probably the most widely known prophecy of Isaiah is found in chapter 7, but very few people understand its historical setting. From the viewpoint of biblical criticism, this lack of understanding has resulted in several problems associated with the prophecy of a virgin conceiving and giving birth to Immanuel. This prophecy and the problems related to it will be discussed later in the notes and commentary.

Isa. 7 is one of the few chapters which can be assigned a definite chronological setting. The setting is Judah's threatened wars with Syria and Ephraim (the northern kingdom of Israel) about 734 B.C. or 742 B.C., depending on which chronology is followed. King Ahaz is counseled by Isaiah against seeking help from foreign powers and is given the famous Immanuel prophecy. Chapter 7 also contains several other prophecies, shown in the following outline.

a. The enemy has not prevailed against Judah (7:1).

b. The king and the people are greatly concerned (7:2).

a. The threatened conquest will not come to pass (7:3-7).

b. Ephraim shall not be a people within sixty-five years (7:8).

a. Ahaz rejects the offer of a sign (7:10-12).

b. The Lord gives him a sign anyway (7:13-15).

c. The lands of Ephraim and Syria will both be forsaken of their kings before eight years pass (7:16).

b. The land will become briers and thorns; hunters will roam and animals will graze where there once was cultivated land (7:24-25).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

The entire chapter is quoted in the Book of Mormon with several slight differences, none of which are significant. The famous Immanuel prophecy is quoted by Matthew, but there are no other references to this chapter in the Doctrine and Covenants or the New Testament. There are many references made by General Authorities to the Immanuel prophecy (but not to other verses in this chapter). Most of these are simply the quoting of the prophecy as evidence that Isaiah had foretold the birth of the Savior.

Isa. 7:3. The Lord's commandment for Isaiah to take his son Shearjashub with him to meet Ahaz is apparently purposeful. A marginal note in the KJV shows the meaning of his son's name to be "The remnant shall return." This meaning comes from the prophecy given by the Lord to Isaiah at the time of his call (6:13). The son's presence may have served either of two purposes. It may have been to remind Ahaz of the prophecy that Judah would not be utterly destroyed, or it may have been a reminder that the Lord had prophesied concerning Judah in order to prepare Ahaz for the prophecy which Isaiah was to deliver.

Their meeting at the "upper pool" may have not been coincidental either. Many biblical scholars have suggested that Ahaz was there inspecting the water supply and deciding how to protect it from the two invading forces. If this was the case, Ahaz's thinking on these matters would also prepare him to receive the prophecy Isaiah had been sent to deliver.

Isa. 7:4 . The designation of the two kings as "the two tails of these smoking firebrands" also carries meaning. A firebrand was a torch. The description of these two kings as tails which are smoking indicates that their strength had been spent, as a torch smokes only when it is burned out.

Isa. 7:8-9. Here is the first prophecy uttered by Isaiah, and the reason for which Ahaz is not to fear. While Syria is to continue as a country with Damascus as its capital and King Rezin as its ruler, Judah's other enemy, Ephraim (the northern ten tribes of Israel), will not even be a people within sixty-five years. A KJV marginal note renders verse 9 somewhat more clearly: "Do ye not believe? It is because ye are not stable."

This prophecy was fulfilled, but exactly when is not certain. Several cities of the Northern Kingdom were captured by Tiglathpileser shortly following this prophecy, and the inhabitants were carried captive into Assyria (see 2 Kgs. 15:29). Ahaz did not begin his reign until the seventeenth year of Pekah, king of Israel (see 2 Kgs. 16:1). Since Pekah's reign was only twenty years long, this conquest would have occurred shortly after Isaiah's prophecy. Hoshea succeeded Pekah as king of Israel, and in the sixth year of his reign, Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, captured Samaria, the capital of Israel. Three years later Shalmaneser carried many more of the children of Israel captive into Assyria (see 2 Kgs. 17:3-6, 23). This happened following the death of Ahaz, but at least within twelve years of the time of Isaiah's prophecy. At this time, Shalmaneser brought in men from Babylon and Syria and placed them in the city of Samaria (see 2 Kgs. 17:24).

This marks the end of the occupancy of Samaria by the northern tribes of Israel. But did they exist longer as "a people"? Some writers refer to still another conquest by Assyria wherein King Manasseh was captured by the king of Assyria and carried captive into Babylon (see 2 Chr. 33:11). This last conquest is very close to the precise sixty-five-year prophecy. However, the capture of King Manasseh has to do with Judah, not northern Israel, and consequently does not apply to the prophecy. Other writers acknowledge this and explain that Isaiah was just using a broad number of years to pronounce the end of the northern kingdom of Israel. There is yet another consideration. The ten northern tribes remained in Assyria for an undetermined number of years and then were led farther into the north (see 2 Esdras 13:39-48; compare D&C 133:26-34). These people have since been known as the lost tribes of Israel and are still not identified. The time of their being led into the north may also figure into the sixty-five-year period spoken of by Isaiah. While the chronology may be uncertain, there is no uncertainty that the prophecy was fulfilled.

Isa. 7:10-12. Obviously Ahaz was not a believer, because he sent to the king of Assyria for help (see 2 Kgs. 16:7). Ahaz's disbelief is indicated in Isa. 7:9, and verse 11 is further evidence of his reluctance to follow the admonition of the Lord. The Lord challenges him to ask for a sign "either in the depth, or in the height above." The RSV renders this phrase "let it be deep as Sheol or high as heaven." In other words, let it be from the spirit world or from God in heaven. Ahaz gives an interesting rationalization for his refusal, quoting Deut. 6:16 to justify his actions. The irony of quoting a scripture out of context in refusing to follow the prophet of the Lord further exemplifies his disbelief.

Isa. 7:13-16. Bible critics have questioned, explained away, and apologized for the Immanuel prophecy. Many even argue that this is not a messianic prophecy, but relates to an event at the time of Isaiah: a young woman (these scholars reject the translation "virgin") was to give birth to a child, and before the child was very old the kings of Syria and Ephraim would be taken away. They suggest further that Matthew was overzealous in using Old Testament prophecies to convince the Jews of the Messiah and should not have used this passage. Others argue that this is a dual prophecy; there was a young woman in Isaiah's day who was to give birth to a child, but the passage was also applicable to the birth of the Son of God. There are still others who have carefully defended the prophecy as a messianic one (see Edward J. Young, The New International Commentary on the Old Testament. The Book of Isaiah [Grand Rapids, Mi.: William B. Eerdmans, 1965]. pp. 277-95).

As Latter-day Saints, we have a great advantage in addition to the work of the scholars. Not only is this passage quoted in the Book of Mormon, but we have the record of Nephi's vision of a beautiful virgin, exceedingly fair and white, who was carried away in the Spirit and who returned bearing the Son of God in her arms (see 1 Ne. 11:13-21). We also have the prophecy of Alma that a virgin in the land of Jerusalem was to be the mother of the Son of God (Alma 7:10). Elder Hugh B. Brown considered Matthew's quoting of Isa. 7:14 an evidence that Isaiah was prophesying of the Savior's birth (see CR, Oct. 1960, p. 93), which refutes the theory of Matthew's overzealousness presented by some scholars. Elder Mark E. Petersen pointed to the recognition of Christ by the shepherds and the wise men from the east, the heralding of this birth by the angelic host, and King Herod's decree to kill the male children of Bethlehem as evidence of the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy (see CR, Oct. 1965, p. 60). In spite of the advantage of modern revelation, however, we still need to be able to understand and explain the famous Immanuel prophecy of Isaiah.

Only one verse of the prophecy is usually cited-verse 14-and that out of context. The prophecy is explainable and is shown to be messianic when quoted in its entirety and in context. Ahaz had refused to listen to Isaiah and had refused a sign from the Lord. Therefore, the prophecy uttered by Isaiah was directed, not to Ahaz, but to all the house of David. Whether there were others present at the time is immaterial. Ahaz, as the king of Judah, had rejected the prophecy. In so doing he had "wearied" Isaiah, a man, but was also wearying God, who had promised David that "thy kingdom shall be established for ever" (2 Sam. 7:16). The King of kings was to come through Judah and David's lineage (see Gen. 49:10), so any appointed king who would believe and live righteously would be supported and sustained by the Lord himself. The second prophecy uttered by Isaiah in this chapter, then, is both a reminder of this promise to Judah and David and a declaration of how the Lord would bring about its fulfillment in spite of a wicked king or a wicked generation. The Lord would bring this about through the miraculous conception of a God (Immanuel means "God with us") and the birth of that God unto a virgin. The coming of Christ was a well-known prophecy. All of the ancient prophets (in both the Old Testament and the Book of Mormon) knew and foretold of Christ's coming (see Jacob 4:4; 7:11; Luke 24:27, 44). It may even be that Isaiah was quoting here a prophecy that had been previously given. The point was that, even if Ahaz rejected the counsel and advice of Jehovah through his prophet, and even if Ahaz led his people into captivity, the Lord Immanuel would still come as had been prophesied.

Verse 15 indicates that Immanuel's diet was to be curd and honey. Some commentators regard this diet as that of the caravan, representing the plain and simple life of the Savior, who was not obligated to the aristocracy of his day. Others interpret the "curd and honey" to be symbolic of the royal diet. Perhaps there is a dual prophecy here. The diet of the inhabitants of the land was to become curd and honey (see note on Isa. 7:17-25). Jesus' birth into the poorer class of people would make this his diet; this suggests a temporal meaning of the passage. A spiritual interpretation would be that Jesus was royalty, the Son of God, through the lineage of King David, and was thus entitled to the revelation from his Father to "know to refuse the evil, and choose the good," to be tempted in all things and yet be without sin (see Heb. 4:15; D&C 20:22).

Isaiah then gives a further prophecy which may be considered a continuation of the second one. "For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings." While this has been the problem verse to many critics in relating the Immanuel prophecy to the life of Christ, the problem is resolved in the context of the historical situation. Isaiah had given a prophecy to all of Judah concerning the house of David. He now comes back to the situation at hand, the problem of Syria and Ephraim. Most of the critics have assumed that the child spoken of in verse 16 is the same child spoken of in verses 14 and 15. Could not the child in verse 16 be any child? A child is accountable at age eight in the eyes of the Lord (see D&C 68:25). In his first eight years he is to learn to distinguish between good and evil. Therefore, Isaiah could be prophesying that the kings of Syria and Ephraim are both going to be forsaken of their kings in less than eight years. This prophecy was also fulfilled: Pekah was killed by the conspiracy of Hoshea about three years after Ahaz was appointed king (see 2 Kgs. 15:30), and Rezin, the king of Syria, was killed by the Assyrians in response to Ahaz's plea for help as they went up and took Damascus (see 2 Kgs. 16:9). Thus within three years both the kings Ahaz feared were removed, and the third prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled.

As the Brethren have spoken in general conferences, their references to this chapter have been limited to verse 14, which is almost always quoted to show that Isaiah foresaw or foretold the day of the Savior's birth. There is one exception to this: Elder Henry D. Taylor once referred to the missionary slogan which the late Elder B. H. Roberts adopted when he served as mission president. The slogan was "Immanuel," which of course means "God be with us." President Roberts also used this slogan in his discourses, in his correspondence, in autographing books and photos, and on numerous other occasions, according to Elder Taylor's report (see CR, Oct. 1975, p. 93).

Isa. 7:17-25 . The prophet Isaiah now utters a fourth prophecy. King Ahaz wants to ask the king of Assyria to come and help him. Isaiah prophesies that the Lord is going to bring the king of Assyria upon Ahaz and all of Judah. The king's coming against them would be the worst devastation they had experienced since the twelve tribes had divided into the two nations of Ephraim and Judah (approximately 975 B.C.). The prophecy states that the land which has been cultivated for agricultural purposes will be left uncultivated following the Assyrian conquest. The fly and the bee are usually interpreted to be the armies of Egypt and Assyria, which would come upon Judah as a swarm. However, the invasion by Egypt is historically questionable. The prophecy therefore seems to refer to literal swarms of flies and bees inhabiting the land. The fly was and still is notorious in Egypt, and the honeybee was apparently notorious in Assyria. When the land remains uncultivated, the Lord will bring the insects from these lands, where they will find a permanent home in the desolate valleys. The Lord's "shaving with a razor that is hired" symbolizes the comfort of having someone else perform a tedious or unpleasant task, such as shaving every morning, and the Lord's using the king of Assyria to do the unpleasant task of punishing the wickedness of Judah. This punishment will be very thorough, as the whole body (land of Judah) will be shaved. Following the devastating "shaving" of the agricultural land, it will be used to graze a few animals. The cow will produce milk, which will be used for making butter, and the honey gathered from the bees will supplement the diet. The main diet for the few nomadic people who remain upon the land will then be milk, or butter, and honey. Thus the land will become a land of milk and honey. The vineyards will be left unpruned or uncared for and will quickly turn into briers and thorns, and only the hunters shall go among them seeking wild animals for food. Small areas will be digged with the mattock (the hoe) for a few vegetables, but the formerly cultivated land will be primarily a grazing land for a few cattle. When Assyria came and conquered northern Israel, she also came upon the regions round about Jerusalem and thus fulfilled this prophecy. Isa. 8 also prophesies of Assyria's coming upon Judah during the conquest of Israel.
