Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

8

The Lord Shall Recover His People

Isa. 8-12

Chapters 8 through 11 are one continuous revelation, and chapter 12 is a concluding song of praise unto Jehovah. Chapter 11 should be of special significance to Latter-day Saints because the angel Moroni quoted it to Joseph Smith in September 1823 and said it was about to be fulfilled. The historical setting for the beginning of the revelation is the same as in chapter 7; whereas chapter 7 was given to Ahaz and those few who were with him, chapter 8 appears to say the same thing to a broader audience-all of Judah. It concerns the fate of the kings of Syria and Israel and the coming onslaught of the king of Assyria upon Judah.

Chapter 9 continues from the Assyrian conquest prophesied in chapter 8 to the time period of Christ's personal ministry. Chapter 10 predicts Israel's rejection of Christ in the meridian of time, her dispersion among the Gentiles, the Gentiles' subsequent rejection of Christ and his gospel, and the return of the remnant of Israel from under the yoke of the Gentiles. A more detailed outline of this long revelation follows.

a. The conquest will be written on a great scroll (8:1).

b. There are two witnesses of the written prophecy (8:2).

c. Isaiah's son is a sign of the time period (8:3-4).

a. They refuse Shiloah and yet rejoice in the defeat of Syria and Ephraim (8:6).

b. The Lord will bring up Assyria like a mighty river overflowing all the land (8:7-8).

a. Isaiah is to trust in the Lord (8:13).

b. Both houses of Israel will stumble over Christ (8:14-15).

c. Isaiah is to seal up the law among the disciples (8:16).

d. Isaiah has spoken and will wait upon the Lord (8:17-18).

e. The various sources of spiritualism must be measured against the law and the prophets (8:19-20).

f. The eventual result will be darkness and anguish (apostasy) (8:21-22).

a. A light will come forth in various lands of Israel (9:1-2).

b. Joy will come as the yoke of the oppressor is broken (9:3-5).

c. The Son of God will come to the throne of David (9:6-7),

a. The Lord warns against pride and stoutness of heart (9:9-12).

b. Judah's leaders cause the people to err (9:13-17).

c. Wickedness encompasses as a fire (9:18-21).

d. The poor and the needy are neglected (10:1-4).

a. He will send Assyria against Israel (10:5-6).

b. The king of Assyria will not recognize the Lord but will boast in himself (10:7-11).

c. The Lord will punish the Assyrians following his judgments upon Israel and Judah (10:12-19).

a. The Lord's people who dwell in Zion will not be afraid of the Assyrian (Gentile)(10:24-26).

b. The burden of the Gentiles will be broken off (10:27-34).

a. The Spirit of the Lord will rest upon the rod (the servant of the Lord) (11:2-3).

b. The earth will be smitten with the word of his mouth (11:4).

c. Peace and knowledge will be restored to the earth (11:5-9).

a. The Gentiles will seek this ensign (the book of Mormon or The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints) (11:10).

b. The Lord will set his hand a second time to recover the dispersed of Judah (11:11-12).

c. The envy between Judah and Ephraim shall depart, and they will inhabit all the promised land of Abraham. (11:13-14).

d. The Lord will work miracles in their behalf (11:15).

e. The remnant which left from Assyria (the ten tribes) will return (11:16).

a. Jehovah is Israel's strength and salvation (12:2).

b. Israel will draw water from the well of salvation (12:3).

c. Israel will praise his name among all the people of the earth (12:4-6).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

All of these chapters are quoted in their entirety in the Book of Mormon, with parts of chapter 11 quoted twice. Most of the many variations between the Book of Mormon text and the KJV are insignificant. When the angel Moroni quoted the entire eleventh chapter to Joseph Smith, he said it was soon to be fulfilled. There are several quotations from these chapters in the Doctrine and Covenants and the New Testament, and a few quotations from the modern-day prophets and Church leaders.

Isa. 8:1-3 . A marginal note in the KJV gives the meaning of Maher-shalal-hash-baz as "In making speed to the spoil he hasteneth the prey." This name, which Isaiah was to write upon a great roll, was a witness of the speed with which Assyria was to take Syria and Ephraim. The law of witnesses (see Deut. 19:15; Matt. 18:16) is fully exemplified by the prophet Isaiah's saying that two witnesses would observe what he recorded upon the scroll, and by the Lord's giving Isaiah's son a name which would symbolize the Assyrian conquest.

Isa. 8:4 . The Lord says that before the infant can cry "mother" or "father," the prophecy will be fulfilled. That would be two or three years at the most. Assyria's conquest of Israel took place within three years of the beginning of the reign of Ahaz (see note on Isa. 7:14), so this prophecy was literally fulfilled. Since the longer time period of a child's accountability was used in Isa. 7:16, it is assumed that the giving of this prophecy followed that one chronologically.

Isa. 8:6-8. Having foretold the future of Israel, the kingdom to the north, the Lord now prophesies Judah's future. Isaiah uses the metaphor of a calm pool or spring and a strong overflowing river to symbolize the king of Assyria. Since Judah has rejected the still, small voice of the Spirit, the force of Assyria will come upon them and completely devastate the land.

Isa. 8:9-10. These two verses are acknowledged to be difficult. They seem to be a declaration against the countries coming upon Israel ("all ye of far countries") that they also will be broken in pieces because God is with Israel and will eventually deliver her from all her enemies. This seems acceptable, as God holds "the destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth" (D&C 117:6).

Isa. 8:11-18. These are also difficult verses. The Book of Mormon helps, however. Apparently Isaiah was forbidden to preach unto Judah, as Mormon was forbidden to preach to the Nephites and was to stand as an idle witness against her (see Morm. 1:16; 3:16). The Lord had left Judah without excuse by giving her two or three witnesses: the previous testimony of Ahaz, the great roll attested to by two witnesses, and the name of the son of Isaiah. Isaiah was to sanctify the Lord of Hosts and to fear him; the Lord would then be his sanctuary. However, the Lord would be a stumbling block to both the unbelieving houses of Israel.

Both Peter and Paul quoted verse 14 to the Jews as evidence of their stumbling over Christ (see 1 Pet. 2:8; Rom. 9:33; 1 Cor. 1:23). Jacob, the Book of Mormon prophet, also foretold that the Jews would stumble over Christ (see Jacob 4:15). To those disciples who would hearken, Isaiah was to "bind up the testimony" and "seal the law." Prophets both ancient and modern are given power to bind and seal something on earth and have it sealed in heaven (see Matt. 16:19; 18:18; D&C 1:8; 68:12). The wording of verse 16 is reversed in D&C 88:84, wherein the Lord sent his disciples among the Gentiles, and in the Appendix to the Doctrine and Covenants, referring to those who refused to believe in the Lord's servants (see D&C 133:71-72). The wording therein is to bind up the law and seal up the testimony instead of binding the testimony and sealing up the law. However, the meaning is the same in either case. While the sealing may be a sealing unto heaven or a sealing against heaven, as shown in the various references cited, Isaiah's charge was to seal up the disciples to heaven. In verses 17 and 18, Isaiah attests that he will follow the Lord and stand as a witness. When Paul uses the first part of Isa. 8:18 as an evidence of Christ's calling the people his brethren, he is apparently quoting it out of context (see Heb. 2:13).

Isa. 8:19-20 . When people request revelation from sources not of God, such as the various forms of witchcraft enumerated in verse 19 (compare 1 Sam. 28:7-25), these sources are to be tested according to the law (of Moses) and the testimony (of the prophets). Elder Ezra Taft Benson quoted this scripture as a key for not being deceived and said that this great truth from Isaiah was so important that it was included in the Book of Mormon (see CR, Oct. 1963, p. 16). President Joseph Fielding Smith quoted verse 19 as an example of the Lord's warning Israel not to seek after "familiar spirits" or other "devices prevalent among the heathen nations" (AQ, 4:33). The Prophet Joseph Smith used the phrase "to the law and to the testimony" (verse 20) in reference to the scriptures generally (see TPJS, pp. 373-74).

Isa. 9:1-2 . Four variations of this passage (those found in the KJV, the RSV, the Book of Mormon, and Matt. 4:15-16) are quoted below to help us understand the message.

Nevertheless the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the nations.Nevertheless, the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation, when at first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun, and the land of Naphtali, and afterwards did more grievously afflict by the way of the Red Sea beyond Jordan in Galilee of the nations.The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined. (KJV, Isa. 9:1-2.) The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined. (2 Ne. 19:1-2.) But there will be no gloom for her that was in anguish. In the former time he brought into contempt the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, but in the latter time he will make glorious the way of the sea, the land beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the nations.The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthalim, by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles;The people who walked in darkness have seen a great light; those who dwelt in a land of deep darkness, on them has light shined. (RSV, Isa. 9:1-2.) The people which sat in darkness saw great light; and to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up. (Matt. 4:15-16.)

Verse 1 in the RSV shows a transition stating that the former anguish or darkness was to be changed to a glorious status. The Matthew account introduces the great Galileen period of the Savior's ministry, which was the first and possibly the most successful of the various periods of his ministry (as usually designated in New Testament studies). When the land of Canaan was divided among the twelve tribes of Israel, the tribes of Zebulun and Naphtali lay to the west of the Sea of Galilee and formed the northern border of Israel next to the gentile nations of the Galilee. The phrase "way of the sea" has puzzled many scholars, but the Book of Mormon has retained the identity of this body of water as the Red Sea. The land of Naphtali and Zebulun was the first area captured by the Assyrians in the time of Isaiah (see 2 Kgs. 15:29). The phrase "afterwards did more grievously afflict by the way of the Red Sea beyond Jordan in Galilee of the nations," as translated in the Book of Mormon (which is basically the same as Isaiah, with the exception of the identity of the sea), probably has reference to a later captivity by Assyria rather than the promise of "making glorious the way of the sea," as translated in the RSV. The blessing which was to have come to this area, but which had been lost by Israel's wickedness and subsequent subjection by Assyria, would come through the "light" of Christ as he ministered unto Judah in Galilee, as noted in Matthew.

Isa. 9:3. The Book of Mormon deletes the word "not" (preceding "increased the joy") found in the KJV. The RSV has also dropped the "not."

Thou hast multiplied the nation, and not increased the joy: they joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. (Isa. 9:3.) Thou hast multiplied the nation, and increased the joy- they joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. (2 Ne. 19:3.)

A marginal note in the KJV suggests an alternate reading of "to him increased the joy" instead of "not increased the joy," which would agree with the other versions.

Isa. 9:4 . The Book of Mormon does not have the phrase "as in the day of Midian" at the end of this verse. This could have been an intentional omission by Nephi, as it did not apply to his people.

Isa. 9:6-7. The only difference in verse 6 in the Book of Mormon is the capitalization of the words "Mighty" and "Everlasting." Since these further designate the greatness and the Fatherhood of Christ, they seem to be significant. The Book of Mormon does not have the word "his" preceding "government," but the JST does retain the word "his" while following the other slight changes in the Book of Mormon.

The angel who appeared to Mary identified the Son who was to be born to her as He who would occupy the throne of David (see Luke 1:32). The angel who spoke to the shepherds on the night of Christ's birth paraphrased Isa. 9:6 (see Luke 2:10-1 1).

The General Authorities often refer to verse 6 as a prophecy of Christ's coming or as a designation of one or more of his titles. But since their comments are not interpretive, they are not quoted here.

Isa. 9:8 . The Book of Mormon retains the identifying "his word" rather than "a word" in the KJV. This retention broadens the meaning to include the gospel rather than just a single prophecy.

The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel. (Isa. 9:8) The Lord sent his word into Jacob and it hath lighted upon Israel (2 Ne. 19:8.)

This fits the context of the sins or reasons for which the Lord's judgments are to come upon northern Israel or Ephraim. After Isaiah prophesies of a future time when a "light" will come forth in the land which is about to be smitten by the Assyrians, he returns to the reasons for which Israel is going to be smitten. These are listed in the outline at the beginning of this chapter.

Isa. 9:9-12. The first evil which is to bring the judgments of God upon Ephraim is the pride of their hearts. They have failed to recognize the judgments which have already come, and have rationalized that if their dwellings are destroyed they will build with better materials. Their reliance upon the material things and their own abilities is evidence of that pride which will cause their downfall. The descriptions of this evil and the other three which follow all end with the same pronouncement: God's judgment will not be "turned away."

Isa. 9 :13-17. The second evil to bring the destructive judgments of God upon Israel is her wicked leaders, both the political and the religious leaders. The "head" (government) and the "tail" (false prophets) are identified in verse 15. The phrase "and honourable" is not given in the Book of Mormon as characteristic of the head. Under the government of Israel, the Lord's prophet was to instruct the king or the government leaders (for example, Isaiah taught Ahaz, as Nathan had taught David), but Israel's future prophets will cause her to err. The entire people will be hypocrites. The Book of Mormon phrase "of them" in verse 17, identifying the young men and the fatherless and widows specifically as hypocrites, points up the justice of God in not showing mercy to them.

Isa. 9:18-21. The third evil to visit Israel is the wickedness which is likened to a forest fire. The fire of wickedness will sweep on, using the people for fuel. All will be consumed in wickedness. This wickedness is so severe that brothers will "consume" brothers, members of their own families, and even themselves-and will still not be satisfied.

Isa. 10:1-4. The fourth and final evil pronounced by Isaiah is the neglect of the poor and the needy. How we care for the poor and the needy is a high priority with the Lord, and to neglect them is to bring his judgment upon us (see D&C 104:17-18.)

Isa. 10:5-11. In Morm. 4:5 we read, "But, behold, the judgments of God will overtake the wicked; and it is by the wicked that the wicked are punished." The Book of Mormon renders the ending of verse 5 "and the staff in their hand is their indignation" (rather than the KJV "mine indignation").

O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation. (Isa. 10:5.) O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is their indignation. (2 Nephi

20:5.)

Thus Assyria is a good example of the principle taught in Morm. 4:5. Assyria will punish the wicked nations of Syria and Ephraim in her own wicked indignation. In verse 12 we read that the heart of the king of Assyria is not right.

Isa. 10:12-19 . In the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord says, "And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments" (D&C 59:21). Assyria is a good example of this principle taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Although there is nothing said about Assyria's being given the opportunity to keep the commandments of God in these verses, when the full history is known it will undoubtedly show that Assyria did have that opportunity. This conclusion is drawn from the allegory of Zenos in Jacob 5, which outlines the history of the house of Israel. The wild olive branches are the Gentiles, who are to be grafted into the tree of Israel and given the opportunity to bear fruit. That some did bear fruit from this graft is shown by the Savior's declaration to his disciples to harvest the fruit among the Samaritans (see John 4:31-38), who were in part a product of the Assyrian conquest as the Assyrians brought Babylonians and others into Samaria.

Isa. 10:20-23 . Having prophesied the fate of Assyria, Isaiah now comes back again to the promise to a remnant of Israel. Although she will be scattered among the Gentiles and will be dependent upon them, Israel will once again rely upon the Holy One of Israel in truth and will return. Paul quotes Isa. 10:22 (with other prophecies) to show the Romans, who were Gentiles, that the righteous of Israel will be saved as well as the righteous Gentiles (see Rom. 9:27).

Isa. 10:24-25 . These verses are a plea to the people who will dwell in Zion in the future. The Zion spoken of by the Old Testament prophets was identified by the Prophet Joseph Smith as the whole of North and South America (see TPJS, p. 362). The "Assyrians" in verse 24 would thus symbolize the Gentiles who were inhabiting that land and were ruling over the blood of Israel scattered among them or living under their rule. The plea is for the Israelites to rely upon the Lord. While they may have trials and tribulations, these will be short-lived and the promised blessings of Israel will be restored.

Isa. 10:27 . An identification of the pronouns in verse 27 will give us a clearer understanding. "His" burden (or yoke) has reference to the Gentile burden of oppression. "Thy" shoulder refers to the shoulder of Israel under that oppression.

Isa. 10:28-34. The various towns in these verses are conquered during an Assyrian assault on Jerusalem, but the assault will fail because the Lord will intercede.

Isa. 11:1. The interpretation of this passage has been given by Joseph Smith in D&C 113:1-4. The stem of Jesse is Christ. The book of Revelation also identifies Jesus as such (see Rev. 5:5; 22:16). The rod is "a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim" (D&C 113:4). That the servant is Joseph Smith himself seems evident. President Brigham Young taught that Joseph was a "pure Ephraimite," and this was confirmed by President Joseph Fielding Smith (see DS, 3:253-54, for both statements). His being a pure Ephraimite does not necessarily mean he had only the blood of Ephraim; it may mean he had some of the pure blood of Ephraim in his veins. This is also evidenced by the fact that his father was the Patriarch to the Church, which office belongs to "the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham" (TPJS, p. 151). Joseph Smith would likely have had the blood of other tribes in his veins as well, since Israel lived among the Gentiles for hundreds of years. Certainly Joseph Smith had "much power" laid upon him, as D&C 113:4 states. All this fits well with the angel Moroni's declaration to Joseph Smith that the eleventh chapter of Isaiah was about to be fulfilled (see JS-H 1:40).

The branch which was to grow out of the roots is Christ (see Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah, [Deseret Book Company, 1978] pp. 192-93). "Branch" is capitalized in the KJV. That a branch of Israel is to come out of the mother tree is mentioned in the allegory of Zenos (see Jacob 5:54-56).

Isa. 11:2-5. The traditional interpretation of these verses is that they describe Christ. This is supported by pas sages in the book of Revelation (2:16; 19:15) and the Doctrine and Covenants (19:15; 113:1-2), and by President Joseph Fielding Smith (see DS, 1:168). Nephi quotes verses 4 through 9 (see 2 Ne. 30:9-15), clearly indicating that verses 4 and 5 describe "the Lord God." There is one verse inserted be tween verses 4 and 5 (2 Ne. 30:10) which appears to be Nephi's comment. There are also three verses following verse 9 which are not in the KJV (2 Ne. 30:16-18).

Isa. 11:2-5 must be understood within the context established in verse 1, including the "rod" (servant) mentioned there, and verses 2 through 4 especially may refer to Joseph Smith. "The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him." As D&C 5:6-10 clearly points out, Joseph Smith was chosen to give the Lord's word to this generation. These verses may have a double reference to both Christ and Joseph Smith. (Isaiah uses double references in other passages as well; for example, see note on 52:13-15.) After all, the servant was to be an instrument in the hands of Christ to carry out his work. As the Spirit of the Lord came upon Joseph Smith, he did attain wisdom, understanding, and knowledge; further, Joseph did judge in righteousness through the Spirit of the Lord.

Isa. 11:6-9. These verses, which describe the millennial reign of Christ for which his servants are preparing, are often quoted in general conferences by modern Church leaders making reference to that future day. The clause "a little child shall lead them" in verse 6 is also quoted occasionally out of context to introduce examples of little children leading today. This is consistent with other scriptures referring to the Lord's speaking "out of the mouth of babes" (see Ps. 8:2; Matt. 21:16; Alma 32:23).

Joseph Smith paraphrased part of verses 6 through 9 in the following two statements:

Men must become harmless before the brute creation, and when men lose their vicious dispositions and cease to destroy the animal race, the lion and the lamb can dwell together, and the sucking child can play with the serpent in safety. (TPJS, p. 71.)

Friendship is one of the grand fundamental principles of "Mormonism"; [it is designed] to revolutionize and civilize the world, and cause wars and contentions to cease and men to become friends and brothers. Even the wolf and the lamb shall dwell together; the leopard shall lie down with the kid, the calf, the young lion and the fatling; and a little child shall lead them; the bear and the cow shall lie down together, and the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall play on the cockatrice's den; and they shall not hurt or destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord of hosts. (TPJS, p. 316.)

Joseph Smith also gave a different rendering of the last part of verse 9-"the earth will be filled with sacred knowledge, as the waters cover the great deep" (TPJS, p. 93)-and indicated that this prophecy would be fulfilled after Israel is gathered. President Joseph Fielding Smith has stated, "If the knowledge of the Lord covers the earth as the waters do the sea, then it must be universally received" (DS, 3:65). He has quoted Isa. 11:9 in reference to the millennial conditions and has urged the Saints to study the gospel, exercise faith, and keep the commandments that they might hasten that day, and he has also stated that the wicked will eventually be removed from the earth, which will further allow truths to sweep the earth, although man will still have his agency to accept or reject the gospel (see AQ, 1:xvii; 2:xiii-xiv; 2:22; 5:143-144). Elder Orson Pratt taught that this great knowledge which was to cover the earth (spoken of in verse 9) was to include a restoration of all the records which had been kept in former dispensations, and he enumerated many of these records (see JD, 16:47ff.; see also Hel. 3:13-15; 3 Ne. 26:8-12; Ether 3:25-4:7 Elder Pratt also taught that

... the earth will be made new, and great knowledge will be imparted to the inhabitants thereof, as predicted in the 11th chapter of the prophecy of Isaiah. The knowledge of God will then cover the earth as the waters cover the mighty deep. There will be no place of ignorance, no place of darkness, no place for those that will not serve God. Why? Because Jesus, the Great Creator, and also the Great Redeemer, will be himself on the earth, and his holy angels will be on the earth, and all the resurrected Saints that have died in former dispensations will all come forth, and they will be on the earth. What a happy earth this creation will be, when this purifying process shall come, and the earth be filled with the knowledge of God as the waters cover the great deep!" (JD, 21:324-25.)

Isa. 11:10 . The root of Jesse is identified in D&C 113:5-6 as "a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days." The fact that these keys of the kingdom were given to Joseph Smith for time and eternity (see D&C 90:2-4) helps us identify the servant. Paul quoted this passage with slightly different wording as evidence that the Gentiles were to receive the gospel. This wording also helps to identify the servant as Joseph Smith: "And again, Esaias saith, There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles; in him shall the Gentiles trust" (Rom. 15:12).

Isa. 11:11-12 . The Prophet Joseph Smith provided this enlightening comment on verse 11:

The time has at last arrived when the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has set his hand again the second time to recover the remnants of his people, which have been left from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea, and with them to bring in the fulness of the Gentiles, and establish that covenant with them, which was promised when their sins should be taken away. See Isaiah xi; Romans xi:25, 26 and 27, and also Jeremiah xxxi:31, 32 and 33. This covenant has never been established with the house of Israel, nor with the house of Judah, for it requires two parties to make a covenant, and those two parties must be agreed, or no covenant can be made.

Christ, in days of His flesh, proposed to make a covenant with them, but they rejected Him and His proposals, and in consequence therof, they were broken off, and no covenant was made with them at that time. But their unbelief has not rendered the promise of God of none effect: no, for there was another day limited in David, which was the day of His power; and then His people, Israel, should be a willing people; -and He would write His law in their hearts, and print it in their thoughts; their sins and their iniquities He would remember no more. (TPJS, pp. 14-15.)

Elder Orson Pratt identified the outcasts of Israel spoken of in verse 12 as the ten tribes: "Here is a declaration that the two great kingdoms of Israel-its 'outcasts,' the ten tribes, scattered seven hundred and twenty years before Christ, and the 'dispersed of Judah,' dispersed among all nations, shall be gathered. But before he gathers them he will set up an ensign-an ensign is to be raised in the latter-days especially for the gathering of Israel." (JD, 14:66.) Thus there are three separate phases of the gathering spoken of in verse 12. President Joseph Fielding Smith also identified Ephraim as the ten tribes, Judah as the two tribes, and the Philistines (in verse 14) as the Gentiles (see AQ, 2:181).

The Lord's setting his hand the second time to recover his people is associated with the "marvellous work and a wonder" prophesied in Isa. 29:14 and in 2 Ne. 25:17 and 29:1. The standard or "ensign" spoken of in Isa. 11:12 is identified in 2 Ne. 29:2 as the words of Nephi's seed (the Book of Mormon). This has also been more broadly interpreted by the General Authorities as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Typical of such statements is one by Elder LeGrand Richards which adds the notation that no other church is accomplishing what this Church is doing for its members and that people come to the Church to learn how it accomplishes what it does (see CR, Oct. 1975, p. 77). This certainly fits the concept of an ensign. Jacob, the Book of Mormon prophet, said that the day the Lord set his hand the second time to recover his people would be the day the Lord would send his servants to prune his vineyard for "the last time," as foretold in the allegory of Zenos (see Jacob 6:2).

Isa. 11:13-14 . These verses describe a return to a united kingdom of Israel as it was before the division following the reign of Solomon. Ephraim was the name by which the northern 101/2 tribes were called, and Judah consisted of the southern 11/2 tribes. Ephraim will at the time of this reuniting occupy the promised land of Joseph, the Americas (see 3 Ne. 15:12-13). This prophecy speaks of more than a geographical uniting; it is a spiritual and political reuniting. Abraham was promised the land "from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates" (Gen. 15:18), which has never as yet been completely occupied by Abraham's children under one head. In Isaiah's time the Philistines occupied the area of the present-day Gaza Strip on the Mediterranean coast, which falls within the geography of Abraham's promised land; and Edom, the descendants of Esau, occupied the area of Mt. Seir to the south and the east. Moab, the descendants of Lot and his eldest daughter, occupied the territory directly north of Edom on the east side of the Jordan. Together, the Edomites and the Moabites represented the expansion of the land of Abraham on the east. The children of Ammon, the descendants of Lot and his younger daughter, occupied the land directly north of Moab on the east side of the Jordan. Today these all constitute the modern nation of Jordan. That this prophecy is yet to be fulfilled is shown by the declaration that the children of Ammon will obey the house of Israel. None of this land east of the Jordan is under the rule of the house of Israel, nor has the envy yet departed from between Ephraim and Judah to bring about a united rule.

Isa. 11:15. Nephi said that "in the days that the prophecies of Isaiah shall be fulfilled men shall know of a surety, at the times when they shall come to pass" (2 Ne. 25:7). This prophecy in verse 15 is one of those which will probably not be understood until it comes to pass, but when it does there will be no doubt as to its fulfillment. The identification of "the tongue of the Egyptian sea" and "the river," which today is uncertain in the minds of biblical scholars, Will become certain when the Lord delivers his people. According to Oliver Cowdery, the events in this verse and those in verse 16 would need to occur so that the gathering could be fully accomplished (see MA, Apr. 1835, p. 111). Elder Orson Pratt referred to this prophecy as a "literal transaction":

The same thing, not a spiritual, but a literal transaction, as the Lord smote the tongue of the Egyptian sea in ancient days, and caused his people to go through on a highway in the midst of those mighty waters which stood like walls on each side of the assembly of Israel. So in the latter days he will not only cut off the tongue of the Egyptian sea, but the river in its seven streams will also be divided and men will go through dryshod. This is the testimony of the prophets concerning the events that are to take place when the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. (JD, 14:66.)

Isa. 11:16. The remnant which left from Assyria are, of course, the ten tribes who were taken into the north. The apocryphal book of 2 Esdras tells of miracles which will attend their return like those that attended their departure: "Then they dwelt there until the last times; and now, when they are about to come again, the Most High will stop the channels of the river again, so that they may be able to pass over. Therefore you saw the multitude gathered together in peace." (2 Esdras 13:46-47.) And the Doctrine and Covenants gives an even more sure prophecy of the event spoken of in Isaiah (see D&C 133:26-33). President Joseph Fielding Smith refers to the entire eleventh chapter of Isaiah in speaking of the lost tribes coming to their brother Ephraim, the firstborn in Israel, to receive their crowning blessings (see DS, 3:252).

Isa. 12:1-6. This song of praise unto Jehovah will be sung in the day of Israel's great restoration. Paul, in writing to the Hebrews, may have been quoting a part of verse 2 to show a brotherhood between Christ and his people (see Heb. 2:13). The water which is drawn "out of the wells of salvation" is similarly promised by John the Revelator (see Rev. 21:6) the "water" which is promised and given through Christ is identified by John as the Holy Ghost (see John 7:38-39).
