Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

9

The Warning to Babylon

Isa. 13-14

Chapters 13 and 14 are the beginning of a series of revelations (chapters 13 through 23) given to nine different nations. Most of these messages of warning begin with the introductory phrase "The burden of," which is usually interpreted to mean a message of doom. Chapters 13 and 14 both concern Babylon and are by far the longest of the series. They are also the only two chapters of this series which are quoted in the Book of Mormon. There is undoubtedly a dual message within them. The basic message is against the old Babylon, which existed before Isaiah's time and became a world power under King Nebuchadnezzar after Assyria's downfall and after the ministry of Isaiah. Babylon became the epitome of wickedness in the ancient world, and was used in both the New Testament and the Doctrine and Covenants as the symbol of the wicked world (see Rev. 14:8; D&C 133:14). Thus a greater message is to modern-day Babylon, the wickedness of our world. It is often difficult to know which Babylon the text is referring to, and it may be that sometimes it refers to both at the same time. Because Nephi included these two chapters in the Book of Mormon record, it would appear that the majority of the text refers to the latter days.

Chapter 14 is an interesting proverb against the king of Babylon. Babylon represents the wicked world, and the king of that wickedness is none other than Satan himself. The graphic description in this chapter of Satan's fall is most interesting.

A detailed outline of the two chapters will give the reader insight regarding what to expect as they are studied.

a. Those who respond to this call are invited into the gates of the nobles (13:2).

b. The whole land of Babylon will be destroyed (13:5).

a. Fear, pain, and amazement will come upon men (13:7-8).

b. The land will be laid desolate and sinners destroyed (13:9).

c. Wonders will appear in the heavens (13:10).

d. The destruction of the wicked will leave but few men (13:11-12).

e. The earth will remove from her place (13:13).

f. Men will be chased, children killed, goods spoiled, wives ravished (13:14-18).

a. It will never be inhabited by man (13:20).

b. Wild beasts will have the land (13:21-22).

a. Strangers (Gentiles) will be joined with them (14:1).

b. Israel will rule over the Gentiles (14:2).

c. Israel will rest from her sorrow and bondage (14:3).

a. Satan will be cast from the earth (14:4-8).

b. He will be received in hell (where he is cast) (14:9-11).

c. Though he fell from heaven, he aspires to be God (14:12-14).

d. He will fall into hell (spirit prison) and be scorned (14:15-17).

e. He will eventually be cast out of hell (into outer darkness) (14:18-21).

a. The Lord will rise up against Babylon (14:22-23).

b. He will tread down the king of Assyria (the Gentiles) (14:25).

c. His hand will be upon all nations (14:26-27).

a. Palestine will not rejoice over Assyria's fall (14:29-30).

b. Another devastation will come from the north to make Palestine cry (14:31).

c. A reason to rejoice is given: Zion will be established, and the poor of the Lord will trust in Zion (14:32).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

As stated previously, these two chapters are quoted in their entirety in the Book of Mormon. There are several significant retentions in the Book of Mormon text which aid in understanding the message. The New Testament and the Doctrine and Covenants also provide some important helps in identifying the time period and meaning of the prophecy. Modern Church leaders have spoken about only three subject areas in these two chapters, and only one of them extensively.

Isa. 13:1 . That the Babylon spoken of in this verse includes more than ancient Babylon is obvious from the rest of the chapter, which clearly speaks of the time of the second coming of Christ. Another Babylon is identified in the Doctrine and Covenants as "spiritual Babylon" and is defined as wickedness (see D&C 133:14). Various other sections in the Doctrine and Covenants use Babylon in this context (see D&C 1:16; 35:11; 64:24; 86:3). The book of Revelation also speaks repeatedly of the fall of Babylon in the last days, which has reference to the fall of the kingdom of the devil (see Rev. 14:8; 16:19; 17:5; 18:2, 10, 21). Jeremiah chapters 50 and 51 contain the words of the Lord against Babylon by Jeremiah the prophet; these sayings are more detailed than Isaiah's and seem directed toward ancient Babylon.

Isa. 13:2. The word "banner" may better be translated "ensign," as in Isa. 5:26. The King James translators rendered the same Hebrew word in three different ways: ensign (Isa. 11:10), banner (Isa. 13:2), and standard (Isa. 62:10). The Book of Mormon uses the word "banner," but the Joseph Smith Translation reads "my banner," which clarifies that it was the Lord's banner which was to be raised. The banner or ensign being lifted up upon the high mountain may also be the establishment of the kingdom of God, as in Isa. 2:2. The exalted voice in 13:2 could be the "voice of the Lord" crying, "Go ye out of Babylon" (D&C 133:4-8). "That they may go into the gates of the noble" is an invitation for all who will gather to Zion from the gentile countries, and for Judah to flee to Jerusalem (see D&C 133:9-13; compare Rev. 18:4).

Isa. 13:3-5 . These verses, along with verse 2, have the same basic message as the parable of the wheat and tares (see Matt. 13:24-30; D&C 86:1-7). Note the following comparison of the King James and Book of Mormon translations of this passage:

I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even them that rejoice in my highness.I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones, for mine anger is not upon them that rejoice in my highness.The noise of o multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together: the Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.The noise of the multitude in the mountains like as of a great people. a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together, the Lord of Hosts mustereth the hosts of the battle.They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the Lord, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land. (Isa. 13:3-5.) They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, yea, the Lord, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land. (2 Ne. 23:3-5.)

Verse 3 has reference to those messengers who are gathered and are to be sent out to warn of the coming destruction of Babylon (the tares) and to invite the righteous (the wheat) to gather out. With the Book of Mormon retention, verse 3 fits much better the context of the entire passage. This gathering may also be correlated with Isa. 2:2, but includes the forces of heaven (the destroying angels) who will follow those messengers and will literally destroy the nation of wickedness, spiritual Babylon (see D&C 86:1-7).

Isa. 13:8. The KJV "they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth" is not in the Book of Mormon, but this deletion does not alter the meaning or the context of the verse.

Isa. 13:10. This verse is closely akin to a sign given by the Savior on the Mount of Olives which was to precede his second coming (see Matt. 24:29). There are also several references in the Doctrine and Covenants which are very similar to this verse, referring to the period of the Second Coming (see D&C 29:14; 34:9; 45:42; 88:87; 133:49). Oliver Cowdery apparently was quoting or paraphrasing this verse, along with Isa. 13:13, when he reported what scriptures the angel Moroni quoted to Joseph Smith in September 1823 and noted that they were soon to be fulfilled (see MA, Apr. 1835, pp. 111-12). There is one interesting difference in the Book of Mormon rendition: it uses the pronoun "her" to refer to both the sun and the moon, whereas the KJV uses the traditional pronoun "his" in reference to the sun. There is no known reason for this change.

Isa. 13:11 . In the April 1974 general conference, President Spencer W. Kimball stated that it seemed hard for many members of the Church to live in the world and yet not be of the world. He then quoted this verse as a warning to those who were following worldly ways. (See CR, Apr. 1974, p. 6.)

Isa. 13:13 . This verse, which notes cosmological changes that will affect the earth at the time of Christ's second coming, is partially quoted or paraphrased in D&C 21:6 and 35:24. It was also quoted by Oliver Cowdery (see note on Isa. 13:10).

Isa. 13:14-15 . The Book of Mormon translation of verse 15 contains some significant retentions:

And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man taketh up: they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every one into his own land.And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man taketh up; and they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every one into his own land.Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword. (Isaiah13:14-15.)Every one that is proud shall be thrust through; yea, and every one that is joined to the wicked shall fall by the sword. (2 Ne. 23:14-15.)

Beginning with verse 14, Isaiah seems to describe the literal conquest of Babylon by the Medes, although this also appears to be a dual prophecy including spiritual Babylon.

Isa. 13:19-22 . The Book of Mormon retains a complete sentence at the end of verse 22 regarding the destruction of the wicked and the Lord's mercy to his people-those who will accept him as their God.

And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged. (Isa. 13:22.) And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces; and her time is near to come, and her day shall not be prolonged. For I will destroy her speedily; yea, for I will be merciful unto my people, but the wicked shall perish. (2 Ne. 23:22.)

This ending is a good transition into the next chapter. In commenting on Isaiah's words, Nephi declared that ancient Babylon would be destroyed and that the Jews would therefore be "scattered by other nations" (2 Ne. 25:15). Elder LeGrand Richards quoted this passage as Isaiah's prophecy of the destruction of ancient Babylon, noting that Elders Spencer W. Kimball and Howard W. Hunter had visited the sites in 1961 and had seen the destruction (see CR, Oct. 1966, p. 42).

Isa. 14:1-3. These three verses are an extension of the final thought in the Book of Mormon rendition of 13:22. The Lord's mercy will be shown by his gathering his people back to their own land. The strangers who will be joined with them are most probably the Gentiles who will have accepted the gospel while the house of Israel is being gathered. The second verse in the Book of Mormon contains an eighteen-word retention which emphasizes the extent of the gathering of Israel-from "the ends of the earth"-and establishes that there will be more than one land for the gathering.

For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land; and the strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place: and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for servants and handmaids: and they shall take them captives, whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors.And the people shall take them and bring them to their place; yea, from far unto the ends of the earth; and they shall return to their lands of promise. And the house of Israel shall possess them, and the land of the Lord shall be for servants and handmaids; and they shall take them captives unto whom they were captives; and they shall rule over their oppressors.And it shall come to pass in the day that the Lord shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve. (Isa. 14:1-3.) And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall give thee rest, from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve. (2 Ne. 24:1-3.)

Verse 2 also shows a reversal of the ruling class: whereas Israel had been captive and in bondage to the Gentiles, the Israelites will now rule (in righteousness) over their former oppressors. Verse 3 retains the wording "that day" instead of the KJV "the day," clearly designating the time when Israel will be gathered and freed from bondage.

Isa. 14:4. The Book of Mormon again retains a designation of the time spoken of: "And it shall come to pass in that day, that thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon" (2 Ne. 24:4).

Verses 4b through 21 are generally considered to be a poem, which Dr. Sidney B. Sperry called "one of the finest examples of Hebrew poetry in the Bible" (The Voice of Israel's Prophets [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1965], p. 44). While the poem contains a description of Satan as the ruler of spiritual Babylon, the message is a dual one; Satan, of course, is described under the guise of the ancient king of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar.

Isa. 14:4-8. This section of the poem describes the beginning of the Millennium, when Satan will be bound and the earth will rest. The reference is to rulers who have come under the influence of Satan and not solely to Nebuchadnezzar or one of his successors. The binding of Satan at the beginning of the thousand years is also prophesied in the New Testament (see Rev. 20:1-3), the Book of Mormon (see 1 Ne. 22:26), and the Doctrine and Covenants (see 43:31; 88:110; 101:28). First 1 Ne. 22:15 suggests that the prophecy of the binding of Satan used by Nephi may have been taken from Isaiah.

Isa. 14:9-11 . This section of the poem predicts Satan's being restricted to the spirit world of hell during the millennial years of peace on earth, and describes the reaction of bell's inhabitants when it is announced that he is assigned there. That he will have influence there is shown by the Prophet Joseph Smith's statement that "when we have power to put all enemies under our feet in this world, and a knowledge to triumph over all evil spirits in the world to come, then we are saved" (TPJS, p. 297). Alma 34:34-35 also shows that the spirit of the devil will have power to possess the unrepentant in the spirit world. When he is bound in the spirit world, "the chief ones of the earth"-those leaders who were influential in the devil's kingdom while they lived upon the earth-will assemble to greet him. When they see him, they will be amazed at his having lost his power.

Isa. 14:12-14 . Isaiah here describes Lucifer's fall from heaven in the premortal existence. The same event is described by John in the book of Revelation (12:7-9) and by both Moses and Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price (see Moses 4:1-4; Abr. 3:27-28). Many of the General Authorities quote these verses in this context (e.g., see Marion G. Romney, CR, Apr. 1971, p. 23). Isaiah's reference to Satan as a "son of the morning" is usually interpreted to mean that he was one of the early spirits born of our Father in Heaven; D&C 76:25-27 also refers to him by that name. His objective-to become God-is echoed by his followers, who are collectively described as "that which... seeketh to become a law unto itself" (D&C 88:35). The Book of Mormon further describes Satan's objective: having been cast out and doomed to a miserable state forever, he seeks to make all men miserable like he is (see 2 Ne. 2:17-18). These verses in Isaiah are often quoted by modern Church leaders in reference to Satan's being cast out of heaven. Joseph Smith taught that Satan's punishment was being forbidden to have a body, and thus he and his followers go throughout the earth seeking to obtain the tabernacles of others (see TPJS, pp. 297-98).

Isa. 14:15-17 . Isaiah now prophesies the devil's fall from earth to the spirit prison, and notes that those who inhabit the spirit prison will be astonished. Satan, who had had such a great influence upon the kingdoms of the earth, is now powerless and unable to do anything for those who are prisoners. As Mormon abridged the records of the Nephites, he warned against the outcome of those who perverted the ways of the Lord and followed the devil (see Alma 30:60). The state of such individuals is described in this passage of Isaiah.

Isa. 14:18-21. The concluding section of the poem describes still a further fall of Satan. "All the kings of the nations, even all of them," will be given some degree of glory in the houses or mansions which they have prepared themselves to receive. Satan will not receive any glory, however, but will be cast into outer darkness. This doctrine is enlarged upon in D&C 88:21-35 (see also D&C 77:8; 133:73).

Isa. 14:22-23 . These two verses are inserted between the proverb of the king of Babylon and what many scholars consider a second poem, which concerns the Lord's judgments upon all nations. These verses appear to be directed to ancient Babylon.

Isa. 14:24-27 . Verse 25 in the Book of Mormon (2 1 Ne. 24) is rendered "I will bring the Assyrian in my land" instead of "break the Assyrian," as in the KJV. The Assyrian represents the Gentiles, and the purpose of the Lord is to give all the gentile nations an opportunity to be numbered. with Israel (see 3 Ne. 30:1-2). The judgments of God will be poured out upon those who reject this opportunity.

Isa. 14:28 . This verse identifies the time when the prophecy was given, not the time of its fulfillment. Whether it refers to the whole prophecy concerning Babylon or the verses which follow is unclear, but it does not really matter, since both have reference to a future and not an immediate time.

Isa. 14:29-32 . Compare D&C 97:21.
