Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

12

Warnings to the House of Israel

Isa. 28-29

Chapters 28 through 35 of Isaiah may have been one revelation concerning the relations between Israel and her surrounding nations. Chapters 28 through 33 present various warnings about different situations that Israel faces and identify promises made by the Lord to correct those situations; chapters 34 and 35 give a general warning of the day of vengeance to all nations, with a promise that Israel will blossom as a rose in her glory. Because of the length of this revelation, and the relationship between the direct fulfillment of chapter 29 and the restoration of the gospel, we will divide our discussion into two chapters. A detailed outline will clarify the overall message of chapters 28 and 29.

a. Pride and drunkenness will cause the fall (28:1-4).

b. There will be a future glory for the saved remnant (28:5-6).

c. "The priest and the prophet" have led them astray (28:7-8).

d. They have rejected the revelation of the Lord (28:9-13).

a. Her leaders have covenanted with death and are in agreement with hell (28:14-15).

b. The Lord will lay in Zion a sure foundation (28:16-17).

c. Their covenant of death will be disannulled through the Restoration (28:18-22).

d. The Lord will plow and sow and harvest to bring about his purposes (28:23-29).

a. Jerusalem will have heaviness and sorrow (29:1-2).

b. The Lord will camp also against the Nephites and bring them down to the dust (29:3-4).

c. The Nephites will speak out of the ground (29:4).

d. Those who are not destroyed (the Lamanites) will be smitten by the Gentiles (29:5-6).

e. Those nations who fight against Zion will suffer a spiritual famine (29:7-8).

f. The Lord will take away their rulers and seers because they have rejected the prophets (29:9-10).

a. The book will be sealed (29:11).

b. It will contain a revelation of God from the beginning to the end of the world (2 Ne. 27:7).

c. The sealed part will not be delivered in the day of wickedness (2 Ne. 27:8).

d. The words of those who have slumbered will be delivered to an unlearned man (2 Ne. 27:9).

e. The sealed part will be revealed later from the housetops by the power of Christ (2 Ne. 27:10-11).

f. Three witnesses will behold the book by the power of God, and a few others will view it according to the will of God (2 Ne. 27:12-14).

g. A learned man will be shown the words which are not sealed, but he will not read them (2 Ne. 27:15-18).

h. They will be returned to the unlearned man to bring forth the work of the Lord (2 Ne. 27:19-21).

i. After the work is completed, the unlearned man will seal the record up again until the Lord sees fit to reveal all things (2 Ne. 27:22-23).

a. The people give lip service to the Lord. but their hearts are far from him (29:13).

b. The wise and the learned will perish, and their understanding will be hid (29:14).

c. Those who seek to hide their counsel from the Lord will be known (29:15-16).

d. Lebanon will be turned into a fruitful field and the fruitful field into a forest following this marvelous work (29:17).

e. The deaf will hear and the blind will see the words of the book (29:18-19).

f. The scorner, the iniquitious, and the contender will be cut off (29:20-21).

g. The house of Jacob will sanctify and fear the God of Israel (29:22-23).

h. Those who erred and murmured will learn from the book (29:24).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Chapter 29 is undoubtedly the most widely quoted and understood chapter of Isaiah among the Latter-day Saints, but it would not be so if Nephi had not included it in the Book of Mormon. By doing so, he retained important truths in many of the verses, plus at least eighteen complete verses which undoubtedly are some of the "plain and precious things" that were taken away from the record of the Jews by the "great and abominable church<_P>" (see 1 Ne. 13:23-29). Quotations from Isa. 28 and 29 in the Doctrine and Covenants and the New Testament also provide some added insights into these two chapters. Chapter 29 is quoted more often by the Brethren in general conferences than any other chapter of Isaiah. Elder LeGrand Richards in particular has seemingly made this chapter his theme and has quoted from it in almost every conference in which he has spoken.

Isa. 28:9 . The principle of revelation taught here through the analogy of a baby's being fed on milk before taking solid foods was also taught by Paul (see 1 Corinthians 3:1-2; Heb. 5:11-14), by Peter (see 1 Pet. 2:2), and by the Prophet Joseph Smith (see D&C 19:21-22). One must learn basic principles before he is ready to understand the mysteries of God.

Isa. 28:10.

For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little: (Isa. 28:10.) For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have.Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost. (2 Ne. 28:30-31.)

Nephi records (in 2 Ne. 28:30) a fuller rendition of this verse than is presently found in the KJV; 2 Ne. 28:31 may also have been part of the original writings of Isaiah. Although Nephi does not identify this passage as a quotation from Isaiah, he does indicate clearly that it is a statement of the Lord. The principle of revelation taught in Isa. 28:9 is also amplified in 2 Ne. 28:30-31. The Lord gives us revelation; as we accept and live by that revelation, we are given more revelation, but if we do not accept what is revealed, we lose the knowledge we have already gained.

Isa. 28:11-13 . Taken out of context, verse 11 might be difficult to understand. But in the context provided by the surrounding verses, it becomes clear that the Lord is teaching that revelation is understood only by those who are willing and prepared to listen. Paul, in writing to the Corinthians about speaking in tongues, quotes this verse to show that we must be prepared to understand prophecy, and we prepare by believing (see 1 Cor. 14:20-22; note that Paul attributed the verse to Moses, not Isaiah-perhaps it was written by both).

Isa. 28:15, 18-19. The "overflowing scourge" mentioned here is also mentioned several times in the Doctrine and Covenants (see D&C 5:19; 45:31; 97:23) however these passages may refer to different times. In fact, Isaiah mentions the scourge twice (verses 15 and 18), which may also indicate two different time periods. Of course, the Lord has sent and will yet send many scourges upon the earth. The Prophet Joseph Smith identified one of these: "The servants of God will not have gone over the nations of the Gentiles, with a warning voice, until the destroying angel will commence to waste the inhabitants of the earth, and as the prophet [Isaiah] hath said, 'It shall be a vexation to hear the report'" (TPJS, p. 87).

Isa. 28:16. This verse is quoted both by Peter and Paul in the New Testament, and these references add to our understanding:

Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, e precious corner stone, a sure foun- dation: he that be- lieveth shall not make haste. (Isaiah 28:16.)Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded. (1 1 Pet. 2:6.) As it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of offence: and whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed. (Romans 9:33.)

Peter quotes the verse as an incentive to believe in Jesus Christ, saying, "he that believeth on him shall not be confounded," whereas the Isaiah reading is "shall not make haste." Paul uses it to demonstrate that the Jews had stumbled over Christ and the gospel was therefore taken to the Gentiles. Although he ends with the words "shall not be ashamed," a marginal note in the KJV suggests "confounded," as in I Peter. The RSV translates both Romans and 1 Peter "ashamed." In any case, either "confounded" or "ashamed" seems to give a plainer meaning than Isaiah's "shall not make haste."

The prophecy that the stone would be rejected by the Jews is also found in Ps. 118:22 and is quoted by the Savior in the New Testament (see Matt. 21:42). In the Book of Mormon, Jacob quoted the allegory of Zenos to show how the rejected stone would become the head of the corner (see Jacob 4:15-18).

Isa. 28:21 . The "strange act" referred to in this verse is identified in the Doctrine and Covenants as the restoration of the gospel in the latter days and its going forth through the Spirit of the Lord (see D&C 95:4; 101:95). Joseph Smith also used the term in relationship to the Book of Mormon's being proven in the eyes of all people (see TPJS, p. 267). The Lord probably calls his work a strange event because the world does not usually rely upon the Spirit to prove things. Oliver Cowdery said the angel Moroni told Joseph Smith that this strange act would bring about a marvelous work and a wonder, and that the scripture in Isaiah was about to be fulfilled (see MA, Feb. 1835, p. 79). This shows a chronological link between chapters 28 and 29.

Isa. 28:22 . Paul may have been quoting a part of this verse in Rom. 9:28 in referring to a "short work" upon the earth. Isaiah uses the word "consumption." Paul was quoting Isa. 10:22 in Rom. 9:27 and seemed to be continuing in verse 28 (compare Isa. 10:23 and 28:22; the rest of this prophecy concerning the remnant's return may also have been in the original Isaiah chapter 10). Both Paul and Isaiah were speaking within the context of a prophecy concerning latter-day restoration.

Isa. 29:1-2 . These are the only two verses in chapter 29 which are not quoted in the Book of Mormon. Almost all of the biblical commentators recognize some difficulties in the wording and in determining the meaning of these verses. The wording in both the KJV and the RSV suggests that Ariel, the city of David (Jerusalem), is being compared to another place. Although Joseph Smith changed the wording of verse 2 in the JST, he did not clarify it. A study of the early verses of chapter 29 in the JST and the same verses quoted in the Book of Mormon indicates that Joseph Smith probably did not complete his work on this portion of the chapter. Elder Orson Pratt has interpreted verse 1 to mean that the Jews continued to "kill sacrifices" after the day of sacrifices had been done away with, and that they added "year to year" in their futile observance of the law of Moses:

After the Messiah came and was sacrificed for the sins of the world, the Jews continued to "kill sacrifices," when they should have been done away: they added "year to year" to the law of Moses, until they brought down "heaviness and sorrow," and great "distress" upon their beloved city. The Roman army encompassed the city-cast a trench about it, and, finally, brought it down "even with the ground." The principal part of the Jews perished, and a remnant was scattered among the nations, where they have wandered in darkness unto this day. (Works, p. 270.)

He further said that the "it" in "it shall be unto me as Ariel" (verse 2) referred to a place other than Jerusalem: "This cannot have reference to Ariel itself, but it must refer to something which should be "As Ariel." It would be folly to say that Ariel shall be as Ariel. Therefore the word "it" must refer to a nation that should suffer similar judgments to those which should befall Jerusalem." (Works, p. 270.) Elder LeGrand Richards has interpreted these opening verses as Isaiah's seeing the destruction of Jerusalem and of another great center which was identified when the Book of Mormon came forth (see CR, Apr. 1967, p. 21). The Savior also uses some of Isaiah's phraseology from verses 3 and 4 in prophesying the coming destruction of Jerusalem in his day (see Luke 19:43-44).

Isa. 29:3-4 . Nephi, in prophesying what would happen to his people in the last days, quoted these two verses with some significant additions and retentions. A comparison of the Book of Mormon and the KJV texts illustrates them clearly.

Note that Nephi says these things shall happen before the Book of Mormon comes forth. Furthermore 2 Ne. 26:17 appears to be the Lord speaking to Nephi, but it may indicate a retention of the original text of Isaiah. Its significance is noted by Elder LeGrand Richards who said that Isa. 29:3-4 could not be explained without 2 Ne. 26:15-17 (see CR, Apr. 1963, p. 118; CR, Apr. 1967, p. 21). President Joseph Fielding Smith has said that Isaiah chapter 29 contains "one of the most important predictions regarding the Book of Mormon" (DS, 3:213).

Orson Pratt says verses 3 and 4 describe the conquest of Jerusalem by Rome. However, he says the speech coming "out of the ground" could not refer to Jerusalem, but is a prophecy about the Nephites:

These predictions of Isaiah could not refer to Ariel, or Jerusalem, because their speech has not been "out of the ground," or "low out of the dust," but it refers to the remnant of Joseph who were destroyed in America upwards of fourteen hundred years ago. The Book of Mormon describes their downfall, and truly it was great and terrible. At the crucifixion of Christ, "the multitude of their terrible ones," as Isaiah predicted "became as chaff that passeth away," and it took place, as he further predicts. "at an instant suddenly." Many of their great and magnificent cities were destroyed by fire, others by earthquakes, others by being sunk and buried in the depths of the earth. This sudden destruction came upon them because they had stoned and killed the prophets sent among them. Between three and four hundred years after Christ, they again fell into great wickedness, and the principal nation fell in battle. Forts were raised in all parts of the land, the remains of which may be seen at the present day. Millions of people perished in battle and they suffered just as the Lord foretold by Isaiah. (Works, pp. 270-71.)

The voice to be "as of one that hath a familiar spirit" may have two different meanings. Elder Orson Pratt describes the Book of Mormon as speaking "in a most familiar manner." He further shows that there is no way they could "speak out of the ground" except by a record:

One of the most marvelous things connected with this prediction is, that after the nation should be brought down, they should "speak out of the ground." This is mentioned or repeated four times in the same verse. Never was a prophecy more truly fulfilled than this, in the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. Joseph Smith took that sacred history "out of the ground." It is the voice of the ancient prophets of America speaking "out of the ground"; their speech is "low out of the dust"; it speaks in a most familiar manner of the doings of bygone ages; it is the voice of those who slumber in the dust. It is the voice of prophets speaking from the dead, crying repentance in the ears of the living. In what manner could a nation, after they were brought down and destroyed, "speak out of the ground"? Could their dead bodies or their dust, or their ashes speak? Verily, no: they can only speak by their writings or their books that they wrote while living. Their voice, speech or words, can only "speak out of the ground," or "whisper out of the dust" by their books or writings being discovered. (Works. p. 271.)

Elder LeGrand Richards called our attention to a minister of another religion who said that the Book of Mormon read with the same sweet feeling as the New Testament (see CR, Apr. 1976, p. 124). In other words, the message of the Book of Mormon sounds familiar to those who have received the message of the Bible, the gospel, or the Spirit of God. On the other hand, "familiar spirits" in Old Testament times referred to a form of spiritualism wherein spirits from the dead were called back out of the ground through witchcraft or enchantment (see 1 Sam. 28; Isa. 8:19-20). Some have used this meaning to disclaim the Book of Mormon. However, a careful reading of Isaiah shows that the words of the record would be "as" a familiar spirit. Just as the spirits came "out of the ground," so would the record of a people who had been destroyed. Nephi in 2 Ne. 26:16 shows that the power of God would be given to these people to "whisper ... even as it were out of the ground."

Isa. 29:5-6.

And I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with a mount, and I will raise forts against thee.After my seed and the seed of my brethren shall have dwindled in unbelief, and shall have been smitten by the Gentiles; yea, after the Lord God shall have camped against them round about, and shall have laid siege against them with a mount, and

raised forts against them; and after they shall have been brought down low in the dust, even that they are not, yet the words of the righteous shall be written, and the prayers of the faithful shall be heard, and all those who have dwindled in unbelief shall not be forgotten.

Moreover the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth away: yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly.Wherefore, as those who have been destroyed have been destroyed speedily; and the multitude of their terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth away- yea, thus saith the Lord God: It shall be at an instant, suddenly-Thou shalt be visited of the Lord of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire. (Isa. 29:5-6.) And when that day shall come they shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts, with thunder and with earthquake, and with a great noise, and with storm, and with tempest, and with the flame of devouring fire. (2 Ne. 26:18; 27:2.)

Elder Orson Pratt said that verse 5 is a description of the destruction which came upon the Nephites because they killed the prophets (see note on 29:3-4 for his statement quoted from Works, pp. 270-71). Elder Mark E. Petersen has said that, following the sudden destruction referred to in verse 5, the Nephites would speak "literally from the grave" (CR, Oct. 1977, p. 16). Elder LeGrand Richards taught that verse 6 referred to the destruction of the Nephites at the coming of Christ, as described in 3 Nephi chapter 8 (see CR, Apr. 1976, p. 123). A further interpretation of verse 6 was given by, Nephi. He said that those who were not destroyed but who dwindled in unbelief would be smitten by the Gentiles (see 2 Ne. 26:19). Nephi then described in great detail the conditions which would exist among the Gentiles in the last days, causing the Lord to visit them with thunder, earthquakes, and so forth (see 2 Ne. 26:20-27:2

Isa. 211:7-8 . These verses, describing the spiritual famine of the latter days (also described in Amos 8:11-12), have several variations, but the most significant is the Book of Mormon's usage of Zion in place of the KJV Ariel. In the JST, the Prophet Joseph Smith also made some slight changes in verse 8, but none in verse 7. This may indicate either that he did not complete the revision of this section in the JST or that the word "Ariel" may have a broader application than previously, supposed. Note that the KJV verse 8 concludes with "mount Zion" and not "Ariel."

Isa. 29:9-10 . Again, the Book of Mormon contains some significant retentions in these verses:

Stay yourselves, and wonder; cry ye out, and cry: they are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink.For behold, all ye that doeth iniquity, stay yourselves and wonder, for ye shall cry out, and cry; yea, ye shall be drunken but not with wine, ye shall stagger but not with strong drink.For the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the seers hath he covered. (Isa. 29:9-10.) For behold, the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep. For behold, ye have closed your eyes, and ye have rejected the prophets; and your rulers, and the seers hath he covered because of your iniquity. (2 1 Ne. 27:4-5.)

Second 1 Ne. 27:4 retains an introduction to verse 9-"For behold, all ye that doeth iniquity" -designating that it was the iniquitous people who would "cry out." The 2 Nephi rendition of the next verse shows that these iniquitous people had closed their own eyes and rejected the prophets, and that the Lord had covered their rulers and seers because of their iniquity. The KJV reads as though the Lord were responsible for these problems, but the Book of Mormon shows that it was the people's choices which had brought upon them their conditions. Paul quoted verse 10 to the Romans as evidence that those of Israel who had hardened their hearts had lost their standing as Israelites, although a remnant had, through the grace of Christ, retained their covenant status (see Rom. 11:5-8). Orson Pratt said these verses describe the apostate world at the time the Book of Mormon came forth (see Works, p. 275).

2 Ne. 27:6-14 . All of these verses were once a part of the original text of Isaiah, but were lost (see JST, Isa. 29:11-19). They contain many great truths, as given in the outline of this chapter, and should be studied as part of the text of Isa. 29. The opening phrase in verse 11 of the KJV-"And the vision of all"-is an authentication of the contents of the sealed portion of the record, as described in these verses in 2 Ne. 27 (see especially verses 7, 10-11).

Isa. 29:11-12.

Wherefore it shall come to pass, that the Lord God will deliver again the book and the words thereof to him that is not learned; and the man that is not learned shall say: I am not learned.

110-111 Then shall the Lord God say unto him: The learned shall notread them, for they have rejected them, and I am able to do mine own work; wherefore thou shalt read the words which I shall give unto thee. (2 1 Ne. 27:15-20.)

And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed:But behold, it shall come to pass that the Lord God shall say unto him to whom he shall deliver the book: Take these words which are not sealed and deliver them to another, that he may show them unto the learned, saying: Read this, I pray thee. And the learned shall say: Bring hither the book, and I will read them.

And now, because of the glory of the world and to get gain will they say this, and not for the glory of God.

And the man shall say: I cannot bring the book, for it is sealed.

111 The Book of Mormon retains a much more detailed account of this prophecy, which was literally fulfilled when Martin Harris took a copy of some of the translated characters from the plates to the learned linguist Professor Charles Anthon. Words from the unsealed part of the record were to be given to "another" (Martin Harris) by the man to whom the book was delivered (Joseph Smith). The intentions of the learned were also foretold in Isaiah. The arguments regarding the authenticity of Martin Harris' visit will not be treated here; suffice it to say his story has been authenticated. He told one story and maintained it over the years, while Anthon told several contradictory stories (see B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church [Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1965], 1:99-109). See the brief account given by Martin Harris (as recorded by Joseph Smith) which shows the literal fulfillment of this prophecy (JS-H 1:63-65).

111 Joseph Smith said that the angel Moroni quoted many scriptures to him which were soon to be fulfilled (see JS-H 1:41). Oliver Cowdery, in relating some of those scriptures, cited Isa. 29:11-14 as having been quoted by Moroni (see MA, Feb. 1835, p. 80). Moroni probably referred to the whole chapter. President Joseph Fielding Smith, along with many other General Authorities, proclaimed that the Martin Harris incident literally fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah (see DS, 3:213). Elder Mark E. Petersen noted the significance of Isaiah's referring to Joseph Smith as an unlearned man (see CR, Oct. 1977, pp. 16-18).

111 -112The Book of Mormon shows the detail of the prophecy when it records that the Lord God would "deliver again the book... to him that is not learned" (2 Ne. 27:19). It further shows that the Lord was giving an opportunity for the wisdom of the world to reject these words before he showed the world that he was not dependent upon the learned for the accomplishment of his purposes (see 2 Ne. 27:20). That the 2 Nephi reading was once in the original text of Isaiah is attested to by its presence in the JST.

2 Ne. 27:21-23 . Joseph Smith also placed these verses, which concern the sealed section of the book (plates), in the JST.

Isa. 20:13-14 . As stated above, Oliver Cowdery said that the angel Moroni told Joseph Smith these verses were soon to be fulfilled. The Book of Mormon retains the fact that the Lord was going to speak these words to the one who would read the unsealed portion of the plates (Joseph Smith):

Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: (Isa. 29:13.) And again it shall come to pass that the Lord shall say unto him that shall read the words that shall be delivered him.Forasmuch as this people draw near unto me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their hearts far from me; and their fear towards me is taught by the precepts of men- (2 Ne. 27:24-25.)

The "marvellous work and a wonder" in verse 14 is associated with the Lord's setting his hand the second time to recover his people (see Isa. 11:11) in 2 Ne. 25:17 and 29:1. According to 2 Ne. 25:18, this marvelous work would be accomplished through the bringing forth of the Lord's words, specified as the words of Nephi's seed (the Book of Mormon) in 2 Ne. 29:2. This is also confirmed by the Savior's words to the Nephites after his resurrection (see 3 Ne. 21:1-9).

Joseph Smith recorded that in the spring of 1820 two divine Personages appeared to him and told him that he should join no church because "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof" (JS-H 1:17-19).

The Savior called the scribes and Pharisees "hypocrites," saying that Isaiah had prophesied of them and then quoting verse 13 (see Matt. 15:7-9; Mark 7:6-7). This might lead some to believe that the prophecy was limited to the time of the Savior, and that it was fulfilled. But the fact that he quoted only verse 13, and not verse 14 with it, indicates the Savior was saying that the Pharisees were the kind of people Isaiah prophesied of-not that they were the fulfillment of his prophecy. Many of the General Authorities have quoted verse 13 in describing the conditions of the world at the time of the restoration of the gospel (see Appendix B under Isa. 29:13).

The "marvellous work and a wonder" which was to come forth to correct the situation described in verse 13 is referred to repeatedly in the early sections of the Doctrine and Covenants (see 4:1; 6:1; 11:1; 12:1; 14:1). This marvelous work has been identified by the General Authorities as the Church, Mormonism, the restoration of the gospel, the everlasting gospel, the translation of the Book of Mormon, and several other principles of the gospel (see Appendix B under Isa. 29:14). An examination of every aspect of the Restoration would show it to be a marvelous work performed or inspired by God. The General Authorities have also testified that this marvelous work has caused the wisdom of the "wise men" to perish and their understanding to be hid. Paul used the latter part of verse 14 in writing to the Corinthians to show that the mission of Christ had confounded the wise and made them look foolish (see 1 Cor. 1:19-20).

Isa. 20:15-16. The third in a series of six "woes" in Isaiah chapters 28 through 33 is stated here, but it actually begins with verse 13. The Book of Mormon retains the word "and" in introducing the verse, which indicates that it refers back to what has been said. The warning is to those who refuse the message of the "marvellous work and a wonder" -the Book of Mormon-which would come forth to correct the precepts of men and who even try to work against it in secret. The Book of Mormon also retains the declaration that the Lord will show them that he is aware of their doings (see 2 Ne. 27:27). Probably this is partly a reference to those who would take the 116 pages of manuscript with the intent to change them and frustrate the works of God. In his foreknowledge, God had prepared the way to frustrate their work (see D&C sections 3 and 10). Paul quoted part of verse 16 in demonstrating how the Lord brings out his purposes (see Rom. 9:20).

Isa. 29:17. The Book of Mormon retains the introductory "But behold, saith the Lord of Hosts; I will show unto the children of men that .... "This helps to confirm the time when this marvelous work was to come forth. "Lebanon" in this verse has been interpreted by at least three General Authorities-Elders Orson Pratt, Joseph Fielding Smith, and Mark E. Petersen-as the whole land of Canaan, which was given to the house of Israel. Elder Mark E. Petersen has pointed out that Isaiah said a sacred book was to come forth before Palestine would become a fertile land, and that Palestine is now a fertile land (see CR, Oct. 1970, p. 142; see also CR, Oct. 1965, p. 61). President Joseph Fielding Smith cited the change which has come upon Palestine, since the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, through irrigation and cultivation of the land (see DS, 3:260-61). Elder Orson Pratt gave a further interpretation of this verse:

The book, therefore, that Isaiah prophesies of, is to come forth just before the great day of the restoration of Israel to their own lands; at which time Lebanon and all the land of Canaan is again to be blessed, while the fruitful field occupied by the nations of the Gentiles, 'will be esteemed as a forest;' the multitude of the nations of the Gentiles are to perish, and their lands which are now like a fruitful field, are to be left desolate of inhabitants and become as Lebanon has been for many generations past; while Lebanon shall again be occupied by Israel, and be turned into a fruitful field. These great events could not take place until the Lord should first bring forth a book out of the ground. (Works, pp. 276-77.)

Isa. 29:18-19 . The "deaf" and the "blind" are those who have been deafened or blinded by the precepts of men, as the Lord had described to Isaiah at the time of his call (see Isa. 6:9). The effects of the book's coming forth are then described by Isaiah: the deaf shall hear, the blind shall see, and the meek and the poor shall rejoice in the Lord. Elder Mark E. Petersen related this to the spiritual force which would attend the book, and its remarkable effect on those who would read it (see CR, Oct. 1965, p. 61). Elder Orson Pratt saw a literal fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy in the physically deaf being restored to hearing: "Those who were so deaf that they could not hear the loudest sound, have had their ears opened to hear the glorious and most precious words of the Book of Mormon, and it has been done by the power of God and not of man" (Works, p. 277). And Elder LeGrand Richards has given a further application of this passage by noting that the Book of Mormon has been printed in braille so that the physically blind would be able to know its message (see CR, Apr. 1976, p. 124).

Isa. 29:20-21 . The Book of Mormon retains an opening phrase in verse 20 which attributes to the Lord the action referred to in these verses. The Book of Mormon also retains a more definite identification of those spoken of in verse 21:

For the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off:For assuredly as the Lord liveth they shall see that the terrible one is brought to naught, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off;That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought. (Isa. 29:20-21.) And they that make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught. (2 Ne. 27:31-32.)

Joseph Smith, in writing of the persecution he and other Saints had suffered in Missouri, referred to verse 21: "We refer you to Isaiah, who considers those who make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate. We believe that the old Prophet verily told the truth: and we have no retraction to make." (TPJS, p. 124.)

Isa. 29:22-23 . Elder Orson Pratt says that this restoration of the house of Jacob will come through the Book of Mormon:

The house of Jacob has been made ashamed, and his face has waxed pale, ever since he was driven away from Lebanon or Canaan, but the Lord has now brought forth out of the ground a book which shall, accompanied by His power, restore the tribes of Jacob from the four quarters of the globe, and establish them in the land of Palestine and Lebanon forever; and His holy name they shall no more profane, but shall be a righteouspeople throughout all their generations, while the earth shall stand, and they shall possess their promised land again in eternity, never more to pass away; therefore, they shall never again be made ashamed. It is in vain for the Gentiles to seek the conversion of Jacob, and to bring about their great redemption, only in the way that the Lord God of Israel hath predicted and appointed: they may call meetings and conventions to convert the Jews, but let them know assuredly that the book spoken of by Isaiah is to accomplish the salvation of the house of Jacob, and bring about the restoration of all Israel, while the Gentiles who will not receive it and be numbered and identified with the house of Jacob, must surely perish, yea, and they shall be utterly wasted with storm and tempest, with earthquakes and famine, with the flame of devouring fire, and their fruitful lands shall be esteemed as a forest, while Jacob shall dwell in safety for ever. (Works, p. 278; see also 2 Ne. 25:17-18; 29:1)

Isa. 29:24 . The purpose of the Book of Mormon specifically, and of the gospel in general, is shown here. As President Ezra Taft Benson has stated, the Book of Mormon is the great standard which we are to use today in measuring truth (see CR, Apr. 1975, p. 96). Elder Orson Pratt also spoke of the precious contents of the Book of Mormon, which was given to deliver mankind from the "precepts of uninspired men":

Oh, How precious must be the contents of a book which shall deliver us from all the errors taught by the precepts of uninspired men! Oh, how gratifying to poor, ignorant, erring mortals who have murmured because of the multiplicity of contradictory doctrines that have perplexed and distracted their minds, to read the plain, pure and most precious word of God, revealed in the Book of Mormon! It is like bread to the hungry-like the cool refreshing fountain to him that is ready to perish with thirst. Lift up your heads ye meek of the earth; let the poor among men rejoice in the Holy One of Israel; let them that have erred in spirit and stumbled in judgment, drink from the fountain of understanding; let all that have murmured because of the uncertainty of the precepts of men, read the words of the book, and they, shall learn doctrine; let the humble and contrite in heart among all nations be exceedingly glad, for the hour of their redemption from Babylon is at hand; let all Israel praise the God of their fathers in songs of everlasting joy; for that which He spake by the mouth of their prophets, concerning their restoration to their lands is at hand to be fulfilled; already has the book which Isaiah said should accomplish your restoration and turn Lebanon into a fruitful field, made its appearance; and it truly is "a marvelous work-even a marvelous work and a wonder!" (Works, pp. 278-79).
