Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

15

The Lord's Coming in Glory

Isa. 40

Chapters 40 through 66 are considered by most scholars today to have been written by a different author (or different authors) than the one who wrote the first part of the book (see Appendix A). Without repeating the arguments against multiple authorship, we will simply state here that we do not agree. However, we recognize that these chapters are different in certain aspects from chapters 1 through 35. While the revelations of the first chapters fall into separate sections rather easily, these later chapters may originally have been one continuous vision or series of visions (see chapter 3 of this work). It is therefore somewhat difficult to divide the present-day chapters 40 through 66 into distinct sections for study. Some of the divisions are more easily determined because of the way they are quoted in the Book of Mormon; but those long sections which are not in the Book of Mormon -chapters 40 through 47 and 56 through 65-are placed into rather arbitrary divisions.

Because chapter 40 seems to stand by itself, it may be an introductory chapter to all the remaining ones. Most noted for its prophecy of John the Baptist's preparing the way for the coming of Christ, it reveals a much broader context. The two great capitals of the house of Israel, Zion and Jerusalem (Judah), are both prominent in this chapter. A recurring comparison between the all-powerful Lord God of Israel and the nothingness of the idol-gods of men is introduced here as well. Chapter 40 seems to set the stage for a study of the remaining chapters of Isaiah.

a. Her iniquity is pardoned (40:2).

b. She has paid double for her sins (40:2).

a. The spirit of Elias will prepare the way before the Lord (40:3).

b. The earth will be restored as it was before the curse (40:4).

c. The Spirit of the Lord will consume all corruptible flesh (40:6-8).

a. Zion will bring good tidings from a high mountain before he comes (40:9).

b. Jerusalem will lift up its voice and proclaim God before he comes (40:9).

c. The Lord will feed his flock like a shepherd when he comes (40:11).

a. The nations of the earth are nothing in comparison (40:12-17).

b. The graven images worshipped by man are nothing (40:18-24).

c. Even Jacob (Israel) does not recognize the power of God (40:27).

d. Those who wait upon the Lord will be given power and strength (40:29-31).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

A careful study of the New Testament helps us understand the first part of this chapter. The New Testament passages can be misleading, however, if not thoroughly analyzed. The Doctrine and Covenants and modern Church leaders have also given great insight into the first part of the chapter. If we correctly understand the early verses, we can understand the remainder more easily.

Isa. 40:1-2 . The message of comfort to Jerusalem, "that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned," clearly refers to the latter days. The Anchor Bible translates this line "that her sentence is served, her penalty is paid." Judah was to be sent through the "furnace of affliction" (see 48:10), so the message given here is to be fulfilled after she has been through that furnace. A look at history and at present-day circumstances shows her still to be going through that furnace. The rest of the chapter also supports a Second Coming time period.

Isa. 40:3-5 . Because these verses are quoted in the New Testament in connection with John the Baptist, it is generally assumed that John's mission was their fulfillment. It is true that John was sent to prepare the way of the Lord. Lehi prophesied of a prophet who "should go forth and cry in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight" (1 Ne. 10:8). He also foretold that this prophet would baptize the Messiah with water (see 1 Ne. 10:9). This clearly identifies the prophet as John the Baptist. His father Zacharias prophesied at the time he named him that John would "go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways" (Luke 1:76). John himself announced that he was "the voice of one crying in the wilderness... as said the prophet Esaias [Isaiah]" (John 1:23). All three of the other gospel writers also identify him as such (see Matt. 3:3; Mark 1:3; Luke 3:4). However, Matthew and Mark quote only verse 3 of Isa. 40-not verses 4 and 5, which clearly speak of the Lord's second coming. Luke quotes verses 3 through 5, but the JST interrupts this passage with five additional verses which outline the mission of Christ from the meridian of time until his second coming:

As it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.As it is written in the book of the prophet Esaias; and these are the words, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight.For behold, and lo, he shall come, as it is written in the book of the prophets, to take away the sins of the world, and to bring salvation unto the heathen nations, to gather together those who are lost, who are of the sheepfold of Israel;Yea, even the dispersed and afflicted; and also to prepare the way, and make possible the preaching of the gospel unto the Gentiles;And to be a light unto all who sit in darkness, unto the uttermost parts of the earth; to bring to pass the resurrection from the dead, and to ascend up on high, to dwell on the right hand of the Father,Until the fullness of time, and the law and the testimony shall be sealed, and the keys of the kingdom shall be delivered up again unto the Father;To administer justice unto all; to come down in judgment upon all, and to convince all the ungodly of their ungodly deeds, which they have committed; and all this in the day that he shall come;Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth;For it is a day of power; yea, every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low; the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways made smooth;And all flesh shall see the salvation of God. (KJV, Luke 3:4-6.) And all flesh shall see the salvation of God. (JST, Luke 3:4-11.)

John the Baptist was the prophet to prepare the way for the Lord's ministry in the flesh in the meridian of time. He came again on 15 May 1829 to restore the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood and thus commence the preparation for the Lord's second coming (see D&C 13). Joseph Smith taught that John came in the "spirit of Elias" to prepare the way for a greater work:

There is a difference between the spirit and office of Elias and Elijah. It is the spirit of Elias I wish first to speak of; and in order to come at the subject, I will bring some of the testimony from the Scripture and give my own.

In the first place, suffice it to say, I went into the woods to inquire of the Lord, by prayer, His will concerning me, and I saw an angel, and he laid his hands upon my head, and ordained me to a Priest after the order of Aaron, and to hold the keys of this Priesthood, which office was to preach repentance and baptism for the remission of sins, and also to baptize. But I was informed that this office did not extend to the laying on of hands for the giving of the Holy Ghost; that that office was a greater work, and was to be given afterward; but that my ordination was a preparatory work, or a going before, which was the spirit of Elias; for the spirit of Elias was a going before to prepare the way for the greater, which was the case with John the Baptist. He came crying through the wilderness, "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight." And they were informed, if they could receive it, it was the spirit of Elias; and John was very particular to tell the people, he was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light. (TPJS, p. 335; see also p. 319.)

Ezra Thayre and Northrop Sweet were called by the Lord in October 1830 to go forth in this same spirit to prepare the way of the Lord (see D&C 33:10). Joseph Smith, in a prayer given by revelation, used Isa. 40:3 as a voice to all men "unto the ends of the earth" (see D&C 65:1, 3). and Covenants 133:22 and 101:23 use the phraseology of verses 4 Doctrine and 5, respectively, in speaking of the Second Coming. Another application of the opening phrase in verse 3 was given through revelation to Joseph Smith in December 1832 (see D&C 88:66). Therein the "voice" in the wilderness is described as the voice of the Spirit, and the "wilderness" is defined as such because one cannot see the Spirit.

Elder Orson Pratt, in expounding on this text of Isaiah, identified the "highway for our God" as "The same as you have made, or assisted in making, the great highway through this desert region, and constructed highways here in the desert called the iron railroad" (]D, 18:149; see also JD, 18:183).

President Joseph Fielding Smith quoted verse 4 as scriptural evidence that the earth is going to be restored to the same condition it was in before the curse came upon it (see DS, 2:316-17).

Isa. 40:6-8. Peter quoted these verses in his first epistle to show the eternal surety of the word of God, but did not interpret the original meaning of Isaiah. He used the phrase "all the glory of man" instead of Isaiah's phrase "all the goodliness thereof":

The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and oil the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field:Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever.The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass.For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away:The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand for ever. (Isa. 40:6-8.) But the word of the Lord endureth for ever. And this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto you. (1 Pet. 1:23-25.)

The flesh is corruptible and therefore temporary, and will burn at the second coming of Christ when his Spirit is poured out on the earth. While flesh is temporary, the word of God declaring these things is definite and will surely come to pass. The Savior taught the same principle, declaring that the word of God would endure even though heaven and earth would pass away (see Mark 13:31). Those who are sanctified to endure the glory of the Lord which shall be poured out (alluded to in verse 7) will not be burned (see D&C 101:24-25; compare 3 Ne. 10:12-14).

Isa. 40:9-11 . Elder Orson Pratt interpreted verse 9 as a prophecy which was fulfilled when the Saints became established in the Rocky, Mountains:

"O Zion" - something about Zion now, before the Lord comes-"O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountains." Did you come up into these high mountains, you people of the latter-day Zion? What did you come here for? Because Isaiah predicted that this was the place you should come to, you should get up into the high mountain. He foretold it, and you have fulfilled it. "O Zion, that bringest good tidings." What good tidings? What tidings have you been declaring the last forty-five years to the nations and kingdoms of the earth? What have you testified to, you missionaries? Your missionaries have gone from nation to nation and from kingdom to kingdom, proclaiming to the people that God has sent his angel from heaven with the everlasting Gospel to be preached unto all people upon the face of the whole earth. This is what you have been proclaiming. Is not the everlasting Gospel glad tidings to the children of men? I think it is, and especially when it is brought by an angel to prepare the way for the great and glorious day of the coming of the King of kings and Lord of lords. It is good tidings that people who receive this everlasting Gospel, are commanded to get up into the high mountain. You have fulfilled it, you have been at it now for twenty-eight years, coming up from the eastern slope, from the great Atlantic seaboard, and gradually rising and ascending until you have located yourselves in a place upwards of four thousand feet above the level of the sea. (JD, 18:150; see also JD, 18:182-83.)

Elder Pratt further said that verse 10 showed verse 9 to be a latter-day prophecy, and that the coming of the Lord would be after Zion had gone up into the mountains (see JD, 18:150, 183). Some of the wording of verse 10 is used in Rev. 22:12 in describing the Second Coming, which is further evidence that these verses concern the Lord's return.

Isa. 40:12-17 . These verses proclaim the power of God in contrast to the nothingness of the nations of the earth. Moses, after being shown the world and the ends thereof, came to the same conclusion (see Moses 1:7-10). And King Benjamin taught his subjects that they should always remember the greatness of God and their own nothingness (see Mosiah 4:11). Paul paraphrased verse 13, and possibly verse 14, in proclaiming the wisdom and knowledge of God:

Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his counsellor hath taught him?O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchahle are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding? (Isa. 40:13-14.) For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor?

Or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again? (Rom. 11:33-35.)

The wording in Romans is somewhat easier to understand.

Isa. 40:18-27. These verses declare the power of God in contrast to the graven images which men worship. There are none equal to God; he created all things, knows all things, and has all power. Verse 27 shows that Israel was also lax in recognizing God's greatness.

Isa. 40:28-31. Those of Israel who wait upon the Lord shall be given power and strength. The same promise is given to those who keep the Word of Wisdom in this dispensation (see D&C 89:20).
