Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

16

The Servant of the Lord

Isa. 41-44

These four chapters constitute a rather long and somewhat repetitious message. Perhaps they could be broken into smaller units, but they all have a central theme-the servant of the Lord. As a matter of fact, this "servant" concept runs through the rest of the book of Isaiah, and identifying the various "servants" Isaiah discusses is vital to an understanding of what he is saying. It must be kept in mind that chapters 40 through 66 are prophetic in nature, not historical. Attempts to explain them historically have led to questions about authorship, as the scholars have tried to tie all the prophecies to historical events. Accepting Isaiah's declaration that the Lord knows the end from the beginning helps us see the prophetic nature of these chapters. They are outlined below to provide an overview.

a. The Lord covenanted with Abraham and supported him in the land of Canaan (41:2-3).

b. The Lord promises to bless future generations through Abraham (41:4).

c. The isles (America-see 2 Ne. 10:20) will respond to the Lord's direction and become a mighty nation (41:5-7).

d. Israel will be the Lord's servant through whom he will fulfill the covenant of Abraham (41:8-9).

a. Those who oppose him will be as nothing (41:11-13).

b. The servant Israel shall thresh out Israel from the nations (41:14-16).

c. The Lord will make the wilderness fertile for the sustenance of gathered Israel (41:17-20).

d. The Lord has declared the end from the beginning, and he challenges those who oppress his servant to show that he is wrong (41:21-24).

e. No one is able to meet the Lord's challenge (41:26-29).

a. The servant shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles (42:1).

b. He shall not contend with Judah, but shall withdraw from them (42:2).

c. He shall heal the physically weak and strengthen the spiritually weak (42:3).

d. He will not complete his work until judgment has come to all the nations of the earth (42:4).

e. The isles (America) shall await his revelation (42:4).

a. They shall be a light to the Gentiles (42:6).

b. They shall open the eyes of the blind (42:7).

c. They shall open the prison house and free the prisoners (42:7).

d. They shall sing a new song of praise unto the Lord (42:10-13).

e. The Lord has waited a long time for this restoration, but it shall be forever (42:14-16).

a. The Lord's servant will be sent unto them (42:19).

b. They shall be made perfect if they will hearken (42:20).

c. They are imprisoned by their enemies because of their not observing (42:20-21).

d. The judgments of God will come upon those who are not obedient (42:22-25).

a. Messengers will be sent as witnesses to gather those who will see and hear (43:8-13).

b. The Lord will send them among the Gentiles to bless them (43:14-17).

c. Israel's oppression will pass, and the Lord will do a new thing in gathering Israel (43:18-21).

d. Israel could have been gathered earlier had she sought the Lord (43:22-28).

a. The Lord will restore the parched ground (44:3).

b. He will pour out his Spirit upon Israel's seed (44:3-5).

c. All graven images will profit nothing (44:9-20).

a. The Lord will blot out her transgressions (44:22).

b. The heavens, the spirit world, and all the earth will sing (44:23).

a. He created man, the heavens and the earth (44:24).

b. He confounds the works of men (44:25).

c. He confirms the words of his servants (44:26).

d. He commands Jerusalem to be built or to be desolate (44:26-28).

1) He commands Cyrus to be his shepherd.

2) He commands that the foundation of the temple be laid.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Very little insight into these chapters is given in the standard works. Only one section is actually quoted elsewhere in the scriptures, and that not fully. The biggest help comes from the last part of chapter 42 in the JST, and from the identification of the servant as Israel in the Doctrine and Covenants. As noted later, the word "servant" carries dual meanings.

Most of the comments made by General Authorities either identify the time period of which Isaiah speaks, which of course is very helpful, or make timely applications from some of his statements.

Isa. 41:1 . The Bible scholars have long troubled over this verse: Where are the islands to whom the Lord speaks? The answer to this question will lead to an understanding, not only of this verse, but also of the subsequent verses and chapters of Isaiah. The RSV translates the word "coast-lands" instead of the KJV "islands." Most commentators feel that the islands or coastlands are the islands and coasts of the Mediterranean-or even the whole Mediterranean basin. However, the Anchor Bible (20:27) notes, "No particular nations are meant, the 'coastlands' for the Israelites meant the limits of the earth." This supports the Book of Mormon teaching that the Nephites were "upon an isle of the sea" (2 Ne. 10:20).

The command to "keep silence before me" may have reference to the Americas' being kept hidden from the world lest they be overrun by other nations (see 2 Ne. 1:8). "Let the people renew their strength" could refer to the establishment of a free nation in the land of America that the Lord might accomplish his purposes (see 3 Ne. 21:4). After the free nation is established, the Lord commands to "let them come near"; this alludes to the restoration of the gospel, whereby Israel now comes to him to be his people. "Then let them speak" refers to the proclaiming of the gospel to the nations of the earth. All these things will bring about the purposes of the Lord (through his servants in the isles of the sea) to "let us come near together to judgment," meaning to commence the work of the last days, to sound a warning to all the nations of the earth so that they may either accept the gospel and be gathered to Israel or suffer the wrath which will follow the testimony of the Lord's servants (see D&C 43:23-28).

Isa. 41:2-4. A second problem for the scholars has been the identification of the "man from the east." He has been identified as Christ, Abraham, Paul, and Cyrus of Persia. Abraham and Cyrus seem to be the prominent identifications, with older scholars leaning to Abraham and more modern scholars to Cyrus. Since Cyrus is actually named in 44:28 and 45:1, modern scholars feel that chapter 41 begins the passage building up to his being named. This is further enforced by their theory that the so-called second Isaiah (chapters 40 through 55) was written at a later time by someone other than Isaiah the son of Amoz.

The "man from the east" appears to be Abraham, as suggested by many older scholars. The arguments regarding the latter-day restoration in the isles of the sea (see note on 41:1) seem to support this identification. The KJV phrase "called him to his foot" is translated "calls him to follow" in the Anchor Bible (20:26), which also adds a footnote indicating that the Hebrew says "called." Abraham was called by the Lord to leave Ur of the Chaldees and go to the land of Canaan (see Gen. 11:31; 12:1; Abr. 2:1-6). He was given "the nations before him" extending from "the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates" (Gen. 15:18). Isaiah 41:2b seems to refer to Abraham's smiting of the kings as he rescued his nephew Lot (see Gen. 14). A more positive identification of Abraham comes from verse 4, wherein the Lord makes reference to "calling the generations from the beginning." Abraham was chosen in the premortal life to be a ruler (see Abr. 3:22-23; Gen. 18:19) and was blessed that through the literal seed of his body the Lord would bless all the nations of the earth (Gen. 12:2-3; Abr. 2:8-11). These verses in Isaiah proclaim that the Lord was the one who had so ordained these things. The Anchor Bible (20:27) suggests, "Yahweh calls the generations from the beginning; he directs history from the origins of man." Verse 4, cross-referenced to the book of Revelation (1:8, 17; 22:13), shows that the same person spoke to both Isaiah and John.

Isa. 41:5-7 . These verses are usually interpreted as a description of the nations of the Mediterranean coastlands, fearing and turning to their idols. In light of verse 1, however, we can see an entirely different meaning. Verse 5 describes the gathering of the nations to the Americas, as prophesied in verse 1. "The isles saw it, and feared," meaning they responded to Jehovah's call and, in the fear (love) of the Lord, "drew near, and came," and built up a mighty Gentile nation in the land of America (see 1 Ne. 22:7). Verses 6 and 7 describe the cooperation required of the people from many lands who firmly established a nation "that it should not be moved." Actually, this could be a dual prophecy of the establishment of the nation and of the Church upon that land.

Isa. 41:8-9 . These verses identify the servant who is to speak. The Lord promised Abraham that his literal seed would bless the nations of the earth (Abr. 2:11). He now calls Israel, the literal seed of Abraham, whom he has gathered from the nations of the earth to the islands (America), to be his servant in bringing judgment upon all the nations of the earth. The Doctrine and Covenants identifies the Latter-day Saints who had gathered as the literal seed of Abraham (see D&C 103:17; 132:30) and as the Lord's servants (see D&C 93:46; 133:30). Thus chapter 41 is a prophecy of latter-day Israel, called initially to gather upon the isles of the sea (America) to be servants in the hand of the Lord to fulfill the covenant he made with Abraham to bear the ministry and the priesthood to the nations of the earth.

Isa. 41:10 . "how Firm a Foundation," a favorite hymn among Latter-day Saints, was composed from the words of this verse. The admonition is to the Lord's servant Israel, who is to carry the gospel to the nations of the earth. The following verses treat the various ways in which the Lord will help Israel accomplish this calling. President Joseph Fielding Smith quoted verse 10 along with other scriptural passages to show why the right hand is used in performing ordinances (see DS, 3:107-8).

Isa. 41:11-13 . The servant is not to fear those who have oppressed him (probably the Gentiles). He is to "seek them," to go among them and proclaim the gospel, but will "not find them" because very few of the Gentiles will accept it (see D&C 45:28-29). Although the Gentiles war against the servant, they shall be as nothing because the Lord God will uphold Israel.

Isa. 41:14-16 . "Thou worm Jacob" is not a derogatory label, but a recognition of Israel's smallness in comparison to the world's population. (A marginal reading in the KJV gives "few men" as an alternative to "men of Israel.") The Lord is going to make them as a "threshing instrument" to gather Israel out of the Gentiles and leave them as "hills of chaff." "The whirlwind shall scatter them" refers to the judgments which will follow their rejection of the gospel, while Israel, who has been gathered out of those nations, will rejoice in the Lord.

Isa. 41:17-20 . Those of Israel who gather will be blessed by the Lord. Again, the Lord describes the wilderness and the solitary places which he will cause to become fertile for Israel's sustenance that his people may know he is with them.

Isa. 41:21-24 . The Lord has declared what is going to happen, and he now challenges those who will oppose his servants to show differently. He has shown how Abraham was called from the beginning and how his seed will fulfill his covenant in the future. The challenge to the oppressors is to do the same: show us "the former things" and also "the latter end of them." The Lord concludes with a declaration of the oppressors' nothingness. Elder Bruce R. McConkie quoted verse 21 as an example of the divine counsel to reason over the scriptures (see CR, Apr. 1973, p. 35).

Isa. 41:25-29 . Again the Lord declares that he has established his covenant with one from the north and also from the east ("the rising of the sun"). Abraham came to the land of Canaan from Haran, in the north, and he came to Haran from Ur, in the east. The Anchor Bible (20:34) gives an interesting translation of verse 27: "In the beginning I spoke to Zion, and to Jerusalem I will send a messenger." The fact that this prophecy occurs in the context of the future events which Jehovah has declared supports the interpretation of verse 1 outlined earlier in this chapter. There were none who could declare the future, as there had been none who could declare the premortal past. All was vanity and nothing, as were graven images.

Isa. 42:1 . The passage in Isa. 42:1-4 is the first of four so-called servant songs in the book of Isaiah (see also 49:1-6; 50:4-9; 52:13-53:12). The servant of the songs is usually considered to be Christ, although there are many other interpretations. Some say it is Israel collectively; others cite various historical figures of the past; still others point to an historical figure in the future; and yet others say it is an ideal figure. To those who identify the servant as Israel collectively, the argument is raised that the servant goes far beyond the Israel which was known in Isaiah's day or the days following Isaiah, when most scholars feel these servant songs were written. With this we would heartily agree, because the designation of Israel as the servant in the Isaiah text has reference to the future restored Israel, as already identified and discussed in Isa. 41:8-9. However, not all four songs necessarily refer to the same servant, nor is the servant in any one song necessarily limited to a single identification. There are possibly dual representations for the servant, with reference either to different time periods or to specific and broader meanings in each situation. Therefore, the servant must be identified within the given context in each case.

Isa. 42:1-4 . The testimony of Matthew identifies the servant spoken of here as Christ. Matthew wrote that the Pharisees plotted to destroy Christ, and that his withdrawing from them fulfilled Isa. 42:1-3 (see Matt. 12:14-20) he also added another verse which originally may have been a part of the Isaiah text: "And in his name shall the Gentiles trust" (Matt. 12:21).

Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew judgment to the Gentiles.He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street.He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets.A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory.He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law. (Isa. 42:1-4.) And in his name shall the Gentiles trust. (Matt. 12:18-21.)

Jesus' withdrawing from the Pharisees is fulfillment of verse 2; he does not strive or contend with them, but continues his work elsewhere, and his voice is not "heard in the street."

His healing the sick among the multitude which followed him into the solitary places (see Matt. 12:15) seems to fulfill the prophecy, "A bruised reed shall he not break." Rather than denouncing the physically defective as being cursed of God, which was the attitude of the times, he healed their infirmities to show the works of God (see John 9:1-3). Similarly, the "smoking flax" (or the "dimly burning wick," as the RSV translates it) refers to the spiritually weak who will not be put out but will be patiently fanned or encouraged until a later time when he sends for judgment "unto victory," as Matthew renders Isaiah's "unto truth."

The reference to Christ's ultimate victory shows that his mortal ministry did not fulfill Isaiah's prophecy. Verse 1 refers to his bringing forth "judgment to the Gentiles." Christ did not personally go to the Gentiles but only to the "lost sheep" of the house of Israel (see Matt. 15:24). Peter, as President of the Church, was later given revelation to preach to the Gentiles (see Acts 10) this was done, but the "victory" spoken of in Matt. 12:20 was certainly not attained at that time. The fact that Matthew does not quote verse 4, which is a part of the so-called servant song, is significant. Verse 4 gives a broader meaning to the passage by declaring that the work of the servant will not "fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth," meaning that the mission of the servant is not ended until the judgment has ended in victory. The verse concludes with the declaration that "the isles shall wait for his law." The Anchor Bible (20:36) uses the word "instruction" in place of "law" and adds this informative note: "Here the meaning seems to be wider, almost equivalent to revelation." Again, the "isles" have reference to the restoration of Israel in the Americas, where she will become the servant to fulfill the work which was commenced by the Savior in the meridian of time.

Isa. 42:5-9. The Savior was to be a light to the Gentiles, as foretold here by Isaiah and pronounced by Simeon, the devout temple worker, in a blessing given to the infant Jesus (see Luke 2:32). However, this light was also to be held up by others. Christ told the Nephites that he was the light to be held up by them (see 3 Ne. 18:24). And he may have been quoting part of verse 7 in sending Paul to the Gentiles to hold up that light (see Acts 26:17-18). These verses in Isaiah speak of those servants who were to be called, following Christ's personal ministry, to further the mission which he would begin. The passage also speaks of another aspect of his mission-his preaching to the spirits in prison. Peter bore witness that Christ visited the spirits in prison during the interim between his death and resurrection (see 1 Pet. 3:18-19). After quoting Isa. 42:7, Joseph Smith commented, "It is very evident from this that He not only went to preach to them, but to deliver, or bring them out of the prison house" (TPJS, p. 219). This work of liberating the captive spirits in the spirit world, which was begun by Christ, is now being furthered by the latter-day servants, restored Israel, as they perform ordinances vicariously for those who have died and entered into the spirit world. Isa. 42:5-9 has been cited by modern Church leaders as evidence of restored Israel's responsibility to help save the dead (see Joseph Fielding Smith, DS, 2:155; Theodore M. Burton, CR, Oct. 1964, p. 33). Such is the work of the Lord extended to the latter days before his judgments come upon the earth.

Isa. 42:10-13 . A new song is to be sung in the isles when and where Israel is to be restored. Israel will be gathered from the ends of the earth, where she was previously scattered, and will give glory and praise from the tops of the mountains in the islands (America), and the Lord will prevail against his enemies.

Isa. 42:14-16. The Lord has waited a long time for this restoration, and he now promises to restore Israel and not forsake her. This latter-day restoration will stand forever, as shown to Nebuchadnezzar and interpreted for him by the prophet Daniel (see Daniel chapter 2, especially verse 44).

Isa. 42:17-25. Those who are deafened and blinded by trusting in false gods are invited by the Lord's servant to hear and see. Joseph Smith made several significant changes in this text in his inspired translation.

Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I sent? who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lord's servant? (KJV, Isa. 42:19.) For I will send my servant unto you who are blind; yea, a messenger to open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the deaf;And they shall be made perfect notwithstanding their blindness, if they will hearken unto the messenger, the Lord's servant. (JST, Isa. 42:19-20.)

The servant is not blind, as the various versions indicate, but the Lord is going to send his servant unto those who are blind and deaf to open their eyes and unstop their ears so they can be made perfect if they will hearken to the Lord's servant.

Seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears, but he heareth not.Thou art a people, seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears to hear, but thou hearest not.The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness' sake; he will magnify the law, and make it honourable.The Lord is not well pleased with such a people, but for his righteousness' sake he will magnify the law and make it honorable.But this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore. (KJV, Isa. 42:20-22.) Thou art a people robbed and spoiled; thine enemies, all of them, have snared thee in holes, and they have hid thee in prison houses; they have taken thee for a prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore. (JST, Isa. 42:21-23.)

Again, the servant is not the one who does not see or listen, but it is the people unto whom the servant is sent. "The Lord is not well pleased with such a people." Their enemies have imprisoned them and kept them for a prey.

Who among you will give ear to this; who will hearken and hear for the time to come?Who among them will give ear unto thee, or hearken and hear thee for the time to come? and who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord, he against whom they have sinned?Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law.Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. (Isa. 42:23-25.) For they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law; therefore he hath poured upon them the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle; and they have set them on fire round about, yet they know not, and it burned them, yet they laid it not to heart. (JST, Isa. 42:24-25.)

Will their enemies listen to their plight? Did not the Lord scatter Israel among them? But Israel will not walk in the way of the Lord, so his judgments are to come upon them.

Isa. 43:1-7 . The reference in verse 3 to "the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour" is another evidence of Jesus Christ's being the God who administered the affairs of the Old Testament. The Prophet Joseph Smith prefaced verses 5 and 6 with these words: "In addition to all temporal blessings, there is no other way for the Saints to be saved in these last days, [than by the gathering] as the concurrent testimony of all the holy prophets clearly proves" (TPJS, p. 183). President Joseph Fielding Smith referred to verses 5 through 7 as one of the predictions of the gathering of Israel (see DS, 3:254). Through Isaiah, the Lord here assures Israel that he will be with them as they are gathered. Elder Orson Pratt spoke of verses 6 and 7 and the time when all Christians would be gathered together out of the world: "Will it leave a Christian behind? Not one. Go and search New York, Philadelphia, and all the eastern States, and the middle and southern States, and then all Europe, for a Christian after this prophecy is fulfilled, and you can't find one. Why? Because they are all gathered in one. How? By new revelation." (JD, 18:186.) Those who are "called by his name" are those who have taken the name of Christ upon them in the waters of baptism and know his voice, as defined in Mosiah 5:6-15.

Isa. 43:8-13 . These verses seem to be an extension of Isa. 42:19-20 in the JST, where it states that the Lord will send his servant to gather those who will see and hear. The Lord again identifies himself as the Savior and the messengers as his "witnesses." Elder Bruce R. McConkie has identified verse 12 as a prophecy of this day:

The power of God unto salvation is found here in the tops of these everlasting hills; and this glorious truth is spreading out to all the nations of the earth as rapidly as people in them accept the testimony and witness that is borne and believe the truths that our fellow representatives proclaim. This is a day of which God has said that all of gathered Israel shall be witnesses of his name. "... ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am god." (CR, Apr. 1972, p. 135; see also CR, Oct. 1969, pp. 82-83; CR, Apr. 1973, p. 36.)

In D&C 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord identified himself in nearly the same words as those given in Isa. 43:11 (see D&C 76:1).

Isa. 43:14-17 . Most scholars believe that these verses refer to a historical setting, but are uncertain of which setting. It is probably a general reference to the Lord's bringing Israel under the reign of the Gentiles for Israel's own good, and to the fact that he will also bring the Gentiles down because they will not recognize his hand or accept the gospel.

Isa. 43:18-21 . The Lord, through Isaiah, now instructs his people to forget their past oppression under the Gentiles and to see the new things he will do for them in the restoration of Israel.

Isa. 43:22-28 . Israel is now chastised for failing to call upon the Lord and perform his ordinances, but is invited to trust in the Lord. "Thy first father" in verse 27 probably refers to Israel as a nation in former times rather than some specific personage. The Israelites were scattered because they did not follow the Lord.

Isa. 44:1-6 . The Lord again confirms his promise to Israel, his servant whom he has chosen, that he will restore his people and they need not fear. In verse 6 the Lord identifies himself in the same terminology used in the book of Revelation, showing that Jesus Christ is speaking in both passages (see Rev. 1:8, 17; 22:13).

Isa. 44:9-26 . (See chapter outline.)

Isa. 44:27-28 . The naming of Cyrus in this passage has led almost all biblical scholars to reject Isaiah as the author, because Cyrus lived approximately two hundred years after Isaiah. Influenced by the humanistic thinking of the times, they do not comprehend that a prophet can foretell the name and specific activities of a man so far in the future. This is no problem to the believer in the Book of Mormon. Joseph, who was sold into Egypt, prophesied of Moses by name more than two hundred years before he delivered Israel out of Egypt. He further prophesied of a choice seer in the latter days who would be called after his own name-Joseph-and he said that his father's name would be the same (see 2 Ne. 3) this prophecy was fulfilled approximately thirty-five hundred years later. As Isaiah testified, the Lord knows the end from the beginning (see Isa. 46:10), so he certainly could reveal the name of a person and identify the man's activities to his prophets as he saw fit. The actual prophecy about Cyrus delivering the Jews will be treated in the next chapter.
