Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

17

Cyrus, the Lord's Anointed

Isa. 45-47

The mention of Cyrus in Isa. 44:28 has led some scholars to suppose that the division between chapters 44 and 45 should have been made elsewhere. However, the earlier chapter is merely referring to the revelation given to Isaiah concerning the future Cyrus who was to be raised up. He tells us in chapter 44 that the Lord has foretold the mission of Cyrus, then in chapter 45 he records the revelation. Chapters 46 and 47 seem to be a continuation of the same general theme and may be part of the same revelation; chapter 46 concerns the gods of Babylon, and chapter 47 concerns Babylon's fall, which came at the hands of Cyrus. Thus these three chapters are treated together here. A more detailed outline follows:

a. The Lord will go before him (45:2).

b. Cyrus will know that the Lord is the God of Israel (45:3).

c. The Lord will bless Cyrus for Israel's sake although Cyrus has not known him (45:4).

a. The Lord armed Cyrus that the nations might know of God from the east to the west (45:5-6).

b. The Lord is the creator and governor of all things (45:7-12).

c. He will raise up Cyrus and direct him, and all nations will be confounded and acknowledge that the God of Israel is with Cyrus (45:13-16).

d. But Israel will be saved with an everlasting salvation (45:17).

e. The Lord has spoken the truth openly (45:18-19).

a. The graven images cannot save them (45:20).

b. Every knee will bow and every tongue confess the Lord (45:21-23).

c. In the Lord will all the seed of Israel be justified (45:24-25).

a. There is no one like the Lord; there is no other God (46:5-9).

b. He knows the end from the beginning (46:10).

c. He will call Cyrus from the east for his purposes (46:11).

d. Salvation for Israel will be in Zion (46:12-13).

a. Judah was given to Babylon, who showed no mercy (47:6).

b. Babylon will become childless and a widow (47:7-9).

c. Babylon trusted in its own wickedness and knowledge, and was lifted up in pride (47:10).

d. Evil and desolation will come to Babylon, whose gods will not deliver its inhabitants (47:11-15).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

The best source of help in understanding these chapters is the New Testament. President Joseph Fielding Smith commented on two passages in chapter 45 and referred to the Book of Mormon to provide an insight into one of these. The Jewish historian Josephus also made an enlightening statement about Cyrus.

Isa. 45:1-4 . As previously noted, this prophecy foretelling the mission of Cyrus has led many to reject Isaiah as its author. However, the Jewish historian Josephus wrote that the prophecy was Isaiah's and that it was given 140 years before the destruction of the temple. This would have been nearly 200 years before Cyrus issued the decree for the Jews to return. The account in Josephus is as follows:

In the first year of the reign of Cyrus, which was the seventieth from the day that our people were removed out of their own land into Babylon, God commiserated the captivity and calamity of these poor people, according as he had foretold to them by Jeremiah the prophet, before the destruction of the city, that after they had served Nebuchadnezzar and his posterity, and after they had undergone that servitude seventy years, he would restore them again to the land of their fathers, and they should build their temple, and enjoy their ancient prosperity; and these things God did afford them; for he stirred up the mind of Cyrus, and made him write this throughout all Asia:-"Thus saith Cyrus the King: -Since God Almighty hath appointed me to be king of the habitable earth, I believe that he is that God which the nation of the Israelites worship; for indeed he foretold my name by the prophets, and that I should build him a house at Jerusalem, in the country of Judea."

This was known to Cyrus by his reading the book which Isaiah left behind him of his prophecies; for this prophet said that God had spoken thus to him in a secret vision:-"My will is, that Cyrus, whom I have appointed to be king over many and great nations, send back my people to their own land, and build my temple." This was foretold by Isaiah one hundred and forty years before the temple was demolished. Accordingly, when Cyrus read this, and admired the divine power, an earnest desire and ambition seized upon him to fulfil what was so written; so he called for the most eminent Jews that were in Babylon, and said to them, that he gave them leave to go back to their own country, and to rebuild their city Jerusalem, and the temple of God, for that he would be their assistant, and that he would write to the rulers and governors that were in the neighbourhood of their country of Judea, that they should contribute to them gold and silver for the building of the temple, and, besides that, beasts for their sacrifices. (Flavius Josephus, Josephus: Complete Works, trans. William Whiston [Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregel Publications, 1972], Antiquities of the Jews, 11.1.1-2.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith cited this passage as evidence of the Lord's foreordaining not only prophets but other leaders as well (AQ, 5:181).

Isa. 45:5, 21. The declaration that "there is no God beside me" was paraphrased by one of the Jewish scribes in response to the Savior's declaration that man should love God with all his heart, soul, mind, and strength. Jesus' response to the scribe was that he was "not far from the kingdom of God" (Mark 12:28-34). What the scribe apparently did not recognize was that Jesus was that God. Verse 21 adds that he is "a just God and a Saviour" (italics added). Jesus Christ was the Administrator of the world by "divine investiture of authority," as explained by the First Presidency in an official statement in 1916 (see Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, Inc., 1965-75], 5: 31-34).

Isa. 45:7 . The statement that God creates evil may be misunderstood and seems to contradict Moro. 7:12: "that which is evil cometh of the devil." The declaration in Isaiah may have reference to the Lord's bringing destruction upon a people "ripe in iniquity." This idea is supported by the RSV, which says, "I make weal and create woe." Another text, Amos 3:6, asks "Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hath not done it?" But the JST reads "and the Lord hath not known it?" The Lord is not the author of evil, but is fully aware of all evil and of the consequences which follow. As Mormon says, "It is by the wicked that the wicked are punished" (Morm. 4:5).

Isa. 45:8 . This verse, declaring another evidence of the omniscience of God, probably has reference to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. The instruction to "drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness" is fulfilled in the visitations of angels (such as the angel Moroni) and the giving of other types of revelation. To "let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation" is to bring forth a record such as the Book of Mormon, which contains the fulness of the gospel. In words similar to these, Enoch was given a promise concerning that which would lead to the building of the New Jerusalem in the latter days (see Moses 7:62). In commenting on the passage in Moses, Joseph Smith said: "And now, I ask, how righteousness and truth are going to sweep the earth as with a flood? I will answer. Men and angels are to be co-workers in bringing to pass this great work, and Zion is to be prepared, even a new Jerusalem, for the elect that are to be gathered from the four quarters of the earth, and to be established an holy city, for the tabernacle of the Lord shall be with them." (TPJS, p. 84.) The Psalmist also spoke of the time when "Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from heaven" (Ps. 85:11).

Isa. 45:9 . This verse is similar to Isa. 29:16, and Paul quoted one or the other in his epistle to the Romans (9:20).

Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the potter's clay: for shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it. He had no understanding? (Isa. 29:16.) Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands? [Isa. 45:9.) Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? (Rom. 9:20.)

Isa. 45:14 . In writing to the Saints at Corinth, Paul made a statement similar to the one at the end of this verse, but the occurrence he described was not given as a fulfillment of the prophecy in Isaiah.

Thus saith the Lord, the labour of Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine; they shall come after thee; in chains they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee; and there is none else, there is no God. (Isa. 45:14.) And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. (1 Cor. 14:25.)

Isa. 45:23. "That unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear" is another statement showing clearly that Jesus Christ is the Administrator of the Old Testament. Paul quoted this passage with reference to Christ in writing to the Romans and the Philippians:

I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. (Isa. 45:23.) For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. (Rom. 14:11.) That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in earth, and things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth;

And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. (Philip. 2:10-11.)

The prophet Abinedi gave an indication of the time when this prophecy will be fulfilled (see Mosiah 16:1-4), and his text was used by President Joseph Fielding Smith to show that those who "bow" and "confess" are not celestial beings who will receive exaltation, but primarily telestial beings who will have to acknowledge the Savior and admit that his judgments are just (see DS, 2:30-31). The Doctrine and Covenants also uses similar language in reference to the telestial beings (see D&C 76:110; compare 88:104).

Isa. 47:7-9. The book of Revelation uses similar phraseology to describe the fall of Babylon in the latter days (see Revelation 18: 7-8).

Isa. 47:15 . Again the Lord uses similar language to describe Babylon's fall in the latter days (Rev. 18:3).
