Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

18

Judah and the Furnace of Affliction

Isa. 48

Chapter 48 is the first chapter of Isaiah quoted in the book of Mormon to "more fully persuade them [Nephi's brethren and the house of Israel] to believe in the Lord their Redeemer." For this purpose Nephi "did read unto them that which was written by the prophet Isaiah; for I did liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning.

"Wherefore I spake unto them, saying: Hear ye the words of the prophet, ye who are a remnant of the house of Israel, a branch who have been broken off; hear ye the words of the prophet, which were written unto all the house of Israel, and liken them unto yourselves, that ye may have hope as well as your brethren from whom ye have been broken off; for after this manner has the prophet written." (1 Ne. 19:23-24.) Isa. 40-47 provides an overview, identifies the "servant," and foretells of Cyrus and the fall of Babylon. While these were important, they were not as relevant to Nephi's people or to the latter-day readers of his record as chapters 48 and 49. Chapter 48 foretells the destiny of Judah and declares the omniscience of God; an outline of the chapter will show these two prominent themes.

a. They swear by the name of the Lord, but not in truth or righteousness (48:1).

b. They claim to be of the holy city, but do not rely on the Lord (48:2).

a. They were shown the things which would happen before they happened (48:3).

b. They were shown these things because they were obstinate and stubborn (48:4).

c. They were shown them so they could not give credit to their idols (48:5).

d. They have seen prophecy fulfilled and have been told of the future, and yet would not hear; this the Lord also knew (48:6-8).

a. They will be sent through the furnace of affliction (48:10).

b. The Lord will not allow his name to be polluted (48:11).

a. He has created the earth and the heavens, and they obey him (48:13).

b. He will fulfill his word on the Gentiles (48:14).

c. Israel will declare God's word, and he will make Israel prosperous (48:15).

d. The Lord has spoken of this from the beginning (48:16-17).

e. If Israel had hearkened to the commandments, they would not have been destroyed (48:18-19).

f. The Lord has delivered his people before (48:20-21).

g. There will be no peace for the wicked (48:22).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Every verse of this chapter is quoted differently in the Book of Mormon. Some of these differences are significant. Neither Nephi nor Mormon commented on this chapter, so the only help for understanding it comes from studying the differences in the Book of Mormon retentions. The modern prophets have said little about this chapter.

Isa. 48:1.

Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness. (Isa. 48:1.) Hearken and hear this, O house of Jacob, who are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, or out of the waters of baptism, who swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, yet they swear not in truth nor in righteousness. (1 Ne. 20:1.)

The phrase "out of the waters of Judah" refers to those of Judah who are baptized into the Church. The Prophet Joseph Smith added the phrase "or out of the waters of baptism<_P>" to the text in the third edition of the Book of Mormon (1840). This clarifies the meaning of the term "waters of Judah."

Isa. 48:2.

For they call themselves of of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel: The Lord of hosts is his name. (Isa. 48:2.) Nevertheless, they call themselves of the holy city, but they do not stay themselves upon the God of Israel, who is the Lord of Hosts; yea, the Lord of Hosts is his name. (1 Ne. 20:2.)

The Book of Mormon retains the words "but they do not," which help us see the apostate conditions of Judah. It also retains the phrase "who is the Lord of Hosts" to further identify or describe the God of Israel, but this does not add meaning to the text.

Isa. 48:3 . The Book of Mormon retains the word "show" in the KJV expression "I did them suddenly." That the Lord "did show them suddenly" places the responsibility for their actions upon the people.

Isa. 48:6 . The Book of Mormon "Thou hast seen and heard" is a plainer rendering.

Isa. 48:3-8 . This whole concept of why the Lord shows the future to individuals or a people is important. The principle of foreknowledge is difficult to understand, but is affirmed by several prophets who have been shown the end of the world from the beginning (see 1 Ne. 14:24-26). The Lord shows the future so that false gods will not be worshipped or credited with his operations. This understanding is an important contribution by Isaiah.

Isa. 48:9 . The Book of Mormon wording "will I refrain from thee" instead of "for thee" shows the Lord will withdraw from Judah rather than intercede for her.

Isa. 48:10 . The Book of Mormon does not include the KJV phrase "but not with silver." The Anchor Bible (20:94) translates the phrase "I have tested you like silver." This phrase may have been added to the original text as an explanation.

Isa. 48:11. The Book of Mormon reads "I will not suffer my name to be polluted" in place of "how should my name be polluted?" This is much more logical reading.

Isa. 48:12 . Again, it is shown that Jesus Christ is the one who is speaking, and he calls his servant Israel to hearken. The Lord spoke to John on the Isle of Patmos and called himself by the same name revealed to Isaiah (see Revelotion 1:8, 17: 22:13).

Isa. 48:14.

All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath declared these things? The Lord hath loved him: he will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans. (Isa. 48:14.) All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; who among them hath declared these things unto them? The Lord hath loved him; yea, and he will fulfill his word which he hath declared by them; and he will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shall come upon the Chaldeans. (1 Ne. 20:14.)

The Book of Mormon retention "unto them" identifies Israel, whom the Lord loved. This shows that the referent of "him" is not Cyrus, as many scholars say. "Babylon" and "the Chaldeans" appear to represent the Gentiles rather than those countries specifically.

Isa. 48:15. The Book of Mormon reading "I have called him to declare" is consistent with the identification of Israel in verse 14, for Israel is to declare God's word.

Isa. 48:16-17 . The Book of Mormon retention "have sent him" in verse 17 shows that all of these verses are speaking of Israel as the servant who is called (see verse 12).

Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret from the beginning; from the time that it was, there am I: and now the Lord God, and his Spirit, hath sent me.Come ye near unto me; I have not spoken in secret; from the beginning, from the time that it was declared have I spoken; and the Lord God, and his Spirit, hath sent me.Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I am the Lord thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go. (Isa. 48:16-17.) And thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I have sent him, the Lord thy God who teacheth thee to profit, who leadeth thee by the way thou shouldest go, hath done it. (1 1 Ne. 20:16-17.)

Isa. 48:20-22 . Verse 22 is almost identical with Isa. 57:21. The Book of Mormon retains some transitional wording which provides a context for the idea presented here:

There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked. (Isa. 48:22.) And notwithstanding he hath done all this, and greater also, there is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked. (1 Ne. 20:22.)

The wicked people who will not respond to Israel's declaration (in verse 20) to come out from Babylon-which is the world, as identified by President Joseph Fielding Smith (see DS, 3:30)-are the ones who will have no peace.
