Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

19

The House of Israel Nursed by the Gentiles

Isa. 4 9

Before Nephi recorded the words of Isaiah on the plates which concluded his book called 1 Nephi, he spoke these words to all the house of Israel who should obtain his writings:

For behold, I have workings in the spirit, which doth weary me even that all my joints are weak, for those who are at Jerusalem; for had not the Lord been merciful, to show unto me concerning them, even as he had prophets of old, I should have perished also.

And he surely did show unto the prophets of old all things concerning them; and also he did show unto many concerning us; wherefore, it must needs be that we know concerning them for they are written upon the plates of brass. (1 Ne. 19:20-21.)

Nephi then recorded what is now Isaiah chapter 48 as evidence that the Lord had shown the prophets of old concerning the people of Jerusalem, and he recorded what is now Isaiah chapter 49 as evidence that the Lord had also shown the Nephites to some of the prophets of old.

Chapter 49 is one of the most important chapters in the whole book of Isaiah, because it also clearly foretells the mission of the Latter-day Saints and the destiny of the land of America in connection with the house of Israel. Nephi interpreted the chapter as foretelling that the land of America would receive some of scattered Israel, while his brother Jacob applied it both to the Jews in Jerusalem and to the Gentiles. Chapter 49 is of such importance that it ought to be studied diligently by every member of the Church. The outline below will hopefully assist in such a study,

a. The children of Israel have been scattered upon the isles of the sea (49:1).

b. They were foreordained to their work (49:1).

c. Their message will be cutting because it is the word of God (49:2).

d. The Lord has kept them hidden (49:2).

e. He will polish them and preserve his servant (49:3).

f. Although Israel's former efforts have been in vain, they will now do the Lord's work (49:4).

a. They are to raise up the tribes of Jacob (49:6).

b. They are to restore the preserved of Israel (49:6).

c. They are also to be a light unto the Gentiles (49:6).

d. Kings will see, and princes will worship (49:7).

e. The Lord will give Israel his servant to establish them as a covenant people in the isles of the sea; then they will "inherit the desolate heritages" (49:8).

f. The "prisoners" will be led by the Lord, and the way will be opened for them (49:9-11).

g. The house of Israel will gather from all lands (49:12).

a. Heaven and earth will rejoice when the Lord comforts his people (49:13),

b. The Lord's promises are never forgotten (49:15).

c. He has engraven them upon the palms of his hands (49:16).

d. Joseph's children shall prosper over the Gentiles (49:17),

a. People will come from far away and build up Zion's waste and desolate places (49:19).

b. They will come seeking freedom or fewer restrictions (49:20).

c. The Lord will lift up his standard to the Gentiles (49:22).

d. The gentile kings and queens will nurse Israel's children (49:22-23).

e. The Gentiles will bow down to Israel (49:23).

a. The Lord will contend with those who fight against Israel (49:25).

b. The wicked will fight among themselves (49:26).

c. All flesh will know that the Lord is the Redeemer (49:26).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

This entire chapter is quoted by Nephi, and part of it is quoted by Jacob. The commentary by both of these prophets is of great worth to our current study, and there are many significant retentions in the Book of Mormon which help us understand Isaiah's words more clearly and fully. The New Testament, the Doctrine and Covenants, and modern Church leaders also add significantly to our understanding.

Isa. 49:1 . About half of this verse has been lost from the KJV.

And again: Hearken, O ye house of Israel, all ye that are broken off and are driven out, because of the wickedness of the pastors of my people; yea, all ye that are broken off, that are scattered abroad, who are of my people. O house of Israel.Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The Lord hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name. (Isa. 49:1.) Listen, O isles, unto me, and hearken ye people from far: the Lord hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name. (1 Ne. 21:1.)

The Book of Mormon retention designates those who are "broken off" or "scattered abroad" as the segment of the house of Israel which is invited to hearken. This retention clarifies what the Lord means with the KJV "Listen, O isles." Nephi told his brothers that these verses referred to things which were spiritual and temporal and that they were given to the prophet by the Spirit to reveal what would "come upon the children of men according to the flesh." He further said that the house of Israel would be scattered upon all the face of the earth and among all nations, that many had already been led away and were scattered upon the isles of the sea, and that many more would be (see 1 Ne. 22:1-5). Jacob also reminded his brethren that they (the Nephites) had been scattered and were "upon an isle of the sea" (see 2 Ne. 10:20-22).

The "me" in this verse is identified in verse 3 as the servant Israel. This will be discussed more fully in the notes on verses 2 and 3. "The Lord hath called me from the womb: from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name" is an obvious reference to foreordination, The wording is similar to that which tells of the foreordination of Jeremiah (see Jer. 1:4-5).

Isa. 49:2. The statement that the mouth of the servant will be made "like a sharp sword" is a reference to the message he will bear, which is the word of God (see D&C 6:2; 11:2; 12:2; 14:2: 15:2; 16:2; 33:1). The sword analogy reflects the cutting nature of the truth of the word of God. As Nephi wrote. "the guilty taketh the truth to be hard, for it cutteth them to the very center" (1 Ne. 16:2). The book of Revelation also uses the sword analogy (see Rev. 1:16).

The Lord's hiding Israel in "the shadow of his hand" is clarified in the Doctrine and Covenants, where the Lord declares that the priesthood holders of this last dispensation are "lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God" (D&C 86:8-9). This description of priesthood bearers as "lawful heirs according to the flesh" is a reference to the covenant which the Lord made with Abraham that all nations of the earth would be blessed through the literal seed of his body, who would bear the ministry and the priesthood (see Abr. 2:9-11). The Doctrine and Covenants also identifies latter-day Israel as the "seed of Abraham" (D&C 103:17). The world did not know where scattered Israel was, but the Lord knew and had concealed them in his protective hand.

The "polished shaft" hidden in the Lord's quiver may be a direct reference to Joseph Smith. As the "choice seer" of the latter day, he was to be the Lord's servant in a special sense (see 2 Ne. 3:6; 3 Ne. 21:10). The Prophet Joseph's description of himself is interesting in this light:

I am like a huge, rough stone rolling down from a high mountain; and the only polishing I get is when some corner gets rubbed off by coming in contact with something else, striking with accelerated force against religious bigotry, priestcraft, lawyer-craft, doctor-craft, lying editors, suborned judges and jurors, and the authority of perjured executives, backed by mobs, blasphemers, licentious and corrupt men and women-all hell knocking off a corner here and a corner there. Thus I will become a smooth and polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty, who will give me dominion over all and every one of them, when their refuge of lies shall fail, and their hiding place shall be destroyed, while these smooth-polished stones with which I come in contact become marred. (TPJS, p. 304.)

The arrow shaft is polished that it might fly truer and faster, and the shaft that is polished is generally reserved for one's most important shot. The last dispensation, when all things are gathered in one, is the Lord's most important "shot," so he saved his "polished shaft" for this latter-day work. Joseph was called to give this generation the word of God (see D&C 5:10), which recalls also the sharp sword analogy mentioned in verse 2.

Isa. 49:3 . The servant here identified as Israel was previously discussed (see especially the explanatory notes for Isa. 41:8-9 and 42:17-25). The servant spoken of here is actually Ephraim, who holds the birthright of the twelve tribes (see D&C 133:30-34; Jer. 31:9), but specifically it is the Prophet Joseph Smith, who heads the dispensation of the fulness of times (see D&C 90:3-4).

Isa. 49:4 . This verse has perplexed scholars through the years. It seems to refer to the Ephraimites who have been devout members of the various Christian churches. But their membership, ordinances, and efforts in those churches have been to no avail as far as obtaining salvation is concerned because the churches have no authority. They must now turn their efforts to the work of their God under the restoration of his authority, and they will be judged or held accountable for this responsibility.

Isa. 49:5-6 . Through the strength of the Lord, Ephraim is to accomplish three things: (1) He will raise up the tribes of Jacob. These twelve tribes constitute the lost tribes, the Jews, and the Lamanites. Although they remained intact after their dispersion, they were not producing fruit unto the Lord at the time of the Restoration (see Jacob 5:38-39). (2) He will restore the preserved of Israel. These are those who have the blood of Israel but have been scattered among all the nations of the earth, as prophesied by Amos (9:8-9), and have lost their identity (see Jacob 5:52-54). (3) He will be a light to the Gentiles. At the same time that Ephraim will gather those of the blood of Israel from among the nations of the world, he will give the Gentiles an opportunity to be adopted into Israel. Thus the blessing of Abraham to all nations will be under way. and salvation will be extended "unto the end of the earth." The Doctrine and Covenants also calls the priesthood holders of this dispensation to be "a light unto the Gentiles" and "a savior unto my people Israel" (D&C 86:11).

Paul and Barnabas quoted the last part of verse 6 to show that the Gentiles were to receive the gospel after the Jews had rejected it (see Acts 13:47). This did not completely fulfill Isaiah's prophecy, but was an application made by Paul and Barnabas.

Isa. 49:7.

Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant of rulers. Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee. (Isaiah 49:7.)Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth. to him whom the nation abhorreth, to servant of rulers: Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful. (2 Ne. 21:7.)

The Book of Mormon deletes several words, as noted above, but these do not change the meaning of the verse.

Isa. 49:8.

Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages; (Isa. 49:8.) Thus saith the Lord: In an acceptable time have I heard thee, O isles of the sea, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee; and I will preserve thee, and give thee my servant for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages; (1 Ne. 21:8.)

The message here, as shown by the important retentions in the Book of Mormon, is that scattered Israel will be established as a covenant people in the isles of the sea through the Lord's servant. Paul quotes part of this verse to the Corinthians to encourage them to accept the gospel in the day or time of their salvation (see 2 Cor. 6:2). This again is an application and not a fulfillment of the prophecy in Isaiah.

Isa. 49:9-12. These verses are interpreted in 1 Ne. 22:10-12. Nephi said these verses teach that the Lord will "make bare his arm," or show his power, in the eyes of all nations in bringing his covenants and his gospel to the house of Israel. The children of Israel will be brought out of the captivity of the Gentiles and gathered to their promised lands, where they will be identified as Israelites. They will be brought out of obscurity and darkness, will be taught the truth, and will come to know the Savior. This redeeming power will not be known to men, but will be the miraculous power of God. The Book of Mormon retention "and then, O house of Israel" at the beginning of verse 12 shows that the gathering will begin after the Lord has fulfilled verses 10 and 11.

In describing a "great multitude" who would be gathered out of "all nations" to serve the Lord, John used the same words as those found in verse 10, but the time period of John's description seems to be the end of the world rather than the beginning of the gathering (see Rev. 7:16).

Isa. 49:13 . The Book of Mormon retains two whole clauses which have been lost from the KJV:

Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted. (Isa. 49:13.) Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, ful, O earth; for the feet of those who are in the east shall be established; and break forth into singing, O mountains; for they shall be smitten no more; for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted. (1 Ne. 21:13.)

"Those who are in the east" seems to refer to Jerusalem, while the "mountains" appears to be a reference to Zion or America. Thus the Lord is declaring that the two capitals of Israel shall be established and smitten no more.

Isa. 49:14-15.

But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me.But, behold, Zion hath said: The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me-but he will show that he hath not.Can a woman forget her sucking child. that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea. they may forget. yet will I not forget thee. (Isa. 49:14-15.) For can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, O house of Israel. (1 1 Ne. 21:14-15.)

The Book of Mormon retention "but he will show that he hath not" at the end of verse 14 forms a logical transition to verse 15, bridging the gap that exists in the KJV.

In verse 14, Zion apparently bemoans a seeming lack of evidence that the Lord has comforted his people, or will have mercy on the afflicted (see verse 13), but the Lord will remember his promises. A woman's love for her offspring is considered to be one of the strongest bonds that exist, but the Lord's love and promises are even stronger and are never forgotten. Zion (the Americas) was the land given to the children of the house of Joseph (see 3 Ne. 15:12-13; Gen. 49:22-26). The Lord has promised that the New Jerusalem, the epitome of beauty, will be established upon this land (see 3 1 Ne. 20:22). The Prophet Joseph Smith said concerning the location of Zion:

You know there has been great discussion in relation to Zion-where it is, and where the gathering of the dispensation is, and which I am now going to tell you. The prophets have spoken and written upon it; but I will make a proclamation that will cover a broader ground. The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land. When Elders shall take up and examine the old prophecies in the Bible, they will see it. (TPJS, p. 362.)

Isaiah's representing the land of Zion as speaking in verse 14 is consistent with another scripture (see Moses 7:48-49). The Book of Mormon retains the identifying phrase "O house of Israel" at the end of verse 15.

Isa. 49:16 . The engraving upon the palms has two possible symbolic meanings. As the Jews used phylacteries to remind them continually of the commandments of God, they wrote the commandments and wore them where they were continually before their eyes (see Deut. 6:6-9). The Lord declared that he was keeping the promises made to Zion continually before his eyes, and that he would fulfill them at the time and in the manner promised. Another deeper meaning would be that the covenant made by Christ (to atone for the sins of the world and to bring to pass the resurrection) would be sealed or completed by his being nailed to the cross. These nail prints in the palms of his hands would then be a sign to the world, and especially to the Jews, that he had kept his promise (see Isa. 22:23, 25; Zech. 12:10; 13:6; D&C 45:48-53).

Isa. 49:17 . The Book of Mormon retention "shall make haste against thy destroyers" shows that Joseph's children, unto whom the land of Zion was given, will gain control over those who previously oppressed them. As the Gentiles came to America and scattered the Lamanite children of Joseph, so Joseph's children will prosper against the Gentiles.

Isa. 49:18-21 . The Lord invites Zion to look into the future and behold the multitudes that will come and adorn its land as a bride. The analogy of a bride is used because a bride is traditionally very meticulous in her dress and grooming on her wedding day. The land which has lain waste and desolate will be built up until man will reason that it is too small for the multitude which will come to it. These multitudes will come from afar seeking freedom because their former lands were too restrictive, "too strait." This will happen after the time when the "first" of Joseph's children (note the Book of Mormon retention in verse 20)-the Nephites-shall have forfeited their blessings in this choice land above all other lands. The migrations to come are going to be so numerous that it will astonish the land of Zion, who was previously complaining that the Lord had forgotten her.

Isa. 49:22-23. These verses have been interpreted for us by both Nephi and Jacob. Nephi spoke of their fulfillment by the Lamanites in the land of America, but he also included all of the house of Israel, and Jacob spoke of their fulfillment through both the Jews and the Lamanites (see 1 Ne. 22:6-9; 2 Ne. 6:8-12; 10:1). The fulfillment was to commence with the Lord's "standard" being raised up to the Gentiles (see verse 22). This standard or "ensign," as it is elsewhere called by Isaiah, is identified in the Doctrine and Covenants as the "everlasting covenant" (see D&C 45:9). Elder Marion G. Romney identified the standard spoken of by Isaiah as the Church, which teaching is consistent with D&C 115:3-5 (see CR, Apr. 1961, p. 119). The Lord has also identified the standard as his words which would be spoken to Nephi's seed (see 2 Ne. 29:2). Thus the Church, the Book of Mormon, and the everlasting covenant may all be seen as the fulfillment of this prophecy in Isaiah.

Nephi said there would be a temporal and a spiritual fulfillment of the children's being carried in the Gentiles' arms and upon their shoulders. He spoke of the house of Israel's being scattered and confounded, which would be followed by the Lord's raising up a mighty nation among the Gentiles upon the land of America who would scatter the Lamanites (see 1 Ne. 22:6-7). This, of course, was fulfilled in the settling of America and the moving of the Lamanites onto reservations, where they were given government aid. Elder Spencer W. Kimball has described how the Lamanites have been carried in the arms of the Gentiles at various times (see CR, Oct. 1965, p. 72; see also CR, Oct. 1956, pp. 52-58).

Nephi described the spiritual fulfillment of this prophecy through "a marvelous work among the Gentiles" (the restoration of the gospel), which would be of great worth to Nephi's seed and that of his brethren. He further declared the great worth of this marvelous work to the Gentiles and to all the house of Israel which would fulfill the promise given to Abraham (see 1 Ne. 22:8-9). Elder Kimball also noted the spiritual fulfillment of these prophecies in his addresses cited in the previous paragraph.

Jacob spoke of the Jews' being carried into captivity after Lehi and his sons left Jerusalem, and of their returning and having the Lord manifest to them in the flesh. He spoke of their crucifying the Holy One of Israel and then being scattered and smitten until the time when they would be gathered again. Jacob then referred to the blessings which would come to the Gentiles through not fighting against Zion and the covenant people of the Lord. He also warned that those who would fight against Zion and the covenant people would "lick up the dust of their feet" (see 2 Ne. 6:8-13).

Jacob enlarged upon the idea that the Lamanites would become "a righteous branch unto the house of Israel" (2 Ne. 9:53). He spoke again of the coming crucifixion of Christ, of the gathering of the Jews from the four parts of the earth to the land of their inheritance, and of the kings of the Gentiles becoming nursing fathers to them. He then said that the land of America would be the land of inheritance for his seed, and that the Gentiles would be blessed upon it. Although there were to be no kings upon this land, the Gentiles would afflict the seed of Israel and become like a father to them. Following this, the land would become a choice land and the great promises of the Lord to the isles of the sea would be fulfilled (see 2 Ne. 10).

As there are three separate chapters which describe the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecies, the following parallel or harmony will help us see how these events were to come about among the Jews, the Nephites, and others of the house of Israel and all nations.

... I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles...

JewsNephitesOthers 2 Ne. 6:8-11 2 Ne. 10:1-2

... and set up my standard to the people...

184 JewsNephitesOthers 1 Ne. 22:8 1 Ne. 22:9-10

184 ... and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.

184 JewsNephitesOthers 2 Ne. 10:10-18

184 And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers...

184 JewsNephitesOthers 2 Ne. 10:3-9

184 ... they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet ....

184 JewsNephitesOthers 2 Ne. 6:12-13 2 Ne. 10:19-20 2 Ne. 10:21-22

184 Isa. 49:24-25.

184 Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered?For shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered?But thus saith the Lord, even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered: for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children. (Isaiah 49:24-25.)But thus saith the Lord: Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; for the Mighty God shall deliver his covenant people. For thus saith the Lord: I will contend with them that contendeth with thee- (2 Ne. 6:16-17.)

184 The "prey" spoken of is the house of Israel, which has been captive to the "mighty" (the Gentiles). While it may seem unlikely that Israel could overcome the mighty gentile nations who have been ruling the world for several hundred years, the Lord, who is "mightier than all the earth" (1 Ne. 4:1), will be on Israel's side.

184 In quoting this verse in 2 Ne. 6:17, Jacob apparently inserted the following into the text: "the mighty God shall deliver his covenant people. For thus saith the Lord." Yet he failed to quote the last line. "and I will save thy children." (Compare 1 Ne. 21:24-25.)

Isa. 40:26. In 1 Ne. 22:13-14, Nephi gave this verse two interpretations: the great and abominable church would war among themselves and become drunken with their own blood, and the nations who would fight against the house of Israel or against Zion would "fall into the pit which they digged to ensnare the people of the Lord."

1 Ne. 22:15-17 . These verses, or part of them, may also have been a part of Isaiah's writings at one time. Although we recognize the similarity between verse 15 and Mal. 4:1, Nephi's words could not have come from this book. Malachi had not written his work at the time Lehi left Jerusalem, so it could not have been included on the plates of brass. It might very well be that Malachi, living several hundred years after Isaiah, was quoting from the original Isaiah text.
