Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

20

Israel Has Not Been Cast Off Forever

Isa. 50-52:12

Isa. 50-52:12 is a message of hope to the whole house of Israel, showing how the covenant of Abraham will be extended to them in the last days through two great gathering places, Zion and Jerusalem.

Isa. 50:4-9 is designated by Bible scholars as another "servant song" to Christ. The servant in Isa. 42:1-4 was identified as Christ. The servant in chapter 49 was definitely identified as latter-day Israel. The servant here is also latter-day Israel, but the passage has a dual meaning as it also describes the mission of the Savior among the Jews (and possibly the other tribes of Israel) in the meridian of time. There are also those who feel, with some justification, that the servant spoken of in these verses is Isaiah himself. The dual meaning of the servant as Israel and Christ fits into the context of the overall message, as outlined below.

a. The mother's bill of divorcement does not apply now (50:1).

b. The Lord has no creditors, so Israel was not sold (50:1).

c. Those who are cast off sell themselves (50:1).

d. Their mother (ancient Israel) was cast off for the same reason (50:1).

e. The Jews did not respond when Christ came to them, and they were driven out (50:2).

f. When Christ called again there was none to answer (50:2).

g. The Lord has power to redeem Israel anyway (50:2-3).

a. The servant can speak and confound the wise (50:4).

b. He listened and followed revelation in spite of persecution (50:5-6).

c. He will smite the contenders with the message of the gospel (50:7-8).

d. He will smite those who condemn him (50:9).

e. Those who walk in the light of their own reasoning will lie down in sorrow (50:10-11).

a. The Lord will comfort Zion physically and socially (51:3).

b. A law (the Book of Mormon) will proceed from the Lord for a light unto Israel in the isles of the sea (51:4-5).

c. The heavens and the earth and its inhabitants will vanish, but the Lord's salvation is forever (51:6-8).

d. Those who have the Lord's law written in their hearts need not fear the reproach of men (51:7-8).

a. The redeemed will return with singing and everlasting joy (51:11).

b. The Lord will be the one who comforts them (51:12-15).

c. The Lord has directed them and hidden them in his hand to be his people (51:16).

a. She has drunk the cup of the Lord's fury, but has no sons to guide her (51:17-18).

b. Two sons will come to her to strengthen her (51:19-20).

c. The cup of fury will be put into the hands of those who afflict Jerusalem (51:21-23).

a. Zion will loose herself from the bands of her neck (52:1-2).

b. Jerusalem will rise from the dust and become a holy city (52:1-2).

c. They sold themselves for nought and will be redeemed without money (52:3).

d. They were ruled over, and the Lord's name was blasphemed (52:4-5).

a. The watchman will publish peace and bring Zion again (52:7-8).

b. The waste places of Jerusalem will sing together (52:9).

c. Those who bear the vessels of the Lord will become clean (52:11).

d. They will not go in haste or by flight, but the Lord will go before and behind (52:12).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

All of these chapters are quoted in the Book of Mormon with the exception of 52:4-5. The other verses in chapter 52 are frequently quoted. There are many significant retentions in the Book of Mormon which help us understand these passages. The Doctrine and Covenants also contains many enlightening references to these chapters, particularly chapter 52. The New Testament quotes several verses, also primarily from the 52nd chapter. Modern Church authorities have made a few statements which help us gain a proper understanding of these chapters. All in all, there is little reason not to understand this part of Isaiah's writings-particularly chapter 52, which is dealt with more frequently in other scriptures than most chapters in the book of Isaiah. This should signify its importance.

Isa. 50:1-3 . Isa. 50-52:12 is a continuation of the theme of chapter 49, and is considered separately here only for convenience of study. Chapter 49 concluded with a declaration that the Lord would fight for his people Israel against those who contended with them or with Zion and that the great and abominable church would be warring within itself. Continuing in the same vein, the Lord here states his reasons for fighting in Israel's behalf: (1) the bill of divorcement which he gave to their "mother" (former-day Israel-see Jer. 3:1, 8) is not in effect for latter-day Israel; and (2) the Lord has not sold them to his creditors, for he has none.

The Lord uses the metaphor of the ancient law of divorce given by Moses, wherein a man who found uncleanness in his wife could put her away, but was required to give her a bill of divorcement; he could never remarry her thereafter, even if her second husband died (see Deut. 24:14). While the Lord had divorced ancient Israel because of their iniquities, latter-day Israel was not included in that bill of divorcement. Some scholars consider that under ancient law, a man could sell his children into servitude, either directly or in marriage, to pay his creditors (see Ex. 21:7), but the Lord is in debt to no one, so this does not apply either. Therefore, there is no reason why the Lord would not deliver Israel from the hands of their oppressors, and certainly he had power to do so.

There will be those in modern Israel who are not delivered, however, because they will suffer from their own iniquities, just as did many in former-day Israel because of their transgressions. The Lord's teachings in this matter are clarified in the Doctrine and Covenants. The context is the day of the Lord's fighting for Israel-and the day spoken of by Moses and Malachi when those who hearken not to the voice of the Lord will be cut off, and the proud and the wicked will be burned, leaving them "neither root [ancestors] nor branch [posterity]." Thus they are no longer a part of Israel; their patriarchal lines are severed.

And upon them that hearken not to the voice of the Lord shall be fulfilled that which was written by the prophet Moses, that they should be cut off from among the people.

And also that which was written by the prophet Malachi: For, behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. (D&C 133:63-64; see also Deut. 18:15, 18-19; Acts 3:23; 1 Ne. 22:20-21; 3 Ne. 20:23; 21:11; Mal. 4:1.)

D&C 133:66-69 contains the Lord's answer to those of Israel who are "cut off," with slight variations from the words in Isaiah. The 2 Nephi reading is also included for comparison:

(D&C 133:66-69.)

Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.Yea, for thus saith the Lord: Have I put thee away, or have I cast thee off forever? For thus saith the Lord: Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement? To whom have I put thee away, or to which of my creditors have I sold you? Yea, to whom have I sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because there is no water, and dieth for thirst.

Wherefore, when I came, there was no man; when I called, yea, there was none to answer. O house of Israel, is my hand shortened at all that it cannot redeem, or have I no power to deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make their rivers a wilderness and their fish to stink because the waters are dried up, and they die because of thirst.In that day when I came unto mine own, no man among you received me, and you were driven out.

When I called again there was none of you to answer; yet my arm was not shortened at all that I could not redeem, neither my power to deliver.

Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea. I make the rivers a wilderness; their fish stink, and die for thirst.

When Christ came to his own in the meridian of time, the Jews collectively rejected the gospel. When he calls again, it will be his second appearance to them. Although the Jews will still not be ready for revelation, the Lord will have power to redeem them. This idea is amplified in chapter 51.

As Nephi commented on Isa. 49 in 1 Ne. 22, he quoted or paraphrased three verses from "the prophet," obviously Isaiah. We do not have these verses in the present Bible text, but they fit very well into the context of Isa. 49 and 50. We can illustrate this by placing the passage between the last verse of chapter 49 and the first verse of chapter 50:

And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob. (Isa. 49:26.)

For behold, saith the prophet, the time cometh speedily that Satan shall have no more power over the hearts of the children of men; for the day soon cometh that all the proud and they who do wickedly shall be as stubble; and the day cometh that they must be burned.

For the time soon cometh that the fulness of the wrath of God shall be poured out upon all the children of men; for he will not suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous.

Wherefore, he will preserve the righteous by his power, even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come, and the righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their enemies by fire. Wherefore, the righteous need not fear; for thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as by fire. (1 Ne. 22:15-17.)

Yea, for thus saith the Lord: Have I put thee away, or have I cast thee off forever? For thus saith the Lord: Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement? To whom have I put thee away, or to which of my creditors have I sold you? Yea, to whom have I sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away. (2 Ne. 7:1.)

The italicized words above are retentions which the Book of Mormon has preserved. In 2 Ne. 6, Jacob quoted Isa. 49, interspersing several of his own comments. (He also inserted Isa. 11:11 between Isa. 49:23 and 49:24.) This was similar to the pattern of Nephi's commentaries on Isaiah, although the intrusions dealt with different subjects.

Isa. 50:4-9. As already stated, this so-called servant song probably had a dual meaning. This claim is supported by D&C 133:66-70, which quotes Isa. 50:2-3 and the last sentence of verse 11, suggesting that a change of thought has been inserted between verses 3 and 11. Verses 4 through 10 may have been inserted to show how the Lord was going to redeem the house of Israel through his "servant" (restored Israel, as explained in chapter 49). The Book of Mormon reading of verse 4 (2 1 Ne. 7:4) clearly shows that the servant is addressing the house of Israel.

Isa. 50:4.

The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned. (Isa. 50:4.) The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season unto thee, O house of Israel. When ye are weary he waketh morning by morning. He waketh mine ear to hear as the learned. (2 Ne. 7:4.)

This verse has been interpreted as a reference to the twelve-year-old Christ as he sat in the temple in the midst of the doctors, who were "astonished at his understanding and answers" (Luke 2:46-47). Others, citing 2 Chr. 36:15-16, have said that the verse refers to prophets' being called to preach to Jerusalem, but the Chronicles reference pertain to a later time than that of Isaiah-although the patterns of the prophets are similar (see Isa. 30:8-11). Verse 4 also fits the calling and mission of Joseph Smith and the elders of restored Israel, who were to cause the wisdom of the wise men to perish (see Isa. 29:14). It would be consistent with chapter 49 to identify the servant "me" as restored Israel.

Isa. 50:5-7. In the JST, verse 5 reads, "The Lord God hath appointed mine ears" rather than "opened mine ear."

The subject still seems to be the servant Israel. The persecution of the Latter-day Saints, particularly in the days of Joseph Smith, is very similar to the events in these verses. The passage may also describe the persecution of the Savior as he was condemned. According to tradition, Isaiah also faced persecutors, eventually being sawn asunder with a wooden saw.

Isa. 50:8-9.

He is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us stand together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me.And the Lord is near, and he justifieth me. Who will contend with me? Let us stand together. Who is mine adversary? Let him come near me, and I will smite him with the strength of my mouth.Behold, the Lord God will help me; who is he that shall condemn me? lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up. (Isa. 50:8-9.) For the Lord God will help me. And all they who shall condemn me, behold, all they shall wax old as a garment, and the moth shall eat them up. (2 Ne. 7:8-9.)

The Book of Mormon identifies the pronoun "he" as the Lord and retains the clause "and I will smite him with the strength of my mouth." Verse 9 also reads more clearly in declaring the fate of those who condemn.

Isa. 50:10-11 . The Book of Mormon reading does not contain the last line of verse 10:

Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. (Isa. 50:10.) Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness and hath no light? (2 Ne. 7:10.)

Without it, verse 11 becomes a warning in the context of Isa. 50:2-3 as clarified by D&C 133 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Those who will not follow revelation or heed the voice of the Lord's servant, but walk in their own light of reason, will lie down in sorrow, having been cut off from Israel.

Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow. (Isa. 50:11.) And this shall ye have of my hand-ye shall lie down in sorrow. (D&C 133:70.)

The Lord gives a further description of their fate in the verses which follow:

Behold, and lo, there are none to deliver you; for ye obeyed not my voice when I called to you out of the heavens; ye believed not my servants, and when they were sent unto you ye received them not.

Wherefore, they sealed up the testimony and bound up the law, and ye were delivered over unto darkness.

These shall go away into outer darkness, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

Behold the Lord your God hath spoken it. Amen. (D&C 133:71-74.)

Isa. 51:1-2. A careful analysis of the covenant made with Abraham and Sarah shows that it will be fulfilled in the last days. The Doctrine and Covenants reveals that Abraham's covenant is now being fulfilled (see D&C 103:17; 132:30). Isaiah's invitation for the righteous to look to Abraham and Sarah pertains to this same time period.

Isa. 51:3. President Charles W. Nibley once quoted this verse and said it referred to Utah and the missionary program, which was gathering Saints to Zion (see CR, Apr. 1930, p. 29). This idea is consistent with the Prophet Joseph Smith's designation of North and South America as the Zion spoken of by the Old Testament prophets (see TPJS, p. 362). But Utah would be only a part of this Zion, and these same physical and social blessings are to come to all the gathering places of the Saints in the land of Zion. The blessings pronounced upon Zion's waste places, wilderness, and deserts are reminiscent of the physical blessings which the Lord has promised those who keep the Sabbath in the land of Zion. These things will be given "to please the eye and to gladden the heart," and will all come "according to the law and the prophets" (D&C 59:16-19, 22).

Isa. 51:4-5 . The "law" which will come from the Lord is undoubtedly the Book of Mormon. This law is associated with judgment in both verses 4 and 5, and it will come forth from the "isles." The Book of Mormon is to judge the nations as well as individuals (see 2 Ne. 25:22; D&C 20:13-15).

Isa. 51:6-8 . In his second general epistle, the apostle Peter expressed teachings similar to these verses:

Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment; and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner. But my salvation shall be forever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up.Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart I have written my law, fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness,For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool. But my righteousness shall be forever, and my salvation from generation to generation. (2 Ne. 8:6-8.) Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat?Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness. (2 Pet. 3:10-13.)

The Book of Mormon retention shown by the italicized words calls to mind the promise given in Jeremiah that a new covenant will be established with Judah and Israel in the future, a further indication that this chapter refers to the last days (see Jer. 31:31-33). President Joseph Fielding Smith taught that verses 6 and 7 speak of the earth's being a living body which must die and become resurrected like man (see DS, 1:72-73).

Isa. 51:9-10. The Book of Mormon retains the word "he" for the KJV "it" in both of these verses. In verse 10 Isaiah cites acts of strength which the Lord has accomplished in times past.

Isa. 51:11 . The "redeemed of the Lord" who were to "return, and come with singing unto Zion" with "everlasting joy" are identified in the Doctrine and Covenants as the Latter-day Saints (see D&C 45:71; 66:11; 101:18). The return has begun, but it will not be completed until the center place of Zion is built up "that the prophets might be fulfilled" (D&C 101:19).

Isa. 51:16 . This verse is similar to Isa. 49:2; see the earlier note on that verse. That Zion will be recognized as the Lord's people is also part of the promise of the "new covenant" spoken of in Jer. 31:31-33.

Isa. 51:18 . Because Judah's sons are without the priesthood, there is no proper leadership. This is the same thought contained in Isa. 50:2, as interpreted in D&C 133:67; both refer to Judah (see the note on Isa. 50:1-3).

Isa. 51:19-20 . The Book of Mormon identifies the two "things" in verse 19 (italicized in the KJV) as "sons." Because the people of Judah have no sons with the priesthood among them, two other sons (who have the priesthood) are to be sent to them.

These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for thee? desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by whom shall I comfort thee?These two sons are come unto thee, who shall be sorry for thee-thy desolation and destruction, and the famine and the sword- and by whom shall I comfort thee?Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God. (Isa. 51:19-20.) Thy sons have fainted. save these two; they lie at the head of all the streets; as a wild bull in a net, they are full of the fury of the Lord. the rebuke of thy God. (2 Ne. 8:19-20.)

Because these "sons" are to bear the priesthood, they have to come from among the Latter-day Saints. They will be the "two witnesses" spoken of in Rev. 11 who will testify in Jerusalem, will be killed and left lying in the streets, and then will be resurrected to meet the Messiah as he appears to the Jews. These two prophets are also spoken of in Zech. 4:3, 11-14. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has stated, "No doubt they will be members of the Council of the Twelve or of the First Presidency of the Church" (DNTC, 3:509).

Isa. 51:21-23. Elder Orson Hyde applied verses 22 and 23 to the persecutors of the Church in the early days of the Restoration (see JD, 10:73-74). While the application was certainly valid, these verses refer to those who come against Judah in the last days.

Isa. 52:1-2 . These two verses demonstrate that what the Lord said in Isa. 51 was addressed to the two gathering places of Zion and Jerusalem. Jacob included them as the conclusion of his quotation from Isaiah (see 2 Ne. 8:24-25). They are also quoted in two other places in the Book of Mormon. When the Savior visited the Nephites, he specified that these verses would be fulfilled when the Jews were gathered to Jerusalem in the last days. He also added one word to the text which was not quoted by Jacob: "Awake, awake again, and put on thy strength, O Zion" (3 Ne. 20:36-37). This was probably because Zion, or America, was "awakening" at the time of the Savior's visit and "putting on her strength," but the Savior knew that within 400 years the Nephites would lose that strength and fall again into a spiritual sleep. The use of the word "again" indicates a dual interpretation of the Isaiah text in this instance, and supports the idea that there are other dual interpretations throughout Isaiah. Moroni, in his final admonition, paraphrased these verses as prophecy which would be fulfilled (see Moro. 10:31).

In March 1838, the Prophet Joseph Smith gave the following interpretation of these verses in answer to a question about what Isaiah meant by "Put on thy strength, O Zion":

He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost. (D&C 113:8.)

He also gave the meaning of "Zion loosing herself from the bands of her neck":

We are to understand that the scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is that he will speak to them, or give them revelation. See the 6th, 7th, and 8th verses. The bands of her neck are the curses of God upon her, or the remnants of Israel in their scattered condition among the Gentiles. (D&C 113:10.)

D&C 82:14 also declares that "Zion must arise and put on her beautiful garments."

Isa. 52:3-6 . These verses are not fully quoted in the Book of Mormon. Only verses 3 and 6 are quoted by the Savior (see 3 Ne. 20:38-39). The fact that verses 4 and 5 refer to Israel's bondage in Egypt and their unjust oppression by the Assyrians, and did not apply specifically to the Nephites, is probably a reason for their exclusion. The Anchor Bible (20:121) translates the last phrase of verse 4 as follows: "... and then Assyria oppressed them violently." This follows the Septuagint reading and is more consistent with history, as Assyria was an instrument in the Lord's hand to humble Israel. On the other hand, the KJV reading could mean that Assyria did not acknowledge the "cause" of their actions because they failed to respond to the Lord or recognize his hand in the conquest of Israel (see Isa. 10:12-13). Because the Lord's name was blasphemed during these historical occurrences, he will cause his people to know his name-and to know that he does give revelation. This is confirmed in D&C 113:10 and is a fitting introduction to verses 7 through 12, which show how in the last days the Lord will establish the knowledge that he exists. Paul applied verse 5 to the Roman Saints who were blaspheming the name of God (see Rom. 2:24). It was an appropriate application which is true of every time period and should be a lesson to Church members today.

Isa. 52:7 . This verse is probably best known because of Handel's Messiah. Its interpretation is given to us in the Book of Mormon, and the time of its fulfillment is provided in the Doctrine and Covenants. The wicked priests of King Noah asked the prophet Abinadi what Isa. 52:7-10 meant (see Mosiah 12:20-24). In a delayed response, Abinadi identified Christ as the "founder of peace" and all those who declare the message of the gospel as the publishers of peace (see Mosiah 15:13-18). Paul bore the same testimony to the Romans concerning those who preach the gospel (see Rom. 10:14-15). In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord quoted the words of verse 7 in sending out modern-day priesthood holders to do missionary work (D&C 19:29; 31:3; 79:1). The Savior also cited this verse as the response of those who come to knew his name and his revelations, as described in verse 6-indicating that it is the message of the gospel which will bring his people to that knowledge (see 3 Ne. 20:39-40).

Isa. 52:8-10 . These verses are quoted four times in the Book of Mormon, and always as a unit, although the Savior once interpolated a comment between verses 8 and 9 when he quoted them (see 3 Ne. 20:33). Although verse 8 speaks about Zion while verse 9 speaks about Jerusalem, the Savior quoted all three verses twice to the Nephites and said they would be fulfilled through both the Nephites and the Jews. This again shows the dual nature of Isaiah's prophecies. The Savior first quoted this passage following his declaration that the land of America was to be given to Lehi's descendants after the Gentiles reject the fulness of the gospel and are "trodden under foot" by the house of Israel; he said this would fulfill the words of the prophet Isaiah (see 3 Ne. 16:10-20). He later quoted the passage while instructing the Nephites concerning the restoration of the Jews. He changed the wording from "thy watchmen" to "their watchmen," as he was referring to Jerusalem's watchmen in this case rather than those of Zion (see 3 Ne. 20:29-35). Abinadi also recognized the universal application of this passage in teaching that "the salvation of the Lord shall be declared to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people" and quoting these three verses as evidence (see Mosiah 15:28-31). Joseph Smith designated Jackson County, Missouri, as the Zion spoken of in verse 8 (see TPJS, pp. 79-80). The "watchmen" are those who preach the gospel, as indicated in verse 7. The song to be sung in Zion will be a new song, sung when all will know Christ (i.e., during the Millennium). The words of the song, which will include parts of verse 8, are recorded in D&C 84:99-102.

The Lord will "make bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations" at his second coming (see D&C 133:2-3). D&C 133:4 admonishes the members of the Church to sanctify themselves in preparation for that day.

Simeon, the devout temple worker at the time of the Savior's birth, declared, "mine eyes have seen thy salvation" (Luke 2:30), which is the designation given to the Savior by Isaiah. But that event obviously did not fulfill Isaiah's prophecy that "all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God."

Isa. 52:11 . There are two admonitions in this verse: the Lord's people are instructed to depart from evil, and those who "bear the vessels of the Lord" (the watchmen or preachers of the gospel) are instructed to be clean. The place from which they are to depart is "Babylon" (D&C 133:5)-that is, "from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon" (D&C 133:14; see also 38:42). The process of becoming clean is shown in D&C 133:6: the Saints are to call solemn assemblies, teach each other, and call upon the name of the Lord. This verse in Isaiah is often quoted by modern Church leaders as an admonition to priesthood holders and Church members to live high moral standards. Paul paraphrased it in writing to the Corinthians with the same objective (see 2 Cor. 6:17). The book of Revelation speaks of the fall of Babylon in the same time period as does Isaiah (see chapter 9 of this book), and also invites the Lord's people to come out of Babylon (see Rev. 18:4).

Isa. 52:12 . This verse is quoted almost verbatim in the Book of Mormon. The Doctrine and Covenants gives a similar but more extended wording:

For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the Lord will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rearward. (Isa. 52:12.) For ye shall not go out with haste nor go by flight; for the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel shall be your rearward. (3 Ne. 20:42.) But verily, thus saith the Lord, let not your flight be in haste, but let all things be prepared before you; and he that goeth, let him not look back lest sudden destruction shall come upon him. (D&C 133:15.)

The "flight" from Babylon should be organized and well prepared, and it will be final-there is to be no looking back. The Lord promises to go before his people and to follow after them.
