Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

22

A New Nation of Israel

Isa. 55-57

Most modern scholars now claim that the Book of Isaiah was written by three different authors, and they call chapters 56 through 66 Trito or Third Isaiah. They do this because they believe that the message, language, and writing style are different in these later chapters than in chapters 40 through 55. We reject this theory and assert that chapters 55 through 57 provide evidence of a single author. (See also Appendix A for further evidence against the multiple-authorship theory.) There is a cohesive message contained within these three chapters which could not be seen clearly if we had to separate chapter 55 from the other two.

Chapter 55 identifies some eternal principles which may be isolated and independent, but the chapter as a whole is the foundation upon which chapters 56 and 57 are built. This unity is shown in the outline below.

a. Thirst and hunger of the soul will be satisfied without payment (55:1-2).

b. The throne of David will lead the people (55:3-4).

c. Those of other nations will gather to create this new nation (55:5).

a. The wicked must forsake his ways and return to the Lord (55:7).

b. The nation will follow the Lord's ways and not man's

c. Joy, peace, and prosperity will be established in the Lord's name (55:12-13).

a. Those who keep the commandments will be blessed (56:1-2).

b. The Gentiles who accept the covenant will be adopted into Israel (56:3-8).

c. The gentile nations will follow their own ways (56:9-12).

d. The righteous and honorable will find peace in death (57:1-2).

e. The Gentiles will adulterate themselves with the kings of the earth (57:3-12).

a. Those who are contrite and humble will dwell with him (57:15).

b. Those who are led there will have peace and will be healed (57:16-19).

c. There will be no peace for the wicked (57:20-21).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Isa. 55:1-2 is quoted twice in the Book of Mormon, but only once in a context which is useful to our study. There are a few New Testament references which help us indirectly to understand some of the Isaiah passages, and there is one reference in the Doctrine and Covenants. Several General Authorities have quoted Isa. 55:6-9 or parts of it; they have used it primarily as a description of a characteristic of God, but not in the context of Isaiah's message.

Isa. 55:1-2. A comparison of the two quotations of this passage in the Book of Mormon shows retentions from the Isaiah text used by Jacob. Nephi apparently only paraphrased the passage.

Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price.Come, my brethren, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come buy and eat; yea, come buy wine and milk without money and without price.Behold, doth he cry unto any, saying: Depart from me? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; but he saith: Come unto me all ye ends of the earth, buy milk and honey, without money and without price. (2 Ne. 26:25.) Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. (Isaiah 55:1-2.)Wherefore, do not spend money for that which is of no worth, nor your labor for that which cannot satisfy. Hearken diligently unto me, and remember the words which I have spoken; and come unto the Holy One of Israel, and feast upon that which perisheth not, neither can be cor rupted, and let your soul delight in fatness. (2 Ne. 9:50-51.)

Nephi's paraphrase refers to the last days, when the Book of Mormon is to come forth among the Gentiles. This time period is also the context of chapter 55 in Isaiah. Jacob quoted the passage in a discourse on the Atonement, as an invitation to partake of Christ's redemption. A similar invitation to come to the Lord is used in variant forms in three different places in the book of Revelation: one is to the church of the Laodiceans in the days of John (see Rev. 3:18) the other two occur in the context of the latter days, although at a later period than Isaiah and Nephi referred to (see Revelation 21:6; 22:17). The Savior himself issued similar invitations (John 4:13-14; 6:47). When we have all the records, we will undoubtedly see that such invitations have been extended from the beginning of the world.

Isa. 55:3-5 . Paul related "the sure mercies of David" (verse 3) to Christ's resurrection (see Acts 13:34; see also The Promised Messiah, pp. 271-75). The new nation spoken of in verse 5, which will be glorified by the Holy One of Israel, is obviously restored Israel, which will eventually be ruled over by Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, a descendant of David. This will fulfill the promise given to David that his seed would be established forever (see 2 Sam. 7:16; Ps. 89:28-37; Rev. 17:14; 19:16; D&C 58:22).

Isa. 55:6-7 . The Lord gave the same commandment to "call upon me while I am near" to the faithful priesthood holders of the Church as he instructed them to fulfill their stewardships in this dispensation (see D&C 88:62-63). Isaiah's invitation is to the wicked inhabitants of the nations, the gentile nations, to call upon the Lord so that they may receive his mercy and receive a remission of their sins. The modern priesthood holders were called to go to those wicked nations and cry repentance. Thus the two references fit into the same time period and context.

Several of the Brethren have quoted these two verses to illustrate the principles of revelation and repentance.

Isa. 55:8-9. These verses, showing that the Lord will establish the latter-day nation of restored Israel according to his ways and not the ways of man, are often used to show the character of God and his greatness. Jacob taught the same principle in the Book of Mormon-that God will give revelation to bring about his purposes.

For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. (Isa. 55:8.) Behold, great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. How unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of him; and it is impossible that man should find out all his ways. And no man knoweth of his ways save it be revealed unto him; wherefore, brethren, despise not the revelations of God. (Jacob 4:8.)

Elder Boyd K. Packer's invitation to the ministers of the Christian churches to consider how the Lord would correct the problems of disharmony in the churches (by restoration through revelation rather than ecumenical council) is an example of how the Brethren use these verses (see CR, Apr. 1967, pp. 129-30).

Isa. 55:10-13 . These verses, an extension of the principle taught in verses 8 and 9, give another interesting analogy to illustrate the word of God. Such analogies are used throughout the scriptures. Just as the rains and the snows come and produce growth, so will the word of God by revelation to man bring joy, peace, and prosperity to restored Israel.

Isa. 56:3-8 . These verses seem to clearly describe the times of the Gentiles when those who are not of Israel will be given the opportunity to come and be numbered with Israel (see 3 Ne. 30:1-2; D&C 45:28). The strangers are those not of Israel who represent the gentile nations where the gospel is restored. The eunuchs, literally those who could not produce offspring, may refer to those who have no posterity in the Church and no other relatives who will join; yet they will become the sons or daughters of Jesus Christ (see Mosiah 5:7; Gal. 4:1-7).

Isa. 56:7. The reference to the Lord's house has given historical trouble to commentators. This verse was quoted by the Savior when he cleansed the temple the second time (see Matt. 21:13; Mark 11:17; Luke 19:46). That event was obviously not the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy, but Christ quoted the passage while expressing his wrath over the temple's being made "a den of thieves." The prophecy points to the time when all people or nations would come up to worship and their sacrifices would be acceptable. This is undoubtedly the same time period to which Isaiah referred in chapter 2 when he spoke of "the mountain of the Lord's house" and said that "all nations shall flow unto it" (Isa. 2:2-3).

Isa. 56:9-12 . There is no general agreement among scholars about the identity of the "beasts," the "watchmen," and the "greedy dogs" in these verses. Many interpret the beasts as the surrounding nations, and the watchmen and dogs as the leaders of Israel who are not protecting their flock but are asleep. However, the context of the preceding and the following verses points to the gentile nations whose hearts and minds are turned to material things, and who depend on their own intellects rather than the higher thoughts and ways of the Lord. The majority of the Gentiles will reject the gospel (see D&C 45:29) and continue in their ignorant and wicked ways.

Isa. 57:1-2. These verses are an extension of the last four verses of chapter 56. There are many good people living among the Gentiles. While collectively the nations have rejected the gospel, these honorable men who have not had a full opportunity to accept it in this life will have a full opportunity in the spirit world. Thus they will find peace in death. The Anchor Bible (20:154), in commenting on Isa. 57:1, "The lines are obscure, but the sense seems to be that the death of the righteous brings them into security." This obscurity vanishes before a knowledge that the work of the Lord goes on in the spirit world.

Isa. 57:3-12. These lengthy and descriptive verses suggest immorality in temple prostitution, which involved even the kings. The message was condensed by the angel who announced the fall of Babylon; he declared that "all nations" and the kings of the earth had committed fornication with Babylon (see Rev. 18:3). In other words, the nations honor the Lord with their mouths, but their hearts are far from him, and they turn to the worship of a king or government for security.

Isa. 57:13-21 . The revelation ends with a message of hope to those who will follow the Lord and inherit his holy mountain, the place of restored Israel. There they will have his presence and enjoy peace and the healing of the soul. The wicked, on the contrary, will have no peace. President Harold B. Lee quoted verses 19 through 21 as an example of Isaiah's attempts to "fortify his people against the wickedness of the world" (CR, Oct. 1973, p. 4).
