Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

23

The Sins of the House of Jacob

Isa. 58-60

Whether chapters 58 and 59 are prophecies against the people of Isaiah's time or those of the latter days is not certain. If Isaiah is describing the latter days, he could be referring to 1820, when the whole world was still in apostasy, or he could be describing the cleansing of restored Israel. Since 59:16 seems to be describing the complete apostasy of Israel, the restoration spoken of in the end of chapter 59 is undoubtedly a reference to the last days. Consequently, the sins of the house of Jacob would represent the corruption of Israel prior to the latter-day restoration. All this may well apply to Isaiah's time also, as a dual prophecy. Chapter 60 definitely speaks of the latter-day Zion or New Jerusalem. However, some of its verses may also be of a dual nature.

Regardless of the time period, the eternal nature of the gospel makes it appropriate to "liken" chapters 58 and 59 to ourselves "for our profit and learning" (see 1 Ne. 19:23-24). The law of the fast as taught in the Church today is basically that which Isaiah taught in chapter 58. Likewise, the sins of Jacob enumerated by Isaiah have application to this day, as an outline of his message will show.

a. They will find pleasure in the day they fast (58:3).

b. They will fast for strife and debate (58:4).

c. They will afflict their souls before men (58:5).

a. It looses the bands of wickedness (58:6).

b. It undoes heavy burdens (58:6).

c. It lets the oppressed go free (58:6).

d. It eliminates the poor by dealing bread to the hungry (58:7).

a. Your "light" will break forth-the Spirit will attend you (58:8).

b. You will have health (58:8).

c. Righteousness will go before you and be an influence for good (58:8).

d. The glory of the Lord will follow you and confirm your actions (58:8).

e. Your prayers will be answered (58:9).

f. The Lord will guide you continually (58:10-11).

g. Your posterity will be blessed, and they will bless you (58:12).

a. You are not to do your pleasures, but the Lord's (58:13).

b. You will "ride upon the high places of the earth" (58:14).

c. You will be fed with the "heritage of Jacob" (58:14).

a. The Lord has not changed, but Israel has (59:1-8).

b. The people grope in darkness, and the Lord is displeased (59:9-15).

a. The Lord will arm himself and recompense Israel (59:17-18).

b. He will lift up a standard to Israel (59:19).

c. He will come to Zion (59:20).

d. He will establish the everlasting covenant with Israel (59:21).

a. Darkness will cover the rest of the earth (60:2).

b. The Gentiles and kings will come to Zion's light (60:3).

c. They will bring their wealth and adorn Zion (60:4-11).

d. The nations who do not serve Zion will perish (60:12).

e. Zion will be beautified and will have peace (60:13-18).

f. The Lord will be their light instead of the sun and the moon (60:19-20).

g. Zion will become a mighty nation in the Lord's time (60:21-22).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

Chapter 58 was quoted almost entirely by Bishop John H. Vandenberg and Bishop Victor L. Brown in two different general conferences with added interpretations and applications, There are also other quotations by General Authorities from this chapter, but they usually just make reference to the law or blessing of fasting and do not interpret the text.

There are some New Testament references. and one from the Doctrine and Covenants, which help us understand chapter 59. The Prophet Joseph Smith and Elder Orson Pratt gave us a fuller understanding of Isa. 60.

Isa. 58:4 . Bishop John H. Vandenberg said the reward of their improper fasting was "strife, debate, and wickedness" (see CR, Apr. 1963, p. 28). They may also have been fasting for the wrong reasons, seeking strength for arguments or sinful endeavors.

Isa. 58:6-7. Bishop Vandenberg also equated these verses with the two great commandments to love God and our neighbor:

I suppose when he speaks of "loosing the bands of wickedness" of "undoing the heavy burdens," and the "breaking of every yoke" that he is referring to the wickedness of people who think only of themselves in selfishness, vanity, pride, and having hearts so set upon the things of this world that the two great commandments of loving God and loving neighbor are entirely forgotten. The principles of loving thy neighbor and of loving God are encompassed in the true purpose of the fast.

Certainly, it takes no imagination to understand what is meant when he says, "... that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?"

He meant that in addition to taking care of the poor, that we should watch over our own kin and be responsible for our father, mother, brother, and sister when they are in need.

It is here that I would like to state that the Lord has caused a day of fasting and prayer to be set up in this day so that collectively the Church might join together to fulfill the purposes of fasting.

In the general letter from the Council of the Twelve to the Church under date of May 17, 1845, which Orson Pratt read to the Saints, these words appear:

"Let this be an ensample to all saints, and there will never be any lack for bread: When the poor are starving, let those who have, fast one day and give what they otherwise would have eaten to the bishops for the poor, and every one will abound for a long time; and this is one great and important principle of fasts, approved of the Lord. And so long as the saints will all live to this principle, with glad hearts and cheerful countenances they will always have an abundance." (DHC 7:413.)

The bishop should frequently encourage the members of his ward to observe the fast day and voluntarily contribute a generous offering. The Lord knows in his wisdom that individually we are generally not prone to seek out the poor, the hungry, and those in need, and individually attend to their needs on a continuing basis. By fasting collectively there is no end to the good that can be done; that no one need suffer; that such assistance as might be given is rendered through the bishop in love and mercy and that full dollar value is rendered without any administrative cost. (CR, Apr. 1963, p. 28.)

Bishop Victor L. Brown interpreted verse 6 to mean "to overcome the temptations of Satan as the Savior did." He also said that verse 7 means "to assist the poor and the needy." (Ensign, Nov. 1977, p. 83.)

A breakdown of verse 6 shows three purposes of the fast: (1) "to loose the bands of wickedness," or to help us overcome personal sins which have engulfed us; (2) "to undo the heavy burdens," or to help us gain strength for difficult assignments or problems; and (3) "to let the oppressed go free," or to petition the Lord to intervene in behalf of our loved ones, such as Alma did when fasting for the salvation of his son (see Mosiah 27:13-24).

Isa. 58:8 . Bishop Brown said this verse describes the achievement of "success in life" (Ensign, Nov. 1977, p. 83).

Isa. 58:9-11 . In quoting parts of these verses, Bishop Vandenberg inserted several interpretive comments. The text is here quoted with his comments as he inserted them:

... If thou take away from... thee the yoke, (or wickedness) the putting forth of the finger, (or accusing others) and speaking vanity;

And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noon day:

And the Lord shall guide thee continually, (or the Holy Ghost will direct your daily life) and satisfy thy soul in drought, (This is your personal security in times of need and difficulty.) and make fat thy bones: (I believe this has to do with health. In the bone there is marrow and marrow manufactures the blood that is vital to the strength and well-being of the body.) and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not (or inspiration and wisdom will flow from you continually). (CR, Apr. 1963, p. 29.)

Bishop Brown interpreted these three verses to mean "To humble and prepare ourselves to communicate with the Lord" (Ensign, Nov. 1977, p. 83).

Isa. 58:12 . Bishop Vandenberg said the following about this verse:

To me this is a promise to those working with the members of the Church who are in need physically and spiritually, "they that shall be of thee," or that you may be able to help them-to do what? "Build the old waste places," and as you help them to build "thou shalt raise up the foundations of (their) many generations (to follow); and then thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach." In other words, you have helped them overcome their weaknesses, to restore their souls, to bridge the gap through reactivating, rehabilitation, and "restoring" the path for them to walk in.

To those responsible for the leadership of the Saints in every unit of the Church, I say, teach the people the principle of fasting, in love, in gentleness, in firmness, and in humility. Fasting will give them spiritual strength and help them to develop self-control. (CR, Apr. 1963, p. 29.)

Isa. 59:1-2 . Elder Mark E. Petersen quoted these verses as a sign of the lack of new revelation and new scripture, both of which are marks of man's having drifted from the path of truth and right (see CR, Oct. 1964, p. 122).

Isa. 59:7. Paul quoted part of this verse to the Romans (see Rom. 3:15-16) along with several other scriptures to show that all were under sin, both Jew and Gentile.

Isa. 59:17 . Paul referred to the "armour of God" in writing to the Ephesians (see Eph. 6:13-17) and to the Thessalonians (see 1 Thes. 5:8). The Lord also used a description of this "armor" in a revelation to Joseph Smith (see D&C 27:15-18). However, this verse in Isaiah refers to the Lord's putting armor on himself to pour out vengeance, while the New Testament and the Doctrine and Covenants speak of the Saints' arming themselves to "withstand the evil day."

Isa. 59:20-21 . Paul said that these verses would be fulfilled after the fulness of the Gentiles had come in (see Rom. 11:26-27). The passage in Romans contains a different ending than the one in Isaiah.

For I would not, brethren. that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in.And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob:As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord; My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in the, mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. (Isa. 59:20-21.) For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins. (Rom. 11:25-27.)

When Joseph Smith went to the Hill Cumorah on 22 September 1823, following the visit of the angel Moroni, Moroni appeared to him again and told him, among other things, that persecution would rage against the Church, "but it will increase the more opposed, and spread farther and farther, increasing in knowledge till they shall be sanctified and receive an inheritance where the glory of God shall rest upon them; and when this takes place, and all things are prepared, the ten tribes of Israel will be revealed in the north country, whither they have been for a long season; and when this is fulfilled will be brought to pass that saying of the prophet ... [quotes Isa. 59:20]." (Oliver Cowdery, MA, Oct. 1835, p. 199.) This would be consistent with Paul's declaration that these verses would be fulfilled after the fulness of the Gentiles had come in.

Elder Orson Pratt reasoned that the coming of this Redeemer, or "Deliverer" as rendered in Romans, was not fulfilled by Jesus Christ in the meridian of time.

Who will be that Deliverer? Certainly Jesus, when he came eighteen centuries ago, did not turn away ungodliness from Jacob, for they then were filling up their cup with iniquity. They have remained in unbelief from that day to this; hence, there did not come a Deliverer out of Zion eighteen centuries ago. But the Zion of the last days, that Zion that is so frequently and so fully spoken of by the ancient prophets, especially by Isaiah, is the Church and kingdom of God; and out of that Church or kingdom or Zion is to come a Deliverer, who will turn away ungodliness from Jacob after the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. (JD, 14:64.)

Isa. 60:1-2. Elder Orson Pratt interpreted verse 1 as a reference to the latter-day Zion:

The passage which I have quoted from Isaiah has reference to the latter-day Zion .... The Zion that is here spoken of is called to "arise and shine, for the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee." There is no one thing more fully revealed in the Scriptures of eternal truth, than the rise of the Zion of our God in the latter days, clothed upon with the glory of God from the heavens-a Zion that will attract the attention of all the nations and kindreds of the whole earth. It will not be something that takes place in a corner on some distant island of the sea, or away among some obscure people; but it will be something that will call forth the attention of all people and nations upon the face of the whole earth. (JD, 16:78.)

This Zion to which the Redeemer would come (see 59:20) was to be established in the glory of the Lord at a period of time when darkness would cover the people of the earth. The words of verse 2 are quoted by the Lord in D&C 112:23 as a description of the conditions on the earth in 1837. The Prophet Joseph Smith said the following about verse 2:

Consider for a moment, brethren, the fulfillment of the words of the prophet; for we behold that darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the inhabitants thereof-that crimes of every description are increasing among men-vices of great enormity are practiced-the rising generation growing up in the fullness of pride and arrogance-the aged losing every sense of conviction, and seemingly banishing every thought of a day of retribution-intemperance, immorality, extravagance, pride, blindness of heart, idolatry, the loss of natural affection; the love of this world, and indifference toward the things of eternity increasing among those who profess a belief in the religion of heaven, and infidelity spreading itself in consequence of the same-men giving themselves up to commit acts of the foulest kind, and deeds of the blackest dye, blaspheming, defrauding, blasting the reputation of neighbors, stealing, robbing, murdering; advocating error and opposing the truth, forsaking the covenant of heaven, and denying the faith of Jesus-and in the midst of all this, the day of the Lord fast approaching when none except those who have won the wedding garment will be permitted to eat and drink in the presence of the Bridegroom, the Prince of Peace! (TPJS, p. 47.)

The crimes and vices spoken of by the Prophet have continued to increase. Only "those who have won the wedding garment," he said, "will be permitted." This shows that he saw Isaiah's prophecy being completely fulfilled in a future day, and also that the inhabitants of Zion would have to be cleansed and prepared for Christ's coming. This period is described in D&C 45 as the time of the establishment of the New Jerusalem, which will occur at a time when all the world except Zion will be at war (see D&C 45:62-75). The Prophet Joseph also described this period:

We ought to have the building up of Zion as our greatest object. When wars come, we shall have to flee to Zion. The cry is to make haste. The last revelation says, Ye shall not have time to have gone over the earth, until these things come. It will come as did the cholera, war, fires, and earthquakes; one pestilence after another, until the Ancient of Days comes, then judgment will be given to the Saints.

... Look to the Presidency and receive instruction. Every man who is afraid, covetous, will be taken in a snare. The time is soon coming, when no man will have any peace but in Zion and her stakes.

I saw men hunting the lives of their own sons, and brother murdering brother, women killing their own daughters, and daughters seeking the lives of their mothers. I saw armies arrayed against armies. I saw blood, desolation, fires. The Son of Man has said that the mother shall be against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother. These things are at our doors. They will follow the Saints of God from city to city. Satan will rage, and the spirit of the devil is now enraged. I know not how soon these things will take place; but with a view of them, shall I cry, peace? No; I will lift up my voice and testify of them. How long you will have good crops, and the famine be kept off, I do not know; when the fig tree leaves, know then that the summer is nigh at hand.

We may look for angels and receive their ministrations, but we are to try the spirits and prove them, for it is often the case that men make a mistake in regard to these things. God has so ordained that when He has communicated, no vision is to be taken but what you see by the seeing of the eye, or what you hear by the hearing of the ear. When you see a vision, pray for the interpretation; if you get not this, shut it up; there must be certainty in this matter. An open vision will manifest that which is more important. Lying spirits are going forth in the earth. There will be great manifestations of spirits, both false and true. (TPJS, pp. 160-61.)

Elder Orson Pratt said that the darkness would be caused "Because the salt of the earth is gathered out; the children of light are gathered together to Zion, and those who are left behind are in darkness, that is, a great many of them. No doubt there will be honest ones, and vast numbers who will come to Zion, notwithstanding the darkness that covers the earth." (JD, 14:355.)

Isa. 60:3 . Elder Orson Pratt commented concerning this verse: "Inquires one-'Is Zion going to become popular, so that Gentiles and kings and great men will come to her light?' Yes, certainly; and not only Gentiles, kings and great men, but many of all the nations of the earth have got to come to Zion .... "(JD, 18:153.)

The wise men who came from the east because they had seen the new star at Christ's birth are thought by some scholars to have fulfilled this prophecy (see Matt. 2:1-2). However, an examination of the entire prophecy shows that Isaiah is speaking of a later time period and a different geographic area, although, due to the nature of dual prophecy, it could also have had reference to the Savior's birth.

Isa. 60:4-5. Zion is invited to see the gathering to her, which is not limited to people but also includes the wealth of the nations. A marginal note in the KJV gives "wealth of the Gentiles" as an alternate reading for "forces of the Gentiles." The Anchor Bible (20:173) translates the last half of the verse as follows: "For the riches of the sea will be turned to you; the wealth of the nations will come to you."

Isa. 60:6-7. Verse 6 is often cross-referenced with the visit of the wise men to the Christ child (see Matt. 2:11). Again, this could be a dual prophecy, but the context of Isaiah is the latter days, when the wealth of the gentile nations will be brought to Zion. These verses thus seem to describe the transporting of wealth from these nations to Zion, where it will be used to adorn the temple ("the house of my glory").

Isa. 60:8-10 . These verses also describe the gathering of the people to latter-day Zion. Elder John Longden interpreted verse 8 as a description of an airplane (see CR, Apr. 1964, p. 116). Verse 9 specifies the area under discussion as the "isles," which would be the land of America (see 2 Ne. 10:20). That ships will bring the Lord's sons and their wealth from Tarshish suggests a great distance. The building of the walls of Zion by the "sons of strangers" has reference to the contribution the Gentiles and their kings will make to the building up of Zion.

Isa. 60:11-12. John also described the gates of New Jerusalem as being open continually (see Rev. 21:25). Elder Orson Pratt interpreted this passage in Isaiah as a description of the latter days, when all nations will have to serve Zion or be "utterly wasted." Even the United States, said Elder Pratt, will have to comply with the ordinances of Zion, repent of her sins, and be prepared for the great and glorious day of the Lord's coming in order to be saved from destruction (see JD, 14:355). President Spencer W. Kimball said in a general conference, "We continue to warn the people and plead with them, for we are watchmen upon the towers, and in our hands we have a trumpet which we must blow loudly and sound the alarm." He then quoted verse 12. (See CR, Oct. 1975, p. 8.)

Isa. 60:13-18 . These verses further describe the beautification of "the city of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel" (verse 14). Elder Orson Pratt said this will be a time of great abundance of precious metals, when "God will give the keys of the treasures of the earth and he will open them up to the people." After quoting verse 17, he continued, "Gold and silver will be so plentiful that they will be used for the pavement of streets" (JD, 18:154).

Isa. 60:19-20 . John also said that, although the New Jerusalem will have no sun, there will be no night. Thus the gates will be open continually, as mentioned in Isa. 60:11 (see Rev. 21:23, 25). Elder Orson Pratt said:

Zion will not need the sun when the Lord is there, and all the city is lighted up by the glory of his presence. When the whole heavens above are illuminated by the presence of his glory we shall not need those bright luminaries of heaven to give light, so far as the city of Zion is concerned. But there will be a great people round about, dwelling in other cities that will still have need of the light of the sun and the moon; but the great capital city where the Lord will establish one of his thrones-for his throne is not to be in Jerusalem alone, it will also be in Zion .... When therefore, he shall establish his throne in Zion and shall light up the habitations thereof with the glory of his presence, they will not need this light which comes from the bright luminaries that shine forth in yonder heavens, but they will be clothed upon with the glory of their God. When the people meet together in assemblies like this, in their Tabernacles, the Lord will meet with them, his glory will be upon them; a cloud will overshadow them by day and if they happen to have an evening meeting they will not need gas light or lights of an artificial nature, for the Lord will be there and his glory will be upon all their assemblies. (JD, 14:355-56.)

Isa. 60:22 . The Doctrine and Covenants interprets this verse for us.

And for this cause, that men might be made partakers of the glories which were to be revealed, the Lord sent forth the fulness of his gospel, his everlasting covenant, reasoning in plainness and simplicity-A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation: I the Lord will hasten it in his time. (Isa. 60:22.) To prepare the weak for those things which are coming on the earth. and for the Lord's errand in the day when the weak shall confound the wise, and the little one become a strong nation, and two shall put their tens of thousands to flight. (D&C 133:57-58.)

Thus the remnant of Israel which will be gathered in the last days will become the mighty nation of Israel. Elder Orson Pratt quoted this verse to support the teaching that Zion will become a great people, destined to fill the mountains in the last days (see JD, 18:153). The JST changes the last line to read, "I the Lord will hasten it in my time."
