Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

24

Isaiah's Appendix

Isa. 61-64

Chapters 61 through 64 are grouped together because parts of chapters 62 through 64 concern the Second Coming and are quoted in D&C 133. The Savior quoted Isa. 61:1-2 in the synagogue in Nazareth and told his hearers that these verses had been "fulfilled in your ears" (Luke 4:16-21). However, the rest of verse 2 and verse 3 also prophesy of the Savior's mission and extend to the day of the vengeance of God, or the Second Coming. Therefore, chapter 61 also fits the overall pattern of the other three chapters, even though most of it discusses the ministry of Jesus in the flesh. An outline of these four chapters will show their relationship to each other and their unity of thought:

a. It begins in the meridian of time (61:1-2).

b. It is completed in the fulness of times (61:1-3).

a. The wastelands will be rebuilt with the Gentiles' help (61:4-5).

b. The priesthood will be restored and acknowledged by the Gentiles (61:6).

c. Israel will become socially acceptable through the everlasting covenant (61:7-9).

d. Zion will adorn herself as the bride in preparation for the Bridegroom (61:10-11).

a. Both lands will become holy cities, or New Jerusalem (62:1-2).

b. They will crown their inhabitants with the glory of the temple endowment (62:3).

c. The watchmen of the Lord will be over Jerusalem until it becomes a holy city (62:6-9).

d. Zion will lift up a standard in a distant land to which many will come (62:10-12).

a. His garments will be red like those of one who treads the winepress (63:1-6).

b. Those who are not destroyed will recognize his mercy (63:7-9).

c. Those who are destroyed will be those who rebelled against him (63:10).

d. The people will lament and turn to the Lord for help (63:11-16).

a. The return of the tribes to their lands will be requested (63:17-19).

b. The servants will plead for the mountains to flow down and for other great blessings to come (64:1-4).

c. The servants will acknowledge their unrighteousness, but will submit to the Lord (64:5-8).

d. They will plead for mercy in the restoration of Israel and the temple (64:9-12).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

An understanding of these chapters rests almost entirely upon D&C 133. Parts of chapters 62, 63, and 64 are quoted there, but in a different sequence. It would be well for students of Isaiah to study D&C 133 along with these chapters. The Savior's quoting of Isaiah 61:1-2a in Nazareth is a great help, of course, but can be misunderstood if not read carefully. Elder Orson Pratt gave some important insights into the last three verses of chapter 62 which are uplifting as well as instructive. There are also a few other helps from the New Testament and other sections in the Doctrine and Covenants.

Isa. 61:1-3 . The Savior's attributing verses 1-2a to Isaiah is a witness for the single authorship of the book of Isaiah, and speaks against the so-called Third Isaiah theory. A comparison of the Isaiah and Luke texts is revealing:

When Jesus sat down following his reading and "the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him," he announced, "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears" (Luke 4:20-21). Thus he proclaimed these verses to be a prophecy of his mission. It is significant that he read only part of the prophecy, thus showing that this text of Isaiah prophesies of his entire mission, which extends to his second coming. His mission, as characterized by these verses, may be categorized as follows:

Although only part of these nine aspects of the Savior's mission applied to the meridian of time, they all pertain to the latter days. The Prophet Joseph declared: "It [these last days] is the acceptable year of the Lord: liberate the captives that they may sing hosanna" (TPJS, p. 77). Peter's reference to Christ's preaching to the spirits in prison confirms this as a part of his ministry (see 1 Pet. 3:18-19). Isa. 61:1-3 and Luke 4:18-19 are often quoted by the General Authorities to show that both Isaiah and the Savior taught of work for the dead. Joseph Smith used the concept of freeing the prisoners in his epistle on baptism for the dead (see D&C 128:22).

When John's disciples came to Jesus to learn whether he was the Christ, he sent them back to John with a message of the miracles they had seen and a summary of Isaiah's prophecy, which would enable them to know that he was the Messiah and not an imposter (see Matt. 11:2-5; Luke 7:19-22).

Isa. 61:4-6. The last half of verse 3 describes Zion, and these verses seem to elaborate on the building of Zion. They may also refer to Jerusalem's being rebuilt, but the passage deals primarily with Zion because it speaks of "strangers" (the Gentiles) being associated with them. Verse 6 is also an obvious reference to the priesthood's being restored in Zion.

Isa. 61:7-9 . While verses 6 through 8 describe the physical restoration of Zion and the priesthood which her men will exercise, these verses seem to describe the reversal of Israel's desolate social condition in the world to the extent that they will have everlasting joy and acceptance among the Gentiles. This new status will be brought about through the "everlasting covenant" which the Lord will make with Israel (the gospel).

Isa. 61:10-11 . These verses show the reaction of Zion to the prophetic promises and conditions which have been described in the preceding verses. Israel's preparation for her marriage to the Lamb in the last days, as described by John the Revelator (see Revelation 19:7-9; 21:2), is also described here by Isaiah.

Isa. 62:1-2 . The new name which is to come upon Zion and Jerusalem is a result of the righteousness of their people in the New Jerusalem (see Rev. 3:12). As Jerusalem means city of peace, the New Jerusalem is the new or perhaps renewed city of peace, or "holy city," as prophesied in Ether 13:5.

Isa. 62:3 . In D&C 133:32 the "servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim" - that is, the Latter-day Saints-are designated as those who will crown the lost tribes with glory when they return from the north countries.

Isa. 62:4 . The JST translates the Hebrew "Hephzibah" as "Delightful," and "Beulah" as "Union." This is supported by marginal readings in the KJV. The Doctrine and Covenants describes this event of the land's being "married" in more modern terms:

He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land;

And the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided. (D&C 133:23-24.)

This catastrophic event of the last days will occur in conjunction with the return of the lost tribes out of the north countries (see D&C 133:26-30; 3 Ne. 21:23-26). Incidentally, this passage from the Doctrine and Covenants confirms that the division of the earth recorded in Gen. 10:25 was a literal division and not just a spiritual or ideological one, as some critics suppose.

Isa. 62:5. The JST changes the word "sons" to "God," making this verse read "so shall thy God marry thee." The two lands will be brought together by the power of the voice of the Lord, just as a marriage is sealed by the voice of one who has the authority to join a man and wife.

Isa. 62:6-9 . Just as D&C 133, which is called the Appendix to the Doctrine and Covenants, speaks of the two gathering places of the house of Israel, so does Isaiah. These verses speak of the Lord's continual watch over Jerusalem until the promise of her becoming a holy city is fulfilled.

Isa. 62:10-12 . Elder Orson Pratt often quoted these verses in reference to the establishing of Zion in the Rocky Mountains. "I have no idea but what Isaiah, in gazing down upon future generations, saw the time when a long train of carriages would be whirled across a continent, without any apparent animal force or power. He perhaps did not understand the modern terms for tunnel through a rock, and hence he calls them gates." (JD, 18:183.) On another occasion Elder Pratt said: "I have no doubt that the prophet saw the construction of this highway in vision, in fact he must have seen it or he could not have predicted it to such a nicety. He must also have seen these trains crossing this great continent, 'dodging' into what seemed to be holes in the mountains, and after watching a little while see them come out at the opposite side." (JD, 14:69.) He further suggested that the casting up of the highway and the gathering out of the stones, mentioned in verse 10, described the construction of the railroad highway through the mountains by the Saints when they blasted out the rocks and gathered out the stones (see 14:69).

Elder Pratt interpreted the phrase "unto the end of the world" to show that Isaiah was standing in Jerusalem and seeing the standard lifted up by the Lord from a very distant land to all the inhabitants of the earth (see JD, 18:184). And he interpreted verse 12 to be referring to Zion in the mountains because of the words "Sought out, A city not forsaken":

How different from old Jerusalem! Was that sought out? No; Jerusalem was built up a long time before Israel came out of Egypt, and was there ready for them to take possession of when they entered the Holy Land. Was Jerusalem ever forsaken? Yes, forsaken for many generations. But not so with Zion, that should get up into the mountains; they should seek out a location, so much so that the city should be called "Sought out;" and instead of being forsaken, as many people suppose the "Mormons" will be, the Lord God will protect them. (JD, 18:184.)

On another occasion, Elder Pratt spoke of "the people who dwell in the mountains" as those who were called a "holy people" by the prophet Isaiah, in spite of the world's looking upon them (at the time of Elder Pratt) as a corrupt people (see JD, 16:86).

Isa. 63:1-2 . The "day of vengeance of our God" (61:2) is now elaborated upon by Isaiah. This day, of course, is the Lord's second coming. D&C 133:46-49 provides an interesting comparison:

And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias. And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was written,The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound;The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised,

And so great shall be the glory of his presence that the sun shall hide his face in shame, and the moon shall withhold its light, and the stars shall be hurled from their places. (D&C 133:46-49.)

Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.And it shall be said: Who is this that cometh down from God in heaven with dyed garments; yea, from the regions which are not known, clothed in his glorious apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength?

And he shall say: I am he who spake in righteousness, mighty to save.

Whether the garments of the Savior will literally be red, or whether this is a figurative expression of his having trodden down the wicked, is not clear. Certainly the symbolism is taught here, regardless of the actual color of the garment. D&C 133:49 is a paraphrase or combination of Isa. 13:10 and 13 and Isa. 24:23, which also speak of the Lord's second coming. The book of Revelation also describes this event in similar language (see Rev. 19:13, 15; 14:20).

Isa. 63:3-9 . These verses are also quoted in the Doctrine and Covenants, but with slight variations:

I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my rainment.And his voice shall be heard: I have trodden the wine-press alone, and have brought judgment upon all people; and none were with me;For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come.And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me.And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.And I have trampled them in my fury, and I did tread upon them in mine anger, and their blood have I sprinkled upon my garments, and stained all my rainment; for this was the day of vengeance which was in my heart.I will mention the loving-kindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord hath bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude o f his loving-kindnesses.And now the year of my redeemed is come; and they shall mention the loving kindness of their Lord, and all that he has bestowed upon them according to his goodness, and according to his loving kindness, forever and ever.For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie: so he was their Saviour.In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old. (Isa. 63:3-9.) In all their afflictions he was afflicted. And the angel of his presence saved them; and in his love, and in his pity, he redeemed them, and bore them, and carried them all the days of old; (D&C 133:50-53.)

These verses announce the completion of the Lord's destruction of the wicked and his atonement for the sins of the repentant. The Doctrine and Covenants further describes the righteous Saints who lived before the time of Christ, received the great blessings of his atonement, and also were resurrected at the time of his resurrection. These will appear with Christ when he comes and calls forth others from the grave (see D&C 133:54-56).

Elder John Taylor contrasted the Lord's first coming, when he was led as a lamb to the slaughter as prophesied by Isaiah (53:7), with his second coming, a day of vengeance, when he will come as a man of war and tread down the wicked because of the wickedness of the earth and the justice of God (see JD, 10:115).

D&C 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants uses the first part of Isa. 63:3, "I have trodden the winepress alone," in describing the destruction of the telestial beings at Christ's coming, then adds this descriptive phrase: "even the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God" (D&C 76:107). Also, D&C 88 says that the various trumps which will be sounded at the second coming of Christ will include the announcement that Christ's work is finished: "The Lamb of God hath overcome and trodden the wine-press alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God" (D&C 88:106).

Isa. 63:10-16 . These verses, which are perplexing to the scholars, undoubtedly need some clarification or textual restorations. They seem to be a lamentation or a plea for the Lord to remember his people and perform some of the miracles which he had previously done for them.

Isa. 63:17-19. The JST contains a significant change in verse 17:

O Lord, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants' sake, the tribes of thine inheritance. (KJV, Isa. 63:17.) O Lord, why hast thou suffered us to err from thy ways, and to harden our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants' sake, the tribes of thine inheritance. (JST, Isa. 63:17.)

This is still a part of the lament of the people, but it also exemplifies the eternal principle of agency, given unto men in the Garden of Eden, whereby man may choose for himself (see Moses 3:17). President David O. McKay, taught that agency is the greatest gift next to life itself (see CR, Oct. 1965, p. 8). Verses 10 through 19 probably preceded verses 1 through 9 in the original text. This conclusion is drawn from the fact that Isa. 64:1-5 is quoted in D&C 133 before Isa. 63:1-9 (see D&C 133:40-45), and Isa. 64:1-5 is a continuation of Isa. 63:10-19. The last part of verse 17 may be a plea for the return of the ten tribes, which is also spoken of in D&C 133:26.

Isa. 64:1-5 . These verses are all quoted in the Appendix to the Doctrine and Covenants (section 133), where they precede the quotation of Isa. 63:1-9, as mentioned above. They are quoted in the context of the servants of God preaching the gospel to every nation (which will occur in fulfillment of a prophecy recorded in Rev. 14:6-7).

O Lord, thou shalt come down to make thy name known to thine adversaries, and all nations shall tremble at thy presence.

Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth; for we have sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be saved. (Isa. 64:1-5.)

And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation. and kindred, and tongue, and people.

And the servants of God shall go forth, saying with a loud voice: Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come;

And worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters-

Yea, when thou comest down, and the mountains flow down at thy presence, thou shalt meet him who rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, who remembereth thee in thy ways.

For since the beginning of the world have not men heard nor perceived by the ear, neither hath any eye seen, O God, besides thee, how great things thou hast prepared for him that waiteth for thee. (D&C 133: 37-45.)

In D&C 133:22 the Lord said that, at the time of his appearance, his voice "shall break down the mountains." This information may also have preceded the verses we have quoted from the original text of Isaiah.

The last part of Isa. 64:2 is quoted elsewhere in the Doctrine and Covenants in relationship to the Lord's second coming: "And it shall be a great day at the time of my coming, for all nations shall tremble" (D&C 34:8). Paul quoted verse 4 to the Corinthian Saints in an attempt to encourage them to have faith in God. The textual differences in his quotation enlighten our understanding of that verse: "But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him" (1 Cor. 2:9).

Isa. 64:5-6. The Prophet changed these verses somewhat. He basically rearranged the phrases, further demonstrating that these chapters may not be as they were originally.

Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth; for we have sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be saved.Thou meetest him that worketh righteousness, and rejoiceth him that remembereth thee in thy ways; in righteousness there is continuance, and such shall be saved.But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away. (KJV, Isa. 64:5-6.) But we have sinned; we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away. (JST, Isa. 64:5-6.)

Isa. 64:11 . The Anchor Bible translates "our holy and our beautiful house" as "our holy and beautiful temple."
