Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

244 25

244 The Millennial Reign

244 Isa. 65-66

244 Because chapter 64 ends with a question, chapter 65 is usually considered to be the answer. However, if chapter 64 is out of place chronologically, as suggested by the arrangement of verses in D&C 133, chapter 65 should be considered the beginning of a new revelation-especially in light of the changes made by the Prophet Joseph in the JST. This revelation could be seen as a summary or conclusion to the book of Isaiah. Chapters 61 through 64 are comparable to D&C 133 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which was given as an Appendix to the Doctrine and Covenants, and chapters 65 and 66 seem to serve as a summary which follows Isaiah's "appendix." These chapters include a description of the Millennium. While the appendix, as in the Doctrine and Covenants, deals with the Second Coming, these chapters summarize the events from the Restoration to the Second Coming, which will usher in the Millennium.

244 1. Those who seek the Lord will find him, whether they are Israelites or Gentiles (65:1-16).

244 a. The Lord sent his servant to the Gentiles because Israel had rejected his ways (65:2-5).

244 b. The Lord brought his justice and judgments upon Israel (65:6-7).

244 c. The Lord preserved a remnant of Israel and Judah to inherit his mountains and to be his servants (65:8-10).

244 -245d. The remnant will also be cleansed through the justice and judgment of the Lord (65:11-16).

a. There will be rejoicing in Jerusalem and no more sor row (65:18-19).

b. Every man will live to the age of 100, and then will be changed to a celestial or terrestrial being (65:20).

c. Men will build and plant without interruption through out their entire lives (65:21-22).

d. The fruits of men's labors will continue with their seed (65:23).

e. Great knowledge will be poured out by revelation (65:24).

f. Enmity between man and beast will cease (65:25).

a. God looks with favor upon the man who is poor and humble in spirit and who trembles at his word (66:2).

b. Those who suffer ritualistic sacrifices but follow their own ways and hearken not to his voice are an abomination to him (66:3-4).

c. Those who ridicule Israel because of Jehovah will be ashamed when he appears in retribution (66:5-6).

d. The Lord will miraculously give birth to the kingdom of God in Zion (66:7-9).

e. Jerusalem will rejoice over the deliverance in Zion because she will be comforted by Zion (66:10-14).

f. The Lord will come with fire and destroy many wicked people (66:15-17).

a. A sign (the Book of Mormon) will be sent among them (66:19).

b. The priesthood will be given to those who are gathered (66:21).

c. Their seed and their names will endure forever (66:22).

d. Their worship will be constant (66:23).

e. They will see the carcasses of those who were destroyed (66:24).

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

The primary source of help for understanding chapter 65 is D&C 101. Also, the changes in the JST give the chapter its proper beginning. The New Testament quotes two passages from chapter 65, supporting the Doctrine and Covenants and JST interpretations. Modern Church leaders have often referred to this chapter in identifying the conditions of the Millennium; they have also provided some interpretations.

Not as much help is available for chapter 66. The New Testament and the Doctrine and Covenants contain a few quotes or paraphrases, but they are not very specific. We have only one interpretation from a General Authority, but it is significant.

Isa. 65:1-2. Paul quoted these verses in writing to the Romans, but with slight differences. The JST gives these two verses yet a different reading.

I am sought of them that asked not for me; I am found of them that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not called by my name.I am found of them who seek after me, I give unto all them that ask of me; I am not found of them that sought me not, or that inquireth not after me.But Esaias is very bold, and saith, I was found of them that sought me not; I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me.I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts; (KJV, Isa. 65:1-2.) I said unto my servant, Behold me, look upon me; I will send you unto a nation that is not called after my name, for I have spread out my hands all the day to a people who walketh not in my ways, and their works are evil and not good, and they walk after their own thoughts. (JST, Isa. 65:1-2.) But to Israel he saith, All day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gain-saying people. (Rom. 10:20-21.)

Paul uses these verses to show the contrast between the Gentiles, who did not seek after God but responded to the call o the preachers of the gospel (verse 1), and Israel, who was "a disobedient and gainsaying people." The Prophet Joseph Smith provided a fuller text, showing that whoever seeks the Lord (Israelite or Gentile) will find him, and whoever does not seek him will not find him. The contrast presented by Paul is sup ported in verse 2 of the JST reading, which indicates that the Lord would send his servants to those not of Israel (the Gen tiles) because Israel had not walked after his ways. The roes sage, then, is that the gospel would be taken to the Gentiles, because Israel had not responded to the call.

Isa. 65:3-5 . These verses describe the hypocrisy of the nation of Israel through the years, the reason for the Lord's anger with her, and his turning to the Gentiles. In verse 4 the JST uses the word "beasts" in place of the word "things' (italicized in the KJV). The Anchor Bible (20:194) translates the same word "unclean meat."

Isa. 65:6-7 . These verses are a declaration that Israel will have to pay for her transgressions because God will recompense evil. The scripture to which Isaiah refers is not readily recognized and may be one which has been lost. The Book of Mormon also teaches us this principle in Morm. 3:15. God is a God of justice, and so the demands of justice must be met.

Isa. 65:8-10 . Although Israel must be punished, the Lord promises to preserve a remnant from Jacob and also from Judah to be his elect, to inherit his mountains and be his servants.

Isa. 65:11-16 . The RSV translates the first part of verse 11 "But you who forsake the Lord, who forget my holy mountain." This helps to show the proper chronology: Isaiah is now addressing the remnant of Israel who have gathered to the Lord's holy mountain but have forsaken him and forgotten the covenants and blessings which are theirs. These too will face the destructive justice and judgment of the Lord as he cleanses his own house (see D&C 112:24-26). However, those who have kept their covenants will have great blessings in contrast to the destruction which will come upon the wicked element of Israel.

Isa. 65:17. This is not a reference to the celestialized earth, but rather to the "paradisiacal" earth spoken of in the tenth article of faith. The earth will be restored to the condition in which it existed before Adam's transgression (see Joseph Fielding Smith, ST, pp. 36-37; DS, 3:94).

Elder Orson Pratt interpreted the last half of this verse as a reference to the people living during the Millennium:

Now, that has reference to the creation that will be renewed, at the beginning of the millennium. People will not remember. Our children that will be born during the millennium will not remember all the wickedness and corruption that existed in the days of their fathers. It will not come into their minds, unless God puts it there; but when they become immortal, after the thousand years have ended, then I think they will comprehend the process by which this world was made. (JD, 21:327.)

The earth will be renewed by a pouring out of the glory of the Lord upon the earth which will cause the corrupted men and animals to be consumed, the elements of the earth to melt, and all things to become new (see D&C 101:23-25; 3 Ne. 26:3). Peter taught that these things would occur in fulfillment of a promise of the Lord (see 2 Pet. 3:10-13).

Isa. 65:18-19 . The joy and rejoicing described here will take place in the New Jerusalem also, and will not be restricted to the Jerusalem of mortal earth. Indeed, this rejoicing will be found in all the cities of peace and righteousness where Israel, the Lord's people, dwell. So the passage has reference to more than the two great capitals, Zion and Jerusalem; this prophecy includes the many holy places of Zion and her stakes, where all the righteous Saints will have gathered in preparation for the Millennium. The joy these righteous people are to experience will come because whatever they ask for will be given them, and Satan will have no more power over them. There will be no weeping or sorrow, because there will be no death. (See D&C 101:27-29.)

Isa. 65:20 . This verse was clarified somewhat by the Prophet Joseph Smith:

There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being a hundred years old shall be accursed. (KJV, Isa. 65:20.) In those days there shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days; for the child shall not die, but shall live to be an hundred years old; but the sinner, living to be an hundred years old, shall be accursed. (JST, Isa. 65:20.)

During the Millennium, the life span of man will be extended to the "age of a tree," or approximately 100 years. There will be no infant mortality, but all people will live out their days and then be changed from mortality to immortality instantaneously, or "in the twinkling of an eye" (see D&C 101:30-31; 63:50). However, there will still be agency on the earth, and man must choose between an honorable terrestrial life and a glorified celestial one. There will be many, particularly during the beginning of the Millennium, who will not yet be members of the Church but will be honorable people by the earth's standards (see Joseph Fielding Smith, DS, 3:63-64; AQ, 2:20-21; 5:141-42).

Isa. 65:21-22 . The Lord paraphrased these verses in D&C 101:99-101 when he instructed the Saints not to sell their properties in Jackson County, Missouri, and promised that they would be permitted to dwell upon these properties if they would "bring forth fruit and works meet for my kingdom." During the Millennium, there will be nothing to prevent or impair the inhabitants of the earth from establishing permanent homes and vineyards for their entire lives.

Isa. 65:23 . Elder LeGrand Richards interpreted this verse to show the eternal nature of families (see CR, Oct. 1973, pp. 75-76; CR, Oct. 1974, p. 73). Homes and vineyards will continue within families.

Isa. 65:24 . The Millennium will be a period of great revelation from the Lord. Knowledge of the creation, the heavens, the spirit world, and the true history of the earth will be revealed (see D&C 101:32-34).

Isa. 65:25 . This verse is condensed in D&C 101:26, which merely states that the enmity of man and beasts and "of all flesh" will cease during the Millennium. Isaiah also states that the lion (symbolizing carnivorous animals) will change its diet to that of cattle. There will be complete peace between man and animals, and also between the animals. President Joseph F. Smith taught that this enmity would cease if man would no longer seek to destroy the animals, and he cited the tame animals found in national parks as evidence (see Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1969], pp. 265-66). Of course, the outpouring of the glory of the Lord upon the earth will also further that ceasing of enmity, and the earth's being changed apparently will also have an effect.

Isa. 66:1-2 . Isaiah is here proclaiming the greatness of God to introduce a summary of the great things the Lord is going to do in the last days. Just before he was martyred, Stephen quoted these verses to show that, although Solomon had built the Lord a house, the Lord did not dwell in temples made with hands (see Acts 7:47-50). In a revelation given to Joseph Smith in January 1831, the Lord referred to the earth's being his footstool and noted that he would yet stand upon it (see D&C 38:17).

Isa. 66:3-17 . The interpretation of these verses given in the earlier outline was drawn from a careful analysis of various versions or translations of the text. Even though there is no unanimity of opinion among the translations or the commentators, the outline seems to be consistent with the chronology and theology of the events of the last days which are being summarized. The only help within other scriptures comes from Rev. 12:1-5, which sheds light on verse 7. Here John saw a woman in travail bringing forth a man child. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has identified this man child as the kingdom of God (see DNTC, 3:516). While the context of these verses in the book of Revelation is in the meridian of time, while Isaiah is speaking of the last days, the identification of the man child would still be the same.

Isa. 66:18-21 . Elder Orson Pratt said that these verses speak of the gathering of Israel from among all nations and languages. In so doing, they declare the glory of Jehovah among the Gentiles. Those gathered will be honored with the priesthood. Elder Pratt interpreted the sign which was to be sent among them to be the same sign given by the Savior to the Nephites when he ministered among them. This sign was the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, first among the Gentiles and then among the Lamanites (see JD, 18:16-17; 3 Ne. 21:1-6). Paul was apparently paraphrasing part of verse 20 in Rom. 15:16 as justification for his preaching the gospel to the Gentiles.

Isa. 66:22-23. Again Isaiah refers to "the new heavens and the new earth," but this time he points to their eternal nature as an illustration. The names of the children of Israel who have gathered and their seed will also be eternal. The scriptures speak of two different creations of a new heaven and a new earth. One is a renewal of the paradisiacal glory of the earth during the Millennium, spoken of in Isa. 65:17 (see the note on that verse); the other is the bringing forth of the resurrected, celestialized earth. This verse may refer to either or both of these because of the eternal status mentioned. Scriptures which speak of the resurrected earth are Rev. 21:1 and D&C 29:23.

Worship among the children of Israel during the Millennium will be as constant as the eternal nature of the earth, their seed, and their names.

Isa. 66:24 . Those who transgressed and were destroyed at the second coming of Christ are either those of a telestial nature or sons of perdition. The same terminology is used to describe those who are in hell (see Mark 9:44, 46, 48; Luke 16:24) and those who become sons of perdition (see D&C 76:44).
