Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

Appendix A Authorship of Isaiah

Modern Bible scholars do not accept the idea that the entire book of Isaiah was written by one author, the prophet Isaiah. This questioning of the unity of the book began as early as the twelfth century and has progressed to the point of almost universal acceptance. The Anchor Bible is representative of that acceptance: "The distinction between First Isaiah and Second Isaiah is so widely accepted in modern scholarship that the argument against it need not be examined at length. The distinction between Second Isaiah and Third Isaiah is almost as widely accepted." (John L. McKenzie, "Second Isaiah," The Anchor Bible [New York: Doubleday and Company, Inc., 1968], 20:xv.)

The term "Second Isaiah" originally referred to Chapters 40 through 66 of Isaiah, which were considered to have been written by an author different from the one who wrote chapters 1 through 39. The term "Third Isaiah" is a later designation, applied to chapters 56 through 66 by scholars who claimed that these were the work of still another author. These three divisions have been further grouped into various sections, such as chapters I through 12, 13 through 23, 24 through 35, and 36 through 39. Some have also attempted to identify certain sections within chapters 40 through 66 as interpolations by other authors at various times. The arguments for these theories will not be discussed in depth here, but we will offer some basic reasons for our accepting the book of Isaiah as a unit written entirely by the prophet Isaiah. This is not to suggest that the text has come forth unmolested from the time of its writing. As noted within this study, there are many evidences that the text has suffered extensively through the years. If the original text were available, perhaps many of the objections now raised against the single authorship claim would be answered.

Actually, the authorship issue revolves around one's acceptance or rejection of divine revelation. The traditional acceptance of Isaiah as the single author is challenged by those who do not comprehend the foreknowledge of God, which includes his ability to name people yet unborn and describe events far in the future. The chief example is found in Isa. 44:28 and 45:1, which record the name of Cyrus, the future king of Persia, and prophesy that he will be responsible for allowing the Jews to return from their captivity in Babylon. Cyrus lived approximately two hundred years after the time of Isaiah. The critics see this identification by name-and the event associated with that name, which is now historical fact- as definite evidence that Isaiah did not write this part of the text. They reason that a prophet may be able to predict events of the near future by analyzing social, economic, and political conditions, but that it is impossible for him to foretell specific names of individuals who will be involved in specific acts, particularly when these people are unborn at the time of the prediction. Their conclusion, therefore, is that this section of the book was written by someone who lived either during or after the days of Cyrus. (See James Muilenberg, "The Book of Isaiah, Introduction," chapters 40-66, The Interpreters Bible [New York: Abingdon Press, 1056], 5:382.)

To those who accept the Book of Mormon as revelation, such specific prophecies pose no problem. Book of Mormon prophets foretold the name of Jesus (see 2 Ne. 10:3; 25:19) and the name of Mary, the mother of Jesus (see Mosiah 3:8? Alma 7:10). The Book of Mormon records a prophecy of Joseph who was sold into Egypt in which he foretold the name of Moses, who would lead Israel out of Egypt, and also the name of Joseph, a seer of the latter days. Therefore, the Book of Mormon verifies that a prophet, when moved upon by the Spirit, is able to prophesy the names of people in the future, thus refuting the reasoning of scholars when they reject the stated authorship of certain biblical texts.

The acceptance of Isaiah as the one and only author of the book which bears his name is also challenged by those who consider the vocabulary, style, and thought of Isa. 40 through 66 so different from that of the earlier chapters that they have to be the work of a different author. With the development of computers, vocabulary studies would seem to be able to settle this issue once and for all, but variant conclusions are being drawn from word studies. The more recent of the studies seem to be reversing the notion that these later chapters contain a significantly different vocabulary than the earlier ones, but the changed style and thought of the later chapters are still a major factor in the scholars' rejection of the single authorship of Isaiah.

It is quite obvious that Isaiah chapters 40 through 68 are in a different style from that of the first part of the book. However, this does not mean that the same author did not write both parts. The manner of revelation may dictate a different style of writing. To those who accept the Doctrine and Covenants as revelation, a significant difference is also noted there. The Lord revealed in his Preface to the Doctrine and Covenants that the revelations given thus far (sixty-five of which were included in the first printed compilation) were of him, but "were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding" (D&C 1:24; compare 2 Ne. 31:3). On a later occasion, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were shown a vision of the various degrees of glory in the eternal world and "were commanded to write while we were yet in the Spirit" (D&C 76:113). This certainly exemplifies a difference in the manner of receiving revelation. Isaiah may well have had a similar experience which could account for the two styles of writing in his book. As evidence of this, 2 Chronicles 26:22 records that the rest of the acts of Uzziah were written by "Isaiah the prophet," whereas 2 Chronicles 32:32 records that the rest of the acts of Hezekiah were "written in the ision ( Isaiah the prophet." If Isaiah's vision was written while he was "yet in the Spirit," this could well account for a different style of writing between the earlier and later chapters. (See chapter 3 for an analysis of the organization of the book of Isaiah.)

FTNT: 1., This seems compatible with the thinking of the scholars, but actually it is not. The scholars' idea is that God is limited by the language and abilities of the man who is inspired, while the Doctrine and Covenants is saying that God will adjust the language to the level of man's ability to understand. The language does not therefore impose any limitation, but is revealed in such a way that man can comprehend the message. After receiving and writing D&C 76, Joseph Smith proclaimed that he "could explain a hundred fold more than I ever have of the glories of the kingdoms manifested to me in the vision, were I permitted, and were the people prepared to receive them" (TPJS, p. 305). ~

Many scholars divide the book into three parts because of the themes which run through the chapters within these divisions. The first thirty-nine chapters, which include the four chapters of history from the book of 2 Kings, deal with political issues of the nations in and around Isaiah's time (some delete chapters 34 and 35 from this section). The theme of chapters 40 through 55, in the analysis of these scholars, is a nonpolitical one, dealing with the gathering of Israel unto a new nation from their place of exile; this interpretation, along with the references to Cyrus, has led them to associate this portion of Isaiah with the captivity of Judah in Babylon. And the theme of chapters 56 through 66 is supposedly one of an established community seeking to strengthen itself into a Zion community. They recognize some overlapping between divisions, but emphasize the differences.

As for the themes found in the three parts of Isaiah identified by the scholars, it should be noted that subject matter often dictates different styles of writing. The three themes are realistic in light of the history of Israel. The early chapters of Isaiah do deal with the downfall of the nation or house of Israel. As Isaiah warned of this downfall, he also held out the message of hope - the promise of a restoration in the latter days. The middle chapters deal with the gathering of Israel to the lands of their inheritance. What the scholars have not recognized, however, is that there are two promised lands for the gathering-Zion and Jerusalem - and that Zion is the land of the Americas, which was given to the descendants of Joseph (see 3 Ne. 15:12-13; TPJS p. 362). The loss of "many plain and precious things" from the record of the Jews seems to be the major cause of this oversight, but the Book of Mormon solves the dilemma (see 1 Ne. 13:20-41). The last eleven chapters do describe the building up of Zion after the children of Israel are gathered. Thus, the themes of the book of Isaiah are consistent with the revealed plan of the Lord for his people. Living in the day when these prophecies are being fulfilled enables Latter-day Saints to recognize and understand the message of Isaiah (see 2 Ne. 25:7), while those scholars who are not a part of this movement are unable to obtain this understanding.

Further evidence for the single authorship of Isaiah is found in statements within the Book of Mormon and the New Testament, But again, the validity of this evidence is based on acceptance of these scriptures as the revealed word of God.

The Book of Mormon plates preserved a text of Isaiah's writings at least five hundred years older than any other manuscript. This text assumes that the prophet Isaiah was the author of both First and Second Isaiah, as they are called. Thirteen complete chapters from First Isaiah are quoted in the Book of Mormon and identified as the work of Isaiah. Passages from two other chapters in this section of Isaiah are also quoted, although Isaiah is not named as the author in those cases. Seven chapters from so-called Second Isaiah are quoted in the Book of Mormon and definitely attributed to Isaiah himself; passages from one other chapter in Second Isaiah are also quoted, but here again the writer is not identified. Interestingly. no passages from so-called Third Isaiah are quoted in the Book of Mormon. However, Moroni, in writing about the covenant of Israel which would be restored in the latter days, admonished his readers to "search the prophecies of Isaiah" because he did not have the space to write them (see Morm. 8:23). That he gave this admonition without stipulating any restrictions suggests that there were several other prophecies in addition to those which had already been quoted in the record which spoke of the covenant of Israel in the latter days. Since the later chapters of Isaiah speak concerning latter-day Israel or Zion, Moroni may well have had reference to these chapters, particularly when we consider that Isa. 49:1 through 55:2 had already been quoted within the Book of Mormon. Since the third section of Isaiah deals with the eventual establishment of a Zion community, it would be natural for the Book of Mormon prophets and the Savior to rely upon the earlier sections to establish their teachings. Israel was to be scattered and gathered again before Zion would be built up; to have stressed the Zion community in that day, although it was mentioned by Isaiah, would have been "putting the cart before the horse." The Doctrine and Covenants was apparently the book to bring about this Zion community, which has come forth in a day when the spiritual foundations of Zion are being laid, and does quote freely from the prophecies in the third section of Isaiah (see Appendix D). Although Isaiah is not named as the original author of these quoted prophecies, the Preface to the Doctrine and Covenants does state that one of the purposes of the latter-day restoration was "that it might be fulfilled, which was written by the prophets" (D&C 1:18). So it is understandable that many prophecies from so-called Third Isaiah are quoted in the Doctrine and Covenants.

The New Testament also witnesses that Isaiah was the single author of the work called by his name. The Savior himself, as well as his apostles, identified as Isaiah's own writings passages quoted from all three of the scholars' divisions of his work (see Appendix E). For example, Isa. 6:9-10 is quoted in Matt. 13:14-15; Isa. 42:1-3 is quoted in Matt. 12:17-20; and Isa. 61:1-2 is quoted in Luke 4:17-19. Since the Book of Mormon does not quote from so-called Third Isaiah, it is significant that the New Testament does. The New Testament quotes eleven passages which are clearly from this section of Isaiah, and contains at least eighteen other passages which are paraphrases or possible quotations. Most of the eleven passages are introduced as scripture by the preface "It is written," and two of them are specifically identified as the words of Isaiah-one by the Savior himself in the synagogue in Nazareth (see Isa. 61:1-2; Luke 4:17-19), and the other by Paul in his epistle to the Romans (see Isa. 65:1-2; Rom. 10:20-21).

In light of all these witnesses, we can see that the original work of Isaiah included all of our present-day text and possibly more, as has been indicated in this book. In the Book of Mormon, Nephi testified that "many plain and precious things" were taken away from "the record of the Jews" (the Bible). He was also shown that other records were to come forth in the latter days to establish the truth of the first record, and to make known the plain and precious truths which had been lost (see 1 Ne. 13:20-41). These last records include the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants, and they witness to the world that Isaiah is the author of the book called by his name.
