Monte S. Nyman, Great Are the Words of Isaiah ( 1980)

Appendix E Isaiah in the New Testament

The most oft-quoted prophet in the New Testament is the prophet Isaiah. There are forty-two different passages of Isaiah which are definitely identifiable, as well as many others which are apparently from Isaiah. The forty-two passages do not include duplications, such as those found in the synoptic gospels. In the list that follows, those passages which are definitely identifiable as quotations of Isaiah are asterisked; others which appear to be from Isaiah are also listed. There are several additional New Testament passages which are allusions to Isaiah's writing, or shadows of his thought, but these are not included here.

The forty-two asterisked quotations in the foregoing list come from twenty-five different chapters of Isaiah. Twelve of these forty-two quotations come from ten different chapters of so-called First Isaiah (chapters 1-35); twenty-one come from eight different chapters of so-called Second Isaiah (chapters 40-55); and nine come from seven chapters of so-called Third Isaiah (chapters 56-66). These facts witness against the theories claiming multiple author-ship of Isaiah.

Fourteen of the forty-two asterisked passages are specifically identified as the words of the prophet Isaiah ("Esaias"). These fourteen quotations come from eleven separate chapters-six chapters in First Isaiah, three in Second Isaiah, and two in Third Isaiah, as they are called. Twenty-one of the forty-two quotations are identified as scripture, though Isaiah is not named as their author. These also are representative of all areas of the book of Isaiah: six are from so-called First Isaiah, ten from Second Isaiah, and five from Third Isaiah. The remainder of the forty-two passages are seven obvious quotations from Isaiah which are identified neither as Isaiah's words nor as scripture; five of these are from Second Isaiah, and two are from Third Isaiah.

DISTRIBUTION OF NEW TESTAMENT ISAIAH QUOTATIONS THROUGHOUT SO-CALLED FIRST, SECOND, AND THIRD ISAIAH

(The numbers of chapters from which the passages are quoted are shown in parentheses.)

FTNT: 3., Includes one quotation attributed to both Paul and Barnabas. ~

1980 ﻿
