Even children can help strengthen a family—do you know how? Elder Robert D. Hales of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles explained, “The key to strengthening our families is having the Spirit of the Lord come into our homes” (“Strengthening Families: Our Sacred Duty,” Liahona, July 1999, 38; Ensign, May 1999, 33). When you pray, study the scriptures, speak kindly, and remember to give thanks, you are strengthening your family! Doing these things invites the Holy Ghost.

The opposite of having the Spirit in our homes is having contention, or anger. When Jesus visited the Nephites, He taught, “He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another” (3 Ne. 11:29).

Disobedience and arguing drive the Spirit away. Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said, “It is the duty of children to obey their parents, to learn, and to help with household chores. They carry the scriptural charge not to contend and quarrel with one another” (“Let Every Man Learn His Duty,” Ensign, Nov. 1980, 70).

As you follow Church leaders’ counsel to be obedient and kind, the Spirit will be with you, helping you strengthen your family.

1.  Cut out the 12 pictures on this page; then cut 12 strips of paper to match the width of the pictures. Think about what principle or action each picture might represent and how it could strengthen your family. Glue or tape each picture to a strip of paper, and form a paper chain from the strips.

2.  For a family home evening activity, discuss the 12 pictures on this page and cooperate to form the paper chain described in idea 1 (above). Have family members cut out extra strips and draw pictures of additional ideas on strengthening your family. Display the chain where you will be reminded that each link is important for the chain—or for your family—to be strong.

3.  For a family home evening lesson or Primary talk, discuss Elder Robert D. Hales’s statement. Tell of a time when the Holy Ghost helped your family feel closer or prompted you to help a family member in need. Discuss ways you have been blessed for obeying your parents, and list ways to feel the Spirit in your home.
