Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Foreword

By Sheri Dew

I will never forget the afternoon I had Marjorie Hinckley all to myself. The setting was her comfortable condominium home in Salt Lake City, and my excuse for imposing on her time was a formal interview about her life with her husband, President Gordon B. Hinckley. I quickly found, however, that Marjorie Hinckley is not formal—gracious, yes; dignified, delightful, unassuming, absolutely. But formal? That's a word I would never use to describe Sister Hinckley, who has an uncanny knack for making anyone her friend and bolstering the person's spirits in the process. I call it Marjorie's Magic, the spell this diminutive woman casts that sends you away feeling light-years better about yourself than you did when you entered her presence. It is a sensation that combines total acceptance and joie de vivre, an optimism and enthusiasm about life that, if transmitted to society at large, would put therapists and pundits permanently out of business.

That afternoon in her condo I might have wished for the clock to stand still. It was pure delight to listen in as she reminisced about the unexpected and even dramatic twists and turns her life has taken during her sixty-plus years as the wife of President Gordon B. Hinckley.

She recalled their teenage years together in Salt Lake City's Liberty Stake, where Gordon's father served as stake president for more than a decade. They had attended different high schools—he went to LDS High School, and she to East High—but in the after-school hours they had found themselves in the same crowd. She had been impressed from the outset with the skinny young man who shared her sense of humor but also demonstrated a more serious, studious side. Their first date was to a Gold and Green Ball when she was eighteen. That night she told her mother, "This young man is going somewhere."

Their relationship continued to blossom, and they dated fairly steadily for some time. Even still, when Gordon left in 1933 to serve in the European Mission headquartered in London, he and Marjorie had not made any promises to each other. But each quietly hoped that the other would still be interested two and a half years hence.

As it turned out, they were. And their courtship picked up where it had left off. Though it didn't take long for either of them to realize that they were meant for each other, they didn't marry immediately. It was, after all, the bottom of the Depression, as he would refer to it ever after, and marriage in that nerve-wracking economic climate was something people didn't jump into without serious planning and a generous dose of caution and courage.

As Sister Hinckley relived for me the events leading up to their April 1937 marriage, she said something I will never forget. "When Gordon came home from his mission," she remembered, "I could tell that he had changed. I had always known he was remarkable, but now there was something even more distinctive about him. As we dated and then became engaged to be married, something became obvious to me. I knew that he loved me, and that he would always be good to me. But I also knew that I would never come first with him." She paused for a moment before adding, "And that was okay."

When I suggested that some women might balk at such a situation, she replied: "I knew Gordon was going to devote his life to the Lord. And I couldn't think of anyone I'd rather have him devoted to."

Her statement was so matter-of-fact that she might as well have been rattling off the grocery list. There was no self-pity or evidence of any grand sacrifice on her part, nor was there any sense of self-congratulation, just an expression of her simple faith and mature spiritual equilibrium. At that moment, it was clear to me that she had been perfectly suited to stand at the side of a man who was destined to play a vital role in the twentieth-century Church.

All of my subsequent interactions with Sister Hinckley, and particularly with the two of them together, have borne that out. It is now simply impossible for me to imagine one without the other. Not every woman would have put up with the incessant hammering, sawing, and painting that went on for months, even years, at a time as her husband turned bedrooms into kitchens and front entryways into dining rooms. Little did she know that she had married a builder in every sense of the word, one who would frequently remodel their home even as he labored tirelessly to build the Church and help the gospel kingdom move forward—first as an employee and later as an ordained leader.

But she has been the perfect companion for someone who is constantly forging into unknown territory, always carrying a heavy load, and never inclined to stand still. Perhaps we will never know the extent to which her wonderful sense of balance and humor have helped her husband maintain his.

Their interactions with each other demonstrate the comfortable camaraderie of their life together. During a meeting with missionaries in London's Hyde Park chapel, President Hinckley began his remarks: "I am going to exercise my prerogative and call on Sister Hinckley to talk with you. This is something for which I will pay a dear price, but so be it." He chuckled to himself as he turned from the podium. But without missing a beat, she stepped to the pulpit, lowered the microphone—she always has to lower the microphone—and said, "I like this man a lot, but I like him some times a lot more than others. What would you do if you were married to a man like this?" The missionaries roared their approval.

On another occasion, this time with missionaries in St. Louis, Missouri, President Hinckley began his remarks, "Sister Hinckley and I have been all over the world speaking to missionaries, and I don't know anyone who does a better job at this than she does. So I think I'd like for her to speak for a few minutes." Again, Sister Hinckley's spontaneous response invited laughter: "I'll tell you exactly why I'm speaking. President Hinckley hasn't decided yet what he wants to say, and he's stalling for time."

After warming up the group and making all in attendance feel as though they were back home with an old and trusted friend, Sister Hinckley left the missionaries with a message of hope and encouragement that set the stage perfectly for her prophet-husband. "It always gives me a lift to meet with the missionaries," she told them, "because my testimony is reborn. I can't tell you how much it means to us that you would come to spend this time with us. You strengthen our testimonies just by being here. There is no more important work in all the world, and you will never do anything more important in all your life than you are doing right now." President Hinckley then took the stand and delivered a rousing message to those missionary troops.

In every conceivable way, Sister Hinckley has stood at her husband's side. One can only imagine the number of times that her gentle encouragement, her gift for looking at life's bright side, and her unfeigned optimism have spurred him on and buoyed him up. One evening during a hectic ten-day trip to England, President Hinckley's first trip abroad after becoming President of the Church, he and Sister Hinckley were enjoying a quiet meal prior to a fireside in a Liverpool stake center. As they were sampling the British fare that President Hinckley had come to love as a young missionary, he said quietly to his wife, almost in passing and as though no one else were present, "I just don't know about this fireside tonight. I have no idea what I am supposed to say." Without so much as looking up from the table, Sister Hinckley reached over, patted her husband's knee, and said, "It will come to you. You'll know exactly what you should say." That was it. There was nothing showy or even remarkable about the interchange. But one could imagine how frequently she had demonstrated this kind of quiet support during his four decades of service as a General Authority.

Did Marjorie Hinckley ever imagine where her life would take her? "Absolutely not," she insists. "I've been busy just getting through today. But sometimes I have to pinch myself when I realize all that I've been able to see and experience. It never gets old. Every day is so exciting. When you see what's happening in this Church all over the world, you're just thrilled to wake up every morning! Life is more than I ever imagined it would be."

I believe that, just as President Gordon B. Hinckley was foreordained to serve as President of the Church, his wife was prepared to walk through life with him. Surely it would have been difficult, perhaps even impossible, for him to do all he has done had it not been for the influence of this woman whose belief in her husband has known no bounds.

She is a gift to all who fall under her magical spell. But most of all, she has proven a companion par excellence, a pillar of strength and stability, to a man who will ever be regarded as one of the Church's great builders.
