Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Acknowledgments

There have been many who have provided encouragement as the compilation of this book went forward. Perhaps "persistent prodding" would be a more accurate description. Sheri Dew, vice president of publishing at Deseret Book, whom I love like a sister, had the tiresome duty of convincing us more than one time that the publishing of this book would be of positive value. She was ever cheerful and invaluable in soliciting and gathering writing from a multitude of sources. She made courageous attempts at educating and helping us do work that was far beyond our own abilities. Her secretary, Elsha Ulberg, is the perfect complement, always available and marvelously helpful.

A particular thanks to each contributor. Remembering and talking is one thing, but writing is a difficult discipline. We are grateful for the many generous contributions. Siblings, in-laws, children, grandchildren, and other family members are particularly appreciated for their willingness to share memories and insights. They also endured a fair amount of prodding and nagging. Their reluctance was not because they couldn't think of things to say but because they worried that they couldn't say them well enough to do this woman justice and that each page meant a little less privacy. I thank them for their generosity.

Sharon Guillone spent hours transcribing and entering material into the computer. Without her the entire mission would have been aborted early on. She worked accurately, quickly, and with enthusiasm.

Ron Millett, president of Deseret Book Company, and Kent Ware, director of publishing, have supported this project from the start. I thank them for their ongoing desire to bring uplifting books to the world. Thanks also to Emily Watts and those who work in editing and production at Deseret Book. Emily is not only thorough and skilled, she also laughs easily—a critical dimension during the course of this project. Thanks to Ron Stucki, designer, Patricia Parkinson, typographer, and others who worked hard to make the graphics reinforce the feeling and message of the book.

Thank you to my ever-patient husband and children, who have endured—once again—a preoccupied wife and mother who is perennially behind fast-approaching deadlines, and who behaves with so little grace under pressure.

It is a wonderful thing as a daughter to have parents who are loved by so many. I'd particularly like to thank the women of the Church who share my love for Marjorie Pay Hinckley. It is to her that the real acknowledgments and thanks belong.
