Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Chapter Two

Genuineness

"I Couldn't Think of Anyone Else to Be"

Maybe it is because Marjorie Hinckley so clearly understands who she really is that she wastes very little energy in pretending, protecting, or defending herself. She immediately opens her circle and pulls you into her good world—whether you are one alone with her in conversation or one of ten thousand people in a foreign country listening to her translated remarks from a pulpit. Marjorie Hinckley possesses a heart without walls—she employs no artificial defenses to hide from others or shut them out. What you see is a good Christian woman, and that is what you get!

Evelyn P. Henriksen, a sister, relates a conversation that is representative of Sister Hinckley's charming genuineness:

At BYU a fireside was held in which Marjorie was featured with her daughters presenting incidents in her life. She had the audience of some twelve thousand in the palm of her hand. They chuckled throughout the evening at her refreshing sense of humor and jumped to their feet in a standing ovation at the conclusion. Later she expressed amazement at the response. My husband said, "Marge, they loved you because you were so relaxed and just yourself."

"I couldn't think of anyone else to be!" she quickly responded.

This genuineness immediately draws everyone in—through the front door and directly to the kitchen, without a pause in any formal parlors. Carolyn Rasmus, former administrative assistant to two Young Women general presidencies, recalls visiting Sister Hinckley and her three sisters one afternoon:

Usually I'm curious about how people decorate their homes: the furnishings, the pictures, the decorations, and the overall ambiance. But on an occasion when I had an opportunity to visit the home of President and Sister Hinckley, I never noticed these things. As I entered the door, I was greeted by the sounds of laughter and happy talk. Sister Hinckley, wearing her smocklike apron, motioned me to sit down and join with her and her three sisters. They likewise beckoned me warmly.

I immediately found myself included in a family conversation that was punctuated with laughter and fun. One sister had brought a humorous newspaper article about the "Olympic Event" we all enter when we drive in the reconstruction areas of the I-15 freeway. They had already read it, but wanted to share it with me. We all laughed heartily as we shared our own experiences driving this road. I felt as if I had always known these women. There was no pretense, no awkwardness in becoming acquainted. It seemed as though we were instant friends!

I asked about the gathering, and they told me how they get together once a week and what a wonderful time they have. Immediately they began recalling conversations they'd recently had, ranging from experiences with e-mail to advice shared with daughters about a wide range of mother-daughter topics.

They reminisced about the times when their children were young and they would meet at their mother's home for similar gatherings. "Our children got to know each other well," one said, and they began remembering a different time and age, but one that reflected the same optimism and joy I sensed on that particular day. As I later related my experience to one of their children, she remembered those wonderful get-togethers. "I don't ever remember hearing them gossip or complain," she said. "Their conversation was always positive and happy. Wherever they were together, it was a happy, safe place to be."

No wonder I never noticed the pictures or the decor of the home. Everyone, including me, was having too much fun.

Patricia T. Holland comments on Sister Hinckley's down-to-earth style:

One gets the feeling around Sister Hinckley that she is absolutely unconcerned with the fads and fancies of the secular world. She is comfortable with kings and queens, princes and prime ministers, but she is just as comfortable—and probably more interested in—the newest member of the Church she just met in a distant land or the youngest child present in some far-flung congregation of the Saints she has just attended. You get the feeling that she sees right to the heart of everything and everyone. The idea that anyone could be false or pompous or self-aggrandizing with Marjorie Hinckley is unimaginable. She has a radarlike sense of honesty, humility, genuineness, and sincerity.

To quote both Sister Frances Monson and Sister Ruth Faust, "She is a real lady!" There is something in that compliment from two of the women who know her best that speaks of the dignity and character that come from being absolutely genuine. In Sister Hinckley, what you see is what you get—and that is what everyone wants to get! Her love, her honest interest in you as a person, her lack of affectation and self-aggrandizement, her faith—she is the real thing, she is a real lady. Marjorie Hinckley fits perfectly the position the Lord has placed her in—standing side by side with our prophet, President Gordon B. Hinckley.

Sister Hinckley has often spoken about self-acceptance. Certainly an acceptance of herself undergirds her ability to be genuine.

I recently read a study of 275 college men and women. It revealed that over 90 percent suffered from gnawing, frustrated feelings of deficiency. They gave all sorts of reasons: physical incompetence, unpleasant appearance, lack of social charm, failure in love, low intellectual ability. To me a form of compensation is almost always possible. The homely young woman may develop the more wit and charm because she is homely. The shy youth with a temperament of a recluse may find a useful niche in scientific research.

No well-integrated life is possible without self-acceptance. If you are shy, accept it. If you have no musical ability, accept it, as though to say: "I, John Smith, hereby accept myself with my inherited endowments and the elements in my environment that I cannot control, and I will now see what I can do with this John Smith."

One of the ablest women in this country, now the wife of a university president, was brought up in poverty. She recalls an occasion when, as a girl, she complained of her hardships to her mother. "See here," said the mother. "I have given you life. That is probably all I will ever be able to give you. Now you stop complaining and do something with it."

A favorite quote from Sister Hinckley's files describes her contentment with what she is—and what she is not:

"Find out what you love to do, what you can do best, and do it. Each man has his own special powers, each man can do at least one thing a little better than millions of other men.

"All about us, we see dissatisfaction—people wishing they were someone else, had someone else's abilities" (Sydney J. Harris).

Sister Hinckley gives simple language to this very hopeful way of evaluating our own performance:

We each do the best we can. My best may not be as good as your best, but it's my best. The fact is that we know when we are doing our best and when we are not. If we are not doing our best, it leaves us with a gnawing hunger and frustration. But when we do our level best, we experience a peace.

She recalls an example of doing her best and finding peace:

I was once asked to speak to a Relief Society on the role of women. I had just read the talk that Pat Holland had given at a BYU Women's Conference and that was published in the July 1980 Ensign. I loved it. It was scholarly. It was perceptive. It was, in my mind, a small masterpiece. I read it through three times. This was the kind of talk I wanted to give.

I sat down at the typewriter and rolled in a clean sheet of white paper. And then I sat there. Nothing happened. After several minutes staring at the blank paper I realized that I was no Pat Holland. Try as I would, I could never write that kind of a talk. I left the typewriter for an hour or so, until the cobwebs cleared from my brain and I could accept the fact that the only kind of talk I could write would have to be the one that could come out of the mind of Marge Hinckley. It would be no Pat Holland masterpiece, but it would be my best effort. I remembered the words in D&C 46:11-12:

"For all have not every gift given unto them; for there are many gifts, and to every man [and woman] is given a gift by the Spirit of God. To some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby."

I was at peace.

A conversation between Sister Hinckley and one of her daughters is a lighthearted expression of her confidence in who she is—and who she is not:

Mother was getting ready for an occasion when I dropped by the apartment late one afternoon. When she told me where she was going—as she reached for a pleated skirt and white cotton blouse—I gasped. "Mother, this is a huge thing," I protested. "The reception is in honor of Dad and you. He's probably going to wear a tux. Every woman there will have on sequins and diamonds."

Continuing to dress, completely unruffled, she said, "Well, I don't have any sequins in my closet. But this skirt is black, and the blouse does have a lace collar. And besides that, if we're the guests of honor, whatever I wear will have to be right!"

Two granddaughters share their feelings about their grandmother's easygoing attitude toward life:

Grandma never competes. She's happy with who she is and who you are. Everyone is a winner, except when it comes to sports. Then BYU must win!

One thing I love about my Grandma is her honesty. I remember being at a play once with Grandpa and Grandma—she would often take us to Christmas plays—and a man came up to my grandpa and said, "Hi, President Hinckley. Do you remember me? I met you twenty years ago at a stake conference in . . ." My grandma leaned over to me and said, "I just don't understand how he remembers people after all these years. At least he's polite and always tries. When people ask me if I remember them after meeting them so long ago, I simply say, 'No. I'm sorry, I don't remember you. What is your name?'" I had to laugh at that.

Duane Cardall, a television reporter in Salt Lake City, Utah, has accompanied the Hinckleys on several of their tours throughout the Church. He fondly recalls his experiences:

Whether at home or in remote regions of the world, the Latter-day Saints flock to see and honor their prophet, seer, and revelator, and then they fall in love with his wife. They're immediately attracted to this diminutive woman with the grandmotherly demeanor and the cherubic smile. It was my pleasure to observe her in meeting after meeting as she accompanied her husband to Great Britain on his first international visit after becoming president of the Church.

It's obvious that the few who are privileged to actually meet and interact with Sister Hinckley immediately feel comfortable in her presence. Unfortunately, the demands on the president's time as well as concerns for the couple's health and safety preclude many one-on-one encounters. But even those who see her only at the pulpit and hear her comments from a distance experience her genuineness and especially her disarming humor.

Opening her remarks in one of the meetings, she told a British audience: "On our way to England once a few years ago we stopped in Detroit to see some of our grandchildren, and our little three-year-old granddaughter cried to come with me. Her mother said, 'You can't go with Grandma. She's going to London.' And this little three-year-old said, 'But London is my favorite town.' She wasn't very brainwashed!"

In that instant, she had her British audience in the palm of her hand, and they sat waiting for her message. That's her style—make them laugh and feel good, and then proceed to leave a message filled with practical advice. During my travels with the Hinckleys, I must admit, I've looked forward to hearing her brief sermons as much as her husband's.

Wherever she goes, whatever the audience, she comes across with disarming genuineness and sincerity.

Ardeth Kapp, former Young Women General President, shares similar feelings:

"Sister Hinckley is so real" is the description often used in describing her influence in people's lives. She is not one who would want to be held up as a perfect model to intimidate others. Rather, she is one of our beloved sisters to walk beside, learn from, laugh with, and follow, knowing that she understands and cares.

On a spring evening in 1996, the Marriott Center on the BYU campus was filled almost to capacity for a BYU Women's Conference fireside: "An Evening with Marjorie Hinckley and Daughters." Thousands of sisters were for a brief time drawn into the Hinckley family circle. I was seated on the fifth row from the front, a little to the side of the platform where Sister Hinckley was seated at a table with her daughters on both sides of her.

The large audience quieted as the strains of organ music filled the Marriott Center. We had no way of knowing for sure what to expect, but the presenters on the platform became the focus of everyone's attention. It appeared that each of the four had a copy of the script they intended to follow. The presentation was going smoothly, a warm and delightful conversation between mother and daughters. Suddenly there was a brief hesitation, a pause, and then Sister Hinckley began chuckling and shifting the papers in front of her as she spoke. The microphones were well placed; we all heard. "I've lost my place," she said. "Where are we?" Her daughter Virginia, now joining the chuckling, gave immediate assistance, and the dialogue continued. There was no sense of embarrassment.

A little later, the formal preparation once again seemed to be a hindrance, and it appeared from where I was sitting that Sister Hinckley set aside the script. She laughingly gave up the formality of speaking to an "audience" and just began visiting with each of us one by one. She was so open, so honest, so real and unassuming—there was nothing to hide and no pretense. She spoke with humor and warmth and gratitude as she told of earlier days in her marriage and some of the challenges she had experienced.

The conversation at one point was focused on the period of the Great Depression. In a teasing way, Sister Hinckley and her daughters told of how President Hinckley typically referred to any time around those years as "the bottom of the Depression." At this point a video clip appeared on the large overhead screen. Even if the discarded script had been followed exactly, the timing could not have been better. The lights went down, and the tape was beginning to roll. There was President Hinckley on the screen ready to make his contribution reflecting on memories of the past. In a warm but serious tone, he began, "It was in the bottom of the Depression . . ." Sister Hinckley, her daughters, and the entire audience erupted into laughter. It was as if we had all been included in this fun family banter.

On this occasion, President Hinckley was sitting not on the stand but in the audience on the front row, where he was able to observe his family. I was sitting just a few seats behind him, a little to the side, where I could easily observe his responses during the meeting. At this point he became the center of attention for those of us who could see him. He immediately broke into laughter. He laughed and laughed, his shoulders shaking as he became the center of the fun. It was a wonderful invitation for the audience to be able to join in the teasing.

However, the best was yet to come. When the family's final words of wisdom, encouragement, faith, and inspiration had been spoken, it was as though President Hinckley could restrain himself no longer. He left his seat on the front row and walked up the few steps to the podium. All eyes were on him as we waited and watched, wondering what the prophet would have to say to us on this occasion when we had been privileged to come a little closer to him and his family.

He didn't have anything to say to us—not in words, that is. At this moment it was not the crowd that had brought President Hinckley to his feet. With a hand on his wife's shoulder, he leaned over and tenderly gave her a kiss, and then gave the same token of love to each of his daughters. He then stepped to the back of the platform, away from center stage.

The scriptural statement "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord" (1 Cor. 11:11) was exemplified in this brief and tender exchange. As their separate positions of prominence were reversed on this occasion—she in the spotlight and he in the supporting role—it was evident to all that President Hinckley was a loving, tender husband and father, and that Sister Hinckley was a woman of great stature at the center of her family circle. We were taken in by the honesty and genuineness of it all.

Barbara Ballard, wife of Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Twelve, offers another concurring voice:

The sparkle that emanates from the countenance of Sister Marjorie Hinckley is contagious and captures the heart of everyone. She is truly "one of us," meaning the women of the Church. She never considers her position as being above anyone. I have heard her say on several occasions, "I sometimes feel I need to pinch myself to help me realize I'm actually here and associating with all these wonderful people." I don't believe she will ever get over the wonder of it.

Mary Ellen Edmunds, former director of training at the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah, has warm memories of Sister Hinckley's humor and genuineness:

I was serving in the Southern Far East Mission in 1963 and had been transferred from the mission office in Hong Kong to the Philippines, one of the three zones in our mission. Shortly after the transfer, we learned that our mission president had been in a very serious accident in Hong Kong and was in the hospital. We didn't see him for seven months, and we were many miles away in another country.

One of the ways in which we were helped was to receive some additional visits from the General Authority who was our supervisor in Asia, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley. How we loved and enjoyed him!

With no thought that it might be inappropriate to write to a General Authority, I wrote some letters to him and his family. One time I had what I thought was a very clever idea. We had an abundance of tiny little bugs in the Philippines—ants, fleas, bedbugs, termites, mosquitoes, flies, and baby cockroaches. I got some clear tape and stuck a variety of these little critters onto pieces of paper to make what I thought was a very unusual, attractive letterhead. I began sending these letters to everyone, knowing they'd be cherished.

One of these pieces of homemade stationery was sent to Elder and Sister Hinckley far away in Utah. The next time Sister Hinckley came with her husband to the Philippines, she had a surprise for me. In Hong Kong we often had a treat called Smarties, small candies that came in a cardboard tube about the size of a pencil. When Sister Hinckley arrived, she gave me one of these "Smartie tubes" with a happy smile. Inside the tube I found a lively little bug-eating lizard—a gecko!

Somehow I realized that Sister Hinckley wanted to help us cut down on the bug and critter population in our little apartment in the Philippines. (Maybe she was also saying that one of those "critter letters" was enough.)

I've loved her ever since. She was REAL! And to her, we were real, too.

There is a tremendous warmth in a mother who isn't trying to be someone else, as one daughter attests:

When we were young, it was very uncommon to have mothers in the classroom—or anywhere at school. I remember only one day. We were having a program in the lunchroom. Chairs lined the room, and the children sat in them as we waited for the mothers to arrive. I noticed with curious interest as each mother came in and then made her way to sit with her child. The mother who came through the door just before mine was wearing spiked heels and a darling dress and had all of this foofy hair. Yes, she was young and, I thought, beautiful. In fact, she looked like a teenager. As she made her way over to her tap-dancer daughter (of course, I thought), I looked up to see my mother come through the same door. With that instant juxtaposition, I will never forget the flood of security and happiness I felt when I saw her—no foofy hair or spiked heels, not very young or very beautiful, dressed in her typically tidy housedress. There was a warm, comfortable feeling and the thought clear as neon: "Oh, I'm so glad that my mother looks like a real mother! Whatever would a person do if her only mother wore darling dresses and had painted fingernails?"

Margaret Smoot, a freelance writer and producer and former spokesperson for Brigham Young University, sums up the down-to-earth attitude that characterizes this very real woman:

Like most members of the Church, I have not had extended time in Sister Hinckley's presence. My contact with her has been primarily electronic. I have watched her on television news as she and her husband have undertaken their many marathon, whirlwind presidential travels. I have had glimpses of her on historic visits to China, traversing the gentle landscape of England, greeting Saints in South America, and shaking hands and waving to throngs of well-wishers closer to home. There she is, unfailingly good-spirited, gracious, walking briskly side by side with her husband.

And usually she is wearing her sensible shoes, chosen for comfort above all other factors. If I knew nothing else of Sister Hinckley, that alone would be testimony of her values and priorities. Sister Hinckley does not do things to impress. She does them for the right reason—because they make sense to her and to the Lord. If you are going to keep up with President Gordon B. Hinckley, she seems to be saying, you must really wear track shoes, with good soles. And keep up she does.

With a prophet known for his quick wit, his wife is his mirror image on matters of humor. Marjorie Hinckley keeps up easily with her husband on that score. And who is to say that she doesn't often best him, quip for quip?

But besting him is not on the agenda for Sister Hinckley. Nor is keeping score. She is a remarkable and exemplary woman who has found a receptive spot in the hearts of Latter-day Saints for the buoyancy she brings to her duties—accompanying her husband in his official capacity as prophet, seer, and revelator of the restored Church of Jesus Christ.

We can't know all their specific challenges, but we can appreciate how high the expectations are and how well they are doing what is asked of them. We can't walk in Sister Hinckley's sensible shoes, but we can emulate her stride. We can learn from her strength and character and down-to-earth qualities, knowing that we will all take a turn in and out of the spotlight, and that, like Sister Hinckley, we too must keep our priorities straight and our identity intact when the multitudes are not present.
