Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Chapter Three

Mothering

"Have Joy in Your Children"

In a Mother's Day sacrament meeting speech, Sister Hinckley aptly expressed her own happiness in being a mother:

Jewish women have a wonderful way of bidding each other good-bye. They say, "Have joy in your children."

And so I say to you, "Have joy in your mothering," whether you are the mother, the aunt, the grandmother, the next-door neighbor. We all have the opportunity to be an influence for good.

Sheri Dew, in her biography of President Hinckley, wrote of how his wife looked forward to summers when her children were young:

[She] loved the sound of the screen door slamming shut as children ran in from the backyard. . . . Marjorie savored the days she had her five to herself, and she went to great lengths to keep summers unstructured so her young ones would have time to lie in the gully and listen to the birds sing if they wanted to. She wept each fall when it was time to send her brood back to school; even when school was in session she looked forward to the moment each day when her children burst through the door and started scrounging for an afternoon snack. One day when Dick had to stay after school for some grade-school discipline, Marjorie marched over to his classroom and announced to his startled teacher, "You can do anything you want with this boy all day long, but after 3 p.m. he's mine."

Sister Hinckley offers some insights on effective mothering:

Children rise higher when they are treated with respect. Use courteous and respectful language when you talk with one another. We have always had pretty clear expectations in our home about using respectful language. One day our little granddaughter had been playing with a friend and came home quite upset about something the friend had said. Her mother asked her what it was. She responded, "Well, it's such a bad word that I can't say it, but it was "shut [point upward]!"

A world-famous child psychologist, Bruno Bettelheim, said at the age of eighty-four, "You can't teach children to be good. The best you can do for your child is to live a good life yourself. What a parent knows and believes, the child will lean on."

You don't teach a child not to hit by hitting. We cannot expect to be respected if we treat others in demeaning ways.

Our children grew up in a semi-rural area. We had a fairly large piece of property with lawns and gardens and orchards and plenty of work to keep the boys out of mischief. A wooded ravine ran through the property; we called it "the hollow."

One day our oldest boy turned up missing. There were lawns to be mowed, irrigation ditches to be cleaned. The hours ticked away. All afternoon I practiced a speech I would give him when he showed up. And show up he did, at mealtime, which I knew he would. "Where have you been?" I asked.

"Down in the hollow."

"And what have you been doing down in the hollow?"

His reply, "Nothing."

Some years later I had reason to be glad that I had not given him the speech. He was home from his mission and a senior at the university. It was test week. He was under a lot of pressure to do well in order to get into the graduate school of his choice. Things were not going too well with his girlfriend. The pressures of adult life were beginning to be felt. I watched him as he drove home from school one afternoon. He got out of the car, kicked a clod of dirt, went over to examine the swelling buds on the lilac tree, came in the kitchen, straddled a chair backwards, and said, "Mom, I had a wonderful childhood, didn't I?"

"Well, I hope so. You did your share of complaining about all the work that had to be done."

"Oh, it was wonderful," he said. "Those long summer days, when you could lie on your back in the hollow and listen to the birds sing and watch the ants build their castles."

The memory of the peace of a summer day—"God's in his heaven, and all's right with the world"—sustained him when the pressures of adult life began to crowd in.

Things are different now. Children hear so many voices from so many directions. There are so few empty summer days. There are pressures to excel. It has become a challenge to let children be children.

It has never been so important that children have a home that is a place of refuge, a place of peace, a place of unconditional love—even when the report card may not be what you hoped for.

My mother taught me some basic philosophies of rearing children. One is that you have to trust children. I tried hard never to say "no" if I could possibly say "yes." I think that worked well because it gave my children the feeling that I trusted them and they were responsible to do the best they could.

Kathleen H. Hinckley, a daughter-in-law, writes:

In my early years of motherhood, I would call my mother-in-law any time I needed some advice about the dilemmas of child rearing. She would listen with compassion and without criticism. Even though I was thousands of miles away, she could relate exactly.

I remember a time when my oldest daughter wanted to come to Salt Lake to spend some time with her cousin. The arrangements couldn't be worked out, and my daughter cried herself to sleep. I could taste the tears and feel the choking sobs in my own throat. I called Grandma for advice, wondering if we should go to greater lengths to work out the trip. Grandma's comforting words were, "She will be all right. She'll learn that that's life, and she'll learn that she can accept disappointment and get over it."

Another time the concern was about swimming lessons. All the mothers were tossing their reluctant, screaming children into the teacher's outstretched arms in the pool. I just could not bring myself to do the same, but I did want our son to learn to swim. When I called her for advice, she verbalized something I would say over and over to myself for many years to come, "Just save the relationship." I believe those words are the most simple and powerful parenting principle I have ever learned. Long before she verbalized this principle to me, I had seen her as a living example of it.

I first became acquainted with the Hinckley family in Boston. Clark, to whom I was about to become engaged, was graduating from business school in a few weeks, and several members of the family gathered in Boston to attend his graduation on June 12, 1973.

One hot, muggy day I was with the extended family on the subway speeding toward downtown Boston from Cambridge when we realized that Clark's two-year-old nephew had stripped to his diapers. Without missing a beat in the conversation, Grandma dressed him. Before anyone knew it, he had taken his clothes off. She put them on and then they were off again! Giggling, Clark's mother said, "It's just too hot for clothes," and the happy two-year-old spent the day sightseeing in diapers. It was my first introduction to the Hinckley way of allowing each family member, whenever possible, to be himself. I was being taught that even two-year-olds have feelings that are important and respected.

A couple of years later, that same little boy did not have any desire to be in the family photograph. Every encouraging antic was performed in hopes of enticing the reluctant child to line up with the family. After all, we were all gathered in Salt Lake from all over the world—Hawaii to New York—and no one knew when we would be together again for such an opportunity. However, I remember the amazement I felt when the prevailing attitude in Grandma's living room that afternoon was that it was no big deal. Nobody got really tense, and sooner or later—I don't remember exactly how—the picture was taken and we were all in it.

In the meantime, all of the relationships were saved.

Sister Hinckley's sons both recall another of her parenting techniques:

President Benson counseled mothers, "Praise your children more than you correct them. Praise them for even their smallest achievement." Mother was an expert at this principle, even when there appeared to be very little to praise! She believed we could do anything we set our minds to do, so if we didn't perform well, she assumed either the situation was unfair or we had simply failed to apply ourselves!

Some of my earliest recollections of Mother revolve around our year or so in Denver. I was three turning four years of age. I had contracted rheumatic fever, and it fell to Mother to take me to the hospital for regular tests, including the dreaded EKG or electrocardiogram. I say "dreaded" not because it was painful but because the terrible anticipation of a negative outcome, which would indicate that the disease had spread to my heart, could be read in Mother's face.

Even at four years of age I was quite a handful. Most mothers would have been a little devious, using a ploy like this: "Let's go for ice cream," and then, once inside the car, completing the sentence with, "after our visit to the hospital."

Mother, unable to tell even the whitest of lies, would simply tell me to get in the car, it was time for a visit to the hospital. I would sit on the living-room floor and kick up a fuss that could be heard around the neighborhood. Finally, she would take my arm and literally drag me to the car and put me in the backseat, and off we would go, with me convinced she was the meanest, most heartless thing on the planet. I didn't realize for years that the hollow-sounding, "This hurts me more than it is going to hurt you," was true. It made her miserable to see me so sick and frightened.

Once strapped into the EKG rig, I was told to hold as still as a mouse so the machine could do its work. This I did superbly for a four-year-old, and I could hardly wait to get home so that I could hurry next door. I would strut into my friend Kay's house and say, "I'll bet you can't hold as still as I can. Watch this!" And I would go into a freeze for about a minute. Sure enough, I won the hold-still contest every time. No one even came close.

You see, Mother had praised me so much for how well I submitted to the EKG tests, including holding as still as a mouse, that I was convinced there was something adulatory about that particular talent. Mom seemed to get a big kick out of these demonstrations to Kay and to the rest of my family, and she would say, "That's right, Dick held as still as a mouse!" The happy ending to that story is that after several weeks in bed, with her tending to my needs, after many trips to the hospital, the rheumatic fever left without ever affecting my heart. When the doctor told us the good news, I couldn't understand why Mother cried.

Sister Hinckley has spoken convincingly to young people about home and the need for love:

Honor thy father and thy mother is one of the Ten Commandments and probably one of the most challenging of all the principles of the gospel for our young people. From my own experience let me tell you that the day is not far off when you will be the mother or the father and someone whom you have not yet seen will be the daughter or the son.

The trouble with the world and the trouble with you and me is that we don't love each other enough. And if we do, we don't bother to show it, or we don't bother to say it. If the world is to know love, it has to begin at home. It has to be in your heart and in mine. And the place to begin is home. I have been shaken and saddened lately by some instances where there has been estrangement between parents and children.

Did you ever stop to think what a terrible responsibility you are to your parents? Not only are they required to feed you and clothe you and educate you, but from the moment you were placed in their keeping it became their responsibility to see that you are taught to live a life that is fitting for a child of God, that you might someday return to Him as pure as the day you came. What a staggering responsibility! We feel it. Most of the mistakes we make are because we love you so much. We are so anxious for you to do your best that we get clumsy in our anxiety. We don't know how to communicate with you and we bungle. But it is only because we love you. And you had better appreciate it, because no one will ever love you as much. Your husband will love you, your wife will love you, but let me disillusion you right now—it will not be the way your mother and father love you. Theirs is as close to an unselfish love as we know on this earth.

Being a son or a daughter is probably the hardest role you have to play. Home is where you are loved the most and act the worst. But I have come to the conclusion that it is in the home where we are tested the most. Most of us have developed a pretty good set of company manners that we exercise at school and socials and church and other places, but it is what we are at home that tells the true story of what we really are. The family unit is fundamental. I wonder if this was so there would be some area where we would function with our guard down so that the Lord could see what we really are.

If you are looking for a good husband or a good wife, find out how your friend treats his parents and his brothers and sisters. Then you will know pretty much how he is going to treat his wife and children. If a girl is rude to her mother—if she talks to her in a loud and sassy voice, if she ignores her counsel and argues with her and says cutting things to her—beware. If she behaves this way in the privacy of her parents' home, she most likely will behave the same in the privacy of her own home. Think of yourself, too. Unless you can learn to live with your parents in love and kindness and respect and helpfulness, pity the person who marries you.

The family is eternal. Love must be nurtured. We must put our pride and our haughtiness and our misunderstandings away and say, "I love you, Mother. I love you, Father. What would you have me do?" You can never be happy under any other circumstances.

On another occasion, she addressed a few remarks to young mothers in a Mother's Day sacrament meeting:

As I watched some of the young mothers come into this meeting with young children, restless from meetings that have preceded this one, I think I felt something of your frustration and challenge to be the perfect mother. Relax. There is no such thing as the perfect mother who fits all the eulogies. We just do the best we can with the help of the Lord, and who knows, these children who are struggling to be free may someday rise up and call us blessed.

The trick is to enjoy it. Don't wish away your days of caring for young children. This is your great day. Sometimes we get so caught up in the physical work and trivia that we forget the big picture. We forget whose children they really are. When the house is filled with children, noise and teasing and laughter, you get the feeling this is forever. Before you know it they will be gone. When our second son went away to school at the age of seventeen, I said, "But Clark, I am not through with you. I feel there is so much I will need to teach you."

"Too late, Mother, too late."

Our children grow so quickly out of our reach.

The rewards of mothering are not immediate. There are times when you are less than appreciated. I took from the oven one day what I thought was a beautiful casserole, only to have my six-year-old son say, "Mom, how come you baked the garbage?"

Then there is the unexpected hug, when you least deserve it. And while you are enjoying these days of mothering, be sure your demands on your children for perfection are not so heavy that they cannot be children.

Don't be like the mother I know who said to her ten-year-old daughter, who was the oldest of five children and from whom the mother needed a little help and cooperation, "Sometimes you act just like a child."

"But Mother, I am," she wisely replied.

A busy parent writes: "One morning I was hurrying my three-year-old's dressing procedure because I had only minutes to spare. In the middle of the commotion and worry, my little girl cleverly enjoyed a little joke of her own about something unrelated to the job at hand. I ignored her fun and indicated my disapproval. . . . Her sweet, thought-provoking response: 'Mommy, don't we even have time to laugh?'"

We all feel the pressures and stress of the sophisticated, fast-paced, complicated, competitive world in which we find ourselves. Not only do we feel it as adults, but the children feel it too. Because of TV, the press, and videos, our children are exposed to adult life very, very early. This makes it doubly important that mothers and fathers consciously strive to make it possible for children to be children before they become adults.

Marjorie Hinckley was a stay-at-home mother in the days when that was the rule rather than the exception. In a very real way she was at the center of family life—usually in the kitchen—for the entire day. Gardening, canning, cleaning, painting, bathing babies, feeding, changing diapers, sorting, cooking, washing, organizing, beautifying, sewing, hugging, listening. That's what she did.

And so in 1955, when she was invited to travel with her husband to prepare for the dedication of the Swiss Temple, it was a big change in routine for Marjorie and the children. The oldest of the five was sixteen, the youngest eighteen months. The absence was to be for six weeks. This may sound like a recipe for disaster, but with her exceptional ability to "mother" even across an ocean, it remains one of the times the grown children like to remember. Her uncanny gifts of nurturing, building, including, and loving came through loud and clear in letters. One of the boys remembers:

Those of us who were old enough to read and remember will never forget her letters. They started to arrive about ten days after our parents had left, and it seems we got either a letter or a series of postcards every day thereafter. They even kept coming for a few days after they returned. Mother told us about the preparations being made for the dedication, the people who were working on the grounds, the flood in the basement, the crisis in the laundry. I will never forget the visual image those letters created in my mind of a land where everything was spotlessly clean, where green grass and flowers grew to the very edge of the roads, where beautiful little chalets lined country roads, and where snow-covered Alps towered majestically above sky-blue lakes and streams. The letters transfixed us, not just with her childlike awe, which was palpable, or with her lifelike descriptions of places and people, but also with her expressions of fondness for us.

Oh, how she missed us, and how proud she was of us! She was the luckiest person in the world, she would write, not just to be experiencing that beautiful country with Dad but because she had such wonderful children at home whom she could hardly wait to see, and in whom she had complete faith and trust. Little did she know that our baby-sitter was not quite as fond of us as our mother was, and we had "given her the weekends off"—which she gladly took! There is much more to that story, but it does not reflect credit on Mother, rather discredit on her offspring.

Marjorie Hinckley's joy in mothering is undergirded by her humility and meekness. Her son Richard remembers this trait in a story he calls "Mothering with Meekness":

Mother was not a strict disciplinarian, nor was she a hard taskmaster. There was plenty of work to do, but she was never very good at getting mad if we approached our tasks with indolence, or even ignored her repeated requests to complete this chore or that. And Mother never swore. And I mean never! Except once.

Kathy and her friend Bobbie Olson were playing at our house. They were about twelve years old. It was a summer day, and they were in and out of the house, racing around acting their age. Mom was trying to tell them something, and they ignored her and were probably a little sassy. They were getting on her nerves, and I remember watching her frustration mount. They were being, in a word, naughty.

Getting nowhere and totally exasperated, Mother finally blurted out, "Damn you girls!" Well, the world might as well have stopped! I was shocked. Kathy was shocked. Bobbie was shocked. Most of all, Mother was shocked. She froze in her tracks, covered her mouth with her hand, and said incredulously, "Oh dear, did I say that?"

Instead of staying mad at the girls, she said, "Oh, I am so sorry I said that. Can you girls ever forgive me? I think I had better go and wash my mouth out with soap!" And she did! That was our punishment if ever we said anything we should not have said, and she wanted to make sure we saw her do the same.

Then she went to her bedroom and sat on the edge of her bed and cried. I felt terrible. Kathy and Bobbie felt terrible. I never heard her swear again.

As Sister Hinckley's children grew and married, she opened her arms to sons-in-law and daughters-in-law with the same acceptance and love she gave her own children. A son-in-law, Jim Pearce, remembers:

Becoming a member of the Hinckley family is not an undertaking that one approaches lightly. It is intimidating. You are facing a father-in-law who is constantly in the company of the brightest and the best and who treasures his daughters and wants the best for them. Could he settle for less? Could he settle for me? Yet, when his daughter and my future wife fell in love with me, I could not pass up the opportunity to give my children such a mother and to enjoy life with such a companion. I went forward with trepidation.

This is where Sister Hinckley came into my life. No one could love a mother-in-law more than I love her. She has always—from my first meeting with her—been completely accepting of me and shown great love. She has always made me feel most welcome, always been supportive and shown great faith in me as I have faced various life choices. She has never been critical. Her happy ways are a delight to be around.

She seemed to believe in me as much as my own mother did, and in my potential to provide a secure, stable, and happy home for her daughter and her grandchildren. That degree of love, trust, and confidence keeps me forever duty-bound to be a better and nobler person than I might otherwise have been.

In the movie Gone with the Wind, Rhett Butler says of Melanie at the time of her death, "She was the only completely kind person I ever knew. A great lady. A very great lady." When I hear those words I always think of my mother-in-law, Marjorie Hinckley.

Kathleen H. Hinckley expresses similar sentiments:

She has been the greatest mother-in-law anyone could ever imagine. She has treated me like one of hers from the very beginning. One of my treasured pieces of jewelry is a beautiful pearl bracelet from her travels to Hong Kong. She gave it to me the first time she came to visit us in New York after Clark and I were married. She told me she had given one to all her daughters many years ago and she had saved this one in anticipation of Clark finding me. "I'm glad he finally did," she concluded.

She has always remembered my birthday with a card expressing her confidence in and her love for me. Often a gift arrived in the mail with some money and a note with strict instructions to buy something I would not otherwise buy for myself.

Sister Hinckley continues to mother her adult children in ways that not only build them but enhance their relationships with one another, as her daughter Virginia describes:

When we lived away from Salt Lake we looked forward to visits from Dad and Mother as they went to and fro on Church assignments. The usual pattern was (if we were on the flight path) to arrange the itinerary to stop in or near our city. Either Dad would stay over one night, taking a flight to Salt Lake in the morning, or we would just take the children and visit at the airport between connecting flights. But Mother would usually stay for a couple of days. You could always count on a boost. She must have been tired, but the conversation never got to that. She would crawl into bed with a child while I put a baby down for the night. I could hear her telling wide-eyed little girls about South Africa, ostrich eggs, azaleas, and the temple that had just been dedicated—and how their grandpa's talks were the very best of all the talks in all the dedicatory sessions!

She'd clean an oven, defrost a refrigerator, shine your kitchen windows, all the while chatting about how wonderful your children were, what a good father your husband was, what nice friends there were in your neighborhood, and what an amazing job you were doing. She was the lifeline between all the members of the family—she told you what was happening at Clark's house, where she'd been a few weeks before. How precociously funny his children were, how gracious and amazing his wife was. About Alan's new job, Kathy's church calling. Jane's new boyfriend. Dick and Jane's new baby. That Dad was proudly telling someone the other day about you and your family. We got those messages through Mother—unabashed, face-to-face praise was never Dad's style.

She was our connector during the early busy family years when we didn't have enough time to write frequent letters or enough money to call long distance. She'd listen to us worry about this child and that, and somehow after we had explained all our frustrations and fears, they were gone. We knew that she'd go home and keep thinking about it for us! And sometimes there'd be a reassuring call or a letter days later: "I've been thinking about ______. You know, I don't think it's a problem. She's going to be okay."

Sister Hinckley's mothering extended beyond her immediate family. A nephew, Scott Wadsworth, shares an experience:

On August 20, 1957, at the age of nine, I had the misfortune of breaking my wrist while playing on the chicken coop in the back corner of our large lot in the little town of Panaca, Nevada.

Mother and Aunt Bea drove me to the hospital in nearby Caliente. The doctor, recognizing a compound fracture that he couldn't treat, gave me something for the pain, and as soon as Dad got home we were off to Salt Lake City to the LDS Hospital.

After surgery and six days in the hospital, my mother, President Hinckley's youngest sister, arranged for me to stay at Aunt Marge and Uncle Gord's house so that she and Dad could go home to care for their other nine children.

Looking back, I am sure that Aunt Marge did many things during this period that would not have normally been on her busy schedule. She was unselfishly kind and caring and made me feel like part of the family. She helped me to cope with homesickness and took me to many doctor appointments. I remember that after each doctor visit, she would take me and whichever of her children were with us to Snelgrove's for ice cream.

At the end of two weeks, while I was visiting the doctor, without warning to either Aunt Marge or myself he rebroke my arm like you would a piece of firewood. It was terribly painful. That night Aunt Marge kept a constant vigil over me as though I were her own son. The next morning she was the one to take me back to the LDS Hospital for another surgery. And then back to her home to recover again.

Over that several-week period, I learned to love the Hinckley family, especially sweet Aunt Marge, who had become my second mother.

Russell Osguthorpe, who grew up next door to the Hinckleys, also saw Sister Hinckley as a second mother:

For the first nine years of my life the Hinckleys were my next-door neighbors. When my family moved a few miles away, the Hinckleys still seemed like neighbors because I spent so much time with their son Clark. Their home was a place where any child would have felt safe, a place where everyone was accepted, a place where creativity and initiative were encouraged. When Clark and I wanted to make some money selling Kool-Aid, increase our collection of discarded license plates, or fly a kite in the field that adjoined the Hinckleys' property, Sister Hinckley would always give us the help we requested. If we needed a ride, she would go immediately in search of a pillow for the car seat—she was too short to see over the steering wheel—and her glasses. Neither of these was ever easy to find.

When it came time to plan the program for my missionary farewell, I asked Sister Hinckley if she would be the featured speaker. With a smile, she unhesitatingly responded, "Gordon would be happy to speak at your farewell." With a little more resolve, I responded, "But I'm asking you to speak." She told me that she would think about it, but that her husband would be the better choice. The next day she agreed to speak at my farewell.

She began her talk on that Sunday evening in 1966 with a smile in her voice as she said: "Russell has been in our home so much with our children that sometimes as I've been tossing the orders and chastisements about, I've had to remind myself that I was not his mother."

She went on to describe the kind of relationships that developed among children and parents in our neighborhood: "For something like fifteen years the Osguthorpes' kitchen door and our kitchen door were separated by a driveway and a huge box elder tree. These were wonderful years, and years that are becoming more precious to us as time passes. There were summer nights filled with children playing Run, Sheepy, Run and Kick the Can. There were green apples, bee stings, and secret hiding places in the hollow. There were vegetable gardens whose peas never reached the kitchen and irrigation water that had to be held back or coaxed forward. But most of all, in that neighborhood, there was love. And it was a love we didn't have to talk about; it was just there."

As I reflect on those days, I am convinced that Sister Hinckley was one of the primary reasons we experienced the love she described. She would never have taken any credit for it. She just saw herself doing what the Lord had called her to do: be a good wife and mother. But in the process of carrying out what some see as menial tasks of parenthood, Sister Hinckley nurtured more than her own children.

Kathy Bagley Garff, another neighbor, remembers a precious—if difficult—learning experience:

When I was a young girl I remember sleeping out in the backyard regularly with the neighbor kids. One morning very early, we all decided to help ourselves to Obert and Grace Tanner's cherries, just waiting to be picked and enjoyed. We quietly climbed the tree and overindulged ourselves. After all, there were plenty of cherry trees in their back garden, and we knew how good those cherries would and did taste! Before the dawn fully ascended, we went running into our homes, our stomachs unable to handle the fresh fruit. We were sick all morning, and when our parents found out what we had done, we had to apologize personally to the Tanners and promise never to help ourselves again. Grace Tanner said we could have all we wanted, but just needed to knock on the door and ask! (It was so simple.) But to add insult to injury, my mother decided it would be a good idea for me to go to work for the Hinckleys and pick cherries for them, earn money, and repay the Tanners. So she took us down to the Hinckleys' orchard, and my "pals" and I went up to the Hinckley door and asked if we could have a job picking cherries.

Little did we know that this was a serious fruit farm. President Hinckley (who was always "President Hinckley" to me because he was our stake president) led us out into the orchard and to the trees. We worked all morning and, of course, we weren't even tempted to eat the cherries. All of the Hinckley kids were there as experienced workers, but I had no experience! Sister Hinckley provided drinks and respite to those of us who were not faring so well. After a morning of work, President Hinckley inspected our cherries. My buckets were full, but the stems were not attached. President Hinckley explained to me that this was not acceptable, and that I would have to grab the cherries by the stem and pull from the stem. He said he couldn't sell the cherries that were stemless—too juicy—and I probably should take these cherries home. Now, that was not good. That wasn't what I wanted to hear. Not only did I not want any more cherries, but my morning of hard work was in vain. Instead of earning money, I owed the Hinckleys money! We were only paid for "approved" buckets.

I must have looked very forlorn, because I remember Sister Hinckley at that moment coming over to me, putting her arm around me, and offering me a drink under a shaded tree. I've always thought her face looked like an angel's, but definitely that morning it looked much more so. Because of her nurturing, I was able to continue picking on other mornings to earn enough money to counter my mischief.

Pak Byung Kyu, an early member of the Church in Korea, reflects on the motherliness of Sister Hinckley toward the members:

As far as I remember, Sister Hinckley acted quietly, always with a smile on her face. She looked like a mother or grandmother who always takes tender care of us with love. She makes us comfortable, like my mother. I got an impression that she and President Hinckley are one, well harmonized. She always seems to support President Hinckley quietly and tenderly with beautiful harmony.

Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi was another of the early Asian Saints who responded to Sister Hinckley's motherliness. He describes his first memory of her:

November 20, 1962, when I was a young missionary in Fukuoka, Japan, I attended a zone conference presided over by Elder Gordon B. Hinckley. I was the only Japanese missionary. We met from early morning until afternoon. Then the sacrament was passed and we had a testimony meeting presided over by Elder Hinckley.

I remember very vividly and clearly, as though it were yesterday, that Sister Marjorie Hinckley stood up to bear her testimony. In her testimony she said, "Heavenly Father loves you; Jesus Christ loves you; and your parents—they love you so much. And, we love you." She gave us more words at that meeting. I could not understand English at that time, but my companion translated her words for me. Sister Hinckley asked all the missionaries to make sure that we wrote home regularly.

I grew up in a single mother's home. My father died during World War II, and my mother was not a member of the Church. But because of Sister Hinckley's words, I decided that day that I would write at least every month and tell my mother how much I loved her and how much I enjoyed serving as a missionary for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Making that decision blessed both my mother and me.

I felt a tremendous motherly love from Sister Marjorie Hinckley. I felt her tremendous spirit that day. I thanked the Lord that I had the privilege to meet such a sweet, pure, sincere, beautiful lady in the Church. This caused me to love my own mother more and now also my sweet companion.

Since then I have had the privilege to be with Sister Hinckley many times. But, in fact, the memories and feelings I had in that missionary meeting long ago have never left me.

Patricia P. Pinegar, Primary General President, also describes Sister Hinckley as "motherly":

I became acquainted with Marjorie Hinckley through the eyes of her daughter Virginia Hinckley Pearce.

I was called to serve as second counselor in the Young Women General Presidency in March 1992. Sister Janette Hales Beckham was called to serve as president, Virginia as first counselor, and Carolyn Rasmus was the administrative assistant. Occasionally in our presidency meetings we would share our love and, at times, our concerns for our dear family members. It was through this sharing that I grew to love Marjorie Hinckley. Virginia always spoke of her with such tenderness and love.

One spring day, while Sister Beckham was in a meeting, Virginia, Carolyn, and I went for a walk. We stopped at a shop that was displaying denim hats with sunflowers on them. Feeling in a carefree mood, we each purchased a hat. As we walked back to the office, Virginia suggested we stop by and say hello to her mother. We donned our hats and rang the doorbell. She was delighted to see us, invited us in, exclaimed over our hats, took our pictures, and asked what we girls were up to.

Everything Virginia had told us about her was true. Marjorie Hinckley is warm and quick-witted. She is genuinely interested in each individual she meets. She is unpretentious and just plain good. The highest compliment I could give her would be that she is motherly, a word that embodies all that is good in a woman.

Like that of mothers everywhere, Marjorie Hinckley's compassion constantly reaches out to all children. A daughter-in-law remembers a conversation:

One morning I called to see how Grandma was doing and she said, "I was doing my housework and I felt depressed. I thought, 'Why am I feeling so depressed?' Then I remembered the sad news I had just read about the airline crash. Imagine the grief of all those families. Imagine the children left without fathers and mothers."

Sister Hinckley's philosophy of mothering and homemaking shines clearly in a speech she gave to a group of women:

We have a lot to learn about simplifying our lives. We have to decide what is important and then move along at a pace that is comfortable for us. We have to develop the maturity to stop trying to prove anything, to be what we are. With all of these decisions we have three responsibilities:

We have a great responsibility to our husbands. I know it is hard to believe, but almost before you can turn around the children will be gone and you will be alone with him. You had better be sure that you are developing the kind of love and friendship that will be delightful and enduring. Let the children learn from your attitude that he is important. Encourage him. Be kind. It is a rough world, and he, like everyone else, is fighting to survive. Be cheerful. Don't be a whiner.

We have a great responsibility to our children. Find joy in them. Don't overschedule them or yourself. You may not be able to take them on exotic vacations. It doesn't matter. When the day dawns bright and sunny, take an excursion to the canyon or park. When it's cloudy and wet, read a book together or make something good to eat. Give them time to explore and learn about the feel of grass and the wiggliness of worms.

Now to our homes. Your home is your own private temple. Keep it clean. Put something beautiful in every room for your family to look at. Create a feeling of order and spirituality. Your home can be beautiful without being elaborate or expensive. I once went tracting with a sister missionary in Hong Kong. We entered the door of a resettlement flat. It was small: four bunk beds, no closets. All the clothes and belongings were stacked neatly on the beds. There was one low table with low stools and an ugly black stove that burned oil. And then my eyes fell on a vase of artificial flowers on a high shelf just under the ceiling. I was touched by that woman's desire for beauty.

As you create a home, don't get distracted with a lot of things that have no meaning for either you or your family. Don't dwell on your failures, but think about your successes.

Have joy in your home. Have joy in your husband. Have joy in your children. Be grateful for the journey.
