Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Chapter Four

Optimism

"Do What Needs to Be Done, When It Needs to Be Done, with a Cheerful Heart"

Sister Hinckley loves to tell about her great-grandmother Charlotte Hyder Evans, who did nothing spectacular in her life, but simply "did what needed to be done, when it needed to be done, and did it with a cheerful heart." Charlotte's great-granddaughter is a master at doing the same.

Consistently positive, cheerful, and optimistic, Marjorie has an ability to see the good in any situation—and to see it instantly—that makes Pollyanna look like an amateur! The cup is never half-empty, always almost-full or about-to-be-full. With this optimism comes a willingness to be flexible and adaptive, to not overreact to daily irritations. Her basic philosophy is that things always work out somehow.

Shortly before we were to be married, Gordon called and said, "I think we had better go to lunch today." So we did and he said, "I think you should know that I only have $150 to my name." Well, $150 sounded like a small fortune to me. I had hoped for a husband and now I was getting $150 too! I said, "Oh, that will work out just fine; if you've got $150, we're set!"

The following excerpt from a family letter demonstrates Sister Hinckley's example of "doing what needs to be done, when it needs to be done, and with a cheerful heart":

I have been working in the yard (11 hours on Friday). Then went to Jane's until 10 o'clock Saturday night to help her prepare and serve the food and back to the yard for about 7 hours Monday and then to Mother's Monday night for yard clean-up at her place. About 30 posterity showed up and it was a smashing success. The men brought a truck and cleaned up the yard, while the women worked in the house. Dorene made a freezer of homemade ice cream and the little ones had a ball running around with their little rakes and shovels. However, as a result of all this physical activity, when my obligation at Relief Society was over yesterday I bit the dust. I had planned to whip into my long-neglected house, but I got on the sofa and sat there like a zombie. I was bone weary. But after a good night's rest I am fit again and have already done a good-size wash and dug three flats of strawberries and taken them to the neighbors, and since Mrs. LeFevre is coming on Friday to clean the house, I am going back to the yard work. My problem is that I would rather play in the mud than do housework.

P.S. Tomorrow I will be downtown to meet Mother so will take care of your errand at Deseret Book. The other request I will try to get to on Sunday.

Another family letter describes her unquenchable cheerfulness—even about her own failures:

I have a new project, one chapter a day from each of the standard works. I have been on it for four days and am only three days behind. Better to have tried and failed than never to have tried.

Janet Lee, wife of the late Rex E. Lee, former president of Brigham Young University, remembers an occasion when Sister Hinckley's optimistic outlook changed her own perspective:

Several years ago, during the Christmas season, President and Sister Hinckley came to BYU for a musical event. Before the program, there was a buffet dinner, and at one point while the men were away from our table, the women began to talk about the frustrations of getting ready for Christmas. Our conversation focused on the fact that everything about the season was becoming a burden for women. We bear the responsibility of selecting gifts, organizing social events, preparing everyone's favorite food, and making certain that family, guests, and even the less fortunate have a merry Christmas. We felt overwhelmed if not resentful.

Sister Hinckley listened patiently, and then without the slightest edge of criticism in her voice said, "I love Christmas. It is the most joyful of all seasons. I love seeing the eyes of little children light up on Christmas morning. I love giving gifts. I love being with my family. We just need to simplify and remember what we are celebrating."

After she had spoken, something magical happened. Our attitudes shifted, and we began to talk about the birth of our Savior and the spirit of giving. In the years that have passed since those words were spoken, a burden has been lifted for me during the holidays. As I shop, prepare food, and join with friends and family to celebrate the birth of our Savior, her words nurture and calm me. "I love Christmas," I hear her say, and I let her teach me to relax and enjoy the season.

Hobie Hinckley, a grandson, remarks on Sister Hinckley's good cheer:

If you're feeling down about anything, it's difficult to stay so for long when you're with her. She has such a contagious smile that cheers you right up. Her laugh and the way she talks about things makes you feel like she sees the bright side of everything.

Jessica Dudley, a granddaughter, agrees:

If you're having a bad day, five minutes with Grandma's never-failing optimism will make you wonder why you were feeling sorry for yourself in the first place.

Another granddaughter, Katie B. Wright, says:

I have never seen Grandma mad or sad. She is always so pleasant and happy. I love her SO much and I am so happy that she is my Grandma!

Roger Dudley, a son-in-law, describes her as the "Ever-Positive, Never-Bad-Day Grandma":

Grandma Hinckley is truly one of a kind. I look forward to Grandma's visits to "the little house" in East Millcreek. She greets us with a warm, friendly smile and "How are you today?" or "What's new in your life?" She listens to the answer and responds as if you and your concerns are all that matter to her. Every day is the "most gorgeous day" or "such a wonderful day." Never a negative, always a positive word from Grandma Hinckley.

On one occasion my wife and I met her parents in New York, where we attended a thrilling 24,000-member meeting at Madison Square Garden. The high point of the two-hour meeting was little Grandma Hinckley standing a tall four-foot-eight (maybe) at the rostrum, peering over the pulpit and saying, "Hello." That simple but love-tendered introduction melted the members in the huge Madison Square arena. From the very start she had them in her hand, and their expressions showed a deep and abiding love for her. Likewise, at a subsequent missionary meeting held at the Manhattan chapel, Grandma Hinckley began with that simple but warm ice-breaker, "Hello, I know you and love you." Instantly every missionary was sitting at the feet of his own grandma. Every word was positive and uplifting, based on a deep sense of love and concern for their well-being.

As we traveled to Salt Lake from New York, I had occasion to watch Grandma Hinckley as she tried to sleep or get comfortable to ease her leg pains. With her eyes closed, often her face grimaced in pain. But when asked about her pain, she said, "It was worth every minute to be with the members and missionaries. It was such a wonderful day." Regardless of the length of the meeting or the car or airplane ride, it is always a wonderful day for Grandma Hinckley.

Duane Cardall, a television reporter, interviewed Sister Hinckley shortly after her husband was ordained President of the Church. He comments on her cheerful support of her husband's grueling schedule:

"Everything is okay" in her mind, even though the couple's schedule of public appearances and frequent travel is extraordinarily challenging, especially for people their age. It is common for the news media and others to comment about the President's grueling schedule "at an age when most men are well into retirement," sometimes forgetting that she is regularly there at his side, supporting him and fulfilling her providential role as the eternal companion to one of God's chosen servants. "Trying to keep up" may be a real concern for a woman in her eighties, simply because of the physical demands of being the wife of the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. But, certainly, she never "just goes along."

"We have a good life," she said as we concluded our television interview. "We love it. We love what we're doing. I wouldn't change a thing. Not a thing."

Barbara Ballard, wife of Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Twelve, has often traveled with the Hinckleys on assignments. She remarks:

I have seen Sister Hinckley when she is very tired during the activities of an assignment overseas and other places. Someone will want to show her something or speak to her. She will perk right up and, with her big smile and twinkling eyes, say, "I'm loving every minute of it." And she is!

Even when expressing honest discouragement, Sister Hinckley is optimistic, and it shows. In a letter to a daughter who was moving to a new home out of state, she wrote:

I was an absolute basket case last night after saying good-bye to Clark and his little family and then saying good-bye to you and yours and leaving you both in overwhelming situations and then to come home to this echoing silence and find the notes left by the girls. It was all too much. To top it off, there was no answer at Dudleys or Pearces and a busy signal at Dick's which lasted the entire night. Either they have left the receiver off or their German guest was spending an evening at home. In desperation I called Evelyn just to tell someone that I was home, but she had taken Amy and all her little friends to the cabin for the night. I finally got Aunt Ruth and she was a sympathetic listener while I told her about how cruel life is. Then I felt better. Dad kept assuring me that you are young and that somehow, before too long, you would both be settled into a respectable house and have an interesting lifestyle going. I know it is all true, but yesterday it looked bleak.

I kept thinking yesterday that you are right back where you were when you arrived in Hawaii two years ago, and you came out in beautiful style there and you will do the same in Chicago—it is just that the pattern is becoming monotonous. It is like climbing a mountain and as soon as you reach the top you get knocked back down to the bottom to climb it again, but I guess the fun is in climbing and not in arriving.

Steven C. Bennion, president of Southern Utah University, remembers the Hinckleys from his childhood days:

While Marjorie Hinckley would shun adulation or worldly honors, her own optimism, cheerful outlook, and good humor make it difficult to remember anything but these overriding positive traits that have been such a blessing to her family and those around her. She is a joy! She is not a person given to self-pity, even though she could find things to feel sorry about in her condition if she chose to. I never remember that being part of her response to difficulties or challenges.

Augusto Lim, an early Filipino convert, remembers:

Sister Hinckley would go out of her way to shake our hands and embrace us, and she always kissed my wife. She was so easy to be with, so caring and loving and concerned about our mutual friends as well as our own welfare.

Han In Sang, an early member of the Church in Korea, recalls the visits of the Hinckleys during the early 1960s:

We didn't have any decent hotels in Korea so it was a tremendous sacrifice for them [Elder and Sister Hinckley] to come. Sometimes they would sleep at the mission home. We didn't have a boiler system, so we would heat water on a big kettle for them to use. Sister Hinckley never complained. In fact, she made us feel as though what we had to offer was a palace. In return, she always brought several pounds of chocolates to give to the missionaries and members.

Do what needs to be done, when it needs to be done, and do it with a cheerful heart. She preaches what she practices in a note to a granddaughter on the eve of starting junior high school:

Dearest Cede,

Tomorrow you will be starting out to conquer a new world. Tuck this $5.00 in your pocket. You may need a bottle of glue to keep yourself together, or to keep your smile glued on. Good luck! We are so proud of you.

Love,

Grams

Ultimately, Sister Hinckley's advice to college students expresses the way she lives her own life:

Think about your particular assignment at this time in your life. It is to get an education. This is a wonderful assignment. Don't take it lightly. Give it your full heart and energy. Do whatever you have to do this week; do it with all your heart and soul; and do it cheerfully. To do less than this will leave you with an empty feeling.
