Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Chapter Five

Gratitude

"I Don't Know Why I Have Been So Blessed"

I am so grateful for the blessings that I have enjoyed in my life. I do not know why the Lord has been so good to me. I don't know why I have been so blessed. But I do know that the Lord has a right to expect a lot of me. Sometimes the commitment gets a little heavy and sometimes I wonder if I can really do this. Then I think of all that I have been given, and it is easy to get up and do a little something more.

Marjorie Hinckley seems to be missing a piece—a piece we call "entitlement." Her children have always laughed at her motto: "Expect the worst, and if it doesn't happen, you'll be pleasantly surprised!" She has spent most of her life "pleasantly surprised" and incredibly grateful.

Characteristically humble, Sister Hinckley is quick to see her own weaknesses. A pair of family letters give insight into her humble and grateful heart:

Last Thursday at [the General Authorities'] Wives luncheon two of the granddaughters of Susa Young Gates gave a musical skit of her life. She was a prolific writer, do-good-er, organizer, etc., etc., etc. I turned to Sister Kimball and said, "It makes me wonder what I am doing with my life." "You are running to and fro," she quipped. She was right. I am running to and fro and shiver to think that someday I will have to account for the time spent.

Wednesday after work Dad and I came home by way of the grocery store to get some milk. It was six o'clock, the dinner hour. A little boy about eight years old was ahead of me in the line. He meekly pushed a worn and torn food stamp coupon across the counter and said his mother wanted to know if he could get a can of soup with it. The clerk told him that he could not spend a food coupon that had been torn out of the book, and he went away empty-handed. It wasn't until I got out to the car that I realized that perhaps he was actually hungry with no food in the house. It has haunted me ever since. I don't know why I didn't have the presence of mind to take him back in the store and buy him a bag of groceries. Needless to say, I have eaten every meal since with a little more gratitude. Sometimes I forget that everyone does not live so well.

Marjorie often says that whatever is good about her mothering, she learned from her mother. To take care of the "guilt" on Mother's Day, she simply thinks about her own mother and grandmothers with gratitude.

As I see traits of Mother coming out in my children and grandchildren, I am constantly having to say, "Thank you, Mother, for what you were, for your faith which has gone down into the very bones of your posterity."

In her private conversation and public speaking, Sister Hinckley's ever-grateful heart constantly finds expression. The following tender words of gratitude were given to a group of student nurses in 1962:

As I sat through your opening exercises this morning, the beatitude came into my mind that says, "Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled." You are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness or you certainly would not have bothered to come here this morning. You were under no obligation. I love you for coming. Every time I see a group of young people such as you I feel as if I would like to lay the world at your feet if it were in my power to do so. But it is not within my power to give you anything. Only as the Lord blesses this gathering with His Spirit will we gain anything at all by meeting together.

I could not have refused this invitation if I had wanted to when I learned that this was to be a meeting of BYU student nurses. It was six years ago this week that I came to the hospital for a serious operation. For two weeks I was in a fog. Of all the faces that went in and out of my room during those days, the only one that I have any distinct remembrance of was a girl in a blue uniform who said that she was a BYU student nurse. I remember her red hair, and her kindly face, but most of all the compassion and tenderness that I felt in her hands. I knew she was trying to help me. With some of the others I had serious doubts. By the time I was well enough to make her acquaintance she had been transferred. The first day up I wheeled myself to a window at the north end of the corridor, and I saw her leaving this home with a fine-looking boy. She was dressed in her Sunday best. I have often wondered what became of her. One thing I am sure of, that if she pursued her nursing career, she is a very, very good nurse.

Norma Ashton, wife of the late Elder Marvin J. Ashton and longtime friend of Marjorie's, comments:

Her expressions of gratitude and appreciation for the smallest to the greatest deeds of service come from her lips to build and acknowledge love for the givers.

Sister Hinckley suggests that remembering and counting blessings creates happiness:

Last evening we took our children walking around the ski trails in Little Cottonwood Canyon. I began to go over in my mind anything that I could think of that had brought inspiration into my life during the past year. There have been numerous experiences that have filled my heart with gratitude. There have been people I have met who have lifted me to a plane of greater endeavor, books I have read that have left their mark.

It's a valuable exercise to close your eyes every once in a while and think, "What is the most wonderful moment I have lived through during the past year?" I immediately think of two wonderful moments. One is when Evan Harbrecht's beautiful voice filled the Swiss Temple on dedication day with the strains of "Bless This House." Another was just an offhand remark from my nineteen-year-old boy when he said, "Gee, thanks, Mom," as I handed him a freshly ironed shirt. The grand and the simple. They are equally wonderful.

Several years later, Sister Hinckley spoke of the same exercise—looking back and remembering wonderful experiences with gratitude.

I don't know why I have had so many wonderful experiences, but I do know how grateful I am for them. I am especially grateful for all of the temple dedications I've participated in. Those are always wonderful events. One of the most impressive temple dedications that I ever went to was in Peru. I will never forget those beautiful people coming down out of the hills with their black braids down their backs; the women in brilliant, flowered skirts, holding white handkerchiefs in one hand and their temple recommends in the other hand.

So when I go to bed and I can't go to sleep, I don't count sheep; I think of these beautiful experiences that I have had. I am so grateful for each one.

Sister Hinckley admonishes young adults to cultivate a grateful heart:

A grateful heart will give you a touch of refinement that can come in no other way.

I went to high school during the days of the famous Depression. It was a miserable experience. But, in a way, I wish you could have been there with us. Somehow it helped me to appreciate much more the prosperity we now enjoy. I know some of you think you are on a tight budget, and you are. I am glad if you are. But it is a tight budget because you have nothing else to compare with it. It isn't your fault that you have had three square meals a day, most every day of your life. It isn't your fault that you have never been hungry in your life. It isn't your fault that somehow or other you have always been able to get a new pair of shoes, whether you needed them or not. It isn't your fault that you have at least five or six changes of clothing in your crowded closets. But all of this makes it doubly hard for you to be truly grateful.

Has the fear of not being able to get an education ever struck terror into your heart? Probably not, for you knew that somehow or other you would get here and that somehow or other you will stay as long as you so desire, for this is America, where only your own indolence can keep you from the good things of life.

And when you finally develop a little gratitude in your heart, make up your mind to express it. "Appreciation unexpressed is not appreciation." If you can't find someone to say thank you to for something, just take a look at your toothbrush and say, "Thank you for being. You are a wonderful little gadget."

"Thank you" is a wonderful phrase. Use it. It will add stature to your soul. Never let a day go by without saying thank you to someone for something—and especially to your Heavenly Father.

Heidi P. Jenson, a granddaughter, recalls the effects of her grandmother's appreciative attitude:

I never considered my mom's cooking good or bad until Grandma came for dinner one day. "Your mother is such a good cook!" she said. "Oh, this food is delicious." I had to say to myself, "Hmm. This food is pretty good." Grandma is always so appreciative, and it's contagious.

In a 1964 interview with Dorothy O. Rea of the Church News, Sister Hinckley emphasized the importance of gratitude:

It has been a matter of concern to me as I have seen the luxury of America compared to other lands. I have wondered how we can teach gratitude and humility to our American children in the face of such abundance. Perhaps the best way is to be constant in the matter of family prayer.

It is good to kneel as a family and to hear daily expressions of gratitude to our Heavenly Father for the blessings we enjoy. The Lord intended His children to enjoy the good things of life. With all that we have, we must also have grateful hearts. We must teach our children not to take all that they have for granted.

In 1954, she spoke in a sacrament meeting on the same topic:

When I was young, a Sunday School teacher once faced our class and said, "I would like to tell you what I am thankful for. I am thankful for my home. I am thankful that I have a good husband and children. I am thankful that I have enough money for the comforts of life." And many other things she listed. "But most of all," she said, "I am grateful for the trials I have had."

This sounded strange to us young people, but as the years have gone by I have come to know what she meant. For it is the trials of life that make us humble and make us strong. I could list bounteous material blessings that the Lord has showered down upon me in this past year. But I am most grateful of all for the small trials that were mine. I am grateful that the Lord in his wisdom saw fit to deprive me of my health and strength for a sufficient length of time that I came to appreciate what good health means and what joy there is in being able to do a day's honest work. And I have now come to sympathize and understand better the discouragement of the sick among us. I came to know what the love of a neighbor and goodness of a friend can mean in time of need. I am indeed grateful that there have been a few times in my life that I have had to depend entirely on the Lord for my well-being and comfort.

The road has not been paved all the way for any of us. We all have a small place in our hearts where we store our sorrows and disappointments. But are there not days when you are simply overwhelmed with the blessings of the Lord?

It was ever thus. Nephi said it well: "I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents . . . having seen many afflictions in the course of my days, nevertheless, having been highly favored of the Lord in all my days" (1 Ne. 1:1).

I can only thank my Father in Heaven for wonderful and unusual opportunities. I know that where much is given, much is expected. And that is a frightening thought.

Ruth Faust, wife of President James E. Faust and a dear friend and neighbor, comments on Sister Hinckley's constant expressions of gratitude:

In our conversations, Marjorie always acknowledges the blessings of the Lord in her life. She indeed has a grateful heart. Not only is she grateful for the wonderful husband that she married but for her children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren as well. Many times I have heard her mention what a blessing it is for her to meet the devoted Saints all over the world when she travels with her husband. She feels it a great privilege to be a member of this church. She is grateful for her health, her heritage, and for the happiness in her heart.

A letter to a missionary granddaughter just before her release is a final, crowning example of Sister Hinckley's humility and gratitude:

So, time is running out, but you still have your life ahead of you. For me, time is running out—period. And I also have the feeling: what have I done?! There is still so much to do and so little time. I am grateful for every day.
