Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Chapter Six

Enthusiasm for Learning

"Make Life an Adventure"

Make life an adventure. Don't say, "Well, here's another day." Say, "Here's a new day. What have I that I can put into it?"

One of Marjorie Hinckley's most contagious qualities is her boundless fascination with new people, new information, strange sights and sounds. Life is a wonderful adventure to her, and to be in her presence is to suddenly see it all that way.

She is an eager reader. Devouring biographies, great literature, the latest best-seller, or a wonderful new children's book, she always has new ideas to talk about.

When asked in an interview if she ever imagined where her life would take her, Sister Hinckley responded with typical enthusiasm:

I didn't. I was busy getting through today. But I didn't think much about where I was going to go or what was going to happen. I didn't give it a lot of thought. It is amazing. I sometimes have to pinch myself a little, thinking about what I've seen and experienced. It never gets old; I just can't believe what's going on. Every day is so exciting. When you see what's happening with the Church, you just get up thrilled every morning, wanting to shout, "Oh, wow, this is so good!"

Elder Bruce Hafen of the Seventy describes her eagerness for knowledge:

Marjorie Hinckley's outlook is intellectually enlarging. She has actively nourished a lifelong development of her own mind and gifts. She has been an avid reader, always reading to her children and for herself. When one of her children enrolled in a university literature class, she signed up and audited the entire course. For years she has regularly enrolled in LDS institute classes. Her natural gift for writing has produced precious bundles of family letters and biographical sketches.

She is curious, observant, thoughtful, and aesthetically sensitive. She remembers with great appreciation the painting of the boy Jesus her mother placed in her bedroom, where the "first thing I saw each morning was his beautiful face." She admired Camilla Kimball for taking up oil painting at age ninety-two. And she loves recalling that it was the rich voice of John Taylor singing a hymn that attracted her great-grandfather to hear the gospel in England 150 years ago.

Sister Hinckley tells of her own "self-directed" education:

I had hoped to go to the University of Utah. But the year was 1929, "the bottom of the Depression." On the day I registered for classes, I returned home to find that the company my father had been working for as an accountant had gone bankrupt and closed. He was out of work. The next day I withdrew from the university, went downtown, and miraculously secured a job as a secretary. Since college was not an option, I decided, well, if this is my life, I'd better educate myself. And I worked hard at it. I read and I read and I read.

This habit has been a blessing to her posterity, as Jennie H. Soulier, a granddaughter, explains:

Grandma loves to read. When I received my mission call to Rome, she said, "You must read The Agony and the Ecstasy, by Irving Stone. You will love it and appreciate the greatness of Rome even more."

Sister Hinckley admonishes college students to study and learn.

Is it worthwhile to be an excellent student? I think it is. The Lord gave you a brain. He intended that you use it. Most of us never get beyond 30 percent of our capabilities. The thing that motivates me is the knowledge that I am a spirit child of God. Because we are His children, we must resemble our Heavenly Father. Do your best. Learn everything you can. The day may come when you will need it.

Everything you do now is preparing you for something else. Did you know that?

Brother Hinckley studied English at the university. He wondered why. Now he knows. When I was a child my parents had me take elocution lessons. How I hated it. But I believe that largely because of those dreaded lessons, I have been able to stand before thousands of people and speak the thoughts of my heart without shaking to death!

How blessed will your children be if you develop some intellectual curiosity. And you will never be bored. God is what He is because He knows everything. And the beautiful thing about it, and one of the things I love most about the gospel, is that everything we learn we can use and take with us and use again. What a concept!

Celia B. Benson, a granddaughter, remembers:

At my wedding shower Grandma gave me an iron with a card that read, "Happy ironing! The most enjoyable of all household duties. Love, Grandma H." It reminded me of when I was trying to decide on a major in college. Grandma told me to study something other than home economics so that when I was at home doing the ironing I would have something interesting to think about. Now, when I pull my old iron off the shelf and run it over a wrinkled blouse, I think of sonnets and Shakespeare . . . and I think of Grandma and smile.

Sister Hinckley's love of learning endeared her to others of like mind. Steve Bennion, a neighbor, says:

When my family moved to East Mill Creek (in the 1940s) it was part of the beginnings of suburban development in the southeastern part of the Salt Lake Valley. Homes were slowly springing up, closer together than had been the earlier pattern when they were surrounded by farms. Seeking a small farm of his own, my father, Lowell Bennion, moved his family to a four-acre plot adjacent to the Hinckleys' farm. Even though the Hinckley and Bennion homes by street were about three blocks apart, in that setting we were comparatively close neighbors. My mother, Merle Colton Bennion, was not as excited to come to the country, since they were leaving a home across the street from the University of Utah and all of the cultural advantages that this close proximity provided.

One of the very precious silver linings in this move to East Mill Creek for my mother was her new neighbor, Marjorie Hinckley. In her she found an instant friend. They had the common bonds of being young mothers quite removed from shopping and other conveniences. There were no bus lines that far in the country in those days, and generally only one family vehicle.

But even more than these commonalities, in Marjorie Hinckley my mother found someone with many common interests. They both loved to read, and they talked about great books they shared. Her innate curiosity and love of learning never waned.

An excerpt from a 1978 family letter shows Marjorie's enthusiasm for learning as well as her disarming humility:

Am taking another great class at the Institute, but instead of going early in the morning it is at 1:10. Much easier than those early morning classes. The teacher graduated in theater and every class is like a "G"-rated movie. The Ten Commandments was a drag compared to the show he puts on. I must say he makes the Book of Mormon come alive. I can't believe what I miss when I read the scriptures on my own.

Sister Hinckley's letters home to her children were always a detailed and wonder-filled recital of her adventures in the world.

For a place to see [Korea] is a clock stopper. And I guess we looked as curious to them as they did to us. Every time we would stop, a dozen children and old folks would gather around to stare, so everyone was staring at everyone. Their native dress is so different—everything from white blouse pants like the Egyptians to beautiful satin brocade coats worn by the women over six or seven layers of long johns and sweaters and other clothing. Women walking down the streets with big jars of water balancing on their heads, oxen drawing big loads of bricks, men carrying huge pieces of furniture on A-frames on their backs. The whole thing was a sight to behold.

Jennie H. Soulier, a granddaughter, comments on this irrepressible enthusiasm for other places and cultures:

My favorite attribute of Grandma is her enthusiasm for life and for all the different, wonderful people in it. She has made me so excited to learn all about others, and enjoy all the different places there are in the world. It's true! I have loved living in different places and loving the people there, just as she said. And each time I go back to Salt Lake, we always have a wonderful catch-up time on all that is happening.

Sister Hinckley describes her feelings about travel:

Travel is wonderful, but sometimes it gets to be a blur—even gets old. But when you get there with the people, you come alive! The people are so wonderful.

There are so many places and people that I have come to love.

I love Hong Kong. I think Hong Kong is one of the most interesting cities in the world. There are two cultures there—there's the British culture and the Chinese culture—all living together. The city itself, of course, is just fascinating. People live on the street, they cook their meals on the street, they sleep on the street. And you're in it. You don't have to go to their homes, or you don't have to just wonder what it's like in their private lives, because their private lives are on the sidewalk.

I love London, too. It's one of my favorite cities in the whole wide world.

I love to go to Korea, anyplace in Korea. I think it's the people that I love there. We have seen so much history in their country. After the war, the trees were gone. They cut them down to burn in their stoves. They were living in shanties. They would get an old piece of corrugated iron and mount it up to make four walls. They are great people—so resilient.

I love to try new things. Including food. But I have never acquired a taste for kim-chee. It's the only food that I've ever run into that I couldn't enjoy. I told that to one of the Korean members, and he said: "Well, it's just as good as your blue cheese dressing." Maybe so!

Maxine Grimm, a longtime friend who lived in the Philippines during the early days of the Church there, describes Marjorie's enthusiasm:

I well remember Marjorie Hinckley's early visits to the Philippines. One day I took her to a very typical Philippine market. It was all under one roof and housed everything from live chickens, pigs, and fish to rice, corn, vegetables, raw sugar, exotic fruits, pots, pans, dishes, linens, embroidered tablecloths, crocheted articles, and so on. It is unbelievable the things you can find. I loved Marjorie's reaction—she squealed as an eel slithered out of its basket and a boy went racing after it—she returned smiles to the many vendors who recognized us as potential customers—"Mum, we have special new cloth, you see"—and she bargained right along with me for a tablecloth. Filipinos love to bargain and are even known to bargain away their profit. Marjorie bought a tablecloth, which she says she still uses on special occasions, and other articles for gifts for her family. We left dripping with perspiration but laughing, and Marjorie commented that this was the first time she had ever been in a market with live chickens.

Postcards to grandchildren were filled with the excitement of new places and people.

Heidi P. Jenson, a granddaughter, has other pleasant memories of her grandmother's travels:

As children, we loved to visit Grandma after she had been on a trip. We would run into her bedroom and she would throw open her suitcase. And then the little presents would flow: peanuts and eyeblinders and winged pens—oh, the delights!—small toothbrushes, combs, mouthwash, and soap. Then we would follow her into the family room, where she would be telling our mothers every detail of the meetings, the sights, and the people. I've been over the world and back through Grandma's stories.

Another granddaughter, Angela B. Folsom, describes how Grandma Hinckley's enthusiasm for faraway places has blessed her own life:

Several years ago my husband was asked by his company to move to Tokyo, Japan. Although my husband had served a mission in Japan, we had never talked of the possibility of someday moving there. While we were prayerfully deciding if this was right for our family, I had many personal questions of my own: How would I communicate? Could I be happy in such a foreign country? Could I adjust to the culture? Most of the questions I couldn't answer, but as we made the decision to move, I realized I was more excited than frightened. Yes, it was a frightening experience I had ahead of me, but all my life I had heard fascinating stories of the Saints in Asia, and I was excited to become a part of it.

One of my vivid memories is of going to Grandma and Grandpa Hinckley's as a child during general conference weekend. The house was always full of Saints from all over the world. Grandma opened her home to those people, and they had wonderful reunions. I remember one Chinese lady (I think from Hong Kong) in particular who visited quite often. She always made egg foo yong in Grandma's kitchen, and I couldn't figure out why it never tasted like the "Americanized" Chinese food from our favorite Chinese restaurant.

Grandma always had wonderful Asian souvenirs in her home. The Japanese rice bowls, the Taiwanese bamboo plates, the Philippine shell placemats were all things I considered treasures. Certainly there was a mystique about the countries from which such wonderful things were acquired. Along with the tangible objects were the stories she shared of the wonder of these countries and the faithful Saints living there. She broadened my horizons and made the world a much smaller place through her stories. Through the stories of her travels, she brought the world into focus.

Thus, when I thought about the idea of living in Japan, it didn't seem so foreign to me. There was a familiarity in it. I felt like I knew something of the country already.

We have now had the opportunity as a family to travel to many of the Asian countries I heard so much about as a child. I now have my own set of Japanese rice bowls, Philippine shell placemats, and Hong Kong pearls. These treasures remind me of Grandma and her love of both the countries and, more especially, the people around the world.

Jessica Dudley, a granddaughter, recognizes that same quality of love:

There is a sparkle of magic that glows from Grandma. It is a love of life, a love of people, a love of the gospel. It is wonderful, almost mystical. It is natural for her, but feels anything but natural to the rest of the world. Grandma shares her magic with everyone, while at the same time, she makes you feel like you are the special one she chose to share it with.

Learning, growing, and loving have been lifelong pursuits for Marjorie Hinckley. Her encouraging advice to a group of students bespeaks her own commitment to intellectual interests:

When I was a young girl I read the autobiography of Benjamin Franklin. It affected me greatly. It is a book about goals. Whether or not Mr. Franklin actually carried out in detail all the ways of living that he listed is not important to me. The inspiring thing to me was that early in life he decided on some goals. They were specific. Somehow I have the feeling that life is so short that unless we begin now to organize and plan, it is going to slip away in bits and pieces with nothing ever realized.

What a world to live in! Never has there been so much to read just to keep up on world affairs. Never has there been so much to learn. Never has there been so much music to listen to. When I was in high school there used to be a ward dance every Thursday night. We walked to the church and when we turned the corner on 8th East we could hear the orchestra and we would break into a run, so excited were we to hear the music. It was just about the only music we heard from Thursday to Thursday, outside of the two or three phonograph records we owned—one of Caruso and the other a violin solo by Kreisler. Now I move from room to room in our small home, and I can hear music from every corner. What a world!

I remember a day when one of my sons read seven history books for a test in history. For three or four days preceding the test he neglected every other facet of his life preparing for the test. He went to the test in full confidence. He knew all there was to know about the history of the U.S. from 1914 to 1945. That afternoon he came home with that dazed after-test look in his eyes. "How could it be, Mother? I knew enough on the subject to write a book, but still there were things on that test I didn't know. How much is there to learn in this world? Do you think anyone will ever learn all that he needs to know?" My only answer to that is that it is a good thing eternity is a long time.

When my second son was in high school he came rushing into the house from school one day and said, "Hey, Mom, I learned the neatest thing today. Watch this." His chalk flew across my kitchen blackboard as he worked out a problem in trigonometry. "Did you know that trig is the only branch of math about which you can learn everything there is to know?" he said. Praise be to a teacher who had aroused such a curiosity in a boy that for one brief moment, at least, he was on fire.

Sometimes I think this is what makes the difference between a good student and a poor one. Just a little curiosity. If you have it, cultivate it—hold fast to it. Never let it go. If you do not have it—get it. It is just that simple.

The rewards for intellectual curiosity are many.

The world will always be your pumpkin, full of magic, full of wonder.

You will be interesting to your friends, to your husband, and a joy to your children.

You will have perpetual youth.
