Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Chapter Eight

A Listening Friend

"How Are You, Really?"

One of the qualities of a true friend is the ability to listen, to communicate on a more meaningful plane than the superficial, "How are you?" level. When Marjorie Hinckley asks how you're doing, she really wants to know. One of her daughters-in-law explains:

When I was a young mother with four children ages four and under and a young busy bishop for a husband, Clark's parents would call every Sunday. I was always amazed at how they remembered the seemingly insignificant details of our life and asked the progress of each one of our projects with interest and concern. From spreading a truckload of dirt to getting our car repaired, they cared. But what I loved even more than the Sunday call was the phone call on Monday morning when Clark's mother would say, "Now, let's have some girl talk." She wanted to know how I was really doing and how I really felt about all that was going on in our busy lives. I could always expect that she would listen without judgment. She never interrupted with answers or anecdotes.

One time she said, "You must be climbing the walls with all those sick children, all these weeks, twenty-degree weather, and no family near." Whatever sense of discouragement or loneliness I might have felt fled at that moment of being understood. She didn't have Pollyanna answers or a set of instructions. She simply communicated that she knew how I felt. I could increase in capacity and stature, because I was understood. What a friend! Long before psychologists wrote books on "validation," she had a natural knack for listening with love and responding with understanding.

Maxine Grimm, who became a friend to Sister Hinckley in the early 1960s in the Philippines, says:

I particularly remember one luncheon when Marjorie and I ate alone in our home in Manila. Marjorie asked me many questions and I just unburdened myself of all my problems. In her sweet, quiet, and concerned way, she allayed all my fears, restored my faith, and put me back on track. What a tremendous relief to find peace through such a dear friend.

Barbara Smith, former General Relief Society President, speaks of Sister Hinckley's wonderful ability to be a friend—even to her own family members:

I appreciate an experience I had with Sister Marjorie Hinckley when she came with her family to the Far East. Given the opportunity to choose how she would like to celebrate her fiftieth wedding anniversary, she expressed a long-held desire to be together in the Orient with her five children and their spouses. Each family planned and saved, and her wish became a reality.

My husband, Douglas, was then serving as president of the Asia area of the Church. Although I had known Sister Hinckley before, watching her as she managed this group with her skillful but loving hand was to see her in a different perspective. She was mother, wife, mother-in-law, but first and always she was a friend to each person. The group seemed to grow closer with every excursion they took. In her humility and common touch with people, including her own family, I saw her give people a sense that if she feels they have worth, maybe they do.

I like to remember a scene in the Salt Lake Tabernacle the night of a general Relief Society meeting. President Hinckley was at the podium giving an address, and on the front row of the center section sat Sister Hinckley surrounded by daughters and granddaughters. Seeing her sitting there close to her girls and looking into the face of her husband as he spoke, to me pronounced her priorities—the things, the people that mattered the most to her. I felt that she was securing for time and beyond those relationships that are dearer than life yet are sometimes not given first place in our lives.

On yet another occasion, she was asked to speak at the fiftieth anniversary of the East Mill Creek Stake, in the area where they had lived for many years and where her husband had served as stake president. In her half-joking way she is reported to have said, "I hope you like me, because if you do not it is your fault. You've made me what I am." Not only is that charmingly put and effective but it also speaks some wisdom. It is the basis for thoughtful consideration we might all undertake about the influence we have as Church members on those around us in our wards. How do we treat one another? Do we include others, admire and praise them whenever we can to encourage goodness? Are we their friends?

When I saw the Hinckley family in faraway China, it didn't matter whether their relationship was a mother to child, in-law to in-law, or husband to wife, the happiness in that family came about because they were all friends. We do not need to travel as far as China to see that kind of love at work; it is a method meant for any who will believe in its power. I have found that it translates very well and it starts with trying.

Ruth Faust, wife of President James E. Faust, has observed and been a recipient of Sister Hinckley's wonderful powers of friendship.

I first became acquainted with Sister Marjorie P. Hinckley about forty years ago when our husbands were counselors to the stake presidents in neighboring stakes. Over the years I have watched her with great interest and admiration. I have learned much by observing her interactions with people. Whether it be a stranger, acquaintance, family member, or intimate friend, everyone is treated with great respect and sincere interest. She quickly finds a common thread for friendship, making everyone feel good after passing her way.

Through the years our paths have crossed more frequently, and I have treasured my association with her. Wives of the General Authorities have a great love and respect for Marjorie's openness and her common touch for making everyone feel comfortable around her. Her sense of humor is sometimes very disarming. Marjorie is always herself—very natural and sincere.

Marjorie has so many qualities that I admire, such as warmth, friendship, and the common touch. She also possesses a wonderful mind of great capacity. She's the perfect example of how a woman in her position should be. I cannot overstate the influence for good Sister Hinckley has been on the many lives she has touched.

George H. Durham II recalls the friendship between the Hinckleys and his parents:

My sisters—Carolyn W. D. Person and Doralee D. Madsen—and I have had the special privilege of being witnesses to the lifelong friendship between President Gordon B. Hinckley and our father, G. Homer Durham (1911-1985). One of the great dividends of that relationship was the friendship that developed between Sister Hinckley and our mother, Eudora Widtsoe Durham (1912-1995). Because of this friendship, Sister Hinckley accepted our invitation to speak at the funeral of our mother. She began by saying:

"Our friendship began years ago when she fell in love with Homer Durham, and I fell in love with Gordon Hinckley. These two young men were such fast friends that we knew that in order to endure it we would have to love each other. And how easy that came, like breathing in and breathing out."

Sister Hinckley's concluding words continue to comfort us as she testifies of friendship, love, the reality of the Resurrection, and of eternity:

"In the passing of Eudora I feel a void and a loneliness, for I have lost a friend. . . . Every conversation I have had with Eudora during the last few years ended the same way, by one of us saying: 'I love you,' and the other one saying 'I love you too.' These were not empty words, they were words of intense and deep feelings.

"There were many short separations in our lives as Homer and Eudora moved about during his illustrious career. But temporary separations had no effect on our close relationship. Distance means absolutely nothing. And so it is with this separation; our love for each other remains intact.

"So, I say again, as I have on so many other occasions: 'Good-bye, Eudora, I'll see you soon. I love you.'

"How grateful I am for the gospel and for the assurance that friendships are eternal."

Throughout her unique and remarkable life, Marjorie Pay Hinckley has represented many admirable things to many people, but to us she will always be our mother's friend.

Barbara Ballard, wife of Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Twelve, comments on Sister Hinckley as a friend:

Sister Hinckley is like a human magnet who draws people to her. Whenever she enters a room, she brightens it because of her cheery presence. She has such a caring way about her that she makes each individual feel as though she were a personal friend whom she would help in any way she could. This was very evident in my first close association with her. I was asked to serve on a committee with her shortly after my husband was called to be a General Authority. I was a bit overwhelmed by my assignment. Sister Hinckley was sensitive to my situation and feelings. She was tender and understanding and so helpful. I will always remember her for that.

Gerry Avant of the Church News staff describes her gratitude for the friendship and validation she has received from Sister Hinckley:

I've been acquainted with Sister Hinckley for about twenty-five years—ever since I started working at Church News—and have always been impressed with the concern and interest she has for me. In the mid-1970s, my father had a stroke that left him paralyzed and unable to speak. I worried constantly about him and traveled home to Georgia as often as I could to be with him and to help my mother, who had undertaken caring for him full-time. I don't remember when I told Sister Hinckley of my father's condition, but she never failed to inquire about him. "And how is your mother?" she would ask; she always expressed admiration for my mother's commitment to care for my father.

My father died in 1984. Since then, my mother has had problems with her health, especially during the past few years. I don't think there has been a single time that I've been in Sister Hinckley's presence that she has not asked, "How is your mother? Is everything okay with her?" Quite often she says, "Give your mother my love." Sister Hinckley acts as though she and my mother are longtime friends! That has given me so much comfort.

Rewarding though my job is, it sometimes becomes quite difficult and physically challenging. I've been sort of a pioneer—the first woman on the Church News staff to travel extensively on assignments. I've always felt that I've had to prove that I can do the job and do it as well as the men on the staff, so I've been extremely reluctant to admit that any task is too difficult, or to take time off to rest when I am tired or even sick while on assignments.

I get particularly tired hauling around camera equipment day in and day out, toting it along with my carry-on bag to and from and through airports.

For some reason, it seems to make things easier when someone else acknowledges that I'm working hard and under difficult circumstances. From time to time, Sister Hinckley has commented on "that heavy camera bag." A few times, she has lifted it just to see how heavy it was and turned to others saying, "Feel how heavy that bag is. She carries that thing all over the place!" After such "fussing over," it has seemed much easier to pick up the bag and carry on.

Colleen Maxwell, wife of Elder Neal A. Maxwell of the Twelve, remembers:

I learned a sweet lesson from Sister Hinckley when she went out of her way to encourage a sister who had experienced a difficult family stigma along with disapproval from many. I watched Sister Hinckley as she befriended this sister and took her under her wing. All who saw her love and concern were touched by her example.

Sister Hinckley always seems to understand how people feel, whether they are family members or brand-new acquaintances. In 1996, the Riverton Wyoming Stake held dedicatory services for monuments built to remember the tragedy of the handcart companies in the winter of 1856. There was more than one monument and more than one meeting and certainly more than one speech. Katrina Glenn (age ten) hadn't met Sister Hinckley before that day, but when asked what the best part of the day was, she said:

The best experience that day was when Sister Hinckley held my hand for one whole minute. She said to me, "After all those meetings you have come here to listen to another one. Do you think you can make it?"

Laura Willes, a niece, describes one particular trait that she loves about Aunt Marge:

We all appreciate her well-developed ability to pay attention to the individual and to listen from the heart. When she looks you in the eye and says "How are you?" she really wants to know and listens with keen attention, sympathy, and understanding. It is always satisfying to be singled out by Aunt Marge because you know that she really cares and is interested in everything you have to tell her.

Kathleen H. Barnes, a daughter, relates a childhood memory of her mother's loving attention to and interest in individuals:

Brother Stange was our ward custodian. He lived in a little house near the church. He was a German immigrant, and his thick accent and strong opinions greatly intimidated me. The church was his castle, and he took great ownership and pride in it. This could be frightening for a child who might have dropped a gum wrapper in the hall or been found running down the ramp toward the basement classrooms. You didn't want him to open your classroom door and see you tilting back on your chair! He was not the least bit shy about lecturing you on your responsibility to keep the ward house clean and in good repair.

You didn't want to run into Brother Stange on Saturday night after the ward show. Popcorn on the cultural hall floor was not exactly his idea of preparing the building for the Sabbath. It always seemed to me that he was a child's worst enemy.

I guess that is why I could never figure out why Mother liked him. Each week after Primary she would take me by the hand and we would walk across the church grounds to visit Brother Stange. The protection of her presence allowed me the chance to see Brother Stange as a person. We would often find him sitting at his table eating raw hamburger filled with chopped onions—a dish he learned to like in the "old country." In fact, Mother would sometimes make a special trip to the butcher to buy high-quality ground beef for this man. There, in his own home, Brother Stange's demeanor was kind and humble and he always thanked us for our visit.

As we walked home, Mother would express appreciation for this "good man" and lament that he was without the companionship of family and had few friends.

Mother has an ability to see beyond the exterior and look into people's hearts.

Phyllis Duncan, a childhood friend, describes Marjorie's early intuitive gift for friendship:

When Marge and I were about ten or eleven years old, it became the "in" thing that Christmastime to have a brown wool skirt and a red rouge-neck (pullover) sweater, to be topped with a wide-brimmed brown beaver hat. Wanting to be right up with the styles, Marge and I ordered said outfits as our main Christmas gift from Santa. And of course, we both were very thrilled to see them on Christmas morning.

Well, during the Christmas week we decided to go downtown to a movie. In those days it was safe and common for us to ride the streetcar into town, which we planned to do. When Marge came out to meet me, we were both very excited about how terrific we were decked out—except for one thing. Marge was carrying a lovely pair of brown kid gloves, and hurried to explain that her Aunt Francis, who was her mother's sister, and who had a good job and liked to give Marge nice things, had given her this very attractive pair of gloves to go with her outfit. Marge was afraid this might keep us from looking just alike. Very quickly it occurred to her that she should give me one and she would keep one and we each would carry a glove. This seemed a perfect solution, so on we went to catch the bus.

I can still see the amused faces of the other bus riders as they watched Marge and me happily enter the bus in all of our glory, sporting our beautiful new outfits, complete with one glove each.

As I remember, we never again appeared in matching clothes until all five of us girls from the First Ward had matching black-and-white-checked jackets in high school, which was the "in" thing to do at that time.

Then, several decades later, it happened again! I was the ward Relief Society president and had asked Marge to come and speak to my Relief Society. Wanting to look particularly nice for the day, I purchased a brown suit. When Marge came into the room, all eyes turned toward her. We were wearing identical suits! Everyone smiled and we broke into laughter. Marge did nothing until she arose to speak, and then warmly told about how as girls growing up we wanted to have everything alike—the same color, the same style, everything. She pointed out that to see that we had chosen to wear the same outfits that day only made her remember the good times and close friendship of those long-ago years. She succeeded in making what might have been a tense moment into a time for sharing happy memories and strengthening a friendship.

A niece, Beth Lloyd Stettler, tells of a time Aunt Marge gave loving support and a listening ear:

Several years ago our fourth child was born. We were so thrilled to have another healthy baby. A few hours after he was born, the doctors told us that he had a heart defect and was in critical condition. A Life-Flight helicopter was on the way to transport him to Primary Children's Medical Center. This would be the first of several stays at the hospital.

Michael had open-heart surgery on the day that he turned two months old. The normal hospital stay for such a procedure is ten days; Michael exceeded that by about two weeks. It seemed that if something could go wrong, it would with Michael.

This was a very trying time for our young family. Our faith was constantly being tested. We relied heavily on the support of friends and family.

Aunt Marge was one of our greatest supporters. I would receive phone calls from her almost daily during our stay at the hospital. I looked forward to the calls. She gave me the encouragement I needed to face another day of not knowing what would happen next. She listened, and she always seemed to say the things that I needed to hear the most on that particular day. Every call she made would give me the courage to face another day of extreme emotional and spiritual challenges. Even though the calls seldom lasted more than five minutes, they always left me feeling better, renewed my hope, and strengthened my faith. I knew that I could face another problem and go on and be just fine.

Aunt Marge's loving support and listening ear made a very difficult time in my life much easier.

Peggy H. Andersen served with her husband in the Northern Far East Mission during the time when Elder Hinckley supervised the area. She was with Sister Hinckley in numerous missionary report meetings, testimony meetings, district conferences, and servicemen's groups, as well as many informal conversations. She says of Sister Hinckley:

She is undoubtedly the best listener in the whole Church. She never seems to tire of what one has to say, and often asks more questions to keep one going. People were never intimidated by her; rather they were drawn in by her kindness and the interest she showed in them. If anyone needed encouragement, Sister Hinckley was the answer. Missionaries would flock around her just to shake her hand, to have a chance to sit down by her and listen to her humor, or to pour out their hearts to her. I wrote in my journal: "I feel so much better after spending time with Sister Hinckley yesterday."

Rhee Ho Nam, an early member of the Church in Korea, was the beneficiary of Sister Hinckley's attention to and interest in individuals.

Sister Hinckley often accompanied Elder Gordon B. Hinckley to Korea, the "Land of the Morning Calm," during the early sixties. The Church's place in Korea was in its infancy and beset by many difficulties, both inherited and unforeseen. On a national level, the aftermath and the memories of the Korean War were not necessarily explained or comforted away; spiritually, the few of us baptized members in the Church were challenged by inexperience.

President and Sister Hinckley did not simply visit the Saints of Korea. They got to know us and our personal struggles.

One of my unforgettable memories was a conference with President and Sister Hinckley. After the meeting Sister Hinckley turned to me and pointed out one of the sisters chatting some distance away. She asked, with a particularly keen interest, the name of this young woman. I readily replied, "Oh, her name is Youn Soon Park." The readiness of my response was by no means mechanical or formal. I had already noticed Youn Soon in testimony meetings and other church meetings. It was hard not to notice her, not simply for her exquisite beauty, but also for her exemplary and steadfast testimony of the gospel.

Then, to my pleasant surprise, Sister Hinckley went on to confirm and encourage my admiration for Youn Soon. She said, "Youn Soon has a beautiful testimony and never fails to be at a meeting." Her gentle but peculiarly firm observation sealed up my shy streak, and I felt as though I had a thumbs-up from above.

I eventually married this beautiful sister. As I look back at that day now, I see how Sister Hinckley's expressions of real interest in me made a difference.

A nephew, Bryant Wadsworth, tells his story of "How are you, really?"

I went into the mission field an idealist. I thought I knew a lot about missionary work. But in early September 1962, when I arrived in Kyoto, Japan, I realized that day-to-day missionary work was nothing like I thought it would be.

It was hot and muggy. I could not understand the language. And most discouraging of all, missionaries were still mortal beings with jealousies and faults like everyone else.

I was homesick. I struggled along with this kind of discouragement for nearly three months. My only solace was the early morning hours when I was awake alone and could pour out my heart to the Lord in prayer.

Then Elder and Sister Hinckley arrived in the mission. I was thrilled to see Uncle Gordon and Aunt Marge, but it was a little awkward. I didn't want to be conspicuous in my delight and I wasn't sure it would be proper to even hint to those around me that they were more than "visiting authorities" to me. Still, I badly needed private time with them.

The first meeting, which began at 8:00 a.m., lasted until we broke for lunch at 1:00 p.m. Elder Hinckley did some personal interviews during the lunch break, and then we reconvened while he instructed us. He then returned to personal interviews.

I went up to greet Aunt Marge, hoping to get a minute alone with her. She took me aside, and we searched for a place where we could be out of the way and have some privacy. We sat down in the kitchen. She asked me how I was doing. Soon I was dumping into her welcoming lap all of my anxieties, discouragements, and troubles. She listened with sympathy and understanding. We would talk for a minute, and then I would cry for a while and she would cry with me. Then we would laugh because most of the worst of my hard experiences seemed to be over—something I hadn't fully realized until this talk.

I shall never forget how kind and considerate she was. At one point she assured me I would be okay because, she said, "You have faith." This really helped me. I felt if she believed that, then it must be true.

We were occasionally interrupted by someone needing a drink of water or wanting to use the phone. Normally this would have added to my anxiety, but for some reason it didn't bother me at all. I went right on talking, bawling, and laughing. We must have been together for an hour or more.

Time for my interview came. I sat down in the chair across the desk from Elder Hinckley and said, "I have just unloaded all my troubles and thoughts on Aunt Marge. She will tell them to you. I don't need to take the time to repeat them here." We talked about things in general, my health, my self-control, my impressions of Japan, the language and its difficulty, and so on. He encouraged me and then asked if I had any questions. Hesitantly, I asked for a priesthood blessing. The blessing that followed has been a significant guide in my life since that day. I think I would not have been in the right frame of mind to receive this blessing if it hadn't been for the wonderful help I had just received from Aunt Marge.

I came away from this experience a new man. It was the turning point in my mission and in many ways the turning point in my life. Only my own mother could have helped me as Sister Hinckley did.

The typical greeting Marjorie Hinckley gives sincerely to literally thousands of people is: "Hello, my friend." In those three words lie enough acceptance and love to get you through any day. And as she looks you in the eyes, you might find yourself unburdening how you really are!
