Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Chapter Nine

Confidence Builder

"I Just Don't Know How You Do It All! You're Amazing"

Marjorie Hinckley has an amazing way of inspiring confidence in every encounter. To her each person is a constant source of wonder and awe—continually the object of her spontaneous exclamations: "I can't believe how smart you are. I can't believe how good you are! I can't believe that you can really do that! Aren't you something!" These phrases are so simple, but so completely sincere—without guile, and certainly devoid of any attempt to manipulate. They aren't even meant to manipulate you into being better. But better is what you want to be. Universally, every person walks away standing a little taller and thinking: "Maybe she's right. I must be a pretty good person—definitely above average—and it's amazing how many things I can do. In fact, I think I'll go do some more good things!"

Virginia H. Pearce, a daughter, describes her mother's encouraging words:

In 1993, as a member of the Young Women General Presidency, I was assigned to speak in general conference. It would be a great understatement to say that preparing a talk for that setting is intimidating. It is, in fact, downright terrifying. Whatever confidence I ever had immediately vaporized when I read the letter of assignment. After weeks of prayer and work, the day approached. Sometime between finishing the talk and giving it to the TelePrompTer people, I gave a copy of it to my mother. That evening she called. "You're amazing. This talk is so wonderful. I can't believe you can do all that you do." I listened like a thirsty traveler in the desert. She went on to describe parts she liked. "I especially like the story about the little boy and the dart game," she said.

After I hung up the phone, I stood a little taller. Shook a little less. Maybe I would be able to speak in the Tabernacle after all. Mother definitely thought I could. And then I thought about the story she had referred to:

A mother was busily preparing dinner when her little boy burst into the kitchen. "Mother, will you play darts with me?" "Just-a-minutes" didn't seem to satisfy the little boy, so the mother followed him down the basement stairs. As they came into the playroom, she said, "I don't know the rules or how to play."

"Oh, it's not hard at all," he beamed confidently. "I just stand right here and throw the darts, and you stand over there and say, 'Wonderful! Wonderful!'"

Without realizing it, I had repeated a story that described my own mother perfectly!

A son-in-law, Alan Barnes, describes a similar conversation that had the identical effect:

It was a short time after taking a new job that we found ourselves at a dinner engagement with some friends and my mother-in-law. During the course of the conversation, a friend asked how I had secured this new position. I gave credit to a mutual friend who had introduced me to the position and had subsequently spoken in my behalf. I suggested that it was because of him and his kindness that I had been selected.

My mother-in-law listened to this exchange and at the conclusion she leaned across the table and put her hand on my arm. "Now," she said, "let me tell you the real story. He got that job because he was the most qualified candidate!"

True or not, it mattered little. What mattered was that in that instant she validated my worth. She believed in me! Since that occasion I have been filled with a great desire never to disappoint her. That same trust and belief in me has been reaffirmed time and time again. Through the years she has restated it in a number of ways.

I shall always be grateful for her support.

One son, Clark, describes his mother's absolute confidence in her children—sometimes completely ill-founded!

Early in the fall of seventh grade, during that brave new world of junior high, I had a science class assignment to make an insect collection. Although we were given several weeks' notice, I characteristically waited until the last few days to begin collecting my insects. As a result, I had a couple of very busy nights trapping bugs around the porch light and mounting them—not too neatly—on a piece of foamcore board. When the project grades came out, I received a well-deserved "C" on my collection.

Mother was incensed—not with me, but with a teacher who, in her mind, didn't know an "A" project when he saw one. Mother, of course, had seen only my last-minute flurry of activity stretching into a late-night vigil around the porch light, not the large and neatly mounted collections of other students.

I knew the real story, of course. I had received a "C" because I had turned in "C" work. I also knew that to protect the reputation of an innocent teacher, I had better get started earlier next time and do the "A" work that Mother assumed I was doing.

A daughter-in-law remembers:

A few years ago I was discussing with my mother-in-law one of the decisions facing my daughter. Her observation was, "She will not make a mistake in a matter of this importance." I was able to rely on her confidence as I watched my daughter work through the problem and discover the answers for herself. She does not try to direct the outcome or interfere. She sincerely believes each one of us has the wherewithal to do the right thing, and she communicates that belief. Her confidence empowers others to make the right choices.

Rosemary P. Olsen, a granddaughter, expresses similar feelings:

My grandmother calls me from time to time to see how we are doing. It always brightens my day. She is a great confidence builder, and after a conversation with her I always come away standing a little taller. She makes me feel like I can conquer the world. She has the ability to see the strengths in a person and acknowledge and encourage them.

A sister, Evelyn, has early memories of the heightened sense of confidence Sister Hinckley gives in every encounter:

My sister Marjorie is seven years older than the next child in our family. Consequently, she was the first married, and all five of us younger ones were enamored with this young couple. A narrow dirt lane led up to the first little cottage where Marjorie and Gordon lived in the country. It was five miles from our house, and mostly uphill. However, we girls at home shared a bicycle, and it was great exercise to cycle those miles. It was worth it to be able to visit Marjorie and to sometimes help her clean her house so it would be ready for entertaining guests. In fact, she had me convinced that it would be impossible for her to have a party without my or one of my sisters' help.

Their living room was lined on three walls with waist-high bookcases and windows directly above them. It was sunny and cheerful. Obviously, they loved to read. As we dusted the books and worked together, Marjorie and I did a lot of talking and laughing. The conversations seemed to go like this:

"Have you read Anne of Green Gables yet, Evelyn?"

"Oh, yes. And I loved it."

"Be sure you get the sequels, because they're just as good."

"I love it when there's more to the story," I added.

"It really pleases me that you are such a good reader, Evelyn. Reading is really fun, isn't it! Tell me about school," she asked. "And tell me all about the family."

I knew that she talked by phone to Mother every day, so I was pleased that she still wanted to hear all these things from me. She wanted to know about everything I was doing and how I felt about everything. She was interested in all my friends and all the family.

Looking back, I realize she used this time for teaching moments also. She probably learned this from Mother. "Temple marriage is so wonderful, Evelyn," she would say. "I still have the priesthood in my home, just like you have it with Daddy."

Before I realized it, we had the cleaning done. We relaxed on the swing and sipped refreshing lemonade. She convinced me that I was the best: the most well-trained, the most skilled, the most cheerful, the most excellent, the most indispensable helper. I believed her!

As I rode my bike home, which was thankfully all downhill now, I was contented and happy, feeling good about myself and my sister.

When I was promoted from junior high, my girlfriends and I wanted to celebrate. I suggested we hike out to Marjorie's home. They liked the idea. We each found a long stick, wrapped our lunch in a large bandanna, and tied it to the end of the stick. With the sticks over our shoulders, we hiked the five miles out of the city and through the farmland. Marjorie welcomed us with her usual sisterly hospitality.

"I can't believe that with all the things to choose from, you all chose to come out here. It really makes me happy and I feel very special!" she exclaimed.

She insisted on getting the old horse out for us so we could take turns riding around the yard. This was a treat for us "city" girls. Of course, she made lemonade, and we stretched out on the shady lawn and felt as though we were in a classy resort.

Sixty years later, my sisters and brother and I meet weekly at Marjorie's apartment. She greets us with the same delight she did so long ago: "With all you have to do, I can't believe you came. You are so wonderful!" And the fact is that by the time we leave to "pedal" back to our homes, we really believe that we are somewhat wonderful! She's pretty convincing.

Clark Hinckley, a son, remembers one act of encouragement that had a long-term effect:

When I was applying to graduate schools, I had carefully selected a couple of top programs as well as a couple of less competitive programs where I had a better chance of being accepted. One day as I was preparing the admission forms, Mother said, "Why don't you apply to Harvard?" My answer was simple—there was no sense wasting several hours and the $50 application fee to apply to a school where I clearly did not have the qualifications to be accepted. But Mother, whose opinion of her children's abilities always exceeded our own, simply said, "I'll pay the $50 if you'll complete the application."

This turned out to be one of those little conversations that changed my life forever. It was as a student at Harvard that I met my future wife.

Sister Hinckley used her many talents to support her children and boost their confidence in themselves. A daughter describes how her mother's help always seemed to empower rather than overwhelm. It was a leg up, not a demonstration of superiority.

Mother has always had a certain amount of creative energy. On so many occasions I was the recipient of it. When I was just five years old, Dad was working for the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad as part of the war effort, and we were transferred to Denver.

As Easter approached, I was assigned to give an Easter poem in Junior Sunday School. Because we had rented a furnished home, and had moved nothing but our personal items, we had no books or magazines that contained anything suitable for a child to learn. In addition, Mother did not have a car, so there was no way to get to a public library. Typically, she took matters into her own hands and sat down and wrote a poem:

Some folks think that Easter time is just for fancy clothes, For Easter eggs and baskets and colored straw galore. But Mother told me differently, She says it's much, much more. It means that Jesus died So we could live forevermore.

When I was in junior high, I was taking a speech class in which one assignment was to give a five-minute presentation in front of the class. The subject was unassigned, but our task was to capture the attention of our audience and sustain that attention for five minutes.

I was a timid child, and the thought of standing before my peers for five minutes was bad enough, but to have to keep their attention was more than I could bear to think about. Mother reassured me and suggested that the best way to keep people's attention is to talk about them by name. So we devised an elaborate story about a dream. In this dream I saw the students in the class. I then began to mention each one by name, telling something about them.

Mother's idea was a resounding success.

Through years of dancing, she encouraged me, often helping me create dance ideas. She taught me to see things in a creative way.

As a senior in high school, I had to write the script for a school assembly. Once again, I brought my task home to Mother, and together we sat at the kitchen table and brainstormed. Out of her creative mind came an idea, and my assembly was born.

Time and time again, she sat with me and stimulated my thinking. She was the spark behind high school campaigns, seminary devotionals, two-and-a-half-minute talks, English papers, and dozens of other assignments. She reaffirmed my timid desires. She encouraged creative thinking, and I always came away feeling that my ideas were noteworthy.

Elder Bruce Hafen of the Seventy speaks of this unique quality of helping without taking over:

The best thing about Sister Hinckley's approach to helping others is the confidence she gives them in themselves. She doesn't come to help with the attitude that only she can save you; rather, she comes to uplift you, and somehow leaves you honestly believing you're so good you hardly need her help.

This contagious belief in the goodness of others bespeaks the gentle yet somehow stirring leadership of both Sister Hinckley and her husband. Together, they reflect an old Chinese proverb: "A leader is best when people barely know he exists. . . . Of a good leader, who talks little, when his work is done and his aim fulfilled, they will say, 'We did it ourselves.'"

Another daughter gives her own example of her mother's constant support and confidence-building ways.

One day Mother, my sister, and I were chatting casually. We shared a great love for children's literature, and my sister and I were bemoaning the dearth of Church books for children. Writing children's books was something I had always wanted to do, and Mother spoke right up: "Why don't you two write some yourself? I'll take your children to the park (four under age four, not counting the two babies) one day next week so that you can do it." Well, how could we pass up such an offer! A whole day free, and with our mother's confidence so sure. The day came. She took the children. We worked on a book. Of course, it took more than one work period, but after that first day we were committed and we could collaborate with countless children underfoot. Over the next few years we wrote and found a friendly publisher for several books.

We look back at our incredible naivetÃ©, to think that we—a couple of unpublished mothers in their twenties—would have the temerity to think that we could write books that someone would buy! But we did, and they did. The whole adventure was a response to our needs as mothers, our dreams, a timely offer for a day of baby-sitting, and most of all to a mother's matter-of-fact confidence in her daughters.

Michael Hinckley, a grandson, relates how his grandmother always makes him feel good about himself:

My grandparents are always happy to have me drop by for a visit. Whenever I speak of problems or disappointments, they both encourage me and assure me that "everything will work out." They tell me they are proud of me, and I always come away feeling great.

Recently I was telling my grandparents that I had reconsidered what I wanted to do for a career and was thinking about going into medicine. I said that this would mean a lot of extra schooling, and I wouldn't be able to start practicing medicine until I was about thirty-six years old. Grandma quickly replied, "You'll be thirty-six when you're thirty-six anyway—even if you don't change careers!"

Putting things into perspective and giving you confidence in yourself is one of Grandma's gifts. She gives people the desire to be good and to improve their lives. She'll always be one of my heroes.

A daughter-in-law, Jane F. Hinckley, remembers her mother-in-law's confidence-building affirmations:

I must admit I fell in love with my future mother-in-law almost before I fell in love with her son Richard. I always knew that she would be the best mother-in-law a person could ever have. No one could have been better. She has never corrected me. She has never criticized me. She has always been so accepting.

One Sunday evening, early in our marriage, we were visiting Dick's parents. His mother wasn't feeling well and was lying down. We offered to fix dinner for the family. I peeled and mashed some red potatoes. After we served them to everyone, Dick said, "I don't think you're supposed to mash red potatoes." His mother quickly said, "Jane can mash any kind of potatoes she wants to mash! They're delicious."

That was typical. I have never felt judged. She has always expressed confidence in me and admiration for everything I do.

This kind of constant building of others has the magical effect of immediately making you want to do better. In essence, planting the desire to be better is the best thing a true teacher can do. In a talk to young people, Sister Hinckley reflected back on just such a teacher from her past:

I wish I could make you feel the way a Sunday School teacher made me feel one Sunday morning when I was about fifteen. I remember leaving his class and during the walk home thinking, "I am going to be very good. I am going to be the best person I know how to be." What a wonderful teacher he was.

Her wish is a reality. She is a teacher who does make everyone want to be a little better. In formal and informal teaching situations, she delivers the expectations couched in language of respect and confidence in the learners' motivations and abilities. Put-downs or humiliation are never part of the teaching moment.

One daughter relates a conversation when a reprimand or warning came in a package that looked like a compliment.

When my future husband and I were dating—I believe engaged at the time—Mother said to me one morning, following a very late night: "You're so lucky. Jim is such an affectionate person and he'll be a great husband. But that affection is something you're going to have to be careful about now." That's all she said. She didn't indicate that she needed a response from me.

I was a little startled—sexual morality was an area I had not heard her venture into before—but the warning was not lost on me. She casually wrapped it in a warm blanket of support and generous feelings toward both of us. Those few short sentences left me feeling approved of, proud of my choice of a husband, and in control of the current situation. Her warning was easy to hear and helped shape my behavior.

A son reflects on his mother's great ability to seize the teaching moment.

I once read that good parenting is largely the art of becoming a supreme opportunist—seizing those unexpected and unanticipated teaching opportunities. I distinctly remember being on the student end of one such moment. As a young boy I teasingly referred to one of my siblings as a fool. It was said in a jokingly complimentary way, not meant as an insult, but the word fool was a word Mother didn't like. She instantly invited me into the living room where she sat me down, handed me a Bible, and asked me to open it to Matt. 5:22 and read the verse aloud. I have never forgotten the last phrase: "Whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire." It was a powerful lesson!

Sarah Dudley, a granddaughter, recalls:

Throughout my life, Grandma has been a wonderful teacher, because she always teaches by expressing confidence in me and by her example. I remember when my family and I were visiting her and Grandpa one Sunday. I asked if I could help her do her dishes. She replied, "No, Sarah. That can wait until Monday. Today let's just rest and give thanks." She probably doesn't recall that, but it has stuck in my mind. She is a wonderful grandma and is still teaching me a great deal about life.

Teaching without humiliating. Expressing confidence by what she doesn't say as well as by what she does say. Even the neighborhood children benefited from Sister Hinckley's effective communication style, as her son's friend Russell T. Osguthorpe remembers:

Sister Hinckley was clear in her communication with Clark and me, but never harsh. I knew she had faith and confidence in us as children, even when we had done something wrong.

When I was about twelve years old, I was playing in the park with Clark when his mother gave him her keys and asked if he would get something out of the car for her. On our way to the parking lot, I matter-of-factly said, "I know how to drive your car."

"You do not," Clark challenged.

"Oh yes I do," I said. "Just give me the keys, and I'll show you."

He gave me the keys, and we jumped in the car. I started it, pulled it out of the parking place, drove it down to the end of the parking lot, turned it around, and headed back to re-park it. Cars were positioned on both sides of the space we were entering, and I almost missed both of them. Just as I was braking, we heard that scraping noise that any driver—even one as inexperienced as I—recognizes immediately. Our right rear fender had grazed the bumper of the car in the next space. My first inclination was to find somewhere to hide, but we both got out of the car, examined the dent in the fender, and noted that there had been no damage done to the other car.

We locked the car and returned with the items Sister Hinckley had requested. Even though she was one of the kindest people I have ever known, I couldn't muster the courage to say anything as we approached her. Looking at the ground, Clark finally muttered, "We dented the car."

"What do you mean, you dented the car?" she replied.

"We drove it," Clark said.

Looking back at her son and somewhat forgetting that I was there, Sister Hinckley gasped, "Whatever gave you the idea that you could drive a car?"

At this point, things had gone far enough. I couldn't stand there any longer and let my friend take the blame for what I had done.

"Clark didn't drive it, I did," I told her.

With the same shock that she had evidenced when she thought her son was the driver, she asked me the same question she'd asked Clark. I told her that I was sorry, and she immediately accepted my apology. I can't remember anything else about the picnic that day, except that I had a sick feeling in the pit of my stomach just thinking about what I'd done: I had dented my neighbor's car, and I didn't have any money to repair it.

That evening when we sat down to dinner, everyone was uncharacteristically quiet. Dad, who could be quite stern at times, finally looked at me and said, "I understand that you had a problem today." Apparently, he had already talked with Sister Hinckley, and they had examined the dent together. I could hardly believe that my dad was not upset with me, but he had no anger at all in his voice. He continued, "Do you think you can earn the money it will take to fix the dent?" I assured him that I would do anything to pay for it. He looked back as if he understood just how miserable I felt, and said, "I will get the car fixed, and then you can pay me back."

The car was repaired, I earned the money to reimburse my dad, and I never heard another word about the incident. Sister Hinckley never mentioned it to me, and neither did any of her children. I don't know if it was even discussed at their dinner table. They all allowed me to keep my dignity and self-confidence.

A daughter talks about her mother's willingness to teach without insisting that a person learn!

In all of Mother's relationships, there is an easy unconditionality. If you wipe the drainboards off in a different direction than she does, do your laundry differently, or approach a Relief Society lesson your own way, she expresses wonder and delight rather than making it a point to "help you do it right" the next time. Always words of admiration and validation. Never critical judgments. The net result: No one has to "perform." People can use all of their energy to get on with the business of living. Maybe this is what they call "unconditional love."

After I became an adult, I don't remember her ever telling me how I should or should not do things, being critical, or even giving advice. But I do remember one time when she offered a suggestion.

Unlike women of character, I have always been able to sleep quite comfortably at night with dirty dinner dishes all over the kitchen. After I've fixed and served dinner, I have just enough energy rationed out to do the "getting-the-kids-to-bed" routine. Barely. However, I have boundless morning energy, and I quite like whipping the kitchen into shape first thing.

Mother came to help me when my twins were born. After observing my habit of leaving the kitchen cluttered at night, as well as my inability to get a handle on the other housework, laundry, child care, and so on, she said: "Ginny, you might be better off if you just did the dishes at night. Then you could start every day with at least a clean kitchen." So unlike her was the comment that I remember exactly where both of us were standing when she made it. But, as unusual as it was, her voice still said that it was entirely my option. I didn't take the advice, and I don't believe she ever mentioned it again. It really shows your mettle as a teacher when you can offer an idea and then let go. And I don't think she was even biting her tongue.

A neighbor, Douglas E. Bagley, remembers Sister Hinckley as a teacher:

When I was growing up, the Hinckleys lived on the east side of 2700 East, while our family lived on the west side. I remember being in either a Primary class or a Sunday School class where Sister Hinckley gave the lesson. She doesn't remember that she was ever a regular teacher of mine, but I can remember her demeanor during the class. She was well prepared. We were a normal, energetic class. Nonetheless, her kindness and intelligence carried our interest for the duration of class time. She must have been a substitute, as I can remember thinking how wonderful it would be to be in her class permanently!

Ramona Hinckley Sullivan, a sister-in-law, remembers Marjorie as a wonderful teacher long before she was married:

When we were all growing up in the First Ward of Liberty Stake, we lived directly across the street from Marjorie Pay's family on Seventh South. There were no television sets, very few automobiles, some recreational activities, but for the most part we had to create our own entertainment. We would gather together five or six of our close neighborhood friends and try to think of something to do.

My group was several years younger than Marge's group. On one occasion we asked the older girls—or someone else had prevailed upon them—to teach us a few things about what to wear and how to improve ourselves. They proceeded to do just that.

We were silly, giggling eight- or nine-year-olds trying to be serious so that these older girls could pass on all their wisdom. It took time and patience—all day. We all persevered. It was worth the effort: even though we were not perfect, we had improved. We worked with our hair, brushing and styling it. We cleaned our shoes. We were told that if we would hang our clothes on hangers in the closet, they would always be ready for the next wearing. It was really fun. Last but not least, Marge told us to smile. A smile would cover up mistakes, add pleasure and happiness to our day, and help hide our embarrassment and self-consciousness when needed. Mostly, it was always available, and you always had it with you. I've never forgotten those wise words from a great teacher.

Joan Hinckley Willes Peterson, a niece, describes her aunt's confidence-inspiring teaching techniques:

It has been forty-seven years since Aunt Marge taught me to tie "the bow," but it seems only a moment ago in my clear recollection.

"Sleeping over" was practically unheard of in the 1950s. It was a very special treat, at least in my neighborhood. I enjoyed just two sleepovers during my growing-up years, so every detail is vividly imprinted.

My mother, Ruth Hinckley Willes, gathered her children together one summer morning and we left our home on the avenues of Salt Lake City for a trip to "the farm." The roads, speed limits, and my mother's slow driving made the travel to East Mill Creek feel like a hundred-mile jaunt. In reality it is but a twenty-minute drive nowadays.

After a wonderful day of family fun, Aunt Marge suggested to Mother that I might like to sleep over! Mother said yes, and I was in heaven. The gray Ford left without me, and I spent the rest of the day and evening playing every childhood game we could think of and watching almost-four-year-old Clark walk on broken glass with his toughened, country feet. I was stung by a bee and kissed by the sun; I giggled until my sides hurt and bathed by donning one of Kathy's bathing suits and having a water fight.

The next morning found Aunt Marge at the kitchen sink fixing breakfast, her family bustling around her. She was always genuinely happy to have her children underfoot, and that included me, for the moment. I had arrived in an old skirt and blouse, played in them, and put them on again the next morning. It seems strange to me now in this casual era of wearing pants for almost everything, but back then girls often wore old skirts or dresses to play in, and we were not allowed to wear pants to school.

The skirt was full, with a ruffle along the bottom and a four-inch-wide sash that began at each side seam and tied in the back in a large bow. I had tried for years to make a bow that went across my waist, beautiful and flat, with tails hanging straight down. Each time, as I twisted around to view my work in the mirror, I found it kitty-corner, reaching for my shoulder blade. I would pull and fluff, but to no avail. My father had taught me how to tie my shoes as I sat on the front step one day when I was four, and that was the scope of my bow lessons.

Dear Aunt Marge asked me if I would like to have her tie my long sash for me, and I said yes. She dried her hands, sat down in the chair behind me, as if this were the most important event of her day, and tied the most beautiful bow I had ever seen. It was perfect! The loops faced straight across my waist on either side, with the material pulled out smoothly so the full four inches showed and the tails hung straight down.

"How did you do that, Aunt Marge? I love it!" I exclaimed. Then I had the bow lesson that changed my tying forever. "First, tie the sash once as you always do," she said. "Then see which sash is coming out on top and which one is coming out underneath. Make the bow loop in the underneath sash, and then bring the top sash straight down across the base of the loop and through; then pull it tight. Smooth it out and you're done. The important thing is to always bring the top one straight down, around, and through."

I thanked her and practiced, first on my shoe and then on my sash. In five minutes I was an expert, and I loved it. And oh, I loved Aunt Marge.

I have tied perfect bows on my darling daughters' dresses and the ponytails of tiny granddaughters, but the last bow of great significance, I tied with Aunt Marge standing beside me. It was for my dear mother, lying in her coffin. The bow was perfect, just as Aunt Marge had taught me so long ago when she took a moment to move a young child forward.

Janet Lee, wife of the late Rex E. Lee, remembers:

During my husband's tenure as president of BYU, I had many occasions to be taught by Sister Hinckley's gentle spirit. Each time I was with her, I left feeling uplifted, encouraged, and desirous of being a better person. Usually our conversations were brief. They took place while we were waiting for a devotional to begin, attending graduation while our husbands took their places on the stand, or seated together at a dinner. Each interaction was a learning experience for me, and I grew to look forward to our meetings with joyful anticipation.

At graduation one April, Sister Hinckley and I were seated long before the processional began. I was especially excited to be there because one of our daughters was graduating. We began talking about the joy of watching children grow up and make good choices. I mentioned how busy life had been for us with the responsibilities of BYU. I shared my concern that my younger children were growing up fast and I wanted to spend as much time with them as possible, despite my busy schedule. She talked about her children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren. I knew how full her life had always been, combining a big family with the responsibilities that came to her because of her husband's various positions. I think I expected her to tell me how important it is to do it all. She said simply, "Family is everything."

I already knew how much I valued my family, but even now when I get caught up in the rush and responsibilities of life, I remind myself, "Family is everything."

Patricia Holland, wife of Elder Jeffrey R. Holland of the Twelve, refers to Sister Hinckley's gifted way of building confidence in every encounter—sometimes with words, sometimes with a note, or sometimes with just the squeeze of a hand.

When it comes to Marjorie Pay Hinckley, I do not wish to speak of her nearly so much as I wish to hug and kiss and squeeze her. Setting aside the love of members of my own family, Sister Hinckley has probably done as much to bless and cheer and encourage me these past years as any other woman in my life. At crucial times or in moments of need, during difficult challenges or with demanding callings, Sister Hinckley has spoken the right word to me or squeezed my trembling hand or—especially—written the encouraging, inspiring note which has given me hope, faith, courage, and confidence. I am sure if she has done this for me, she has done it for countless others.

Countless others will attest that Marjorie Hinckley has, indeed, encouraged and inspired them with her confidence and her understanding.
