Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Chapter Ten

Grandmothering

"I Sometimes Think You Are Too Good to Be True"

The following excerpt from a letter to a granddaughter, Jennie H. Soulier, who was working in England at the time, introduces Marjorie Hinckley's attitude toward her role as a grandmother:

May 18, 1989

Your Mother's Day letter written on the 10th and mailed on the 12th arrived in today's mail. One week, which is quite wonderful service all the way from Coventry, England. This was a letter to warm my heart. This was a letter to make any rough roads we might have traveled to reach age seventy-seven worth it all. You gave me a Mother's Day supreme. A wonderful letter and a phone call. I ask myself what I ever could have done to deserve such a remarkable and beautiful and wonderful granddaughter! I sometimes think you are too good to be true. If only everyone in the world could have a granddaughter like you, what joy would be in the world. I don't know what to say except "I love you" and that seems so inadequate. Thank you for being what you are and for bringing so much joy into our lives.

Love,

Grandma.

Sister Hinckley's particular brand of grandmothering is one of camaraderie and support and encouragement. Maybe she learned this from her own mother, as suggested in this three-generation portrait drawn by daughter Jane H. Dudley:

It was a warm May afternoon. The school bell had rung for the close of the day, and the countdown for summer was on. My friend and I had big plans for after school. I would go home with her while she changed her clothes, and then she would go home with me. We could ride bikes until dinner. If we were lucky we could ride down to the root beer stand and buy a frosty mug. It all sounded too wonderful, so we picked up our pace.

As we turned into my friend's driveway, a sick feeling settled in the pit of our stomachs. We knew that our grand plans had been severely altered as we looked up and saw her grandma. She was the hardest-working woman I knew. She dripped with Comet cleanser and Slix furniture polish. This was a woman who greeted everyone with a rag. It didn't matter if you lived in the house or not, she assumed that you had come to clean. My friend and I knew that any plans we had made were over. I made up a feeble excuse that I had to go directly home and left. I didn't dare enter her house, knowing that I would become the next victim of the dust rag. "Call me when you can play," I said feebly.

I ran home ready to call someone else, wondering why my friend's grandma always broke the rules of grandmothering.

I bolted through the back door. "Hello," I yelled. "I'm home." There on the small sofa sat Grandma Pay. She was my mother's mother, and one of the sweetest and kindest persons I knew. Mother called from the kitchen, "Jane, make sure that you straighten your room before you go out to play." Grandma looked at me and said, "Oh, Marge, don't always be telling that child what to do. She has just had the longest day at school."

Now this, I thought, is a true grandma! A true grandma doesn't see any faults in you. Grandmas were placed on the earth to love and praise you. I knew then that I was one lucky person.

The years went by. My friend's grandma was still cleaning, and Grandma Pay was still sitting on the sofa telling me what a nice person I was. I loved that little woman. I hoped that one day my children would have a grandma who loved them unconditionally, not for what they accomplished.

Yesterday the back door flew open, and my daughter, Sarah, ran in from school. She came in the family room and there was Grandma Hinckley sitting on the sofa. "Hi, Grandma," Sarah said. "Well, hello, Sarah, you look so beautiful today. Did you have a nice day?" was the reply. I walked into the room and said, "Hello, Sarah, make sure you put your backpack away." I could say that. I was the mom and my mother was the grandma.

Sarah has a real grandma. She knows the rules and abides by them. "Lift up your head and be of good cheer" is her motto. My children love her. They will always carry with them wonderful memories of Grandma Hinckley. She has showered them with trinkets from foreign lands, thrown Christmas parties just for them, taken them on shopping sprees at ZCMI, and bought them candy bars at the grocery store. Most of all, she has praised and loved them. Grandma is their biggest fan, and they in turn are hers.

Grandma Hinckley not only loves her grandchildren, she loves everyone: missionaries, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, neighbors, and the clerk in the store. She has grown old through the years and is sitting on the small sofa more and more. However, she will always have a kind word to say. She knows the rules and rights of grandmothering, and that is how it should be.

This "I'm on your team" spirit infuses all of Grandma Hinckley's interactions with her grandchildren. There's never a hint of "What's the matter with this younger generation?" Just expressions of confidence and a feeling of mutual enjoyment. As Jessica Dudley, a granddaughter, says:

Grandma Hinckley always makes you feel like you are the most important person in the world. When you are talking with her, nothing else matters. Some of my favorite memories with Grandma are when I have just dropped by their apartment to say hi. Grandma will stop whatever she's doing just to chat with me. We'll talk about everything and nothing. We'll laugh about anything. When you're in Grandma's presence, everything you have to say is important.

Amy Pearce, a granddaughter, remembers the comfort of her grandmother's love:

While on my mission in Germany I received a package from my brother for my birthday. It was a bag of pink mints, with a note: "I couldn't think of a better gift than a touch of home: Grandma and Grandpa Hinckley. Let the flavored sugar carry you away into a world of comfort and love on East Capitol Blvd."

My brother was right. "A world of comfort and love." The candies are my childhood at Grandma and Grandpa's house in tasteable form. There has always been, ever since I can remember, a dish of thick pink mints—each one about the diameter of a nickel—on the table in their living room. And a spare bag or two in the chest of drawers next to the wall. Yes, we children discovered their hiding place many, many years ago.

I took my brother's advice, putting a few mints in my pocket as we tracted up and down the drizzly streets of Germany that winter. Every time I would pop one into my mouth, I was instantly back in the comfort of Grandma and Grandpa's love.

Elizabeth Hinckley, a granddaughter, remembers:

Once I made a mistake at Grandma's house. I felt really, really scared and I wanted to disappear, shrivel up, and hide in the corner. But Grandma and my aunt Jane laughed and said, "Lizzie, don't worry." They told me it was okay and didn't matter. No one held it against me or even remembered it five minutes later.

Joseph B. Hinckley describes his grandmother:

She's fun, she's cute, she's very talkative. She gets around town. Anyplace you go with her is fun. She likes to visit with her grandkids and know what we're doing, how we're doing in school, and anything else we're up to. She thinks we're great!

Another grandson, Spencer Hinckley, says:

The most outstanding characteristic of Grandma is that she is always happy and positive. She is always smiling, and you can't keep from smiling when you're around her. She is always just so happy to be there—no matter where she is. I suppose that is evidence of her quiet testimony of the gospel. It emanates from her countenance. I love her.

And granddaughter Ada Hinckley concurs:

She is always smiling, and when you think of her it makes you smile!

Celia B. Benson remembers her grandmother as a close friend:

There has never been a generation gap between Grandma Hinckley and her grandchildren. She isn't the typical grandmother who bakes homemade gingerbread cookies and sits in a rocker and knits. Growing up she was more of a best friend than a grandmother. That explains why we called her our "groovy grandma."

I'll never forget how when I was ten years old Grandma took my cousin Rosemary and me to ZCMI to pick out matching outfits for our first day of fifth grade. I couldn't believe it because the shirt, sweater, and pants all matched—and they weren't even on sale! Being the third girl in the family, I was used to hand-me-downs, so this was a big deal for me. Grandma then took us to the ZCMI beauty parlor to get a manicure and then to lunch at the Tiffin Room. We felt like princesses for a day. We were sure that nothing we did the rest of our lives would compare with that one day. We had been treated like royalty and could now die happy.

Granddaughter Katie B. Wright says:

Grandma Hinckley is as thoughtful and generous as any person I have known. She has a way of making you think you are the greatest. She does it in little ways, like taking you to lunch or sending a note in the mail.

I remember sleeping over at Grandma's and the next day she took me to ZCMI. We had lunch in the basement and then she bought us an extra sweet at the bakery. (Grandma loves sweets.) I felt spoiled!

Angela B. Folsom found her grandmother to be a motivating teacher:

Grandma cultivated in me a love for the hymns of the Church. As I progressed in my piano playing so that I could play the hymns, she challenged me to memorize the words also. Every time I had memorized all the verses to a hymn, I was to sing it to her. She would then give me a reward.

Around age eight, I remember standing in her living room near her piano, singing "I Stand All Amazed" and "When upon Life's Billows." Those were also the first two hymns I had learned how to play, and I was so pleased. I don't remember what I received as a "reward," or even if I received anything, for knowing all the verses. What she taught me, however, was the importance of hymns and music in our lives. She often told me during those times together, "If you are going to be a member of this church, you need to learn the hymns. There will be many times in your life where hymnbooks won't be available (such as general conference) and you will want to be able to sing." I cherish the advice she gave me at such a young age.

Amy Pearce remembers her grandmother's warmth:

I remember sitting in church as a young child and looking at all of the older women in our ward. Some of them had such bony laps and arms or pointed noses and chins. Some were tall and had long hair. I couldn't help but make comparisons between these grandmas and my own Grandma Hinckley. I'm always convinced that my grandma came right out of the storybook encyclopedia that describes what the perfect grandma is like. She is round and soft in the places that grandmas should be. Her lap is comfortable to sit on; she has the perfect amount of wrinkles, gray hair, and glasses; and she is always smiling—even when she drifts asleep.

When I would sit on Grandma's lap, I always felt like the blue-ribbon winner at the state fair. Grandma would examine my hands and fingers, telling me that they were the most beautiful hands she had ever seen. What she wouldn't give to have fingers like mine! How incredibly lucky I was to have such wonderful nails! My eyelashes were always long and beautiful, my feet were perfect for the sand and water of the beach, and even my multitude of freckles were a blessing. She would run her fingers through my hair, praising its thickness and color. This went on and on. With each thing she would mention, I felt like I must have been the only one in the whole world to have dimples or strong legs or two of the best climbing arms or whatever it was that happened to be showcased at the moment. What blessings! What a special person I was! She would always say, "Best of all, you have a great personality."

Grandma is always praising. She can turn anyone from an ugly frog into an elegant prince. She is observant. She notices everything and she never hesitates to point out the positive points. These little positive points may be very obvious, but therein lies the charm. She is taken back and impressed with the obvious. Nothing and no one is too small or insignificant for her praise.

Grandson Hobie Hinckley says:

One thing I really love about Grandma is her humility and gratitude. She usually mentions in letters she writes, "Oh, I have such wonderful grandchildren. I just hope I can live worthy of them!" That is always a great boost, with such a wonderful person as Grandma saying she hopes to live worthy of us grandchildren! I always feel that it should be the other way around, because she is such a spiritual person, and a great example to all of us.

Heather B. Blair, a granddaughter, remembers some special teaching moments:

Marjorie Pay Hinckley is a women of culture and refinement, and she wanted her grandchildren to have a taste for culture also. One of my treasured memories is of taking elocution lessons from Grandma. When I was about ten years old, we began weekly elocution lessons. We started with the basics: "She sells sea shells by the sea shore," and "Eight great gray geese gazing gaily into Greece." I would stand in the front hall while Grandma sat at the far end of the living room, and I would recite these things to her until they were considered perfect. We would then read poetry together and choose one or two poems that I would memorize for next week's lesson. They would be poems like Robert Louis Stevenson's "The Swing" or "I Have a Little Shadow." She taught me diction, composure, how to look at an audience without really looking at them, and much more. She helped me learn proper pronunciation and diction, where and when to emphasize words, and how to organize and write a talk.

We would read literature together for her Relief Society lessons. I can still vividly see us sitting together at the round table in her kitchen reading Robert Frost's "Death of the Hired Man" and crying together at the end of it. To this day, we still enjoy reading it together. She taught me to love great literature and fine arts.

Emily P. Fox remembers the wonderful freedom of going to Grandma's house as a child:

There was such freedom at Grandma Hinckley's house. I don't ever remember her reminding us of the rules—rules, what a strange idea—or limiting our fun with warnings and nagging. As soon as we arrived, the cousins would run down the basement stairs, out onto the back patio where our parents and grandparents were visiting, then down the weeded hill that led to the canyon below. Making our way through the weeds, dirt, and rocks, we stopped partway down the steep hill where the terrain flattened out. We would spend unclocked hours there. It was our own little world where we created anything our minds could imagine. We sectioned off the "rooms" in our "houses" with large sticks or short ones put end to end. We built sinks, digging away dirt for the basin and outlining the hole with rocks. We made chairs from larger rocks or large green leaves if any could be found.

Soon, someone from the patio level would come down with an ice-cream cone in hand and we knew dessert was being served. There weren't even interrupting announcements about dessert being ready. We would just make our way up the hill whenever we could take a break, to grab a cone and then return to continue our serious work. Grandma's was a magical place where we felt a peaceful, happy freedom.

Amy Pearce, another granddaughter, remembers the inside of Grandma's house:

Grandma's house was full of treasures. They had collected a variety of exotic things over the years from their many travels. Little, shiny wooden boxes with inlaid mother-of-pearl and ancient calculators from Asia, colorful masks from South America, music boxes from Germany, carved figurines and porcelain elephants from Indonesia, paintings, baskets, and so on. She had two woven pieces from the Orient hanging on the wall in her entryway. They were each two or three feet long, with red and purple tassels hanging from them. A few of my girl cousins and I would play with the tassels for hours. I loved the way they would smoothly and quickly slip through my fingers. It was on these tassels that I learned how to braid.

I don't know if Grandma ever saw us playing with the tassels—or anything else, for that matter. She never said anything to us about it. When we left her house, the tassels would always be braided or twisted in the newly discovered way of the day, and always upon our return they would be hanging orderly and straight again. So I guess she knew about our work. When I think of this now, I can't believe that it didn't drive Grandma nuts—little dirty hands and fingers mauling the silky tassels and wooden figurines? But that was the magic in it. Grandma had trust and confidence in us. Her house wasn't just a museum for preserving and protecting interesting artifacts, it was a magical world where we were always welcome to learn and explore.

Ann Hinckley, a granddaughter, recalls:

After living far away from grandparents for most of my life, we finally moved back to Salt Lake City the summer before I started college. I just couldn't get enough of Grandma and spent many of those summer days at her house. We talked of my plans and her memories, thumbed through her high-school yearbooks, folded loads of laundry, looked at souvenirs from the far-off lands she had visited, went grocery shopping for miniature bottles of milk and half cartons of eggs, took naps, and made memories. It's always good to be with Grandma.

Celia B. Benson describes her grandmother's letters:

Grandma Hinckley was an avid letter writer. She filled our mailboxes with vivid details of her travels across the continents. Her detailed descriptions of people and places came alive to us as we experienced the sights and sounds of many faraway lands. When she wasn't traveling, she continued to fill our mailboxes with notes and cards carrying words of encouragement. Grandma was always our greatest cheerleader. She had a way of saying just the right thing at the right time to make you feel like you could conquer the world—or at least make it through the day. Through the years her notes and cards have become little pillars of strength to buoy me up in times of need, or just to remind me that somewhere there is someone who thinks I'm okay.

A few letters and postcards from Grandma Hinckley demonstrate this skill of long-distance grandmothering:

Nov. 27, 1980

Dear Celia,

Happy birthday! Please get something for you with this money. I realize it will not buy much more than a double-decker cone on today's market, but know that my love for you is also keeping up with inflation—it triples with each passing year.

XOXO,

G. Hinckley

February 22, 1985

Dear Holly, Annie, Spencer, and Ada,

Your report cards were simply outstanding. You are all very smart, but even better than being smart is that you work hard, and that is the most impressive of all. Rosemary had a great report card like you and I said, "Oh, Rosie, you are so smart," and she replied, "I'm not so smart, I just work hard." That is even better than being smart. However, you are all very smart and you all work hard and that is a great combination. Even better than that is that you are all good children, and that is the most important of all. When I consider that we have 23 grandchildren and not one problem child I feel like the most blessed grandmother in the whole world. You are like 23 angels right out of heaven. I don't know what we have done to deserve you.

I will be returning your report cards with some other material in a few days. You will want to keep them.

We love you, love you, love you!

Grandma H.

P.S. A kiss for Joseph. XO

February 22, 1981

Dear Holly,

While Grandpa was in a meeting Friday afternoon I walked through the Polynesian Center for two hours with some friends and decided this is a place where we should have a cousin's party. Maybe someday!

Love,

M.

Pusan, Korea, May 31, 1980

Dear Emily,

There are hundreds of people on the beach today, but I have not seen one swim suit. The women are all in dresses, carrying their shoes in their hands and holding up their skirts while they wade out in the water. When the waves come up to their knees they scream and run back. It is hard to enjoy this alone. As I walked along the beach I pretended one of you was with me.

Love,

G. Hinckley

Visits to grandchildren have been no less effective than letters. Even though a visit cannot be read and reread, the confidence Grandma Hinckley always instills seems to last a very long time. Jeff Barnes, a grandson, talks about one such visit:

I had been in the mission field just six weeks when Grandma and Grandpa came to Poland with the Tabernacle Choir. I was still in a state of bewilderment, still adjusting to the food, the surroundings, and the language in that strange and very foreign land.

Grandpa held a meeting with the missionaries. It was a new mission, and there were only about twenty-five of us at the time, including some couples and the mission president. The meeting was held in the Marriott Hotel in Warsaw. We all had lunch with Grandma and Grandpa, and then we had a short meeting.

The minute the closing prayer was said, Grandma made a beeline for me. "Get your companion," she said, "and follow me." She then led us upstairs to her room and began unloading her bag. She handed us toiletry kits and slippers from the airlines. She gave us two tubes of toothpaste and some little bottles of shampoo. She was also carrying a little package from my parents. It was all like manna from heaven because those items were still extremely scarce in Poland.

She then sat down and gave me the greatest gift of all—her time and her genuine interest and love. She wanted to know how I was really doing. Was I happy? Was I eating right? How was the language coming? Was I getting my rest? Did I need anything?

She left me with reassuring words. She believed in me and just knew I was going to be a great missionary!

When we parted that day, I was renewed. It meant so much to me to have had that brief interlude. I left knowing that I wanted to be a great missionary!

A journal entry from another grandson, Jonathan Dudley, describes his grandparents' visit to his mission.

August 30, 1995

Grandma and Grandpa were here today. They are so busy. Grandpa dedicated the new Hyde Park chapel. They both spoke and did a great job. Grandpa did fine but Grandma was the best. Everyone loved her, and all the missionaries commented to me how hilarious she was. On Monday afternoon we held a mission conference. Once again, Grandma was the star. I spoke to them for a minute after the meeting, and then they left for Cambridge. They keep a crazy schedule. I am so lucky to have them both. It was fun to see them.

Granddaughter Rosemary P. Olsen also treasured her grandparents' visits:

My husband and I were living in Sacramento, California, while he was completing his training. It was the first time in my life that I had lived away from my family and I missed them terribly. Not only was I used to being near my immediate family but there was also a lot of interaction with extended family, including my grandparents, that I missed. Visitors for me were like a little piece of heaven.

So you can imagine how excited I was when I heard that my grandparents would be at our Sacramento regional conference. Their schedule, as usual, was to be very full, but Grandpa called to say that he thought they could come to breakfast Sunday morning before the meeting. We were thrilled.

Then, on Saturday, they called to say that a media interview had been set up on Sunday morning. He wouldn't be able to come to my house, but could I find a way to pick Grandma up during the priesthood leadership session? Could I find a way? You bet!

She was darling, as usual. Fussed over me and my children. Loved my house. Visited and visited. It was wonderful.

Grandpa, amazingly, seems to make it to all of the blessings, baptisms, and weddings. I don't know how he does it. But if there is ever any slack to be taken up in the family, Grandma is ready and eager to do it. Maybe she is the reason that none of us has ever felt neglected or resentful. It is through Grandma's visits, letters, and telephone calls that we have experienced the wonder and majesty of my grandfather's great efforts in doing the Lord's work.

She is contagiously optimistic about everyone and everything. Through her telephone calls she fills me in on my cousins and aunts and uncles. She keeps me connected with them and their lives, sharing funny stories of my cousin's children, where an uncle is traveling, or about the nice boy my cousin is dating. She is the glue that keeps our family together.

Ann Hinckley, a granddaughter, reminisces:

Pink lemonade and lamb always remind me of Grandma. Growing up in Michigan, we spent very few holidays with faraway grandparents and cousins, but I do remember one Easter Sunday at Grandma's. Even though my siblings and I were all very young, she sat us at her large dining-room table—just like the adults—for Easter dinner. Her fine china and goblets sparkled. The tablecloth was pink, the napkins were pink, even the lemonade was pink. It was breathtakingly wonderful to me. Something about the novelty of drinking lemonade with dinner, or tasting lamb and mint jelly for the very first time—or it very well may have been the beauty of everything pink. But it was magic. I felt absolutely like royalty. I still never eat lamb without wishing for pink lemonade, and lemonade always tastes better with lamb. They are meant for each other. And they will always remind me of Grandma.

If the grandchildren had to pinpoint one time of year that reminds them of Grandma, it would have to be Christmas. This is her holiday. Everything she does with it is magical. Around the beginning of December, little cards arrive every four or five days in the mail. Each child remembers the excitement of getting a card with just his or her own name on it. If you lived out of town, it was added reassurance that Grandma always thought about you even if you didn't see her very often.

And these aren't ordinary cards. They pop out or stand up or play a Christmas carol. Lizzie even remembers one that her brother received that unfolded into a Santa mask. The cards usually contain one or two sentences at most, things like: "Good things happen at Christmastime" or "From your secret elf" or "Start counting the days" or just a simple "XOXO." She usually doesn't sign her name, but the small, cursive penmanship is very familiar.

Somewhere in between all of the cards is an invitation to the Grandchildren's Christmas Party: "Attendance mandatory" or "Only the chicken pox will qualify as an excuse." Christmas anticipation doesn't get any better than that.

Sunday, December 18, 5:30 p.m.

Christmas dinner and fish pond.

Walk through Temple Square.

Try, try, try to be there!

Love,

Grandma H.

Thursday, December 22, 7:00 p.m.

Walk through Temple Square if we didn't make it on the 18th.

Sleepover.

Breakfast.

"Annie" at Promised Valley Playhouse.

4:00 p.m. Straight home!

Love,

G. Hinckley

Michael Hinckley, a grandson, remembers these extraordinary parties:

My earliest and clearest memories of Grandma are the "Cousins' Christmas Parties," which were an essential part of each Christmas season. The magic of the Christmas season is already prevalent in the lives of children, yet this annual gala put on by Grandma added even more excitement. First of all, the simple fact that Grandma would invite only the grandchildren to come to the party was something significant in itself. While at family dinners we kids were always at the "children's tables," such was not the case on this occasion. There were no adults—only Grandma. We children all sat together at the "adults' table." We were the important people.

The tables were festively decorated with linens of green and red, plates portraying Christmas scenes and symbols, and other articles ornamenting each dining place. Perhaps the most exciting feature of the dinner table was the shiny Christmas-tree ornament decorating the place of each grandchild. (I still have all of these, and I will pass them on to my children.) Inevitably, these were the most beautiful ornaments we would place on our trees each year. Usually Grandma had purchased them earlier in the year in some foreign country.

Before we ate, Grandpa gave us a little manners lesson. Apparently our manners, or rather our lack of manners, were the reason Grandma began having the parties! I'm not sure our manners improved, but some of my cousins remember specific rules: no elbows on the table, don't reach across someone to get food, say "I'm finished, thank you," rather than "I'm all done!"

The dinner itself was an event to be remembered. Fruit cocktail in stemmed sherbet glasses, ham, potatoes, corn, rolls (with raspberry jam), and an array of other vegetables, meat, and delicious foods. The desserts would vary from ice cream to cakes, pies, cookies, and so on. Yes, the food was spectacular, but the real fun was after dinner.

We started with several games of Bingo. Grandma would call the numbers as we placed our pieces down on the appropriate squares, each child hoping he or she would be next to yell "Bingo!" There were prizes for those who won. And for those who didn't win, there were still prizes. Everyone's a winner with Grandma.

Next was the "fish pond." Grandpa had already wired an elaborate "fishing pole" together and strung a blanket across a door opening. Grandma sat on the other side of the blanket. Each child cast, waited for Grandma to secure the gift (each suited to the individual child), and then "reeled in." The fishing was always good!

As evening wore on and we had all prepared for bed, we would lie down in our sleeping bags behind doors, under the piano, on the sofa, or in any other creative spot we could find with a cousin or two. Then Grandma would read to us, the same wonderful Christmas stories every year. They made us feel warm inside. After she finished reading, she would sit absolutely still in a chair until every one of us was sound asleep. One time when she started to tiptoe through us to get back upstairs, my sister said, "I'm still awake!" So she sat down and read her favorite story, The Little Match Girl, all the way through again.

The next morning it was breakfast, and then sometimes she had tickets to a Christmas play for all of us. By the time our parents picked us up, we were finished with the best part of December.

The Christmas parties still go on now, but they're no longer sleepovers. Every grandchild, including spouses and great-grandchildren, comes to the festive dinner and enjoys Bingo and the fish pond. We love being together.

Of course, every year Grandpa says: "Now, you kids know that this is the last Christmas party. There are too many of you, you're too noisy, and it's just too much work for your grandma!"

We just laugh and wait eleven months for the invitations to come in the mail.

Ada Hinckley remembers that Grandma found a way of including even the out-of-town grandchildren in the Christmas parties:

I remember when we were little and lived away from Salt Lake City, we would anticipate the fish-pond box in the mail with our wrapped presents, and we would open them as a family the same night that all of our cousins did at Grandma's house. Although we lived away from our cousins and grandparents for a time, we never felt left out of the festivities, because we would always get to be a part of the fish pond. Many times we received a doll or an ornament from an exotic part of the world she and Grandpa had been to earlier in the year. We all have a great collection of ornaments from Grandma, and every year when we put them on the Christmas tree we remember the year we got each of them and the different countries they are from.

Granddaughter Elizabeth Hinckley has similar memories:

Even when we lived in Arizona, Grandma always thought of us and included us. At Christmastime, when all the cousins did fish pond, she would send us our fish-pond presents in the mail. She would send us Christmas cards throughout the whole Christmas season. We always loved to get her cards and presents.

Grandma Hinckley also collected many dolls herself, as Holly Hinckley, a granddaughter, remembers:

One of my favorite Grandma Hinckley memories is playing with her doll collection in the basement of the house on East Capitol Boulevard. We would take out each doll, and Grandma would tell us where the doll came from and the story of her trip to that country. She has dolls from everywhere: Fiji, Argentina, the Philippines, Norway, Hong Kong, Korea, Finland—places I had never even heard of at that age. She would tell us all about that country, the people there, her experiences with them, the native costumes, and so on. We would take our favorite dolls out over and over again to hear the stories. One day we pulled out a rather ordinary-looking doll and asked where it came from. "ZCMI," was the answer. We laughed hysterically. We asked her over and over again where it came from, just to hear her say again, "ZCMI." Giggling with Grandma over whatever struck us as funny was even more fun than playing with her dolls.

The memory of playing dolls with Grandma in her basement came back to me years later when I was serving a mission in France. In anticipation of Grandma and Grandpa's trip to Paris, my stake president called me to find out what he could offer them as a remembrance of their time in France. He wanted to know their tastes and if they collected anything. The one thing that came immediately to my mind was that my grandmother loved dolls from foreign countries. And so they presented her with a traditional French doll to add to her collection.

Another granddaughter, Mary Dudley, describes her feelings:

My grandma is the kindest person in the world. She loves all of God's creations, from a bird singing in the tree to the soft hug from a grandchild. She somehow knows just what to say or do in any situation. On many occasions you'll feel a soft hand slide into yours. That's the best feeling that anyone could ever have. I love her very, very much. Come rain or shine, I will always feel that soft hand in mine.

That gentle love shines through in a simple note to a granddaughter:

Thank you for the brief but wonderful visit yesterday morning. You brought sunshine that lasted all day and reminded me of the overwhelming blessing of 25 beautiful, perfect grandchildren. They are all so good I have to ask myself, "Can this be true?!"

Love,

Grandma

In the words of grandson Spencer Hinckley—words that speak for all twenty-five grandchildren:

She's nice. She's funny. And we love her.
