Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Chapter Eleven

Reaching Out

"We're All in This Together"

We all have a responsibility—a responsibility to make a difference, to be an influence, to lift someone. We are all in this together to work out our salvation, to reach our potential, and to be our brother's keeper. To help each other.

Some years ago I had a friend who decided at the age of fifty that she was going to learn to play the piano. She courageously started out with Thompson's Book I. Each morning she went to the church at seven o'clock, where she would practice on the piano and the organ. After about a year they asked her to play a special number for one of the Relief Society lessons. She said she didn't feel ready, to give her another three months. The three months passed, and she consented to play a special number that she had memorized. This was her first public appearance on the piano. She started out beautifully. It went well for about three measures; then she lost it. Everything went blank. Her music teacher, who was present, said, "Don't be ruffled, Merle. Just start over." She started over and made it all the way through without a single mistake.

We have never loved Merle like we loved her that morning. Perhaps it was because she faltered a little in the beginning and we were all pulling for her, saying to ourselves, "Come on, Merle, you can do it." If her performance had been flawless from the start, we might all have been defensive and said, "Oh well, Merle can learn to play the piano because her husband is the kind who will get his own breakfast while she practices and her children don't make demands on her" and so on and so on and so on. As it was, she faltered a little, and we loved her the more. That experience has given me great comfort. I figure that if I fall a little short of what is expected of me, perhaps my sisters in the gospel will be compassionate and love me for trying.

It was Lucy Mack Smith who said, "Let us all help one another, that we may sit down together in heaven."

Marjorie Hinckley really believes that we're all great people. We're here to help each other, and that's that. With a charming kind of innocence, her glasses seem to see only the good in others. Not surprisingly, everyone behaves a little better in her presence. One of her children was complaining about someone one day and she said, "That's strange. She's always been so nice to me." The daughter shot back, "Oh, Mother. That doesn't mean anything. Who wouldn't be nice to you!"

In fact, everyone in The World According to Marjorie Hinckley is good. By genetic predisposition or overwhelming compassion, she simply is unable to see bad in people. "Let's be kind to one another," she says, "for most of us are fighting a hard battle."

Augusto A. and Myrna M. Lim, president and matron of the Manila Philippines Temple, recall meeting Sister Hinckley for the first time:

The first time we remember meeting Sister Hinckley was in early 1965. It was just a few months after our baptisms, and the Hinckleys had come to the Philippines for a district conference. At the time President Lim was acting as the district clerk, and so our family was seated on the front row in front of the stage where the Hinckleys were seated. We remember that our second little daughter, Mitzi, was a little restless and went up on the stage. Sister Hinckley quickly picked her up and held her on her lap and entertained her through much of the meeting. She was so sweet and kind to this little child. That simple gesture let us know that she was one of us.

Angela B. Folsom, a granddaughter, confirms her grandmother's loving concern for the people she meets in her travels:

I remember the little notebook Grandma always brought home from a mission tour. It was filled with the names and phone numbers of parents of missionaries. She would spend whatever time it took telephoning mothers to let them know their missionaries were healthy and happy. It was just one more way she reached out to make the human connection.

Sister Hinckley expresses gratitude for the support we give one another in our ward families:

What a wonderful thing is a ward. It is like an extended family. Robert Frost, in his poem "The Death of the Hired Man," says, "Home is the place where, when you have to go there, They have to take you in." We have done a great deal of traveling in our lives. The best part of travel, of course, is coming home.

The first thing I do when I get home is touch base with my children. The next thing is to attend church in my very own ward, my very own Relief Society, and then I know that I am really home. It makes no difference whether it is a ward where we have lived for years or one we have recently moved into. I can remember a particular time when our ward had been recently divided. Because of other assignments, several weeks went by before I attended. When I returned to church it seemed that I knew only a handful of people. The rest were strangers. But do you know what? I still was thrilled to be back, because it was where I belonged, and that gave me a feeling of being home.

What a tremendous support system we have in one another. I have a friend named Sally. When I first met Sally she lived on the Isle of Wight, off the south coast of England. She was a member of a Protestant church. She lived in a large house on an estate with her husband, who was several years older than she, and her three young sons. One day she told me she had a terrible fear, a fear that her husband would die before her, and that her sons would grow up and leave the island, leaving her to grow old alone—no one to look after her or care about her.

"Doesn't that worry you?" she asked.

"No," I replied, "because if all my children moved away I would still have a bishop who would care about me and home teachers who would care about me and Relief Society visiting teachers who would really care about me."

It began to happen just as she feared. The sons came to America to be educated, eventually marrying and settling here. Her husband died. But the happy ending is that the sons, one by one, heard the gospel and joined the Church. Sally came to America. Her children taught her the gospel and she joined the Church. Her second son is now her bishop. She is a member of a ward in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. She is no longer afraid.

Sister Hinckley describes how our sisterhood and brotherhood in the gospel bridges the superficial differences between people:

When Brother Hinckley had the responsibility for the work in Asia, our children were young and I didn't travel with him often. As they grew older, I began to go more often. But I will never forget my first trip to Hong Kong.

We arrived at the mission home in the early evening and had just put our bags down in the room assigned to us when the mission president's wife knocked on the door. She said, "Sister Hinckley, there is something I think I should tell you. There is a reception tonight in the mission home for many of the members. A very important lady will be here. She is Chinese, educated in Burma, a very prominent woman in community affairs, playing an important role in the United Nations Committee of Hong Kong. She has been ill and has not been out of the house for six months. Her doctor has given her permission either to attend a United Nations banquet at the hotel tonight or to attend her church reception at the mission home. She has chosen to come here because, having seen an apostle, she wants to see what an apostle's wife looks like."

Terror struck my heart. Remember that I was relatively young and new at this. We had been traveling for ten days. There had been no time to shampoo my hair for ten days. My clothes were wrinkled. I had inadvertently left my dress shoes in the hotel in Okinawa. I had only my sturdy walking shoes. I looked in the mirror, and the only thing I could think of was that Cinderella had a fairy godmother. Where was mine?!

I did the best I could with what I had to work with and went out to meet this impressive woman. Fortunately, she could speak English, and I soon discovered that though there could not have been two women with more diverse backgrounds, we had everything in common. We both knew that Joseph Smith had a vision. She was my Relief Society sister. And she longed for her children to grow up in the faith.

What did I learn from this? That the gospel of Jesus Christ is the greatest common denominator on the face of the earth, and that when every knee shall bend and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ, there will be no divisions among us.

Even pictures of Sister Hinckley in the newspaper reach across the boundaries of age and distance, including individual people in one great church family.

Dear Sister Hinckley,

My name is Elizabeth Bouchelle. I am 13 years old and I live in Virginia. I just want you to know that I love you. You always seem to be smiling and enjoying all of the activities you go to with President Hinckley. I am always delighted to see pictures of you in the Church News. I just wanted you to know how much I admire and appreciate all you do. Please remember that there is a little 13-year-old girl in Virginia who is praying for you.

Love,

Elizabeth Bouchelle

One final story, told by Marie Hafen, wife of Elder Bruce Hafen of the Seventy, shows how even in a huge, impersonal meeting hall, Sister Hinckley finds a way to make that small but vital connection, giving everyone the reassurance that we are all one great family. This incident took place at the conclusion of a member meeting in Australia, where more than six thousand Saints had gathered to hear from the prophet.

The meeting was over. The Saints were singing farewell as the Hinckleys stood smiling at the platform edge. Sister Hinckley took a step forward and motioned with her finger for ten-year-old James to come toward her. He looked around to see whom she was motioning to. As he realized he was the one, he pointed at himself with an incredulous "Who, me?" gesture. She nodded and smiled more broadly as her finger continued to motion him forward. Suddenly his face had the startled look of a kangaroo in the headlights.

A combination of ushers and family members hoisted James up onto the four-foot-high platform. Sister Hinckley put her hands on his shoulders and said something like, "Young man, I've been watching you all through the fireside. You are wonderful. You paid perfect attention. How the Lord must love you. You are the future of the Church in this beautiful land of Australia. I just love you." And she hugged him.

When President Hinckley saw what was happening, he walked over to James and embraced him gently just as he left Marjorie's arms. James was still searching for something—anything—to say when the ushers carefully lifted him back to the playing floor to his family. I'll always remember that shining little moment, the picture of instant connection and intimate communication of genuine love. That image—the prophet's arms around a young LDS boy, made possible by Sister Hinckley's unaffected and spontaneous warmth—captures for me the spiritual heart of what the Hinckleys' visit meant to the Church members throughout Australia and New Zealand.

As the story was told to me by James's mother later, it seems that James had prayed prior to the meeting with great hope that he would have a chance to shake the prophet's hand. His mother had counseled him that this probably wouldn't be possible because of the thousands of people who would be in the hall. Sister Hinckley's beckoning gesture was an answer to a boy's prayer.

President Hinckley repeats over and over that we are one great family, ten million strong. Sister Hinckley's inspired gesture of inclusion and love was the practical application of her husband's teachings. We are all in this together: a prophet, his wife, you and I, and a little boy in Brisbane.
