Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Chapter Twelve

Synergy

Marjorie Pay and Gordon B. Hinckley

Support is a solid noun and a very active verb in all of Marjorie Hinckley's relationships. However, it is never more obvious than in her relationship with her husband. On introducing Sister Hinckley to a large audience at BYU, Patricia T. Holland described the support Sister Hinckley gives:

In order to fortify the foundation of any lasting structure, a good architect knows that by joining together two 2 x 4s of equal strength, he can create a synergy so powerful that it doesn't just double the strength, it quadruples it.

This is what the Lord has done with Marjorie Pay and Gordon B. Hinckley. The synergy that exists between the two of them has more than quadrupled in strength for the Church, for their home, and for each other.

That support has been evident from the beginning years of President and Sister Hinckley's marriage. When in the summer of 1945 her husband was trying to decide whether to continue working for the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad or return to employment with the Church, Marjorie's response to the conflicting offers was a characteristic statement of practical and accommodating support:

As for the job, you had just better make up your mind to do the one which you enjoy the most, as you will spend quite a bit of your life working at it. As for me, I can make myself reasonably happy wherever you are, and as for the children, it is a question either way and is something we cannot possibly foretell, no matter how we speculate and wonder and worry.

Let's hurry and take up life together again. I like it better that way.

Sister Hinckley speaks of mutual respect in marriage:

I have been thinking back—way back to 1937. We were married during the Depression—"the bottom of the Depression," as my husband always says. Money was scarce, but we were full of hope and optimism. Those early days were not all blissful, but they were filled with determination and a great desire to establish a happy home. We loved each other, there was no doubt about that. But we also had to get used to each other. I think every couple has to get used to each other.

Early on I realized it would be better if we worked harder at getting accustomed to one another than constantly trying to change each other—which I discovered was impossible. Try not to be too demanding of one another. There must be a little give and take, and a great deal of flexibility, to make a happy home.

While it is important to be accommodating and flexible, of course we can draw the line when it is personally important for us to do so.

A son reflects on his mother's ability to draw that line:

Mother's independence is an interesting thing. She has always been supportive of Dad, but she is also the only person who can make him back down. If she told him, "You are not going to tear up the kitchen this week, and that is final," he didn't touch the kitchen. And it's not just that he gives in. He stops blustering and starts to chuckle, then turns and walks out of the room with admiration written all over his face! I think he loves the feisty, independent part of her.

Donna Packer, wife of President Boyd K. Packer of the Twelve, shares her admiration of Sister Hinckley's support of her husband and his calling:

My husband was sustained to be an Assistant to the Quorum of the Twelve and Gordon B. Hinckley was sustained as an Apostle on September 30, 1961. I felt this was an overwhelming responsibility to associate with the Brethren and their wives. I was eager to hear and remember every word and action of these more experienced sisters.

Sister Hinckley was one I watched and listened to. She had a delightful, natural sense of humor that made her approachable. As I nurtured that acquaintance, I found a depth that came from pioneer heritage and years of family and Church service.

One of her grandfathers, in the prime of life, was killed in the construction of the Manti Temple. Now alone, her grandmother became an exceptional example of a mother who had to adjust to experiences in life.

One day Sister David O. McKay, another wife whom we all greatly respected, gave a thought on the role of women that has stayed with me for nearly forty years. One of the things I remember her saying was, "It is the artful duty of a woman to adjust."

Sister Hinckley has been an outstanding model, one who adjusts her schedule and the family's schedule to meet the needs of her priesthood holder. Sister Hinckley's Church service has included total support for her very active husband.

Ruth Faust, wife of President James E. Faust, remembers:

During the time President Kimball and President Romney were ill and President Hinckley was carrying such a difficult burden in the First Presidency, Sister Hinckley asked if she could have a ride to a particular function with me. She said, "I'm not going to drive anymore." When I asked her why, she said that she had returned home a little late recently and her husband had told her how relieved he was and how much he worried when she was out in the car. "Well," she said, "I don't want to add to your problems. You can cross that worry right off your list. I'll quit driving."

I've thought many times about that unselfish gift, so quickly and easily given, and wondered if I could give up my independence that generously. Marjorie Hinckley is truly an elect lady.

Margaret D. Nadauld, wife of Elder Stephen C. Nadauld of the Seventy, recalls another occasion where Sister Hinckley put her personal life on hold for the sake of the work:

I will always treasure my memory of November in Nashville in 1991, and Marjorie Hinckley's eightieth birthday. It was a memorable occasion for us, as we were there on assignment with President and Sister Hinckley for the regional conference that weekend.

For the Sabbath, the Grand Old Opry auditorium had been transformed into a lovely meeting hall where Saints gathered by the hundreds. Flowers banked a large pulpit; hymns of Zion were sung; reverence abounded; and prayers were offered to the Lord in gratitude for His blessings on the Saints in that area.

There was a hush over the congregation as the prelude music ended and the conducting officer began this much-anticipated conference. During the preliminary portion of the meeting, time was turned over to a local stake president. He came to the pulpit, his arms filled with an elegant bouquet of beautiful, long-stemmed red roses. He asked Sister Hinckley to join him at the pulpit and presented that beautiful bouquet to her, wishing her a happy birthday from all assembled. He then proceeded to read a tribute that had been sent, along with the roses, by her children to be read in commemoration of her eightieth birthday.

It was a tender moment for all of us as we recognized that this was one of many, many instances when President and Sister Hinckley had been separated from their family on special occasions. The Hinckley children, however, were practiced at making ties strong even in absences. They had found a way to let their mother know of their devotion to her, their admiration for her, and their love for her, even though she was a thousand miles from home. They knew she would be in the presence of loving brothers and sisters who would indulge their sentimental moment.

Sister Hinckley received the gift of love with graciousness and responded with a comment typical of her: "Oh, to be sixty again!" Then this diminutive, exemplary, lovely woman spoke of the great joys of being married to a servant of our Heavenly Father and the experiences she had enjoyed traveling the world with him. Her eyes smiled in a permanent happy twinkle as she spoke. And we knew that, at least for the years since her husband had been called to the ministry, Sister Hinckley's personal interests had been put on hold for the sake of the things that were most important in her life, and that was just fine by her!

Sister Hinckley has pondered, probably more than once, on the role of the supporting wife.

In the book of Alma is a story that has fascinated me since I first read it. It is about a very colorful character named Moroni—not to be confused with the last survivor of the Nephites, who was also named Moroni. This man was a brilliant military commander, and he rose to be supreme commander of all the Nephite forces at the age of twenty-five. For the next fourteen years he was off to the wars continuously except for two very short periods of peace during which he worked feverishly at reinforcing the Nephite defenses. When peace finally came, he was thirty-nine years old, and the story goes that at the age of forty-three he died. Sometime before this he had given the chief command of the armies of the Nephites to his son Moronihah. Now, if he had a son, he had a wife. I've often wondered where she was and how she fared during those fourteen years of almost continuous warfare, and how she felt to have him die so soon after coming home. I am sure there are many, many stories of patience and sacrifice that have never been told. We each do our part, and we each have our story.

Sister Hinckley gives more than verbal encouragement and constant adjustments of energy and schedules to support her husband's demanding calling. She offers her natural gifts, not in competition but in partnership with her husband's. Theirs is a cooperative and complementary work effort, fit into a perfect rhythm by years of practice.

For instance, President Hinckley's efficient, time-oriented pace pushes him in and out of meetings with dispatch, but she good-humoredly goes more slowly, taking time to pay attention to those who are anxious to greet them. His natural reticence about giving or receiving lavish praise is compensated by her generous compliments about everything and everyone. His blustering remonstrances are offset by her good-natured soothings, "Now, just settle down."

Janet Lee, wife of the late Rex E. Lee, former president of Brigham Young University, describes these complementary roles:

The dedication of buildings is a major event at BYU. On one such occasion, Rex and I were waiting in a quiet room of the new building with President and Sister Hinckley. The dedication program was to begin in a few minutes, and President Hinckley was standing by a window watching students hurry to class. He spoke as though to no one, saying something about the young people looking different from the way they used to. I think he might have used the word unkempt. Sister Hinckley didn't miss a beat. In an instant she was at his side, and with a smile and a soft voice transformed the moment from bewilderment to bemused acceptance. "They are just fine," she told him. "That is simply the way young people like to dress today; they want to be comfortable. Think about how good they are."

There was not a hint of reproach in her voice. She had a way of defending the students with love and understanding, yet showing the same respect for anyone who viewed things differently. Those students had a friend in an eighty-two-year-old woman whose love for everyone united a prophet and his young followers that day.

And so there is a constant balance between the two of them—sometimes needing a little fine-tuning, but certainly creating a marvelous synergy.

As for Sister Hinckley's constant support of her husband—is she, as some in the world might suppose, erasing her own existence? Far from it! Although she is unselfish and other-centered, there doesn't seem to be a question of her own basic worth. Perhaps her sense of self is so fundamentally sound that she can be completely unselfish without losing even a particle of her real self.

Even though her husband's busy and demanding life requires a great deal of her time and energy, it has always been understood, by both of them, that she is an important individual:

Gordon always let me do my own thing. He never insisted that I do anything his way, or any way, for that matter. From the very beginning he gave me space and let me fly.

Another memory from Janet Lee illustrates the Hinckleys' mutually supportive relationship:

Once a year during my husband's administration, we had the honor of inviting General Authorities into our home for dinner. On one particular evening, the seating arrangements placed President and Sister Hinckley opposite each other instead of side by side at their table. I was unaware at the time, but it was a special day for the Hinckleys. In a few days I would learn that it had been their wedding anniversary.

In a devotional at BYU the next week, President Hinckley shared some reflections from that evening as he thought about his life with Sister Hinckley. Listening to his words, I was tutored by the genuine tenderness of his message. I felt good about life in general: about what had been, what is now, and what will be. Hope and an understanding of the beauty of true and everlasting love replaced my fear of growing older. In his own words, President Hinckley described his wife in a way no one else could. Once again I was taught by her life to be content with what I am, always looking forward to being that better person I can become as the years go by.

President Hinckley began: "May I be personal for a moment? I sat at dinner across the table from my wife the other evening. It was fifty-five years ago that we were married in the Salt Lake Temple. The wondrous aura of young womanhood was upon her. She was beautiful, and I was bewitched. Now, for more than half a century, we have walked together through much of storm as well as sunshine. Today neither of us stands as tall as we once did. As I looked at her across the table, I noted a few wrinkles in her face and hands. But are they less beautiful than before? No, in fact, they are more so. Those wrinkles have a beauty of their own, and inherent in their very presence is something that speaks reassuringly of strength and integrity and a love that runs more deeply and quietly than ever before."

Always, I will remember the gentleness in his voice as he spoke. I have not been given the privilege of growing old with my eternal companion, but in my imagination I want to believe that if we had been able to celebrate fifty-five years of marriage, I could have deserved such a tribute.

All of the characteristics and gifts of Marjorie Pay Hinckley enrich and complement those of her husband, Gordon B. Hinckley. They bless his personal life as well as make it possible for him to do the things that the Lord has required of him.

Her faith stands as a supporting pillar next to his.

Her genuineness helps to nullify the poison of adulation, against which those in public life always have to be on guard.

Her remarkable aptitude for mothering has given him the reassurance that even in his absence his children have been taught, loved, and well cared for.

Her unfailing optimism and good cheer have buoyed him up and given him happy companionship during rigorous travel assignments.

Her constant expressions of gratitude and humility have brought a spirit of contentment into their relationship.

Her enthusiasm for new information, people, and places has been a match for her husband's.

Her ready humor has lightened his load and restored perspective.

Her listening and understanding ear have given him respite.

Her generous expressions of confidence and belief in his abilities have moved him forward.

Her attention to grandchildren has bound their hearts to him and to the gospel.

And, reaching beyond their immediate family, she has gone about the Church at his side, knitting our hearts together in unity and love—into one great family ten million strong.
