Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Women of Faith

One beautiful spring Sunday morning in Brisbane, Australia, we were attending a stake conference. Although I had been invited to sit on the stand with my husband, I was relaxed, confident that I would not have to participate, as there was much stake business to be conducted. Suddenly I heard my name announced as the next speaker. I looked out at the audience of over a thousand people, my mind a complete blank. In the few seconds it took to walk the three or four steps to the pulpit, I remembered that my husband had said on a previous occasion, "If you have nothing to say, just bear your testimony." That was it. I would bear my testimony. So I expressed my love for the gospel and my gratitude for membership in the Church.

At the conclusion of the meeting a young woman of perhaps eighteen years of age said to me, "Sister Hinckley, you don't really appreciate the Church. You couldn't appreciate it the way I do, because you have always had it. I am a recent convert."

I was so taken back by the accusation that I could not think of an appropriate response. Only after we had parted company did I think of the things I could have said. I could have said, "My dear young friend, how could I not appreciate the gospel when I have seven ancestors who left their comfortable homes in England at different times and came across the plains, some of them giving their lives for the cause?"

I could have told her that when I was a child, my father took me, together with my brother and sisters, to a spot in Emigration Canyon known as Little Mountain. There we sat on the rocks while Father told us that this was the approximate place where the handcart pioneers came down the canyon and into the valley in December of 1856. My grandmother was with them. They called her Polly. She was twelve years of age. On the trip across they had buried her sister Fanny, her brother James, and her six-week-old baby sister Edith, who was born during the journey.

Just hours before reaching the Salt Lake Valley, Polly's mother died. This young girl rode into the valley in one of the wagons, her feet frozen and her mother's earthly remains held tenderly across her lap. They arrived at nine o'clock at night, December 11, 1856. The next morning when Brigham Young came and saw their condition, three of the four survivors damaged by frost and their mother dead in the wagon, he wept. I quote from my grandmother's writings: "The doctor amputated my toes, while the sisters were dressing mother for her grave. When my feet were fixed they carried us in to see our mother for the last time. . . . Oh, how did we stand it. That afternoon mother was buried. I have thought often of my mother's words, 'Polly, I want to go to Zion while my children are small so that my children can be raised in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for I know this is the true church.'"

I could have said to my sweet little convert friend, "Do you know what a profound effect this story of my grandmother had on my impressionable young mind, what feelings of pride and commitment and gratitude swelled in my heart?" With those early feelings of commitment, I determined to find a way to prove my faith.

Then I grew to adulthood. I had a wonderful marriage, children of my own, a comfortable life blessed with all the necessities and even some of the luxuries. I began to wonder how I could demonstrate my faith in such a convincing way as my grandmother and great-grandmother. As time went on this became more and more of a concern. Life was almost too good. I was even having feelings of guilt.

Then something wonderful happened. I learned about Charlotte. Charlotte Hyder Evans was my great-grandmother on my maternal line. Charlotte came across the plains also, when she was sixteen years old. The weather was favorable and they arrived safely, without undue hardship. Charlotte married a wonderful man and had twelve children. Like all other pioneer women, she went through the hardships incident to the building up of a new commonwealth—insufficient food, along with all kinds of sacrifices. She had her share of sorrow, sadness, and disappointment. She took care of the children and earned the living while her husband returned to England on a mission. At age forty-three she was widowed. She carried on with faith and with good cheer. When the Manti Temple was being built, she raised funds. When thread was needed, she tore up her skirt and gave the women wide strips to use as thread for sewing and mending. She made her adobe home a veritable palace with her beautiful handwork and flowers from her garden. When there were dead to be buried, she made burial clothes. When the call came for raising silkworms for the manufacture of silk, Charlotte was one of the first to plant two dozen mulberry trees to provide food for the silkworms. When the Relief Society was first organized, she became a visiting teacher, and she remained so for the rest of her life. Now, here was a woman I could relate to. Perhaps her contribution was not too dramatic or spectacular, but Charlotte did whatever needed to be done when it needed to be done. And, more importantly, she always did it with a cheerful heart. What more can any of us do?

Women of faith—they come in all ages and sizes. Even a child can show us the way.

Amy Eliza is nine. She is the sixth generation from Charlotte. She walked to the bishop's house with her parents one Sunday to pay her little tithing. On the way home, she asked, "What does the bishop do with our tithing money?" Her parents explained the many things that tithing is used for, including the building of temples. Four days later the building of a temple in Taiwan was announced. Amy Eliza was ecstatic. "Oh, thank goodness," she exclaimed. "They got my money just in time." Charlotte planted her mulberry trees. Amy Eliza made her contribution to the temple.

President Kimball said, "We are not asking for something spectacular, but rather for the women of the Church to find real self-fulfillment in the pursuit of righteousness in worthy endeavors."

A quote from Brigham Young, "Daily toil, however humble, is our daily duty and by doing it well we make it part of our daily worship."

And, I might add, part of our faith.

It is for us, brothers and sisters, to plant our own mulberry trees, making certain that underlying everything we do in the course of a day is a settled faith in God, in His existence, personality, and attributes. There must be faith in the restored gospel and in its power to save; faith in the divine mission of the Savior. This faith will give us the power to work righteousness.

God bless us all to do what needs to be done by our hands, and to do it cheerfully and with joy.
