Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

I Have Heard Angels Sing

When I was a young girl of about twelve years of age, our Sunday School teacher told us in class one morning that the angels of heaven sang at the dedication of the Manti Temple. I could scarcely believe this.

Grandmother Paxman was living with us at the time, and I knew that she had been to the dedication of that temple. So I hurried home to ask her about it. I said rather apprehensively, "Grandmother, did you hear angels sing at the dedication of the Manti Temple?" She said, "I certainly did." And then she proceeded to tell me that before the service began, while the people were still assembling, she heard beautiful choir music. It sounded as if it were coming from an upstairs room, and she thought the choir was rehearsing. She said, "I wondered why a choir that could sing so beautifully would have to rehearse." Then, she said, "I noticed that the choir members were just taking their seats and were not singing at all, and I knew I had heard angels."

I was so impressed with this story. And I hoped that I might live so that someday I might see such a miracle. Many, many years—even decades—have passed and I have not heard angels sing like my grandmother did, nor have I witnessed any other spectacular miracle. And I am grateful. My testimony has been fed by small, simple, and sometimes seemingly unimportant experiences. I think this is as it should be. There are very few big and spectacular miracles in most of our lives. But it is a quiet multitude of little miracles that makes life sweet and adds to our testimonies. It is walking up a narrow, steep, back road on the island of Okinawa at seven o'clock in the morning and hearing the strains of a Mormon hymn come out of a squeaky pump organ. It is seeing the beautiful countenance of a Chinese man who sells fish on the streets of Aberdeen, as he stands to conduct a little sacrament meeting, in all the dignity of his calling. It is seeing the determination on the face of a young elder when he faces the difficulty of learning a new language and says, with fear and trembling but with great determination, "I'm going to lick this if it kills me." It's seeing a young father and mother drive fourteen hundred miles through the expanses of Australia with four boys under six years of age to attend a stake conference, and finding that the mother can still smile.

I wish to share with you a few angel voices I have figuratively heard sing. The experiences were sometimes small, but each one has helped me to believe.

Brother Hinckley has had the responsibility of the missions of the Orient for the past two years. Last year, I had the privilege of going with him through these missions in the early spring and again in November. Then, two months ago, on the fourteenth of April, we visited stake conferences and met with the missionaries in many of the islands of the South Pacific and in New Zealand and Australia and then went up to Bangkok, Singapore, and Saigon, Vietnam, to meet with the members of the Church who are in that area serving in the armed forces of the United States.

Our first stop was in Samoa, where there is a wonderful stake of Zion, presided over by a distinguished-looking gentleman who is part Samoan and part Chinese. We were not able to be there on a Sunday, so the first session of conference was held on Monday night. It was very hot and steamy. We were tired, not having seen a bed since Saturday night. We had to speak through translators, and it was a difficult experience, but the people were patient and they came back to the second session on Tuesday night. We expected to have four days in Samoa, but our flight out was canceled and we had to content ourselves to stay for a full week. This was very difficult for my husband because he had a tight schedule for the next five weeks, which all went under the bridge. But it wasn't really too painful for me.

Life in Samoa is very colorful. Most live in open-air falles. This affords no privacy for the family, but makes for very interesting sight-seeing on the part of the visitor. It was wonderfully interesting to roam around watching the people shred coconut and dry cocoa beans. Also, this gave us additional time to meet with the missionaries laboring in Samoa. There were about a hundred missionaries in this mission, thirty-five of them from the United States and the others local Samoans serving full-time. The Church also maintained three schools in Samoa, and because of the delay we had the pleasure of visiting the students in all three schools.

We went over to the island of Savaii and drove up into the hills, covered with coconut plantations and other beautiful tropical foliage, to visit the school at Viola. They were not expecting us, but thirty minutes after we arrived, they had the entire student body assembled in the auditorium, which was a roof with open sides. When we arrived at the auditorium, there were two hundred students, from the first grade through sixth, sitting on the floor with crossed legs in poker-straight lines. It was a sight to behold. They sang two songs—something about "love under the apple tree" and a religious number. Then a few speeches from the visitors. Then they marched by, each shaking hands with us as they sang a beautiful Samoan song, "Goodbye, my felenie," or "Good-bye, my friend, I never will forget you." They sounded like angels to me.

The next morning at the village, down on the lagoon, there was a district conference scheduled. We went to bed early, hoping for a good night's rest before all of the scheduled meetings. At three a.m. the whole village seemed to come alive. People were chattering like magpies. We could hear water splashing. I got up and looked out the window at the back of our room and discovered that the water of the lagoon was about twelve feet from my bed. There were at least a dozen Samoan boys swimming and laughing and playing in the water like it was noonday. Trucks came and went, and we learned later that Saints were beginning to arrive for the next day's meeting. We tried to ignore it and pretend that it was still night. At four a.m., everything still pitch dark, a choir of perhaps thirty young voices began to practice "High on the Mountain Top." Over and over and over again they sang it. "Surely this isn't actually happening," I said. Choirs don't practice at four a.m., even on the island of Savaii, Samoa. By five o'clock we couldn't fight it any longer, so we got dressed and went out to join in. By this time there were another twenty or so youngsters jumping up and down in a deep pool of water just beyond our front door, brushing their teeth, shampooing their hair, pushing each other in, scrubbing their elbows with coconut fiber. By ten o'clock that Saturday morning all were clean and shining and sitting quietly in the chapel for the first session of their district conference. It was a sweet experience to see the influence of the Church of Jesus Christ on that isolated island of the Pacific where life is so different.

The next stake conference was held in New Zealand. As we sat on the stand and looked over that large congregation of over 1,000—some Caucasian and some Maori—a flood of memories swept over me of the first time I had been in New Zealand, five years before. It was for the dedication of the temple. My mind went back to those days.

I thought of the little woman from the South Island who sat in the temple chapel prior to going through for her endowments. In her hand she clutched a straw bag from which was bulging her Book of Remembrance. One could only guess at the years of preparation that had gone into that book, culminating in her trip to the temple.

I thought of the Maori lady who had given birth to seventeen children and who knelt at the altar of the temple during the first days of its opening to be sealed to those children and to her husband who had been many years gone.

I saw again Millie Tanio, who during those hectic days of open houses and dedication had kept the temple clean and sparkling as a diamond. Millie was half Maori, and until construction of the temple began, she lived in a fishing village with her husband, Joe, who walked with a limp from a high-school rugby injury. When the temple was being built, they left their home and came to Hamilton to work on the construction. When it was complete, they stayed on to act as custodians. How proud they were of this assignment. "If I never get to heaven, it doesn't matter," Millie said. "I'm having my heaven right here." Does she sound like an angel to you? She did to me.

I thought of other lessons I had learned from the Maoris. When we left home to go to the temple dedication, our youngest daughter, Jane, was just five years old. I promised her I would bring her some shells from New Zealand. I saw shells in people's homes, I saw them in window displays, I saw them used as decorations on restaurant tables, but no shells for sale. I tried everywhere. We were several miles from the ocean, so I couldn't gather my own. Frustrated, I told the temple matron that I thought these Maori people had really missed an opportunity. They could have gathered shells and made them available to sell to all these temple visitors and made a good piece of money.

This good sister had lived among the Maoris for some years, and she said, "Sister Hinckley, you don't understand. The beach to them is a place where you bury your feet in the warm sand, and fish, and ride the waves. It isn't a place to exploit." She said, "If you want some shells, don't try to buy any, just go into any Maori home and admire the shells you see there, and they will give them to you." I came home without any, but a little wiser.

Not only did we go to two stake conferences while in New Zealand but Brother Hinckley dedicated a library at the Church college and something like nine or ten chapels. Some were in the big cities; others were back in the mountains. The mayors of the cities turned out and occupied places on the stand. Sometimes members of Parliament were present and said very kind things about the Church. But dignitaries or no dignitaries, there were always the Maori choirs, dressed in white with flower corsages, looking beautiful and singing like angels.

We met so many of that wonderfully dedicated group of people, the labor missionaries. Those beautiful buildings in New Zealand would have been impossible without their work and your tithing. Most of the foremen and supervisors are from the United States. They have left their loved ones at home, or taken small children with them, and have subjected themselves to every kind of change you can imagine, going from place to place wherever a chapel is being built until the time comes for release. Financially, I can't imagine that they are doing any better than holding their own, but they are having a rich and rewarding experience.

I was interested in a brother from California who was supervisor for all the buildings throughout New Zealand. He traveled from dedication to dedication. Most of them were the fruits of his labors, either directly or indirectly. He made fine speeches at all the dedicatory services. And it was he who had said just six years ago when the missionaries knocked on his door in California, "Well, yes, I'll join your church, but I'm not going to do anything in it." All kinds of things—you could call them miracles—happen to all kinds of people when they lose themselves in the work of the Lord.

Next we attended stake conferences in Australia in the beautiful cities of Sydney and Brisbane. Over a thousand people. Just like Salt Lake City. Unbelievable. Australia is a vast and surprising country: beautiful, semitropical living along the coasts, vast desert covering most of the interior. We flew for hours over a section of Australian desert without seeing a sign of life.

From there we went to Vietnam (and this is beginning to sound like a travelogue), where we met with our servicepeople and the only native members in the entire country of Vietnam. Saigon, the capital of Vietnam, is a beautiful city resembling Paris, France. In fact, it is known as the Paris of the Orient. Two and one-half million people live in Saigon. The two native members are young women twenty-one and twenty-three years of age. One of them was at the airport to meet us at midnight when we arrived. I had been strapped into the jet for twelve and a half hours. I felt like an unmade bed. She was dressed in white satin trousers over which she wore a long silk apricot-colored tunic. Her hair fell to her waist, jet black and shiny clean. Her creamy olive complexion was flawless. I thought I had never seen such a vision of loveliness.

We held a meeting with the servicemen and their families and the two Vietnamese girls. I would like to read you a little from the testimony of one of these girls. I wrote down what I could remember of it.

"One thing is great surprise. My family is hardly ever sick since coming into the Church. Maybe this is one of the blessings that the Lord has given me. My family has always been so much sick and now I pray, 'Father, give my family good health.' And they are sick no more. I always try to be righteous and fair, but now I have faith. I do. I pray I may live good, like all of you, so others may be missionary girl this way.

"I have great hope as my father got some Mormon literature in French, so he could read about it. I feel my father like this religion. I want my whole family to have it. I do not know enough to teach them, but I have feeling in me that what I am learning is true. I appreciate the love you all have for me and the love I have for you."

When I was a child, I used to go to the Tabernacle at conference time with my mother and father. It was crowded, even in those days, and I can still feel the discomfort of being packed into a seat until there was no room at all for squirming. On more than one occasion, I heard President Heber J. Grant bear his testimony. He always said it in pretty much the same language, and I came to look forward to it. If he changed a word, I was disappointed. It went something like this—in a big booming voice: "I've borne my testimony from Canada on the north to Mexico on the south, in all the countries of Europe and on the islands of the sea."

How this used to thrill me and make goose bumps appear on my arms! Since then I've heard many and many a testimony, and I suspect that our testimonies are made up in a small part of testimonies of others which we have heard and to which we have responded. The testimonies I have heard have been to me the voices of angels singing. They have confirmed my belief in the Lord, just as the angels singing at the dedication of the Manti Temple confirmed my grandmother's belief in the Lord.

May we be ever grateful for the abundant miracles available to us in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
