Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

The Savior

Christmas is a wonderful time of the year. As the season begins, we are still basking in the glow of Thanksgiving Day, when we paused to thank our Heavenly Father in a special way for our multitudinous blessings and in many instances enjoyed the company of beloved family members and friends.

And then we come into the beautiful Christmas season.

I love everything about it. I know it has become too commercial. We would all agree. But perhaps in our particular culture, that is the way we have of showing that this is the most important day of the year. I love the street lights, the Temple Square lights, the store decorations, the folks from the Salvation Army ringing their bells. Yes, even the crowds of Christmas shoppers, knowing that most of them are looking for something that might make someone happy. There is much of hustle and bustle, of gift wrapping, card sending, baking, housecleaning, phoning, and feeling concern about proper gifts for this one and that one. But the wonderful thing is that through it all there is an escalating awareness of the Savior. We will, sure as anything, read again about His birth in Luke. We will sing and listen to all kinds of music about Him, from "Away in a Manger" to The Messiah. But what does it all mean if it doesn't do something to us inside? The words that always jump out at me are "Come, follow me." What did Jesus do that we could follow him in doing?

Jesus went about doing good.

He healed the leper, cast out devils, raised the dead. None of this can we do in just the same way. But in the environment we find ourselves in, there is so much we can do. There is no such thing as a small act of kindness. Acts of kindness come easily at Christmas. Our grandchildren are having a great time shopping for a family who cannot provide a Christmas for their children. But there are myriads of kindnesses we can do all through the year if we are alert to them.

I would just like to share some stories about the Savior that I particularly love, things I have learned from His life concerning the invitation He repeatedly gave to us to "come, follow me."

I have loved Him since I was a child. In the bedroom where my sisters slept, Mother hung a large picture of the boy Jesus teaching the wise men in the temple. She had positioned the picture so that the first thing our eyes saw when we awakened each morning was the beautiful face of Jesus. I was grown and long gone from the home before I realized what a profound effect this had had on my life.

When the picture came into my possession in later years, I could not throw it away, although it was old and damaged. It represented my first strong feelings of love for the Savior—the beginnings of my testimony. And because it depicted the boy Jesus teaching the wise men in the temple, that story has always been one of my favorites. When I was young, I admired His adventure and His boldness in leaving His parents to talk with adult men in the temple. When I became a mother of boys myself, I was intrigued and inspired by the mother of Jesus through this experience. After I had experienced losing a child for an hour or two in a crowded place, I could now empathize with her anxiety. But how beautifully she handled it when they found Him. In her words of gentle yet unmistakable reproof, she said: "Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing."

The boy's reply astonished them, in that it revealed—to an extent they had perhaps not before realized—His rapidly maturing powers of judgment and understanding. Said He, "How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:49). His reply, in the words of James E. Talmage, was to Mary a reminder of what she seems to have forgotten at the moment, the matter of her son's paternity. Nevertheless, He obeyed His parents and returned with them to Nazareth. "And [Jesus] went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them: but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart" (Luke 2:51).

I had always wanted to go to Nazareth, and on our first trip to the Holy Land I eagerly looked forward to seeing where the boy Jesus lived. But when we arrived, we found that because of a strike we could not go to Nazareth. Then the opportunity and blessing of going to the Holy Land came again. Once again I hoped we could go to Nazareth. This time it was possible.

I will never forget that experience. We arrived in Nazareth at noon. The main street was narrow and steep, crowded with merchants selling their wares—everything from fish to nylons. The noise was deafening. Schoolchildren were on their way home for lunch. At the bottom of the street was a very large camel, and a group of children chattering with excitement gathered around it. Two boys about nine years of age were making their way up the street, one walking backwards, as they threw a ball back and forth. "Was this the way it was when Jesus was a boy?" I asked myself. "Did He go home for lunch and stop to look at a camel and throw a ball with His friends?" I began to understand more fully that even though He was divine, the Son of God, the Prince of Peace, the King of Glory, He was also mortal. He lived on the same earth we live on. He had to overcome the challenges of mortality even as you and I do. He had to discipline Himself to get up in the morning and do His chores. He had to study and learn. My love for Him knows no bounds.

Somehow He became more personal to me. I began to think of Him more when I faced the everyday challenges, knowing that He knew my feelings and would know exactly how to comfort me. "And he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities" (Alma 7:12).

Succor according to our infirmities. To me this is summed up in the word comfort.

In my scripture reading lately I have become aware of the repeated mention of the word comfort. What a beautiful, soft, and gentle word is comfort.

Whether it is "to console, to soothe, to relieve, to encourage, to give strength and hope," how we need to be comforted. We all need it.

We read the papers and listen to the news. We find little comfort there. How grateful we are for the words in the scriptures:

"Therefore, let your hearts be comforted . . . ; for all flesh is in mine hands; be still and know that I am God" (D&C 101:16; italics added).

The Savior Himself spoke these soothing words: "Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted" (Matthew 5:4; italics added).

As a resurrected and glorified being, giving His last instructions to His disciples, He spoke words of reassurance: "I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you" (John 14:18).

And then as we take that sentence and continue with His invitation from the scriptures: "Come, follow me," we understand more completely. What better way to follow Him than to comfort another?

Sometimes it takes so little. Boy skins his knee, mother kisses it. Boy grows up and leaves home. Boy is twenty-five and in the military. His tank division is put on red alert. Father and mother go to him. Father gives him a blessing. Mother hugs him. He is comforted.

How grateful we are for the privilege of praying in the name of the Savior—in the name of the boy who played in the streets of Nazareth and understands this mortal life completely, in the name of the one who sacrificed Himself that we might live again with Him and the Father, who are the ultimate sources of comfort and peace.

I know that my Redeemer lives—what comfort this sweet sentence gives! Alma, speaking to the soon-to-be baptized members of the Church by the waters of Mormon, told them they should be "willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort (see Mosiah 18:9). May our willingness find words and deeds to help our brothers and sisters, now and always.
