Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

"Bless Our Missionaries in the Field and Lead Them to the Honest in Heart"

When we were in London for the dedication of the London Temple, I had my first experience of seeing our missionaries in action. This was an exciting adventure for me. For something like fifteen years my husband had worked with the missionary program. We had talked missionary talk, breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Our phone rang thousands of times with the problems of the twenty to thirty thousand missionaries who came and went during that time. So it was wonderful for me to look out of my window that beautiful morning when we arrived in London and see just a few rods away some boys in dark suits talking with little groups of people on the London Temple grounds. I flew down two flights of stairs and across a broad lawn and stood on the outside of the circle and listened. I'll never forget that experience. It overwhelmed me to see these youngsters being so bold. I thought of my young son who was still in high school, of what it took to get his eyes off the ground to meet the eyes of another. And I wondered what miracle had been wrought in these boys.

When I arrived on the scene, a young boy was speaking to the group. And I mean boy. He wasn't a man. He didn't appear to be old enough to drive a car, though I am sure he was. This boy was answering some questions that the open-house guests had concerning the temple, through which they had just toured. The spectators were a fine-looking, well-dressed group. Among them I noticed a woman of about thirty-six years of age who was looking at the missionary intently, never taking her eyes off him. He brought the little discussion to a close by explaining that he knew that when he said his prayers at night, he was addressing a personal being, a Father in Heaven who lived. Such boldness from a youngster! Then he asked if there were any more questions.

The woman who had never taken her eyes off him said, "Yes, I have a question. How can you be so sure of what you are saying?" And then I heard one of the most powerful testimonies I have ever heard. He said, as nearly as I can remember, "Everything in the scriptures tells me that God is a personal being, beginning in the second chapter of Genesis, which says 'And God made man in his own image and in his likeness.' And I have a testimony in my heart that He lives and is my Father in every sense of the word." The woman stood in silence, her eyes still fastened on him. What can you say in the face of such a testimony? The only thing she said was, "It's incredible!" as she made her way slowly down the path.

I overheard a young and pretty wife say to her husband as they were leaving the grounds, "My, but those young missionaries certainly do misquote the Bible, don't they, dear?" He answered, "That's the strange part about it. They didn't misquote a word." She was silent for a moment, and then said almost hesitantly, "Then, if that is so, they surely have the answers to a lot of things, don't they?" I wanted to turn and say to her, "Yes, they do have the answers, the answers to everything. They have the gospel of Jesus Christ in its fullness, if you could just humble yourselves to accept it."

I thought of the Savior's words: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, . . . how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!" (Matt. 23:37).

Those sweet, intelligent, inspired missionaries wanted to gather the British people who came to the temple grounds. When the guests left, they were given some literature together with a little slip of paper explaining that if they would like more information about the Mormons, they could fill out the slip and mail it to the mission office in London, fifty miles away. The mission president told us that they had received as many as fifty requests in one day's mail. It was heartwarming.

Missionaries do the Lord's work. They make a difference.

I hope none of you young men will cheat yourselves of the most tremendous experience that can ever come into your lives. You are going to live a good many years. Make up your mind while you are young that you are going to give two of these years to the Lord. This will be no sacrifice on your part. It is nothing short of an obligation that you have inherited. You have what you have today because back along the line somewhere, sometime, someone taught the gospel to you or one of your ancestors. The very least you can do is to do the same for someone else.

I heard a boy—his first year at the university—make the remark once that he didn't want to go on a mission because he thought every returned missionary he had ever met was kind of a sissy guy. I've never felt so much like taking issue with anyone over anything. That boy today, three years later, is married and working at a little two-cent job in California. His two younger brothers are at present in the mission field, going through the kind of rough-and-tumble experiences that this boy will never know if he could have stood up under.

Let me tell you that missionary work is not for the weak. If there is any situation in the world that will separate the men from the boys, it is missionary work. I've seen a boy shake with sobs of discouragement over problems beyond his capacity. And then I've seen him six months later, when through faith and prayer and sweat and toil he has come out the conqueror.

When you young men leave the airport for your mission field, you'll probably be nineteen years of age. Your mother and father, in spite of the love they have for you, will have spoiled you almost beyond saving. It isn't your fault. You can't help it that you have been raised in a land of luxury, where you've had a bicycle ever since you can remember and a car at your disposal since you've been old enough to care. It isn't exactly your fault that you've had three square meals a day, and plenty of snacking in between. It isn't really your fault that you've had a good bed to sleep in every single night of your life and that you have never had to go without shoes when you've needed them. This isn't really your fault.

But the result is that when you leave for your mission, you'll be a spoiled, pampered, and protected kid. Four to twelve hours later, when you arrive in the mission field, your mission president is there to welcome you, and he sees you for what you must now become. You must now become a mature man, one who knows how to work until he is weary, and who knows how to roll with the punches, and who knows when to speak and when not to speak, and who knows how to conduct himself as a representative of Jesus Christ, and who knows how to keep a press in his pants during the rainy season and his shoes shined in spite of the mud, and whose table manners are above reproach, and who knows how to put himself in the other man's shoes, and who can learn to communicate in a foreign language in six months, and who knows how to forget himself completely in the service of others. And miracle of miracles—and remember that miracles come from our Father in Heaven—most of you nineteen-year-old boys make the miraculous transition and become mature men.

One homesick boy from Idaho, the darling of his mother's eyes, the pride of his grandmother and aunts, found himself a missionary on the island of Fiji. He had a great deal of musical ability and training. He was assigned to a place where there was not even a piano, and where none cared whether he could carry a tune or not, and where the cockroaches were giving him a bad time in the cold shower. We took him out for an American hamburger to pick up his lagging spirits. It was hard to leave him. But I have confidence that he'll grow up, and he'll learn about hard knocks, and then pretty soon, he'll forget all about himself. He'll be so taken up with trying to teach someone about the gospel and so happy when he leads someone into the waters of baptism that he'll be saying, "Cockroaches? What are they?" This can happen. I know it can.

One more missionary story. On our first trip to London, we drove up to the manufacturing town of Preston, where my husband had first labored as a missionary twenty-five years before. You know how nostalgic a returned missionary is over that first field of labor! So up we went to take some pictures and reminisce.

We arrived in Preston at five o'clock in the evening. Now, this was not the beautiful, green, picturesque part of England, but the industrial area. Even so, there was a kind of stark beauty in the cobblestone streets and the long rows of chimney pots. The factories had just closed for the day, and it seemed like all of England had jammed onto the buses or were walking four abreast on the streets. They looked tired. As I looked into their faces, I felt sorry for them—sorry that they had nothing more to live for than to go to work and come home at night, with nothing more important in their lives than a cup of tea at ten and two and a pub to sit in during the evening. If only the light of the gospel could have touched them! And the most discouraging thing of all was the fact that there hadn't been a baptism in that town for over a year.

We had two elders stationed in this town, and we started out, address in hand, to find them. As we approached the flat where they had lodgings, I became apprehensive. I said to my husband, "You know, maybe we shouldn't call on these two elders. They are not expecting us, and perhaps we might find them in some situation that might embarrass them. I believe if I were a missionary in this town I might just go to bed and pull the covers over my head, or knock off for a game of tennis, or drown my discouragement in the picture show." My husband had no such misgivings, and we rang a doorbell. An English woman opened the door of a shabby but tidy flat. The smell of boiling cabbage greeted us. "Do Elders So-and-so live here?" we asked. "Come in," she said. We stepped into a narrow hall and she called up a flight of stairs, "Gary, two people here to see you." I held my breath, and in a moment two boys appeared at the top of the stairs. What a vision they were: white shirts, pressed trousers, shined shoes, looking for all the world like two handsome princes. It was all I could do to restrain myself from embracing them. Were they on the job? They were so much on the job that they hardly had time to visit with us. My husband said, "We would like to take you to dinner."

They were out the door before the sentence was finished. "No cabbage tonight!" remarked one. The senior companion hastened to explain that they were delighted to go to dinner with us, but they had three cottage meetings scheduled, the first one at six-thirty. We listened to them as we ate. Their devotion, their sincere and energetic efforts to teach the gospel to someone—anyone—in Preston were a revelation to me.

"But aren't you discouraged?" I asked.

"Discouraged about what?" they replied.

"You haven't had a baptism here in over a year!"

"Well, that doesn't mean there isn't anyone in Preston who wants the truth. And if there is someone here who is looking for the truth, we will find them."

I wouldn't have believed it without seeing it. The last we saw of those boys was the next morning as we were about to leave. In parting, they said, "Well, if we cannot be of any further help to you, we must get about our business. We are tracting a suburb on the outskirts of town and we must hurry on."

I looked at them as they marched up the street with their long, youthful strides. I said in my heart a prayer that I have repeated since I was a child, "Bless our missionaries in the field and lead them to the doors of the honest in heart."
