Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

Unsolicited, Unwelcome, and Unwanted Advice from a Seventy-Five-Year-Old Woman to College Students

The title of my remarks is: "Unsolicited, Unwelcome, Unwanted Advice from a Seventy-Five-Year-Old Woman." There are quite a few not-so-wonderful things about growing old, so there ought to be some rewards. One of them certainly is that you can give unsolicited, unwelcome, and unwanted advice. There are other advantages, too. By the time you've reached the age of seventy-five, you are what you are. You don't have to prove anything anymore. And you are more or less accepted by others with a degree of tolerance because you are old and a little senile, of course. Our weaknesses, more often than not, are blamed on our advanced age. One woman who is the same age as President Ronald Reagan, seventy-five, said, "If President Reagan is anything like me, he must go into the Oval Office on occasion and say, 'Now, what did I come in here for?'"

I will now proceed with the unwanted advice by saying that if I were a student on a university campus, I would jump in with both feet. I would not want to be like the man who said, "I missed out on my college days. You see, I didn't enter into it quite all the way. I was afraid, I guess. I wanted to try out for a part in the school play once, but I didn't. I intended to; I went up to the room where they were reading the parts that night, but I didn't go in. There were so many there who could do it better than I, and I turned away down the hall. I wanted to try out for the football team, too, but I told myself I was too light and I turned away from the practice field. And it's funny, but you know, I can't watch a college football game, I can't listen to one on the radio, I can't watch one on television, I can't go to a college play because I see myself out on that field or on the stage where I might have been if I hadn't been afraid. And I find myself wishing that I could go back to college and live those days over again."

All about us we see dissatisfaction. We see people who want to be somebody else, or want to have someone else's talents. I suppose we're all guilty of this a little.

In the book Woman to Woman (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), Norma Ashton tells a story about President Spencer W. Kimball. Spencer Kimball and Harold B. Lee were very, very dear friends. They went into the Quorum of the Twelve within a few weeks of each other. In fact, President Kimball said that he always envied his friend. He loved him so much and admired him so much he wanted to be like him in every way. And he often said, "Harold, I wish I could play the organ like you do," or "Harold, I wish I could speak like you do," or "Harold, you can see the gist of a problem so quickly. I wish my mind were as clear as yours."

Then one day, when they came out of their Thursday temple meeting, President Kimball said to President Lee, "You did a magnificent job with your report today. Oh, I wish I could do as well as you." And then he said with a twinkle in his eye, "I guess Brother Lee had had enough. He put his hands on his hips, he looked me straight in the eye. He said, 'Spencer, the Lord doesn't want you to be a Harold B. Lee. He only wants you to be the best Spencer W. Kimball you can be.'" And then he said with a smile, "After that I just tried to be the best Spencer W. Kimball I could be."

And would you say he succeeded in this?

The scripture in the Doctrine and Covenants is a comfort to me, I think it's a comfort to all of us: "For all have not every gift given unto them; for there are many gifts, and to every man [and woman] is given a gift by the Spirit of God. To some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby" (D&C 46:11-12). From a column by Sydney Harris in the Deseret News a while ago I copied the following: "Nobody knows how smart or how talented he is until he finds the incentive to use himself to the fullest." This reminds me of a young man who said to his friend, "Can you play the piano?" and the friend replied, "I don't know, I've never tried." Sydney Harris continues, "God has given us more than we know what to do with, so get going. Find out what you like to do, what you're good at, and jump in with both feet." And so I am telling you, try out for the school play or the basketball team, or dance, or track, or whatever. Even a failure can be counted as a success because it will give you experience.

Now may I quote from the Wall Street Journal: "The greatest waste of our natural resources is the number of people who never reach their potential. So get out of that slow lane; shift into the fast lane. If you think you can't, you won't. If you think you can, there's a good chance that you will. And even making the effort will make you feel like a new person. Don't be afraid to fail; you've failed many times, though you may not remember. You fell down the first time you tried to walk. You almost drowned the first time you tried to swim. Don't worry about failure—worry about the chances you miss when you don't even try."

And now to the second bit of unasked-for advice. If I were a student in college, I would make developing friendships on campus a very important goal. You wouldn't want to be like the man who said, "I missed out on my college days, you see, I didn't enter into it all the way. Working my way through school took all my time, or at least I said it did. Sometimes at night my roommates would gather and go for an ice cream or something. And they'd invite me to go with them. I never did. I told them I had to study. It seemed to me a lot of foolishness the way they'd go to the drive-in or loiter on the library steps, or go to snake dances and rallies. I even missed the football games. Froth, I called it, wasted time. I was in school to study. Every time I see two school chums now slap each other on the back and say, 'Remember the time . . . ,' I gulp a little because I missed out on all of that. And I find myself wishing I could go back to school and live those days over again."

Now, I'm not suggesting that you play when you should be studying, but developing friendships is important. It's a skill you will need all of your lives. No man is an island, and associating with and learning to enjoy the company of good people is a valuable part of your education.

As I pulled into a parking lot a couple of weeks ago, a car drove in beside me. It was a dear school friend of fifty-five years. We have kept in touch all through the years. I hadn't seen her for maybe three months, but our conversation picked up exactly where it left off at our last encounter. I felt so warm and comfortable in her presence, because here was a woman who knew me when I was young, and thin, and full of dreams. She understood me; she knows where I came from. Her absolute integrity and loyalty have been an inspiration to me all through the years. Her love and caring has sustained me and given me comfort when I needed it. Perhaps she has been more important to me than all the secular training that I received when I was in school.

And among the friends I would make on this campus, if I were you, is at least one of these wonderful faculty people. Each of your professors has a lot to give you that isn't in the textbooks. You might even take an apple to him. Talk to him, let him know of your desire to succeed in his class, let his or her good influence be felt in your life in a very personal way.

And now the third bit of advice. This is about becoming acquainted with those sometimes intimidating textbooks. When you open that textbook, say to yourself, "I want to know what this book has to teach me."

I found myself one day in the home of one of our wonderful Church leaders in Buenos Aires, Argentina. There were several women there. We were waiting for our husbands, as usual, who were in a meeting at the stake house. These were delightful, beautiful women whose native language, of course, was Spanish. I wanted so much to be part of that group. I was straining to catch any Spanish word I could catch, and failing miserably. Suddenly, like an old-time vision passing across my eyes, was a Spanish class that I had taken at East High School in 1928. I took the class for two years, and I could see it as plain as if I were back there. I could almost smell the chalk dust and hear that scratchy record playing "Cielito Lindo." I could see Miss Farrell, the teacher, leaning on the windowsill trying to fight back the tears because those three big bullies on the back row were completely out of control. And then I thought of Eleanor, who always sat right beside me and was always looking on my paper and popping her gum in my ear.

I did the very minimum required to get a respectable grade in that class, and I promptly put every Spanish word out of my mind when I left it. I took the class because I needed the credit. I certainly did not take it to learn Spanish. Who needed to know Spanish, anyway? I didn't know a single person who spoke Spanish. Even the teacher spoke only a few laborious sentences occasionally. And now, when Brother Hinckley and I travel through the stakes and the missions of the Church, we find that Spanish has become the second language of the Church. And we find ourselves constantly struggling to communicate with these wonderful, Spanish-speaking members whom we love so much.

I missed out. I missed out on a valuable experience because I did not have a love affair with my Spanish textbook when the opportunity was there and the time and season were right. So, no matter the class, or how irrelevant it may seem, learn, learn, learn, as if your life depended on it. Perhaps it will. Learn the thrill of digging for fossils on the mountainside, or working over a test tube until dark, or getting on the trail of something in the library and searching it down feverishly for hours. Learn to be a real student, an excellent student.

A friend of mine lost her parents when she was very young. She was raised by her grandmother, who for some reason or other never bothered to tell her anything much about her mother. One day, when my friend was in her teens, she was going through some papers in her grandmother's house, and she ran across a report card of her mother's from grade school. At the bottom of the card in a space labeled "Remarks" the teacher had written: "Excellent in every way."

This young woman clasped the card to her chest and waltzed around the room saying, "My mother was excellent. My mother was excellent in every way!" It's all she ever knew about her mother, but it inspired her the rest of her life. It does matter, my dear young friends, that you are excellent in every way. It matters.

And now, the fourth and, you will be glad to know, the last bit of unasked-for advice. If I were a college student, I would make religion an important part of my college life. You can't be a whole person without religion. You can't feed your body and your mind and starve your spirit. Listen one more time to the man who said: "I missed out on my college days. You see, I didn't enter into it quite all the way. I went there as a freshman and I became somewhat irritated over having to take courses in religion in order to graduate. I must be honest and say that I even cheated on some of the examinations in those courses. It was only later that I discovered that I never understood the meaning of the great principles that were being discussed. I never really understood them or internalized them. It was only after I was out of college, and the scales fell from my eyes, that I discovered that those principles, if understood and accepted and lived, would bring me the greatest joy I could ever know. It was only then, in the later years of my life, that I made the personal commitment to try to live those principles and to represent Him in the finest way that I could. I dropped into the university on another day and attended a devotional in which a great man talked about those principles, and I found myself wishing that I could go back to college and live those days over again."

Now, there are some specific ways to avoid such a disaster. One way is to make a real effort to get your very own personal testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ. President Harold B. Lee once told us that it is vital for us to have our own testimony and not to have to lean on the testimony of others if we are to survive in the years ahead of us. And there are ways to do this. First there must be a desire to know. There must be the wanting.

If you will pardon a personal example, I would like to tell you about my testimony. Being born under the covenant, I grew up in a family of faith. My parents were totally committed to the gospel. Our lives centered on the Church. I believed because it had never occurred to me not to believe. When I was seventeen, I received my first real Church calling. It was to teach a class of boys and girls in the junior Sunday School. I was thrilled and excited. I got the manual Saturday night and began to prepare the lesson.

It now occurred to me that I was about to teach some innocent children something of which I had no personal testimony. I had only been walking on a path of belief. This upset me. I felt uncomfortable about it. I went to my father and told him of my dilemma, and, wise father that he always was, he said, "Well, why don't you read Joseph Smith's story of the First Vision, and see how you feel about it."

I went into the bedroom and closed the door, and I began to read the story that I knew almost by heart. But this time—this time—it was different. It was different because I read wanting to know, wanting desperately to know, and I wanted to know soon—before Sunday morning. By the time I had finished reading, there had come into my heart the sweet assurance that when Joseph Smith told what happened to him in the grove, he told the truth. I have never doubted it since, and I was ready and anxious to teach the children the next morning.

A story of a girl in Australia also illustrates this desire for a testimony. She graduated from high school and went to work in an ice-cream store. Her parents were very domineering and had made her feel that she wasn't worth much. So every day she dished up ice cream, and every night she went home and watched television. She was vegetating.

Then two Mormon missionaries knocked at her door. They were invited in. They began to talk. The parents were not the least bit interested in anything they said. But something they said electrified this girl. They said that she was a child of God. She said the fact that she could, in any way, have any kind of a connection with any kind of a God so shocked and intrigued her that she asked the elders if they could come back the next night and tell her more. They said no, they had another appointment. So she asked if they could come in the morning, at seven o'clock.

They went back at seven the next morning and taught her more. She went down to the ice-cream store early. She went into the back room and kneeled down to offer the first prayer of her life. She didn't know how to pray, so she simply said, "Is what these missionaries are telling me true? Am I your child?"

At that moment, she said, a beautiful feeling seemed to enter the soles of her feet and go right up through her and out the top of her head. It just enveloped her. She stood up. She said, "Thank you very much. That's all I wanted to know."

Of course she joined the Church, and as she participated in the programs, this girl blossomed like a rose. Her testimony came in response to a passionate desire to know. Desire is the very first step in gaining a testimony.

Now, perhaps we cannot all expect such an immediate and specific answer, but the desire must be there. President David O. McKay gave a talk at priesthood meeting in general conference that may have been a bit shocking to many, since many of us are conditioned to expect that prophets have no difficulty in getting divine manifestations. President McKay told how he had struggled in vain through his teenage years to get God "to declare to me the truth of His revelations to Joseph Smith."

He prayed fervently and earnestly in the hills and at home, but had to admit to himself that "no spiritual manifestation has come to me." But he continued to seek the truth and to be active in the Church. He went on a mission largely because he trusted his parents. "Finally," President McKay said, on his mission, "the spiritual manifestation for which I had prayed as a boy in my teens came as a natural sequence to the performance of duty." That's very impressive to me. It came as a natural sequence to the performance of duty. Just as the Lord declared in John 7:17: "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine."

Now, what does this tell us about attending church, and about being actively engaged in it? You belong to a student ward here, and we know there are not enough callings to go around. But I hope you have talked to your bishop and told him that it is your desire to help in whatsoever way you can. Discipline yourselves. Get out of bed on Sunday and go to your meetings. It's important—terribly important.

I met a friend one day not long ago, a doctor at the LDS Hospital whom I hadn't seen for a little while, and I asked him casually what he was doing in the Church these days. He lit up like a Christmas tree. He said, "I have the most wonderful job I have ever had in the Church. I am a bishop of a student ward on the University of Utah campus." And then he said with tears in his eyes, and with his voice choking with emotion, "This morning, Monday morning, my twenty-year-old Relief Society president called me and said, 'Bishop, what can I do to help you this week?'" Think of that for a moment: What can I do to help you? That's what it's all about.

Some of you may say, and especially you returned missionaries, "Well, I don't need to be bothered with all that. I have a testimony. I feel secure in it. I'm okay." But let me remind you of the words of President Harold B. Lee: "Testimony isn't something you have today, and you will have always. A testimony is fragile. It is as hard to hold as a moonbeam. It is something you have to recapture every day of your life."

Brother Hinckley and I had the marvelous experience of traveling all over Europe with the Lees right after President Lee became the president of the Church. He held meetings with hundreds and hundreds of missionaries. And every time President Lee addressed a group of missionaries, every single time, he said, "Elders and sisters, your testimony has to be renewed every day." And I believe it. Sometimes it is renewed just because of a little experience, or maybe reading a verse of scripture that touches a tender spot, or turning a corner and coming upon a field of wildflowers, or seeing a newborn babe, perfect in every way. But it mostly comes from living the gospel and serving in the Church. It isn't so hard to renew your testimony daily if you are active in the Church. As President McKay said, "It comes as a natural sequence to the performance of duty."

Well, I've given you a lot of advice—and even if my advice was unsolicited, unwelcome, unwanted, and will be politely ignored, I feel so much better for having said it! In closing, though, I think you deserve to hear some advice from someone more qualified to give it than I. This is advice from one of my favorite, favorite people. It is advice from Alma the Younger. I love that man. I love him for what he has taught me, and for the way he makes me feel when I read his words. His conversion came through a very painful process. But once he was converted, he jumped in with both feet. As he grew older and was able to rid himself of the affairs of government, he began preaching the gospel, first in his hometown of Zarahemla, and then over the river in the valley of Gideon. He must have been a marvelous speaker, for the scriptures tell us that the people of Gideon responded. They followed him. They did as he asked them to do. Not one hundredth part of the things he said to the people of Gideon has been recorded, but what we do have is pertinent to us today.

These were his parting words to the people of Gideon: "I would that ye should be humble, and be submissive and gentle; easy to be entreated; full of patience and long-suffering; being temperate in all things; being diligent in keeping the commandments of God at all times; asking for whatsoever things ye stand in need, both spiritual and temporal; always returning thanks unto God for whatsoever things ye do receive. And see that ye have faith, hope, and charity, and then ye will always abound in good works" (Alma 7:23-24).

And now, my dear young friends, as the years rush on and you look back on your college days, I hope that you will say, "I lived those days to the fullest, and I am happy."
