Virginia H. Pearce, Glimpses into the Life and Heart of Marjorie Pay Hinckley ( 1999)

A Love Unlike Any Other Love

Whenever the hymn "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet" was sung in the presence of President Spencer W. Kimball, he would join in with enthusiasm, thinking, he said, not in terms of himself as president of the Church, but of all the prophets who had gone before. So it is with Mother's Day. We hear the beautiful music and tributes paid to mothers and we think not of ourselves, but of our own mothers and other mothers who have warmed our hearts and nurtured and inspired us.

A succession of mothers who have been instrumental in shaping my life started five generations back with Sarah, the earliest on my matriarchal line to join the Church.

Sarah grew up in a home of refinement in Cambridge, England, and was well educated for a woman of her time. Her husband died at the young age of thirty-two, leaving her with three daughters and one son, and a family business. He had wanted his children reared in a church, so they affiliated with the Church of England shortly after his death. A Mr. Goates called regularly at her home with butter, eggs, and bakery products, and on occasion she would chat with him on current topics, including religion. She became so intrigued with his explanations of the Bible that she asked to what church he belonged. When he told her he belonged to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, her curiosity was aroused. He brought her literature to read. This she studied diligently, searching the scriptures to verify the truths she was seeking. At first her children disapproved of their mother's association with the baker, whom they thought of inferior class. They were humiliated when she took them to the town hall to hear the Mormon missionaries. As time passed, however, her daughters became interested and decided to join the Church with their mother. Sarah was the first woman to be baptized in Cambridge. Three days after the girls were baptized, Sarah's only son died suddenly.

Soon Sarah began thinking of emigrating to Zion. Her parents were distraught and tried to dissuade her. They begged her to stay in England so the girls could continue their education at Cambridge College. They offered her three hundred pounds more from their estate if she would remain at home. She replied that she could not accept their offer, that she felt impelled to go to Zion. She sold her business and began her preparations.

On February 23, 1851, Sarah and her daughters left Cambridge. What dauntless faith and courage they possessed! They left their loved ones and friends, never to see them again. They left the comforts of a well-established home, the security of a thriving business, educational opportunities for the girls, and a gracious way of life, all to go to an unknown, strange, and undeveloped land. It was a bold step, an expression of the strength of Sarah's testimony and of her desire to live the gospel in Zion and to do what seemed best for her daughters. This faith and commitment went down into the very bones of her children and her children's children.

Sarah's daughter Charlotte was seventeen when the family made the long journey from England. Charlotte became my great-grandmother. When they were ten days out at sea, she recorded in her diary: "The sea is calm and beautiful. The wind is in our favor and although I long to see my friends in Cambridge, I console myself in the thought that I am going to Zion, the promised land. Oh! glorious thought."

Before a year had elapsed, Charlotte was married to the young man who played the bugle on their trek across the plains. To this union were born twelve children. The first arrived when she was eighteen, in a covered wagon and with no one to attend her. This beautiful and gentle young mother faced all the rigors, disappointments, and sorrows of pioneer life. She lost two sons in death within a year, one twelve years old and the other fourteen. She did not complain when her husband was called to serve a mission in England, leaving her to provide money for him and a living for the children. She did not complain when he returned home after thirteen months because of ill health and died only a few weeks later, leaving her alone, at the age of forty-three.

Like other pioneer women, Charlotte did whatever needed to be done. She not only cared for her family, nurturing, teaching, guiding, and loving them, but was also active in charitable work. She gathered money for the construction of the Manti Temple. She gathered wheat for the Relief Society storage bins, made burial clothes, and nursed those who were sick. When the call came for the Saints to raise silkworms for the manufacture of silk in Utah, she planted twenty-four mulberry trees to feed the worms. Through all the hardships of a rugged pioneer life, she was always cheerful. What she did, she did with joy—joy in the gospel, joy in life itself, and joy in her children. Her two granddaughters, who grew up next door to her, said they never heard their grandmother raise her voice or speak a cross word. She was indeed a saintly woman, a mother to be honored.

Next came Charlotte's daughter Martha Elizabeth. She was the ninth child of this family of twelve in Nephi, Utah. When Martha was nineteen, she married George Paxman and moved to Manti, where George was working on the Manti Temple. They did not have much by way of worldly goods, but they had enough for their needs. George worked eight hours a day on the temple and received only a weekly order of four dollars at the local store. The balance of his compensation came from the Tithing Office. But it was a labor of love. He was building a temple to God. Their joy was increased with the birth of a blue-eyed baby girl near the end of their first year in Manti.

On June 27, 1887, a month before little Frances was one year old, George staggered home in great pain from work on the temple, where he had hung one of the heavy east doors. He was taken to Nephi by team and wagon and then to Provo, where he died three days later of a strangulated hernia.

Martha's world collapsed. She returned to her mother's home in Nephi, and eight months later she gave birth to another daughter, whom she named Georgetta, after her beloved George. She then moved into a small adobe house next door to her mother and struggled to begin a new life with her little girls. She became an expert seamstress. Sometimes she took them with her into the homes where she sewed for two or three days at a time. Sometimes she sewed in her own home late into the night after they were in bed. Her gifted hands turned out an incredible quantity of beautiful handwork: crocheted doilies, tablecloths, afghans, lace collars, beaded purses, and many other items. Always she kept the girls close to the Church. She taught them the things of God. She read to them from the best books. She was meticulous about paying a full tithing.

When the girls finished school in Nephi, Martha moved to Salt Lake City, rented a small home, and went to work in the alterations department of a department store. One of her daughters attended the LDS Business College and the other went to the University of Utah on a scholarship.

Martha, an attractive woman, had offers of marriage after the death of her husband, but she chose not to marry again. The principle of eternal marriage to George sustained her through sixty-six years of widowhood. She had unshakable faith in the gospel and played the sacred role of motherhood as a single parent in a magnificent way.

Martha's daughter Georgetta was my mother. I could write a book about the things my mother taught her children, but I mention only a few. She inherited from the three mothers who preceded her the spirit of sacrifice for the gospel and for her children. Her unconditional love for the Lord and for her children was ever present. Having grown up in a family where there was no priesthood, she never got over the wonder of having a husband who held and honored the priesthood of God.

One of my earliest memories is of sitting by the dining room stove with Mother when the younger children had gone to bed, waiting for Father to come home from MIA. I can still see him coming through the door with snow on his hat and coat. He and Mother then talked and laughed about what had gone on. I thought his being the MIA president must be the most wonderful thing that could happen to a family. And so it was down the years with many Church callings. It was the same when he grew older and was ordained a patriarch. When people came to our home for blessings, Mother was her happiest. She would have the house in immaculate order, with fresh flowers and an air of happiness permeating every room.

Thus she prepared me, without realizing it, to live happily with a man whose total commitment to the Lord has dictated our lifestyle. I cannot remember a time when our five children were growing up that their father was able to sit with us in church. He was always on a church assignment. Because of the home in which I grew up, it did not occur to me that there was any other way to live. Mother had taught us by example that the most wonderful thing in the world is to have a husband who loves the Lord. It wasn't that she ever openly said this; it was her ever constant attitude.

There is nothing so powerful in the world as the example of a righteous mother, and to have four generations of blessed mothers to sustain and uphold and inspire is a blessing beyond measure.

Now we have a generation of new mothers in a different kind of world, different from the pioneer lifestyle but with its own unique and sometimes overwhelming challenges. Their children are growing up in a world where Satan is making his presence felt in every facet of life. Evil in every form is swirling about them—disrespect, irresponsibility, negative criticism, offensive language, dishonesty, immorality, drugs, and the sometimes questionable advantage of too much affluence. How marvelous are the mothers who are nurturing and strengthening the youth of today. How valiant they are in making their homes a refuge from the evils that could otherwise engulf them.

In his book Everything But Money, author Sam Levenson tells of growing up in a crowded New York tenement where the environment was anything but genteel. But his wonderful mother was dedicated to making respectable and upright adults of her eight precocious children. He writes, "The fight against individual corruption was part of the fight against the environment. The moral standard of the home had to be higher than that of the street. 'You are not on the street; you are in our home. This is not a cellar nor a poolroom. Here we act like human beings.' I remember the speech well. Like royalty, Mama said 'we.'" (Everything But Money [New York: Pocket Books, 1966], p. 123.)

And so it is with the mothers of today. They are committed to loving their children into standing on higher ground than the environment surrounding them. We see young mothers coming into church on a Sunday with their children, all with clean, shiny hair, shoes polished, dresses and suits looking as if they were on their way to the photographer, and the mothers' arms filled with books and supplies as they head for classes to teach yet other children. There can be weariness and frustration in these motherly activities, but there is also joy.
