Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

INTRODUCTION

From the days when Adam was driven from the Garden of Eden, the Lord has commanded that his children should seek knowledge concerning their salvation. The heavens have always been open when necessary for knowledge to be revealed and when the people sought for light in relation to their temporal and eternal salvation. It is not the will of the Lord that the heavens have been closed since the departure of the apostles nearly nineteen hundred years ago. He has always been willing to converse with man and instruct him in doctrine, and guide him in spiritual things, when man has shown a willingness to be so instructed. It is a sad reflection upon the Christian world that there has been a prevailing belief that revelation ceased and man is dependent solely upon what has been written in the scriptures as it has come down to us, unfortunately too often in imperfect form. The trouble with the Christian world since the time when Peter and his associates of the Twelve were on the earth, is that it has arrogated to itself the right to know the mind of the Lord and the plan of salvation without any further manifestation of divine power or spiritual guidance. We have been told that the "canon of scripture" is closed; that there is to be no more vision, no more coming of messengers from the divine presence, for all such things are no longer needed. Hence we find the professed followers of our Master divided, and stumbling in the dark with diverse interpretations on the "written word." The simple logic of this condition should teach us one and all that it is impossible for unity to exist in the minds of men in relation to the plan of salvation.

One prominent writer, many years ago, summed up the matter in these words:

The sum of the whole matter is this: Reason is the last arbiter; our own reason, our individual reason, my reason, nobody's else. There are various sources of authority, Bible, or Church, or God, but each one must be tested by our personal reason before it is believed. We are all of us at bottom rationalists, cannot help being. What God is, whether there be a God, we must decide by the best reason we have. If we are made in the image of God, that image is in reason, not in body; and our little reason can and must get some true view of God, just as our little blinking myopic eyes can truly, if imperfectly, decry the infinite spangled universe. Reason may see faintly, even erringly, but it is all we have to guide us. It may rest on custom, tradition, social inheritance, the teachings from childhood of those whom we think possessed of more knowledge and judgment than we, but all our beliefs rest on such reason as we have. . . . It is by reason that we too must test the Bible as well as the Vedas, Moses as well as Hesiod or Zarathustra. If we find in our Bible anything of cosmogony, or history or morals that does not approve itself to our reason, we must reject it, we cannot help it. That did not, could not come direct from God, but came through fallible man, the framework and the chord of whose harp was constructed after the fashion of their day, and could not sound perfect music. Reason prefers our school text-book to our Bible on matters of geology and astronomy, sifts Bible history by comparison with contemporary records recovered from the sands and clay of ancient empires and reason it is that judges the teachings of Jesus to be superior to the sacrificial cult of Leviticus, or the cursings of Ezekiel and Amos. Our light is better than theirs, for our reason has more knowledge, more experience, on which to rest. The best human reason—I think I do not err—whether it looks outward or inward, finds God.(William Hays Ward, The Independent, March 14, 1915. )

This may be an accurate summation of the prevailing view which has dominated the thinking of men during the past few centuries and more particularly that of the present century; but it does violence to the doctrine of revelation and guidance by the Holy Ghost, which was promised to those who truly served the Lord in righteousness. This view is the natural result of the doctrines of the closed heavens. If men are left to grope in spiritual darkness guided only by their individual reasons, then confusion, disorder, contention and a million different views are the inevitable result. Far better is the counsel of our Savior to his disciples just before he left them:

And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.

If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.

If ye love me, keep my commandments.

And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;

Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.(John 14:13-17.)

Likewise we have the testimony of Moroni which thousands have put to the test:

And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things.(Moroni 10:4-5.)

It is a dreadful thought to believe that our Eternal Father thinks so little of us that he leaves us to guide ourselves, falteringly, blindly groping, with no help but our weak, uncertain power to reason out the eternal plan of salvation. The Lord has not forsaken the inhabitants of the world, they have forsaken him. In the very beginning he said to Adam that he was to teach the glorious truths of the gospel to his children, and this Adam faithfully did. We read however—

And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters.

And Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish.

And the Lord God called upon men by the Holy Ghost everywhere and commanded them that they should repent;

And as many as believed in the Son, and repented of their sins, should be saved, and as many as believed not and repented not, should be damned; and the words went forth out of the mouth of God in a firm decree; wherefore they must be fulfilled.(Moses 5:12-15. )

The Lord has commanded the members of the Church in this day to seek him by prayer, by faith and study. We have been commanded to study the commandments he has given us in the Doctrine and Covenants,(D. & C. 1:37. ) in the Book of Mormon(3 Nephi 23:1-5; 26:6-11. ) and in all the scriptures, with the promise that "Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life . . . , it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come."(D. & C. 130:18-19. ) Notwithstanding these commandments it has always been a difficult problem to get the members of the Church, with few exceptions, to study diligently the revelations and the commandments that have been given for our eternal blessing. The Savior said to the Jews: "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me."(John 5:39.) How many members of the Church think likewise, but fail to prepare themselves by study and by faith? The Lord has revealed to us all things pertaining to our salvation that are expedient and that we should know in order to give him the proper service and find the way back into his presence.

And I give unto you a commandment that you shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom.

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand.

Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you.(D. & C. 88:77-80.)

The Lord said to the Nephites:

. . . And there shall be no disputations among you, as there have hitherto been; neither shall there be disputations among you concerning the points of my doctrine, as there have hitherto been.

For verily, verily I say unto you, he that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another.

Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of men with anger, one against another; but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away.(3 Nephi 11:28-30.)

If the members of the Church would search their scriptures more intensely in the spirit of humility and prayer, disputations would cease among us. It seems to be a difficult thing to eliminate from the minds of some of our brethren cherished notions that are contrary to the revealed word. Many questions have been answered time and time again by those who have the knowledge and are prepared to give the answers, yet the error continues to exist. At this point it is not amiss to mention the fact that there are numerous fictitious "visions" and "manifestations" that have been palmed off on the people. These have been denied and corrected time and time again, yet they still persist. We have been taught from the beginning, and the Lord has proclaimed it, that when he has some revelation for the Church it will come through the divinely appointed source. Why is it that some members of the Church grasp at every sensational rumor with apparent eagerness and delight? If the same eagerness were applied to the revelations already given and we would heed them soberly and in humility of spirit, all would be well. The Lord has promised the Church "commandments not a few, and revelations in their time,"(D. & C. 59:4.) yet we have some clamoring for more revelation when we have failed to keep those already given. The Lord said to Nephi—and this not many years after Lehi landed on this American continent—

Behold, this is the doctrine of Christ, and there will be no more doctrine given until after he shall manifest himself unto you in the flesh. And when he shall manifest himself unto you in the flesh, the things which he shall say unto you shall ye observe to do.

And now I, Nephi, cannot say more: the Spirit stoppeth mine utterance, and I am left to mourn because of the unbelief, and the wickedness, and the ignorance, and the stiffneckedness of men; for they will not search knowledge, nor understand great knowledge, when it is given unto them in plainness, even as plain as word can be.(2 Nephi 32:6- 7.)

The Lord told Jeremiah:

. . . After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.(Jeremiah 31:33-34.)

That will be the day spoken of by Isaiah, when peace and righteousness shall rule the earth.

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.(Isaiah 11:9.)

Can we not hasten that day by manifesting a little more faith, a little more desire to seek for knowledge and a little more obedience to the commandment, "to give diligent heed to the words of eternal life?"

The Lord has told us to take heed, "walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men; for some are of men, and others of devils. Wherefore, beware lest ye are deceived; and that ye may not be deceived seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given. "(D. & C. 46:7-8.)

From time to time members of the Church are deceived and led astray because they have no substantial foundation in faith, and lack knowledge of the gospel. Skilful deceivers, under these conditions, prey upon the weak and destroy the little measure of faith which they possess. Therefore it behooves us all to be alert, diligent and studious, doing all things in prayer and humility. Then we can overcome the world. Alma has given good advice in his counsel to Zeezrom:

. . . It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him.

And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full.

And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell.(Alma 12:9-11.)

The reason for these answers to questions is to endeavor to settle once and for all time the problems discussed, which occur and re-occur so frequently, yet are answered in the revelations in the Standard Works; moreover with the thought in mind to stimulate members of the Church to spend a little more of their spare time in personal search. Of far more profit is a fact discovered by research than by information received. The impression on the mind lasts longer.

—Joseph Fielding Smith
