Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

1

The Personages in the Godhead

Question: "I would like to have you help me explain for an investigator what the last sentence in the testimony of the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon means when it says: 'And the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God.'

"I was puzzled for a moment but told him that surely the three witnesses knew of the first vision of the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and therefore knew that they were separate personages, but they were one in purpose and unity. He did not say whether he accepted or rejected what I said, but I was not completely satisfied."

Answer: A careful reading of this testimony reveals the fact that the three men understood clearly the individualistic nature of the members of the Godhead. Moreover, Oliver Cowdery had written most of the manuscript of the Book of Mormon, which he could not have done without becoming acquainted with the fact that the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost are three separate Personages.

We find similar expressions to this of the witnesses in other scriptures; in the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Bible; for instance, Moses, by divine revelation, declared to Israel that there is but one God whom we shall worship. Yet Moses knew that it was Christ (Jehovah) who led Israel from Egypt to the land of Canaan, and that he is God.(Deuteronomy 6:3-4 .)

In the Doctrine and Covenants we find this written:

As well as those who should come after, who should believe in the gifts and callings of God by the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and of the Son;

Which Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God, infinite and eternal, without end. Amen.

And we know that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God.(D. & C. 20:27-29.)

This is very clear, and there is no confounding of the Personages of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Therefore the statement that they are "one God" must refer to something other than that they are "one essence" and "without body parts and passions" as so many Christian people believe.

SUPREME COUNCIL COMPOSED OF THREE PERSONAGES

This reference, then, to the three as one God, must be interpreted to mean that they constitute one Godhead or Supreme Council, composed of three separate Personages, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Paul, in his epistle to the Corinthian saints, says this:

As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered in sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other God but one.(1 Corinthians 8:4.)

Paul knew as well as any man could know it that the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost constitute one Supreme Council—one God. In the following verses he adds this:

For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many,)

But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.(Ibid., 8:5-6.)

Here Paul speaks of both the Father and Son as God. Near the close of his epistle to the Roman saints, he said:

And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.(Romans 16:20.)

The "God of peace," who according to the scriptures is to bruise Satan, is Jesus Christ.(Genesis 3:15; Hebrews 2:14.)

It is very strange that Christian people can be confused and believe that the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are one substance or entity, in the face of the constant repetition in the New Testament of the evidence which clearly proclaims them separate and distinct from each other. It appears to those who are guided by the light of truth, that the frequent declarations of the Savior that he and his Father are distinct from each other, but one in thought and action, is so plain that even the most simple should understand it. Our Redeemer was constantly addressing his Father in prayer. He taught his disciples to pray to the Father, not to him, and the most touching and tender appeal that was ever recorded is his prayer to his Father in the seventeenth chapter of John.

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou has sent . . . .

And now Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. . . .

And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are. . . .

And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are.(John 17:3, 5, 11, 22.)

How plain it is that the Father and Son are separate Personages, yet one in power, wisdom and unity. Hence they are, with the Holy Spirit which carries out their will—one God or Presiding Council!

Then there are the words to Mary at the tomb, so distinctly declaring the separate Personages of Father and Son:

Jesus said unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God.(John 20:17.)
