Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

2

The Savior and Adam in the Pre-existence

Question: "Did the Savior and Adam exist on another planet as mortal beings before they came to this earth?

"These people say that Brigham Young states that Adam was brought from another planet, with a mortal body, and that the Savior came with a resurrected body because he said that he had power to lay down his life and power to take it up again, and inasmuch as the Savior states he had helped to create other worlds that he had to be a resurrected being to organize an earth.

"I am satisfied from the scriptures we have that Adam and the Savior were just the same in the pre-existence as we were and that Adam had only a spiritual body until God organized a body for him, and that the Savior had only a spiritual body until he was born of a mortal mother; but I want authority from you."

Answer: We will treat the question of Adam first. Adam was among the intelligences spoken of by the Lord to Abraham who were appointed to be rulers on this earth. He was Michael, a prince, and son of God chosen to come to this earth and stand at the head of his posterity, holding the "keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life."(D. & C. 78:16.) This Holy One is Jesus Christ. On the earth Michael was known as Adam. In the pre-existent state he was a spirit like the others of our Father's children. In the Book of Genesis(Genesis 1:26; 2:7.) we are told that Adam obtained his body from the dust of the earth, and that he was not subject to death is inferred in the commandment the Lord gave him, that if he transgressed the divine commandment and ate the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, he should surely die.(Gen., 2:17) In the Book of Mormon(2 Nephi 2:22.) we are positively informed that Adam would have lived forever in the garden if he had not partaken of the forbidden fruit. So Adam was in no sense mortal until after his transgression. That his immortal spirit came from another world is verily true, just as it is true of each one of us, for we all lived in the spirit existence before we came into this world and obtained bodies which inherited mortality through the fall of Adam.

We are also informed in the scriptures that before Adam and Eve transgressed they were without children, and the fall was essential to the peopling of the earth with their offspring. When the truth in relation to the consequences of the fall were made known to Adam and Eve, they rejoiced, and Eve said:

. . . Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient.(Moses 5:11. )

Lehi also understood this truth, and he said:

Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy.(2 Nephi 2:25.)

ADAM A PRE-EXISTENT SPIRIT

In an article published in The Improvement Era(Improvement Era, Vol. 13, pp. 75-81.) President Joseph F. Smith and his counselors John R. Winder and Anthon H. Lund said the following in relation to Adam:

Adam; our progenitor; the first man, was like Christ, a pre-existent spirit, and like Christ he took upon him an appropriate body, the body of a man, a "living soul." The doctrine of the pre-existence—revealed so plainly, particularly in latter days—pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that a man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo experience in mortality. It teaches that all men existed in the spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and that all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in like manner.

It is held by some that Adam was not the first man upon this earth, and that the original human was a development from lower orders of the animal creation. These, however, are the theories of men. The word of the Lord declares that Adam was "the first man of all men,"(Moses 1:34.) and we are therefore in duty bound to regard him as the primal parent of our race.

Joseph F. Smith John R. Winder Anthon H. Lund.

First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

CHRIST CREATED THE WORLDS

In relation to Jesus Christ it is sufficient to say that we know that he was the Creator, under the direction and commandment of his Father, of this world and many other worlds. John in the introduction to his Gospel said this:

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. . . .

All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.

In him was life; and the life was the light of men.(John 1:1, 3-4.)

A plainer translation could be given, but this will suffice. In the Doctrine and Covenants we find the following:

Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I AM, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made;

The same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes;

I am the same which spake, and the world was made, and all things came by me.(D. & C. 38:1-3.)

In the writings of Moses this is recorded:

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten.(Moses 1:33.)

CREATION ACCOMPLISHED WHILE SAVIOR WAS A SPIRIT

These great works and this wonderful experience all came before our Savior had a physical body. This work was done by him when he was a Spirit. It is an erroneous notion without any foundation in truth to think that Jesus had to be clothed with a body of flesh and bones before any work could be performed by him.

When the Lord appeared to the brother of Jared, he showed him his body. It was the body of his Spirit, and it was in the exact form of his tabernacle when he walked the streets and highways of Palestine.(Ether 3.) The only physical body of flesh and bones he ever had was the body born of Mary in the village of Bethlehem, which in his resurrection became inseparably connected with his spiritual body.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said the doctrine of reincarnation is a doctrine of the devil.(Smith, Joseph Fielding, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 105.)
