Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

3

The Meaning of "Son of Man"

Question: "In Matthew 20:28, we find the following: 'Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.' What is the correct meaning of the term 'Son of Man?' The marginal reference leads me to Philippians 2:7, which is as follows: 'But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men.' Are we to understand that 'Son of man' has reference to the fact that Jesus came into the world 'in the likeness of men' or became mortal? If not, what does it mean?"

In each of the four gospels we read where the Savior frequently refers to himself as "the Son of man." Invariably in the New Testament, the common noun, "Man," is printed with a lower case "m." This is very likely due to the fact that the scholars who did the translating did not understand the significance of this expression. Seemingly, they took the view as you have expressed it, that it has reference to the fact that our Lord became a man and while on the earth appeared as a man. You will realize that for centuries the prevailing notion that God, when speaking of either the Father or the Son, was without body and was not in the form of man, except as our Lord appeared among man in his earth ministry.

The expression should be written, "Son of Man," with a capital "M," meaning Son of God. In revelations given to the Prophet Joseph, the Savior uses this term when speaking of himself. See the Doctrines and Covenants, 45:39; 49:6, 22; 63:53; 68:11. There are other occasions when our Lord called himself "Son Ahman." See sections 78:20 and 95:17.

This title given to the Savior may have been common in the days of the antediluvian saints. It is recorded in the Pearl of Great Price, that Enoch saw generation after generation down through time, and we read, ". . . Enoch was high and lifted up, even in the bosom of the Father, and of the Son of Man; and behold, the power of Satan was upon all the face of the earth." (Moses 7:24.) Then in verse 54 we read, "And it came to pass that Enoch cried unto the Lord, saying: When the Son of Man cometh in the flesh, shall the earth rest? I pray thee, show me these things." From these words written long before the advent of Jesus Christ on the earth, it would appear that he was known by this title in that day.

THE LORD'S COUNSEL TO ADAM

We have received other definite information in the counsel the Lord gave to Adam, as recorded in Moses 6:57, which is as follows:

Wherefore teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; for, in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge, who shall come in the meridian of time.

Here the Father speaks to Adam of himself as a Man, whose name is "Man of Holiness." Therefore, we are justified in saying of Jesus when referring to himself as Son of Man, he means that he is verily the Son of God who is Man of Holiness, or Holy Man.

Incidentally we learn that the place where Adam dwelt, and where he blessed his righteous descendants three years before his death, and where the Lord appeared to him, was named Adam-ondi-Ahman. May we not in truth say that the meaning of this name Adam-ondi-Ahman is, the place, or land, of God where Adam dwelt?
