Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

5

The Least in the Kingdom

Question: " It is said of John the Baptist that among all that were born of women there was none greater than he, yet the least in the kingdom of heaven was greater than he. We do not understand how this could be. Will you please give us an answer?"

Answer: This saying is in reference to the Savior's estimate of John as recorded in Luke 7:28, after the disciples of John had come to him and said: "John the Baptist hath sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he that should come? or look we for another?"(Luke 7:20.) Later the Savior bore testimony to the greatness of the mission of John, which testimony is recorded in Luke 7:28.

At a meeting held in the Nauvoo Temple, Sunday, January 29, 1843, the Prophet Joseph Smith gave the answer to this question. He had been asked to do so at a meeting the week before, when time would not permit of an answer. We quote the full report of the Prophet's remarks:

The question arose from the saying of Jesus, "Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he." [Luke 7:28.] How is it that John was considered one of the greatest prophets? His miracles could not have constituted his greatness.

First. He was entrusted with a divine mission of preparing the way before the face of the Lord. Whoever had such a trust committed to him before or since? No man.

Secondly. He was entrusted with the important mission, and it was required at his hands, to baptize the Son of Man. Whoever had the honor of doing that? Whoever had so great a privilege and glory? Whoever led the Son of God into the waters of baptism, and had the privilege of beholding the Holy Ghost descend in the form of a dove, or rather in the sign of the dove, in witness of that administration? The sign of the dove was instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil cannot come in the sign of a dove. The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage. It does not confine itself to the form of the dove, but in sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove; but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed, as the dove is an emblem or token of truth and innocence.

LEGAL ADMINISTRATOR OF THE KINGDOM

Thirdly. John, at that time was the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom there was then on the earth, and holding the keys of power. The Jews had to obey his instructions or be damned, by their own law; and Christ himself fulfilled all righteousness in becoming obedient to the law which he had given to Moses on the mount, and thereby magnified it and made it honorable instead of destroying it. The son of Zacharias wrested the keys, the kingdom, the power, the glory from the Jews, by the holy anointing and decree of heaven, and these three reasons constitute him the greatest prophet born of a woman.

Second question:—How was the least in the kingdom of heaven greater than he?

In reply I asked—Whom did Jesus have reference to as being the least? Jesus was looked upon as having the least claim in God's kingdom, and [seemingly] was least entitled to their credulity as a prophet: as though he had said—"He that is considered the least among you is greater than John—that is I myself!"(D.H.C., Vol. 5, pp. 260-61; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 275-276. )
