Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

6

The Marriage of the Lamb

Question: "The scripture in Revelation 19:7 speaks of the marriage of the Lamb. This has puzzled one of my investigators and I have tried hard to find an answer for her. Can you help me?"

Answer: The scriptural passage under question is in the nature of symbolic language which is not to be taken literally as a marriage between a man and a woman. The full text is essential to our correct understanding and is as follows:

And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great.

And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Al-le-lu-ia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.

Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready.

And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints.

And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. And he saith unto me, These are the true sayings of God.(D.H.C., Vol. 5, pp. 260-261; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 275-276. Revelation 19:5-9)

A FIGURE OF SPEECH

This prophecy of the marriage of the Lamb is a figure of speech, having reference to the second coming of our Savior and the feast, or supper, that the righteous shall receive at his coming. When teaching the Jews, and more especially his disciples, the Savior spoke of the bridegroom when referring to himself. Such references are found in Matthew 9:15; Mark 2:19-20, and in the story of the ten virgins in Matthew 25.

In Revelation, Chapter 21, the comparison is made to a marriage of the Lamb with the city, New Jerusalem:

And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.

And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

And there came unto me one of the seven angels which had the seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife.

And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and shewed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem descending out of heaven from God,

Having the glory of God: and her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal.(Ibid., 21:2, 3, 9, 10, 11.)

THE SECOND COMING OF OUR LORD

In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 109, verses 73 and 74, we find the following:

That thy church may come forth out of the wilderness of darkness, and shine forth fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners;

And be adorned as a bride for that day when thou shalt unveil the heavens, and cause the mountains to flow down at thy presence, and the valleys to be exalted, the rough places made smooth; that thy glory may fill the earth.

The vision of John and the revelation to Joseph Smith both have reference to the same event, the second coming of our Lord in his power and glory, to receive his Church or kingdom, the New Jerusalem being the capital city of the Church, and there is no difference in the meaning whether reference is to the Church or the New Jerusalem, for the righteous will have inheritance in the New Jerusalem. Therefore the bride of the Lamb is the organization of the righteous who have inheritance in the holy city.
