Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

7

The Savior's Visit to the Spirits in Prison

Question: "The question arose in our class as to whether or not the Savior went in person among the spirits in prison to preach the gospel to them. The following statements appear to be in conflict.

" 'And also they who are the spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son visited, and preached the gospel unto them, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh.' (D.&C. 76:73.)

"And the following by President Joseph F. Smith in 'Gospel Doctrine', p. 473.

"'But unto the wicked he did not go, and among the ungodly and the unrepentant who had defiled themselves while in the flesh, his voice was not raised, neither did the rebellious who rejected the testimonies and the warnings of the ancient prophets behold his presence, nor look upon his face.'"

Answer: It is very easy to obtain a misunderstanding from a quotation of a part of a sentence, or from a verse which is detached from its context. There is no conflict between the statement in 1 Peter 3:18-20, Doctrine and Covenants 76:73-75, and the vision given to President Smith. Unfortunately the class seemingly considered only the first half of the sentence. It should be understood that all spirits, both good and bad, were in prison, for none had been liberated until after the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

A more careful reading of what President Smith saw will reveal that there is nothing in what he has written that denies to Christ the privilege of speaking to all those who were repentant; but his voice was not heard among the "wicked," the "ungodly," and the unrepentant who "had defiled themselves while in the flesh" and had "rejected the warnings of the ancient prophets."

There is nothing in the statement of Peter or in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 76, that declares that he raised his voice among these wicked and ungodly who were rebellious. The full text of Peter's declaration and that in the "Vision"(D. & C. Section 76.) is that he took his message, first to the righteous and also to the "honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by the craftiness of men." To them it was declared as stated by Peter: ". . . that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit."(1 Peter 4:6.)

THE MESSAGE OF THE SAVIOR

The fact remains, as we discover by a more careful consideration of the texts, that the message of the Savior was, first to all those who were worthy of the celestial resurrection, and, secondly, to those honorable men who were disobedient because blinded by the craftiness of men, but who on their repentance, or the receiving of the testimony of Jesus, were entitled to come forth in the terrestrial kingdom.

In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 88, verse 99, we discover that those who shall inherit the terrestrial kingdom will be entitled to come forth when the "second trump" shall sound at Christ's coming. These are they who "received their part in that prison which is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the flesh."

The rest of the dead who evidently did not hear the voice of the Savior, and among whom he did not go, but received the visitation of his servants the prophets who were sent to them, are those who will not receive the resurrection until the end, for they are the "spirits of men who are to be judged, and are found under condemnation."(D. & C. 88:100.)

The procedure spoken of by President Smith is a most natural one. While the Savior was on earth he said he was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. He did not proclaim his message among the Gentiles, but after his resurrection he sent his disciples into all the world to every creature.

FAULTY AND PERSONAL INTERPRETATIONS

There is a common tendency among mankind to read into texts some things which are not found therein, and unless we use great care we may place faulty and personal interpretations upon the sayings of the prophets which by them were not intended.

When the Lord said by revelation, "For . . . the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape,"(Ibid., 1:2.) it should not be understood that he meant that all men everywhere should hear his voice, but that his word should be proclaimed by his servants.(Ibid., 1:4.) In the revelations the Lord frequently speaks of "the day of visitation." We do not understand that this is a personal visitation but is to be a pouring out of his judgments upon the ungodly.
