Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

8

Why Did Jesus Come Alive Again?

Question: "While telling the story of the resurrection of Jesus, one of the children asked, 'Why did Jesus come alive again?' The only answer I could give was that he was so good that he just could not stay dead. I have read the scriptures on the crucifixion, but cannot seem to get the full reason for the necessity of his death, and how he had the power over death. Will you please explain this to me as it is given in the scriptures?"

Answer: The death and resurrection of Jesus Christ form the very foundation of the plan of salvation. They are the most fundamental doctrines of all the teachings in the scriptures. It is essential that every member of the Church have a perfect understanding of the reason why Jesus came into the world and the nature of his mission. The responsibility for this instruction rests primarily with the parents, but it is also necessary that it be taught in our auxiliary organizations as well as in priesthood classes.

The plan of salvation was prepared before the foundation of our earth was laid. We were then the spirit children of our Eternal Father. In the course of our progression it was necessary that we have the privilege of coming to this earth and here receive our bodies of flesh and bones and pass through this period of mortality where we are subject to all the conditions we find in his life: pleasure and pain, happiness and sorrow, and be tried and tempted to see if we would be true to our Eternal Father and keep his commandments when we were not in his presence as we kept them when we were spirits living in his presence. This earth is a probationary state, or a place prepared where we are tested and given the privilege of walking by faith, that we may become worthy to return to our Father to dwell in his presence, and become his eternal sons and daughters.

ADAM AND EVE AS FIRST PARENTS

The great honor to come here and be the first parents of all men was given to Adam and Eve. They were placed by the Father in the Garden of Eden where there was no death. Adam and Eve in the condition in which they were when placed in the Garden of Eden could have lived there forever if they had not broken a law, but they would have lived alone and would have had no children.(2 Nephi 2:22-25; Moses 5:11.) The Lord told them they could eat the fruit of every tree in the garden except the fruit of the "tree of the knowledge of good and evil," and if they did eat this fruit they would surely die. Satan tempted them and they ate this fruit and broke this commandment. By doing this a change came over their bodies and they became subject to death, as the Lord has said, and they were driven out of the garden. After they were driven out children were born to them and they have spread over all the earth. All the children inherited death from our first parents, so we will all have to die as our ancestors have done before us. This made it necessary that something be done to redeem us from death and restore us to life again where there would be no death, for this transgression of Adam and Eve placed all of us subject to Satan's power after death. The Lord has told us through his prophets that if some remedy was not provided to restore life our spirits would become subject to Satan forever and he would have ruled over us while our bodies would have remained in the grave forever. Both justice and mercy demanded that this broken law which brought death would have to be mended to defeat Satan and bring us back to receive the mercies of our Eternal Father.

REDEMPTION FROM DEATH PREPARED IN PLAN

The means provided for our redemption from death were prepared in the plan of salvation before Adam and Eve were sent to the earth, and Jesus Christ volunteered to come and atone for this transgression and thus gain the victory over the devil. Therefore, he is called the "Lamb of God," who was chosen to be slain "from the foundation of the world."(Revelation 13:8; 1 Peter 1:19.) The only way this atonement could be made was for Jesus who was chosen to pay the debt to justice and mercy, and redeem us from the grasp of Satan, to come into the world with power over death, for no one who was under the bondage of death could pay the debt and restore us to live forever. Jesus was the only person who ever came into this world who had power over death, and having that great power, by the shedding of his blood on the cross he could redeem us and get the power of the resurrection. After he came forth from the tomb he had all power to call every other person forth from the grave. And after he came forth, on the third day after his crucifixion, he opened the graves of the righteous saints who had lived from the days of Adam to the time of his crucifixion.

He had declared to Martha that he is the resurrection and the life(John 11:25-26. ) and this he taught to his disciples. Jacob, the brother of Nephi, has given us a very clear understanding of the mission of Jesus Christ and how he came to redeem us from death and from Satan. This is found in the second book of Nephi, Chapter nine, which all who consider what is here written should read carefully. He explains how we would have been angels to the devil, without the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, and now because of the mercies of our Heavenly Father and his beloved Son Jesus Christ, we have escaped from the grasp of this great monster.

CHRIST RECEIVED LIFE FROM HIS FATHER

A word or two showing how it was possible for Jesus Christ to come and redeem us is necessary at this point. Jesus had no father of the flesh, that is who was mortal and subject to death. Our Eternal Father to whom we pray is the Father of the body of Jesus Christ and from his Father he inherited life and death was always subject to him. He had the power to lay down his life, because he was the Son of Mary who was like us, mortal, and he had the power to take his life up again for that power was in him. In his teachings to the Jews and his disciples he frequently told them of this power and of his mission. On one occasion he said:

For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself;

And hath given him authority to execute judgment also,

because he is the Son of man [God].(John 5:26-27.)

Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.

No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.(Ibid., 10:17-18.)

I hope I have made this matter clear to all teachers of children, for they must have the correct understanding of the doctrine of the resurrection, and how we became redeemed through the shedding of the blood of Jesus Christ.
