Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

9

Alma on the Resurrection

Question: "In our class we were discussing our Manual Lesson 8, 'If a man die, shall he live again?' When we mentioned that Moroni and Peter and James appeared to Joseph Smith as resurrected beings, a member who was visiting our class took issue with this, stating that they could not have been resurrected. He based his argument upon the passage in Alma 40:19, which he interpreted as meaning that all who died before the time of Christ, both the wicked and the righteous, without reservation, must be resurrected before any of those who lived after the time of Christ.

"Our adamant visitor still maintained that Alma specifically supports his argument unequivocally.

What I want to know is how Alma 40:19, should be interpreted in view of Elder Talmage's explanation concerning the order of the resurrection?"

Answer: The visiting member should read his scriptures more carefully. It is true that Alma in Chapter 40, verse 19, did not make his meaning clear and if we deal with that verse only, it is easy to obtain the thought that all who died before the Savior's coming were to come forth at the time of the Savior's resurrection, both the wicked as well as the righteous. Verse 20, however, makes it plain that Alma did not intend to say that all the dead were to come forth at that time, and he therefore modified his first remark and said it was his "opinion" that the souls and the bodies are reunited "of the righteous," at the resurrection of Christ, and his ascension into heaven. It is evident Alma's understanding of the extent of the resurrection at the time the Savior came forth from the dead was limited, therefore he stated only his opinion.

The Prophet Abinadi, when before King Noah and his priests, made this matter very clear in speaking of this first resurrection in the following words:

And now, the resurrection of all the prophets, and all those that have believed in their words, or all those that have kept the commandments of God, shall come forth in the first resurrection; therefore, they are the first resurrection.

They are raised to dwell with God who has redeemed them; thus they have eternal life through Christ, who has broken the bands of death.

And these are those who have part in the first resurrection and these are they that have died before Christ came, in their ignorance, not having salvation declared unto them. And thus the Lord bringeth about the restoration of these; and they have a part in the first resurrection, or have eternal life, being redeemed by the Lord.

And little children also have eternal life.

But behold, and fear, and tremble before God, for ye ought to tremble; for the Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against him and die in their sins; yea, even all those that have perished in their sins ever since the world began, that have wilfully rebelled against God, that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them; these are they that have no part in the first resurrection.(Mosiah 15:22-26.)

THE TESTIMONY OF MATTHEW

This is in perfect harmony with the testimony of Matthew:

And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose,

And came out of their graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.(Matthew 27:52-53.)

We are informed by the Savior, when he visited the Nephites, that it was the Saints only who were raised from the dead, following his resurrection.(3 Nephi 23:9-10. )

We know definitely that David, king of Israel, did not come forth from the grave in this first resurrection because of the sins which he committed. Peter in his discourse on the day of Pentecost gave us that information as follows:

Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is with us unto this day.(Acts 2:29. )

This is confirmed by the Prophet Joseph Smith when in a discourse he said:

Even David must wait for those times of refreshing, before he can come forth and his sins be blotted out. For Peter, speaking of him, says: "David hath not yet ascended into heaven, and his sepulchre is with us unto this day." His remains were then in the tomb. Now, we read that many bodies of the saints arose at Christ's resurrection, probably all the saints, but it seems that David did not. Why? Because he had been a murderer.(Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 188.)

The Prophet also declared that Moroni came to him a resurrected personage,(Ibid., p. 119; see also D. & C. 133:55.) so also John the Baptist, Peter, and James were resurrected beings when they came and bestowed upon the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery the Aaronic Priesthood and the Melchizedek Priesthood.
