Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

10

The Resurrection Universal

Question: "If sons of perdition are to become members of the devil's kingdom, will they be permitted to have tangible bodies, or will they be like Satan, denied the right to bodies? In other words, will sons of perdition be resurrected and receive immortal bodies, or will their bodies be destroyed?"

Answer: The scriptures are very clear on this question. Paul, for instance, wrote to the members of the Church at Corinth, "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive."(1 Corinthians 15:22.) The Savior told the Jews that the hour would come when he would visit the dead and they should hear his voice, "And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation."(John 5:29.) In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord said: "But, behold, verily I say unto you, before the earth shall pass away, Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump, and then shall all the dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and they shall come forth— yea, even all."(D. & C. 29:26.)

Our Redeemer came into the world to obtain the mastery over death. If one soul born into this world, no matter how wicked he may be, were denied the resurrection, then Jesus Christ would not have the victory. It is imperative, therefore, that all must receive the resurrection, and Amulek declared this emphatically to the people of Ammonihah,(Alma 11:40-45.) as did Alma to his son Corianton.(Ibid., 40:22-26.)

The second part of the question is, will they receive their bodies in the resurrection and then afterwards have them destroyed? Alma has answered this in his discourse at Ammonihah:

And now behold, I say unto you then cometh a death, even a second death, which is a spiritual death; then is a time that whosoever dieth in his sins, as to a temporal death, shall also die a spiritual death; yea, he shall die as to things pertaining unto righteousness.

Then is the time when their torments shall be as a lake of fire and brimstone, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever; and then is the time that they shall be chained down to an everlasting destruction, according to the power and captivity of Satan, he having subjected them according to his will.

Then, I say unto you, they shall be as though there had been no redemption made; for they cannot be redeemed according to God's justice; and they cannot die, seeing there is no more corruption.(Ibid., 12:16-18.)

LATTER-DAY PROPHETS PROCLAIMED A UNIVERSAL RESURRECTION

President John Taylor in a discourse December 31, 1876, said:

What, will every body be resurrected? Yes, every living being; "but every man in his order, Christ the first fruits; afterwards they that are Christ's at his coming. Then cometh the end." That is, the Saints shall live and reign with Christ a thousand years. One of the apostles says, But the rest of the dead live not again until the thousand years are expired. Now all must come forth from the grave, some time or other, in the self-same tabernacles that they possessed while living on the earth. It will be just as Ezekiel has described it—bone will come to its bone, and flesh and sinew will cover the skeleton, and at the Lord's bidding breath will enter the body, and we shall appear, many of us, a marvel to ourselves.(Deseret News, December 31, 1876.)

President Joseph F. Smith in a discourse delivered January 20, 1895, said this:

Then all of the bodies that lie in the grave are called forth; not all at the first resurrection, nor in the morning of the first resurrection, but some perhaps in the last resurrection; and every soul will be required to go before the bar of God and be judged according to the deeds done in the body. If his works have been good, then he receives the reward of well doing. If evil, then he will be banished from the presence of the Lord. Nevertheless, he is an immortal being, because he possesses his resurrected body. Every creature that is born in the image of God will be resurrected from the dead, just as sure as he dies, you can write that down if you please, and never forget it, never allow yourself to have any unbelief on that account: "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive."(1 Corinthians 15:22.)

It matters not whether we have done well or ill, whether we have been intelligent or ignorant, or whether we have been bondsmen or slaves or freemen, all men will be raised from the dead; and, as I understand it, when they are raised from the dead they become immortal beings, and they will no more suffer the dissolution of the spirit and the body.(Improvement Era, Vol. 19, p. 386.)

In a discourse at the conference held April 7, 1844, the Prophet Joseph Smith made the following remarks on the resurrection:

There have been remarks made concerning all men being redeemed from hell; but I say that those who sin against the Holy Ghost cannot be forgiven in this world or in the world to come: they shall die the second death. Those who commit the unpardonable sin are doomed to Gnolom, to dwell in hell, worlds without end. As they concoct scenes of bloodshed in this world, so they shall rise to the resurrection which is as the lake of fire and brimstone. Some shall rise to the everlasting burning of God; for God dwells in everlasting burnings; and some shall rise to the damnation of their own filthiness, which is as exquisite a torment as the lake of fire and brimstone.( D.H.C., Vol. 6, p. 317.)
