Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

12

The Prophet's Vision of Salvation for the Dead

Question: "I have a question concerning the vision of the celestial kingdom given to Joseph Smith as recorded in volume two of the D.H.C., page 380, which is as follows:

" 'All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall live heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.'

"Knowing that baptism is essential for entering the kingdom of heaven, I assume that it is understood that those who die without a knowledge of the gospel will have to receive baptism, vicariously, before they can inherit the kingdom; but will not those who died in ignorance have to have the gospel taught to them and receive their reward according to how wholeheartedly they accept Christ and his teachings, or will they be rewarded in accordance to the things they would have done on earth, had they had the chance to do them? It seems that the latter is implied in the revelation."

Answer: This revelation is one of the earliest foreshadowing the salvation for the dead. It was given in the Kirtland Temple, under the following circumstances: The First Presidency and a few others met in the Kirtland Temple to attend to some ordinances when the heavens were opened to them and the Prophet beheld the celestial kingdom and saw his father, mother, and his brother Alvin, who had died before the restoration of the gospel, in that kingdom. He marveled over this, since Alvin had died before the priesthood was restored and the Church was organized and, therefore, had not been baptized. Then came the voice declaring the words previously quoted. This was January 21, 1836.

Later, in October 1840, the Prophet wrote an epistle to the Twelve who were in Great Britain, in which he preached to them baptism for the dead. In this epistle he said:

I first mentioned this doctrine in public when preaching the funeral sermon of Brother Seymour Brunson; and have since then given general instructions in the Church on the subject. The Saints have the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who are dead, whom they believe would have embraced the gospel, if they had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the gospel in the spirit, through the instrumentality of those who have been commissioned to preach to them while in prison.

Without enlarging the subject, you will undoubtedly see its consistency and reasonableness; and it presents the gospel of Christ in probably a more enlarged scale than some have imagined it.(D.H.C., Vol. 4, p. 231.)

REVELATIONS ON BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD

From that time on, the subject of baptism and salvation for the dead was a favored theme by the Prophet in which he declared that only through baptism could either the living or the dead obtain salvation in the celestial kingdom. In September 1842 he wrote by revelation the two important letters on salvation for the dead and the need for a recorder making a complete record of every ordinance thus performed. These appear as sections 127 and 128, in the Doctrine and Covenants.

The Savior said to Nicodemus, "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." Nicodemus did not understand this; so the Lord repeated: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God."(John 3:3, 5.)

Baptism, therefore both by the water and by confirmation, under the hands of one who holds divine authority to officiate in these ordinances, is a requirement made of every person old enough to be accountable before the Lord. The vision given to the Prophet in the Kirtland Temple in 1836, was one portraying what would be, not that had taken place, for his father and mother were still living. Because Alvin had accepted and approved the mission given to his younger brother Joseph but was cut off before there was an opportunity for him to be baptized, the Lord indicated that he was, through the vicarious ordinances of the gospel when performed for him, entitled to all the blessings of the exaltation which he would have received had he lived to obtain them in person.

In his justice our Eternal Father grants to all those who would have received the gospel had that privilege come to them, the same blessings which are received by the faithful who are living. This is done by vicarious work in the temples of the Lord.
