Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

14

The Salvation of Little Children

Question: "In our class we were discussing the statement made by the Prophet Joseph Smith: 'And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven.' (D.H.C. 2:381.)

"Some of those present thought it did not seem logical that all children no matter what their race or creed would be saved in the celestial kingdom, while their parents would not be able to obtain celestial glory. They cited the case of a Negro baby for an example. We will appreciate any light on this subject."

Answer: It is hardly proper for members in the class to entertain doubts in relation to a revelation from the Lord, but in perfect order for them to ask for an explanation, when they fail to understand.

There is neither inconsistency in this revelation nor an injustice to the parents who refuse to repent and receive the gospel. The Lord has revealed that "Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God."(D. & C. 93:38.)

Again he has said:

But behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten; Wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me.(Ibid., 29:46-47.)

The Savior also took little children and blessed them saying to his disciples:

Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.(Matthew 19:14.)

Since all mankind come into the world innocent so far as this mortal life is concerned, and there is no sin laid to their charge, should they die in their childhood before they are accountable for their deeds, it would be manifestly unjust to condemn them, whether they are white, brown, or black.

Nephi wrote:

. . . and he doeth nothing, save it be plain unto the children of men; and he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile.(2 Nephi 26:33.)

INNOCENT CHILDREN NOT AT FAULT

It is not the fault of innocent children who die that their parents do not come into the Church and refuse to accept the gospel. Through the mercy and justice of our Eternal Father, every soul is entitled to hear the gospel. If they do not have the privilege in this mortal life, then they will have it in the spirit world, where it is preached to the dead and even the dead will be judged according to their works.

Baptism is the door into the celestial kingdom. All who forsake their sins and are baptized and remain true will enter the celestial kingdom. Therefore parents are offered the gospel, if not in this life, then in the spirit world, and if they reject it, the sin is on their own heads.

For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated.

And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed.(D. & C. 1:2-3.)
