Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

15

Little Children in the Celestial Kingdom

Question: "When an infant dies, will it be exalted into the celestial kingdom? Some members of the class expressed the thought that because children die before reaching the age of accountability they will be exalted into the celestial kingdom the same as those who live and endure to the end upon the earth. Others feel that those infants who die before eight years of age will still have to be tried and tempted at some time after the resurrection just as adults are here and that they will have to earn their place in the celestial kingdom after enduring such trials. Will you give us some help on the question?"

Answer: From the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith until now, articles have been published repeatedly answering the question in relation to the salvation and exaltation of little children. It would be well if we could get some questions settled once and for all time so that they will not have to be repeated. It would be well if members of the Church would do more studying of the fundamental principles of the gospel as the Lord has commanded us to do.

Little children who die before the age of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom. The Prophet Joseph Smith received this knowledge by vision in the Kirtland Temple, January 21, 1836. On that occasion it was shown that ". . . all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven." (D.H.C., Vol. 2, p. 381.) Serious thinking would tell us that if these children are saved, they are not subject to a later trial by the temptation and buffeting of Satan. The Savior taught his disciples when in their presence this doctrine as plainly as words can tell.(Matthew 18:6-10; 19:13-15; Mark 10:13-16.) Revelations given in our day also show that little children who are deprived of the experiences in mortal life are, by eternal decree, redeemed from the temptation of Satan.(D. & C. 29:46-48; Mosiah 15:24-25; Moroni 8:10-24.) Such revelations are perfectly clear and should be beyond dispute.

OUR ETERNAL FATHER IS JUST

Our Eternal Father is just, as well as merciful. It would be an injustice to little children who die in early life to deprive them of the opportunity to obtain all the blessings that are promised to adults who are faithful and true in this life. A doctrine which would deprive little children of such blessings borders on the corrupt teaching which has persisted almost since the passing of the ancient apostles and which is one of the outstanding notions which points so clearly to the apostasy in primitive days. It will be interesting to have a glimpse at this abominable practice and doctrine which has brought misery to the souls of thousands of parents who have lost their little ones.

The Catholic Encyclopedia states: "The absolute necessity of this sacrament [baptism] is often insisted on by the Fathers of the Church, especially when they speak of infant baptism." It quotes St. Ireanaeus as saying: "Christ came to save all who are reborn through Him to God, infants, children, and youths" (infantes et parvulos et pueros). This reference attributes these words to St. Augustine: "If you wish to be a Catholic, do not believe, nor say, nor teach, that infants who die before baptism can obtain the remission of original sin." And again: "Whoever says that even infants are vivified in Christ when they depart this life without the participation of His sacrament (Baptism), both opposes the Apostolic preaching and condemns the whole Church, which hastened to baptize infants, because it unhesitatingly believes that otherwise they can not possibly be vivified in Christ."(The Catholic Encyclopedia, p. 265, Article on Baptism.)

St. Ambrose is quoted as having said that "No one is excepted, not the infant, not the one hindered by any necessity." In the Pelagian controversy are found similarly strong pronouncements by the Councils of Carthage and Milevis, and of Pope Innocent I. The explanation is made that because of the church's belief in the necessity of baptism as a means to salvation, as was already noted by St. Augustine, the Church committed the power of baptism in certain contingencies even to laymen and women.

Catholic theologians are unanimous in declaring that "infants dying without baptism are excluded from the beatific vision," but concerning the state of such souls in the next world they do not agree. While it is certain that unbaptized infants must endure the pain of loss, (Paena Domni), it is not at all certain that they are subject to the pain of sense (Paena Sensus). St. Augustine taught that unbaptized infants would not be exempt from the pain of sense, but at the same time it would be of the mildest form. St. Gregory Nazianzen expresses the belief that such infants would suffer only the pain of loss. . . .

Since the twelfth century, the opinion of the majority of theologians has been that unbaptized infants are immune from all pain of sense.(Ibid., p. 267.)

THE INTRODUCTION OF HERETICAL DOCTRINES

So we see that it was not long after the departure of the apostles that the most damnable heresies crept into the theological teachings and practices and destroyed the church. How grateful Latter-day Saints should be that the truth has been restored. The spirit of every child born into this world was mature in the pre-existence. We lived in the presence of our Eternal Father. We were taught his laws and obeyed them. We had knowledge and understanding far beyond anything we gain in this life. Naturally that which we gained by obedience in the pre-existence will in the next world be restored to us. The main purpose of mortal life, we may be sure, is to obtain tabernacles of flesh and bones, and then to be tried and proved through our deeds in the body. If an infant dies, it has obtained its body. The body does not grow in the grave, but the spirit returns to await the resurrection. Following the resurrection the infant will grow to the full stature of its spirit. The spirit and body become inseparably connected, and every privilege to obtain the exaltation given to mortals will be given to those who die in infancy. Justice demands that this be done. I recommend to readers the teachings of President Joseph F. Smith as found in Gospel Doctrine. From those teachings the following paragraphs are taken.

But, with little children who are taken away in infancy and innocence before they have reached the years of accountability, and are not capable of committing sin, the gospel reveals to us the fact that they are redeemed, and Satan has no power over them. Neither has death any power over them. They are redeemed by the blood of Christ, and they are saved just as surely as death has come into the world through the fall of our first parents. It is further written that Satan has no power over men or women, except that power which he gains over them in this world. In other words, none of the children of the Father who are redeemed through obedience, faith, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, and who live in that redeemed condition, and die in that condition are subject to Satan. Therefore, he has no power over them. They are absolutely beyond his reach just as little children are who die without sin. To my mind this is a consolation and a glorious truth that my soul delights in. I am grateful to my Heavenly Father that he has revealed it unto me, for it affords a consolation that nothing else can give, and it brings a joy to my spirit that nothing can take away, except the consciousness on my part of having sinned and transgressed against light and knowledge which I may have possessed.

Under these circumstances, our beloved friends who are now deprived of their little ones have great cause for joy and rejoicing, even in the midst of the deep sorrow that they feel at the loss of their little one for a time. They know he is all right; they have the assurance that their little one has passed away without sin. Such children are in the bosom of the Father. They will inherit their glory and their exaltation, and they will not be deprived of the blessings that belong to them; for, in the economy of heaven, and in the wisdom of the Father, who doeth all things well, those who are cut down as little children are without any responsibility for their taking off, they, themselves, not having the intelligence and wisdom to take care of themselves and to understand the laws of life; and, in the wisdom and mercy and economy of God our Heavenly Father, all that could have been obtained and enjoyed by them if they had been permitted to live in the flesh will be provided for them hereafter. They will lose nothing by being taken away from us in this way. . . .

SPIRITS ARE FULL-GROWN BEFORE MORTAL BIRTH

The spirits of our children are immortal before they come to us, and their spirits, after bodily death, are like they were before they came. They are as they would appear if they had lived in the flesh, to grow to maturity, or to develop their physical bodies to the full stature of their spirits. If you see one of your children that has passed away it may appear to you in the form in which you would recognize it, the form of childhood; but if it came to you as a messenger bearing some important truth, it would perhaps come as the spirit of Bishop Edward Hunter's son (who died when a little child) came to him, in the stature of full-grown manhood, and revealed himself to his father, and said: "I am your son."

Bishop Hunter did not understand it. He went to my father and said: "Hyrum, what does that mean? I buried my son when he was only a little boy, but he has come to me as a full grown man, a noble, glorious, young man, and declared himself my son. What does it mean?"

Father ( Hyrum Smith, the Patriarch ) told him that the Spirit of Jesus Christ was full-grown before he was born into the world; and so your children were full-grown and possessed their full stature in the spirit, before they entered mortality, the same stature that they will possess after they have passed away from mortality, and as they will also appear after the resurrection, when they shall have completed their mission.

Joseph Smith taught the doctrine that the infant child that was laid away in death would come up in the resurrection as a child; and, pointing to the mother of a lifeless child, he said to her, "You will have the joy, the pleasure, and satisfaction of nurturing this child, after its resurrection, until it reaches the full stature of its spirit." There is restitution, there is growth, there is development, after the resurrection from death. I love this truth. It speaks volumes of happiness, of joy and gratitude to my soul. Thank the Lord he has revealed these principles to us.(Gospel Doctrine, pp. 452-56.)
