Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

17

The New and Everlasting Covenant

Question: "Second: What is meant by the new and everlasting covenant? Does it mean temple marriage and sealing?"

The new and everlasting covenant is the fulness of the gospel.(D. & C. 66:2.) It is composed of "All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations" that are sealed upon members of the Church by the Holy Spirit of promise, or the Holy Ghost, by the authority of the President of the Church who holds the keys.(Ibid., 132:7.) The President of the Church holds the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood. He delegates authority to others and authorizes them to perform the sacred ordinances of the priesthood.

Marriage for eternity is a new and everlasting covenant. Baptism is also a new and everlasting covenant,(Ibid., 132:22.) and likewise ordination to the priesthood, and every other covenant is everlasting and a part of the new and everlasting covenant which embraces all things.

In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 132, the Lord speaks of two covenants that are everlasting and a great many have confused the two. The first everlasting covenant is revealed in verses four and five as follows:

For behold, I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting covenant; and if ye abide not that covenant, then are ye damned; for no one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory.

For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world.

This covenant pertains to the covenant of marriage which was to be revealed. Then the Lord speaks of the new and everlasting covenant which is obedience, faith, in God, repentance from sin and baptism for the remission of sins and the keeping of every commandment belonging to the plan of salvation, for the Lord has said:

And I now give unto you a commandment to beware concerning yourselves, to give diligent heed to the words of eternal life.

For you shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God.(Ibid., 84:43-44.)

At the time of the organization of the Church there were some who wished to unite with it by virtue of the fact that they had once been baptized by immersion, but with a sectarian baptism. The Lord announced:

Behold, I say unto you that all old covenants have I caused to be done away in this thing; and this is a new and everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning.

Wherefore, although a man should be baptized an hundred times it availeth him nothing, for you cannot enter in at the strait gate by the law of Moses, neither by your dead works.(Ibid., 22:1-2.)

So here the Lord speaks of baptism as a "new and everlasting covenant." However, in Section 132, verses 6 and 7, the Lord speaks of the new and everlasting covenant and in detail explains what it is. He is now speaking of a definite covenant, which embraces "All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations," pertaining to salvation and exaltation in the celestial kingdom.

Here we discover that marriage for eternity is not the new and everlasting covenant, but an everlasting covenant embraced in the new and everlasting covenant which covers all things.
