Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

18

The Sin against the Holy Ghost

Question: "Will you kindly explain the significance of verses 26 and 27 in the Doctrine and Covenant, Section 132? Some hold to the view that after a man and a woman are married for time and all eternity, nothing can prevent them from receiving the promised blessings of exaltation except blasphemy against the Holy Ghost or the shedding of innocent blood. Others feel that such a doctrine tends to nullify the repeated statement in the scriptures that every man will be judged and rewarded according to his works."

Answer: Your question in relation to what is written in these verses is one that is constantly recurring. It is a great regret that so many well-meaning men are deceived into thinking that after they are married in the temple for time and all eternity they become immune from the consequences of all sin except the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost or the shedding of innocent blood. According to what is written there is but one unpardonable sin, that is the sin against the Holy Ghost and the shedding of innocent blood. All other sins may be forgiven, but only on conditions of sincere and permanent repentance. Shedding innocent blood is spoken of in the scriptures as consenting to the death of Jesus Christ and putting him to open shame. For those who have had the witness of the Holy Ghost, fighting with wicked hate against his authorized servants is the same, for if this is done to them, it is also against him. For men who have had the light of the Holy Ghost to turn away and fight the truth with murderous hate, and those who are authorized to proclaim it, there is no forgiveness in this world, neither in the world to come.

In the twelfth chapter of Matthew, verses 31-32, the Lord states in substance what is said in the two verses in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 132, referred to above. The Prophet Joseph Smith's revision of these verses is as follows:

Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men who receive me and repent; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven unto men. (Italics author's.)

And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of Man it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him; neither in this world; neither in the world to come.(Inspired Version, Matthew 12:26-27.)

INFLUENCE OF HOLY GHOST IS SPIRIT SPEAKING TO SPIRIT

The reason blasphemy against the Son of God may be forgiven, even if the Son be made manifest in a vision or a dream, is that such manifestation does not impress the soul as deeply as does the testimony of the Holy Ghost. The influence of the Holy Ghost is Spirit speaking to spirit, and the indelible impression is one that brings conversion and conviction to the soul as no other influence can. The Holy Spirit reveals the truth with a positiveness wherein there is no doubt and therefore is far more impressive than a vision given to the eye.

In the Book of Hebrews it is written:

For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,

And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,

If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.(Hebrews 6:4-6.)

Peter has also borne witness to this truth:

For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.

For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them.(Inspired Version, 2 Peter 2:20-21.)

We have heard of some who have stated that a man cannot be an apostle of Jesus Christ unless he has seen the Lord. The fact is that the testimony of the Spirit is far more impressive and lasting than a vision given to the eye. This the Lord knew when he said that the blasphemy against him may be forgiven but not the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.

John, in his writing to the members of the Church in the first century of the Christian era instructed them in matters of this kind:

If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for it.

All unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin not unto death.(Ibid., 1 John 5:16-17.)

THE SIN UNTO DEATH

The sin unto death is the unpardonable sin which will bring to those who partake of it banishment with the devil and his angels and is called the second death. From these words of John we gather that any sin, except a sin unto death, may be forgiven on true repentance. This is in harmony with what is written in the vision in the Doctrine and Covenants in regard to sons of perdition:

Thus saith the Lord concerning all those who know my power, and have been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves through the power of the devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy my power—

They are they who are the sons of perdition, of whom I say that it had been better for them never to have been born;

For they are vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the devil and his angels in eternity;

Concerning whom I have said there is no forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come—

Having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame.

These are they who shall go away into the lake of fire and brimstone, with the devil and his angels—

And the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power.(D. & C. 76:31-36.)

From this it appears that all the rest of mankind, no matter what their sins have been, eventually will be heirs of redemption from the devil and his angels. We must not, however, lose sight of the fact that all men are to be judged according to their works. To be redeemed from Satan and his angels does not mean that all will find their way into the celestial kingdom. Although redeemed from his power, they will have to go to that kingdom which they merit according to their works. The remaining verses of this section inform us of this fact. Some, after being redeemed, will go to the telestial kingdom. They will suffer the wrath of God(Ibid., 76:98-107.) which will continue through the Millennium and to the end of the earth when they receive their resurrection. Paul said that the last enemy to be destroyed is death.(1 Corinthians 15:24-26.) Those entitled to the terrestrial resurrection will come forth after the coming of Jesus Christ.(D. & C. 88:99.) Redemption does not mean, therefore, that they are to receive eternal life in the celestial kingdom.

IT IS POSSIBLE TO SIN BEYOND REPENTANCE

Repentance is a gift of God. It is possible for men to sin beyond the power of repentance. This was the condition of the Nephites in the days of Mormon. Of them it is written, they were beyond the power of redemption and they sinned knowingly.(Helaman 13:38, Mormon 2:13-14, 5:16.) We read that the devils believe and tremble, but they do not repent.

Now we will consider the significance of these two verses. Regarding the punishment of the unrepentant, Moroni has written:

Then will ye longer deny the Christ, or can ye behold the Lamb of God? Do ye suppose that ye shall dwell with him under a consciousness of your guilt? Do ye suppose that ye could be happy to dwell with that holy Being, when your souls are racked with a consciousness of guilt that ye have ever abused his laws?

Behold, I say unto you that ye would be more miserable to dwell with a holy and just God, under a consciousness of your filthiness before him, than ye would to dwell with the damned souls in hell.(Mormon 9:3-4.)

When the Lord left his Nephite disciples he said to them:

And he that endureth not unto the end, the same is he that is also hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence they can no more return, because of the justice of the Father.

And this is the word which he hath given unto the children of men. And for this cause he fulfilleth the words which he hath given, and he lieth not, but fulfilleth all his words.

And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins.(3 Nephi 27:17-19)

The Lord does not contradict himself. Therefore we must reach the conclusion that no blessing ever promised is granted to men without the requirement of faithfulness; or, in case of transgression, a sincere and humble repentance. While in the two verses under consideration there is no mention of repentance, it is deeply implied and must be considered so in the light of these other scriptures. How foolish it is for anyone to think that the Lord has given him a blessing that is not based on faithfulness and will be received whether repented of or not.

PROMISES BASED UPON FAITHFULNESS

Therefore we can say most positively that all those who are married in the temple for time and all eternity receive their blessings and enter their covenants with these promises based upon their faithfulness. If it so happens that they do sin and break their covenants, but have not sinned unto death, they will have to repent completely and faithfully of all their sins or they will never enter the celestial glory. No unrepentant person who remains in his sins will ever enter into the glories of the celestial kingdom.

Let us see if we can discover the real intent of these two verses. As stated, the blessings are based on faithfulness. Suppose a man violates his covenants by committing a heinous sin and afterwards humbly and prayerfully forsakes it and seeks forgiveness with all his heart; the sin not being one unto death, what will be required of him? The revelation states that nevertheless he will be "destroyed in the flesh, and shall be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption, saith the Lord." Now, where is there a man who wishes to pay such a price? Should a man who had not made such covenants commit the same sort of offense and then he should repent and receive the truth with all his heart, it is not written of him that he would have to pass through such an awful ordeal. With him his repentance may suffice without the suffering and torment following his repentance. David committed a dreadful crime, and all his life afterwards sought for forgiveness. Some of the Psalms portray the anguish of his soul; yet David is still paying for his sin. He did not receive the resurrection at the time of the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Peter declared that his body was still in the tomb, and the Prophet Joseph Smith has said, "David sought repentance at the hand of God carefully with tears, for the murder of Uriah; but he could only get it through hell: he got a promise that his soul should not be left in hell."(Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 229.) Again we ask: Who wishes to spend a term in hell with the devil before being cleansed from sin?(For additional discussion on the subject of paying the price for sin, see Doctrines of Salvation, Vol. 1, pp. 133-138.)
