Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

19

The Second Death

Question: "In teaching a theology class a question arose on which we would like to receive the answer if possible. I want to teach only that which is true. The question is on the fourteenth chapter of Helaman and centered particularly in the 17th and 18th verses where Samuel says:

" 'But behold, the resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord.

" 'Yea, and it bringeth to pass the condition of repentance, that whosoever repenteth the same is not hewn down and cast into the fire; but whosoever repenteth not is hewn down and cast into the fire; and there cometh upon them again a spiritual death, yea, a second death, for they are cut of again as to things pertaining to righteousness.'

"Now on first reading, this conveys the idea that Samuel is referring to sons of perdition, and, following the cross reference to Alma 19:16, we get the same impression that the second death is an everlasting death as to things pertaining unto righteousness. Also in Jacob 3:11, 'O my brethren, hearken unto my word; arouse the faculties of your soul; shake yourselves that ye may awake from the slumber of death; and loose yourselves from the pains of hell that ye may not become angels to the devil, to be cast into that lake of fire and brimstone which is the second death.'

"A member of the class explained that this second death, or spiritual death, meant anyone who did not attain the celestial kingdom; in other words, anyone who did not receive the presence once again of God the Father. Now with this idea all who go to the telestial and terrestrial as well as well as sons of perdition, suffer the second death. Or were these people spoken of by Alma, Jacob, and Samuel so wicked and of such a murderous nature that they were about to fall under the same curse as the devil and his angels?"

Answer: It is very clear in the Doctrine and Covenants 76:30-37, that the only persons who will be completely overcome by this dreadful fate are the sons of perdition, who go with the devil and his angels into "outer darkness." All the rest of mankind, even the wicked, will receive some measure of salvation after they suffer the wrath of God. However, they will of necessity be brought to repentance and acceptance of the gospel of Jesus Christ as far as it will apply to them. They will not be given the ordinances which do not pertain in their kingdoms. From the reading of other passages we discover that there will be great multitudes embracing the vast majority of mankind, who will never be privileged to come back to dwell in the presence of the Father and the Son. These receive banishment from their presence, but not entirely do they get beyond the divine benediction.

The Lord said in the Sermon on the Mount:

Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat:

Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.(Matthew 7:13-14.)

The Lord has given us a definition of spiritual death(D. & C. 29:41-44.) which was pronounced upon Adam and Eve after their transgression. This second spiritual death is partaken of by every soul who has not repented of his sins and obtained a remission by baptism in water, and the baptism of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Of these the Lord said:

And thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probation—that by his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life, even as many as would believe;

And they that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall, because they repent not;(Ibid., vs. 43-44; italics added.)

ALL MUST EVENTUALLY CONFESS OR BE BANISHED

The time will come when "every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God," that Jesus is the Christ,(Romans 14:11; italics added.) and all who are worthy of a place in any of the kingdoms of glory will have to learn to be obedient to the divine laws by which they will be governed. All who refuse will have to go with the devil and his angels into perdition. This group will be composed of those who have known the light and have had a testimony of the truth and who have sinned against the light beyond the power of repentance.

Having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame.

These are they who shall go away into the lake of fire and brimstone, with the devil and his angels—

And the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power;

Yea, verily, the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord, after the suffering of his wrath.(D. & C. 76:35-38.)

Who glorifies the Father, and saves all the works of his hands, except those sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him.

Wherefore, he saves all except them—they shall go away into everlasting punishment, which is endless punishment, which is eternal punishment, to reign with the devil and his angels in eternity, where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched, which is their torment—

And the end thereof, neither the place thereof, nor their torment, no man knows;

Neither was it revealed, neither is, neither will be revealed unto man, except to them who are made partakers thereof.(Ibid., vs. 43-46.)

Evidently many among us have made a dreadful mistake, but not unpardonable, in thinking that the sons of perdition will be very few. We have heard it said at times that they will be so few that they probably could be "counted on the fingers of one hand." Where this thought originated we may not know. From the reading of the scriptures it appears that there will be a large number; far too many even if there were but one, for their punishment is most severe without any question.

All those who are permanently subject to the second death are those who have had the testimony of the Holy Ghost and who have known the truth and then have rejected it and put Christ to open shame. Of these we read:

For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,

And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,

If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.(Hebrews 6:4-6; italics added.)

FATE OF NEPHITES WHO WERE ONCE BELIEVERS IN CHRIST

In relation to the Nephites spoken of by Jacob, Alma, Samuel, and others, we should remember that these were once members of the Church who had turned away and denied the truth and fought to destroy it. They were not like the people in the gentile nations who never received the truth. These Nephites had received the light, rebelled, and then attempted to destroy it. After the visitation of our Lord, both Nephites and Lamanites lived in unity in the light of the gospel for nearly two hundred years. The Lord established his Church in all its fulness among them, and when they began to rebel they did it knowingly. This is clearly indicated in the words of Mormon. They had the guidance of the Nephite twelve, and three of them remained until in the extreme wickedness of the people the Lord would not permit them to remain. Samuel's castigation of these Nephites was fully justified in his accusation and prophecy of their punishment.

Behold, we are surrounded by demons, yea, we are encircled about by the angels of him who hath sought to destroy our souls. Behold, our iniquities are great. O Lord, canst thou not turn away thine anger from us? And this shall be your language in those days.

But behold, your days of probation are past, ye have procrastinated the day of your salvation until it is everlastingly too late, and your destruction is made sure; yea, for ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head.(Helaman 13:37-38.)

And again the words of Mormon:

And it came to pass that when I, Mormon, saw their lamentation and their mourning and their sorrow before the Lord, my heart did begin to rejoice within me, knowing the mercies and the long-suffering of the Lord, therefore supposing that he would be merciful unto them that they would again become a righteous people.

But behold this my joy was vain, for their sorrowing was not unto repentance, because of the goodness of God; but it was rather the sorrowing of the damned, because the Lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin.(Mormon 2:12-13.)

INHABITANTS OF THE TELESTIAL AND TERRESTRIAL GLORIES

Those who never receive the Holy Ghost who enter the telestial and terrestrial kingdoms are not entirely shut out from the influence of God our Father. We are informed that the inhabitants of the telestial kingdom, which will be a kingdom with some measure of glory, will be ministered to by those of the terrestrial kingdom. They will suffer the wrath of God on earth and after death until they have paid the price of their sinning and have learned to be obedient to law. The record says of them:

These are they who received not the gospel of Christ, neither the testimony of Jesus.

These are they who are thrust down to hell.

These are they who shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection, until the Lord, even Christ the Lamb, shall have finished his work.

These are they who receive not of his fulness in the eternal world, but of the Holy Spirit through the ministration of the terrestrial;

These are they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

These are they who suffer the wrath of God on earth.

These are they who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.

These are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty God, until the fulness of times, when Christ shall have subdued all enemies under his feet, and shall have perfected his work.(D. & C. 76:82, 84-86, 103-6.)

Those who were honorable men who will be permitted to go to the terrestrial kingdom will be blessed with ministrations from the celestial kingdom. They will be privileged with visitations from Jesus Christ but will be denied the presence of the Father. Thus we learn that our Eternal Father will do all that he can for the inhabitants of the earth according to their works. The inhabitants of the telestial and terrestrial kingdoms will be given a measure of salvation, but not the fulness. They will be redeemed from the power of Satan after they have paid the penalty of their transgressions and have learned to be obedient to divine law.

But behold, and lo, we saw the glory and the inhabitants of the telestial world, that they were as innumerable as the stars in the firmament of heaven, or as the sand upon the seashore;

And heard the voice of the Lord saying: These all shall bow the knee, and every tongue shall confess to him who sits upon the throne forever and ever;

For they shall be judged according to their works, and every man shall receive according to his own works, his own dominion, in the mansions which are prepared;

And they shall be servants of the Most High; but where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end.(Ibid., 76:109-12.)
