Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

20

The Iniquity of the Fathers

Question: "We are studying the Ten Commandments. Will you give me an explanation of the last half of the second commandment, Exodus 20:5? It has seemed to me that the second Article of Faith is a direct contradiction of this commandment."

Answer: The scripture in question is as follows: ". . . visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me."

The second Article of Faith reads: "We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression."

Adam's transgression was banishment from the presence of God and bringing the physical death into the world. The majority in the religious world maintain that every child born into this world is tainted with "original sin," or partakes of Adam's transgression in his birth. The second Article of Faith contradicts this foolish and erroneous doctrine. This has nothing to do whatever with the latter part of the second commandment.

What your question means, as I interpret it, is this: You have an idea that the commandment means that when a man sins his children will be held responsible for his folly and be punished for it, for three or four generations. The commandment does not mean anything of this kind. The Lord never punishes a child for its parents' transgressions. He is just and merciful. The real meaning of this visiting of the iniquity is that when a man transgresses he teaches his children to transgress, and they follow his teachings. It is natural for children to follow in the practices of their fathers and by doing so suffer for the parents' iniquity which they have voluntarily brought upon themselves.

NUMEROUS PASSAGES SHOW MERCY AND JUSTICE

There are numerous other passages of scripture showing the mercy and justice of the Lord and that they are not to be punished for the fathers' transgression. Here are a few:

The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the fathers: every man shall be put to death for his own sin.(Deuteronomy 24:16.)

But the children of the murderers he slew not: according unto that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, wherein the Lord commanded saying, The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers; but every man shall be put to death for his own sin.(2 Kings 14:6. Compare 2 Chronicles 25:4.)

In those days they shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children's teeth are set on edge.

But every one shall die for his own iniquity: every man that eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge.(Jeremiah 31:29-30.)

The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.(Ezekiel 18:20.)
