Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

21

The Sacrament and Forgiveness of Sin

Question: "Will you please answer this question: Does the partaking of the sacrament forgive one of his sins?

Answer: The forgiveness of sins comes through faith and sincere repentance. If a member of the Church has committed sin, the correct procedure is repentance and a sincere desire to right the wrong. If we have wronged a brother or a sister, we should go to the injured person and confess our sin and should make amends. If it is a sin against the Church, we should confess it before the Church and seek forgiveness. It is written:

And if he or she do any manner of iniquity, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law, even that [the law] of God.

And if thy brother or sister offend thee, thou shalt take him or her between him or her and thee alone; and if he or she confess thou shalt be reconciled.

And if he or she confess not thou shalt deliver him or her up unto the church, not to the members, but to the elders. And it shall be done in a meeting, and that not before the world.

And if thy brother or sister offend many, he or she shall be chastened before many.

And if any one offend openly, he or she shall be rebuked openly, that he or she may be ashamed. And if he or she confess not, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of God.

If any shall offend in secret, he or she shall be rebuked in secret, that he or she may have an opportunity to confess in secret to him or her whom he or she has offended, and to God that the Church may not speak reproachfully of him or her.(D. & C. 42:87-92.)

The Lord has also instructed us as follows:

Thou shalt thank the Lord thy God in all things.

Thou shalt offer a sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in righteousness, even that of a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day;

For verily this day is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High;

Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times;

But remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord.(Ibid., 59:7-12.)

THE SACRAMENT IS A MOST SACRED ORDINANCE

Partaking of the sacrament is one of the most sacred ordinances given to the Church. It is given in order that we may be brought in closer communion with the spirit of the Lord and thus renew three most sacred covenants. They are: first, that we will take upon us the name of Jesus Christ; second, that we will always remember him; third, that we will always keep his commandments which he has given us. We are promised if we will do this that we will be blessed with the constant companionship of his spirit. If we have violated any one of these covenants, then there should be sincere repentance through which we receive forgiveness of the Church before we partake of the sacrament.

The Lord said to the Prophet Joseph Smith in August 1830, when he went to purchase wine for the sacrament:

For, behold, I say unto you, that it mattereth not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an eye single to my glory—remembering unto the Father my body which was laid down for you, and my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins.(Ibid., 27:2.)

Again in March 1841, the Lord said:

Ye are also commanded not to cast any one who belongeth to the church out of your sacrament meetings; nevertheless, if any have trespassed, let him not partake until he makes reconciliation .

And again I say unto you, ye shall not cast any out of your sacrament meetings who are earnestly seeking the kingdom—I speak this concerning those who are not of the church.(Ibid., 46:4-5.)

When the Savior visited the Nephites, he taught them as follows:

And now behold, this is the commandment which I give unto you, that ye shall not suffer any one knowingly to partake of my flesh and blood unworthily, when ye shall minister it;

For whoso eateth and drinketh my flesh and blood unworthily eateth and drinketh damnation to his soul; therefore if ye know that a man is unworthy to eat and drink of my flesh and blood ye shall forbid him.

Nevertheless, ye shall not cast him out from among you, but ye shall minister unto him and shall pray for him unto the Father, in my name; and if it so be that he repenteth and is baptized in my name, then shall ye receive him, and shall minister unto him of my flesh and blood.

But if he repent not he shall not be numbered among my people, that he may not destroy my people, for behold I know my sheep, and they are numbered.(3 Nephi 18:28-31.)

PARTAKING OF THE SACRAMENT UNWORTHILY

Paul had to take the members of the Church in Corinth to task for their sins in partaking of the sacrament unworthily. It appears that when they assembled they turned the sacrament service into a feast where they ate and became drunken. So Paul said to them:

What? have ye not houses to eat and drink in? or despise ye the church of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I say to you? shall I praise you in this? I praise you not.

For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, That the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was destroyed, took bread:

And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.

After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.

For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come.

Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body.

For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.(1 Corinthians 11:22-30.)

And who are guilty of sin shall truly repent and make restitution before partaking of the sacrament.

While of these emblems we partake In Jesus' name and for his sake, Let us remember and be sure Our hearts and hands are clean and pure.
