Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

22

Prayer and Fasting

Question:"How old is the law of prayer and fasting? We know that prayer and fasting were practiced in the days of our Savior. Was it also a law in ancient Israel? When was it introduced as a commandment in this dispensation, and when and why was the day changed from Thursday to the first Sunday of each month? We have discussed these questions, and there is a difference of opinion."

Answer: Fasting we may well assume is a religious custom that has come down from the beginning of time, and always associated with prayer. There are numerous customs and practices that were given anciently about which the knowledge became so common that their origin has been lost in antiquity; therefore we cannot give time or place where the first commandment on fasting was given. It was common in the most ancient times, and there are numerous incidents recorded in the Old Testament indicating that it was well established not only among the true worshipers of Deity but also among the heathen nations. All of this indicates the antiquity of fasting, which we may presume was revealed to Adam.

We may obtain the understanding from the writings of Isaiah that fasting and prayer were commanded by the Lord. For their perversion of this doctrine, Isaiah rebukes Israel and endeavors to bring them back to the path of faithful obedience. His words and commandment are as follows:

Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.

Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinances of their God: they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in approaching to God.

Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your feast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours.

Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high.

Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord?

Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?

Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?(Isaiah 58:1-7.)

A CONTRITE SPIRIT AND A HUMBLED HEART

Here Isaiah points out clearly the intent of the fast. It was observed with a contrite spirit, a humbled heart, before the Lord. Evil was to be forsaken, prayer and supplication offered with a covenant to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and let the oppressed go free. If they would do this, then, said the Lord, "shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy reward."(Ibid., 58:8. Isaiah points out clearly the real intent of the fast. It is to be observed in the spirit of humility and worship. The poor were to be remembered and fed; the naked were to be clothed; and the burdens of the oppressed were to be relieved. Who dare say that the welfare plan was not a commandment to ancient Israel? Yet the people had made mockery of it.) Israel, however, had perverted the fast and thus merited Isaiah's and the Lord's rebuke.

All through the Old Testament we find evidence of the observance of fasting and prayer. Two of the best examples are worthy of mention here. The first is the story in the book of Esther. This story should be familiar to everyone. Briefly, Haman, the enemy of the Jews, forced the king to make a decree that all the Jews within the kingdom should be destroyed. The law was one that could not be revoked. Esther, the queen, sent a petition to all the Jews saying:

Go, gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and my maidens will fast likewise; and so will I go in unto the king, which is not according to the law: and if I perish, I perish.(Esther 4:16.)

Her petition before the king bore fruit, and while the king could not change the decree, he countered it by permitting the Jews to arm and defend themselves. Another striking example of fasting is recorded in the Book of Daniel. When the tricksters plotted against Daniel and had him cast into the den of lions according to the unchangeable law and when the king wished to deliver him, the plotters said: "Know, O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, That no decree nor statute which the king establishes may be changed."(Daniel 6:15.) Then the king went to the palace and passed the night in fasting: "neither were instruments of musick brought before him: and his sleep went from him."(Ibid., 6:18.) Daniel also sought the Lord in fasting and prayer when seeking the favor of the Lord.(Ibid., 10:1-3.)

NEW TESTAMENT REFERENCES TO FASTING AND PRAYER

In the New Testament also there are numerous references to fasting and prayer, when blessings were expedient from the Lord. In this case it is sufficient to refer to the commandment of our Savior, taught in the great Sermon on the Mount, and to the healing of the youth possessed by an evil spirit. On the mount the Savior said:

Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.

But thou, when thou fastest anoint thine head, and wash thy face;

That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.(Matthew 6:16-18.)

The other incident is the casting out of the devil from the youth whom the disciples could not heal. The disciples asked the Lord why they had failed. He informed them that it was because of their lack of faith, for if they had faith even the moving of mountains would be possible to them; then he added: "Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting."(Ibid., 17:21.)

Fasting and prayer in the present dispensation have been carried over from primitive times. From the organization of the Church the principle of fasting in the spirit of prayer has been a commandment of the Lord.(D. & C. 59:8-13; 88:76, 119. ) In regard to the choosing of a set day of the month, we have this testimony coming from President Brigham Young in a discourse in the old tabernacle, Salt Lake City, December 8, 1867:

. . .You know that the first Thursday in each month we hold as a fast day. How many here know the origin of this day? Before tithing was paid, the poor were supported by donations. They came to Joseph [Smith the Prophet] and wanted help, in Kirtland, and he said there should be a fast day, which was decided upon. It was to be held once a month, as it is now, and all that would have been eaten that day, of flour, or meat, or butter, or fruit, or anything else, was to be carried to the fast meeting and put in the hands of a person selected for the purpose of taking care of the poor. If we were to do this now faithfully, do you think the poor would lack for flour, or butter, or cheese, or meat, or sugar, or anything they needed to eat? No! there would be more than could be used by all the poor among us. It is economy in us to take this course, and do better by our poor brethren and sisters than they have hitherto been done by. Let this be published in our newspapers. Let it be sent forth to the people, that on the first Thursday of each month, the fast day, all that would be eaten by husbands and wives and children and servants should be put in the hands of the bishop for the sustenance of the poor. I am willing to do my share as well as the rest, and if there are no poor in my ward, I am willing to divide with those wards where there are poor. If the sisters will look out for rooms for those sisters who need to be taken care of, and see them provided for, you will find that we will possess more comfort and more peace in our hearts and our spirits will be buoyant and light, full of joy and peace. The bishops should, through their teachers, see that every family in their wards, who is able, should donate what they would naturally consume on the fast day to the poor.(J. of D., Vol. 12, p. 115.)

This custom of holding fast meetings on Thursday was continued in Nauvoo and also after the coming of the members of the Church to the Rocky Mountains. I can remember the time when certain business houses closed their doors each fast day and placed on the doors, "Closed for fast meeting." It seems that the people were more faithful in those days in attendance and willingness to remain to the finish of a two-hour meeting or even longer.

FAST DAY FIRST SUNDAY OF EACH MONTH

The change from the first Thursday to the first Sunday of the month came about in this manner. Hyrum M. Smith, who later became a member of the Council of the Twelve, was a missionary in Newcastle, England, in the year 1896. On the Thursday of the fast meeting, members of the Church in that land had to get excused from their employment with a loss of pay. Some of them were workers in the coal mines. When these came from the pits, they had to go home, bathe, and change their clothes. This was a loss both of time and compensation. Hyrum wrote to his father, President Joseph F. Smith, and asked why, under such circumstances, the fast day had to be a Thursday and not a Sunday. President Smith took the letter to the meeting of the First Presidency and the apostles and presented it there. The following is an excerpt from the minutes of the meeting held November 5, 1896:

President Joseph F. Smith introduced the subject of fast meetings, suggesting that a change of the time from the first Thursday to the first Sunday in each month would probably be beneficial. This was endorsed by President George Q. Cannon, and after other brethren had spoken on the subject, it was decided that the Tabernacle services be dispensed with on the first Sunday of each month, and that the saints in this city as well as in the country wards, should have the privilege of meeting in their meeting houses at 2 o'clock P.M., to observe fast day.

Perhaps unfortunately, the time of fast meetings was gradually changed to an earlier hour in most of the stakes and wards of the Church, which probably has resulted in a loss of spirituality and of observance of the fast.
