Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

23

Upon This Rock

Question:"Last Sunday my husband and I were called on to speak at the evening services in our ward. We were followed by another speaker who gave a forceful address in which he warned us of false doctrine that he said is being taught in the Church. In part of his address he said many throughout the Church are teaching false doctrine in relation to the saying of Jesus to Peter, 'And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.' He said that the Catholics say this rock is Peter, and many in the Church teach that it is the rock of revelation. The rock, he said, is Christ. Is it a false doctrine to say that this rock is revelation? We have been taught always to believe it."

Answer: The expression "the rock" is used in the scriptures with different meanings that must be interpreted according to the context. There are times when it refers to Christ and times when it refers to the gospel and other times when the reference is to revelation and again to the Church. Let us consider the passage under question. At Caesarea Philippi the Lord asked his disciples,

Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?

And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets.

He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am?

And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.

And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter; and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.(Matthew 16:13-19.)

THE CHURCH IS NOT ESTABLISHED ON ANY MAN

The interpretation placed on this conversation by the Catholics is extremely absurd. It is contrary to reason to think that the Lord would establish his Church upon any man, no matter how faithful and wonderful he might be. It is the Church of Jesus Christ, not the church of Peter. When the Nephite disciples sought the Lord to know what was to be the name of the Church, he said to them:

Have they not read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name? For by this name shall ye be called at the last day;

And whoso taketh upon him my name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the last day.

Therefore, whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake.

And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel.(3 Nephi 27:5-8.)

The extent of the authority to Peter was to hold the keys of the kingdom of heaven, meaning the presiding authority upon the earth. These keys enabled him to take charge and preside over the work of the Lord, exercising divine authority. The antecedent of this is "revealed" in the preceding paragraph, and upon revelation the Lord would build his church. It has always been so understood in the past, and it is today. If there is no communication with the heavens, if the Lord cannot speak, then he has no authorized servants upon the earth. When the gift of revelation ceased then errors crept in with disastrous results. This is the complaint made in ancient Israel at times; because of wickedness, there was no prophet, no vision, no communication with the heavens.(1 Samuel 28:6.) For nearly, if not quite, nineteen hundred years there had been no divine revelation. Religious denominations relied entirely on the dead letter of the Bible for their authority. They closed the heavens against themselves, and their interpretations of scripture without divine guidance led them into division, subdivision, and multiplication of churches, each going its own way blindly and in confusion. The power of the priesthood was lost and the true Church of Jesus Christ ceased to exist on the earth. There had been no prophet, no revelation, or divine instruction from the time of the apostles of old until the Lord again opened the heavens and sent holy messengers to restore that which had been taken away.

EXPLANATION BY THE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH

Speaking on the meaning of the Savior's words to Peter concerning the rock, the Prophet Joseph Smith has said:

John was a priest after the order of Aaron, and he held keys of the priesthood, and came forth preaching repentance and baptism, for the remission of sins, but at the same time cries out, "There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose," and Christ came according to the words of John, and he was greater than John, because he held the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood and kingdom of God, and had before revealed the priesthood to Moses; yet Christ was baptized by John to fulfill all righteousness; and Jesus in his teaching says: "Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." What rock? Revelation.(Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 273-74. )

Members of the Church should not spend their time in argument over this passage; nor should there arise misunderstandings. In the Doctrine and Covenants we find passages in which the term "rock" refers definitely to revelation, also to the Church and to Jesus Christ. In the Book of Mormon and the Bible like passages are found. Here are a few examples:

Therefore, fear not, little flock; do good; let earth and hell combine against you, for if ye are built upon my rock, they cannot prevail.(D. & C. 6:34. See Ibid., 10:69; 33:13; and 3 Nephi 11:39. )

It appears clear that this passage refers to revelation. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 50:44, the rock refers to Christ, "the stone of Israel." In the Book of Mormon are several passages that clearly refer to Jesus and others that refer to revelation and the gospel; for instance, consider these:

And in them [Nephite records] shall be written my gospel, saith the Lamb, and my rock [revelation] and my salvation.(1 Nephi 13:36.)

And then at that day will they not rejoice and give praise unto their everlasting God, their rock and their salvation? Yea, at that day, will they not receive the strength and nourishment from the true vine? Yea, will they not come unto the true fold of God?(Ibid., 15:15.)

Rejoice, O my heart, and cry unto the Lord, and say: O Lord, I will praise thee forever; yea, my soul will rejoice in thee, my God, and the rock of my salvation.(2 Nephi 4:30. Compare Helaman 5:12.)

From these passages we see that the "rock" is used variously: in reference to the gospel, revelation, and Jesus Christ. When we get this clearly in our minds and have the spirit of discernment so we can understand the passages in which this term is used, there should be no conflict as to the correct meaning by members of the Church.
