Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

25

Churches on Earth during the Millennium

Question: "Will there be any other churches with ministers on the earth during the Millennium teaching doctrine contrary to the doctrines of the Church which the Lord established? I understand that in the resurrection people of all creeds and manners of belief will be resurrected, but I am not clear in relation to the millennial reign?"

Answer: When the reign of Jesus Christ comes during the Millennium, only those who have lived the telestial law will be removed. It is recorded in the Bible and other standard works of the Church that the earth will be cleansed of all its corruption and wickedness. Those who have lived virtuous lives, who have been honest in their dealings with their fellow man and have endeavored to do good to the best of their understanding, shall remain. To Malachi it was revealed that". . . all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch."(Malachi 4:1) Isaiah also declared that because the people had broken the everlasting covenant and defiled the earth, ". . . therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left."(Isaiah 24:6.) In this dispensation the Lord revealed the following:

And prepare for the revelation which is to come, when the veil of the covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the earth, shall be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together.

And every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed;

And also that of element shall melt with fervent heat; and all things shall become new, that my knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth.(D. & C. 101:23-25.)

ALL CORRUPTIBLE THINGS SHALL BE CONSUMED

So we learn that all corruptible things, whether men or beasts or element, shall be consumed; but all that does not come under this awful edict shall remain. Therefore, the honest and upright of all nations, kindreds, and beliefs who have kept the terrestrial as well as the celestial law, will remain. Under these conditions people will enter the great reign of Jesus Christ, carrying with them their beliefs and religious doctrines. Their agency will not be taken from them. On this subject President Brigham Young has said:

In the Millennium men will have the privilege of their own belief, but they will not have the privilege of treating the name and character of Deity as they have done before. No, but every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to the glory of God the Father that Jesus is the Christ.(Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 182, 1925 ed.: p. 119, 1943 ed.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith has said:

There will be wicked men on the earth during the thousand years. The heathen nations who will not come up to worship will be visited with the judgments of God, and must eventually be destroyed from the earth(Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 268.)

The saying that there will be wicked men on the earth during the Millennium has been misunderstood by many, because the Lord declared that the wicked shall not stand, but shall be consumed.(D. & C. 5:18-19; 29:8-10; 101:23-25.) In using this term "wicked" it should be interpreted in the language of the Lord as recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 84, verses 49-53. Here the Lord speaks of those who have not received the gospel as being "wicked" as they are still under the bondage of sin, having not been baptized. "The inhabitants of the terrestrial order will remain on the earth during the Millennium, and this class is without the gospel ordinances."(Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 269.)

The Lord said through Isaiah, speaking of the Millennium:

For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.

There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed.(Isaiah 65:17-20. Compare D. & C. 101:28-31.)

GOSPEL TO BE TAUGHT WITH GREAT POWER

The gospel will be taught far more intensely and with greater power during the Millennium until all the inhabitants of the earth shall embrace it. Satan shall be bound so that he cannot tempt any man. Should any man refuse to repent and accept the gospel under those conditions then he would be accursed. Through the revelations given to the prophets we learn that during the reign of Jesus Christ for a thousand years, eventually all people will embrace the truth. Isaiah prophesied of the Millennium as follows:

The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.

And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child put his hand on the cockatrice' den.

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.(Ibid., 11:6-9.)

This chapter in Isaiah Moroni quoted to the Prophet Joseph Smith and said to him it was about to be fulfilled. If the knowledge of the Lord covers the earth as the waters do the sea, then it must be universally received. Moreover, the promise of the Lord through Jeremiah is that it will no longer be necessary for anyone to teach his neighbor, ". . . saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord." (Jeremiah 31:34.)
