Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

26

The Twelve Tribes of Israel

Question: "We would like to be put straight on the twelve tribes of Israel. We have been discussing them in our class, and it seems that we have several conflicting opinions. We know that Jacob had twelve sons, but in a book with the title 'God Planted a Tree,' we find recorded the statement that Ephraim and Manasseh, sons of Joseph, took the places of Reuben and Simeon, and in the lesson book, 'Life in Ancient America,' it also states that Ephraim was substituted for Reuben as one of the tribes in Israel. It was pointed out that in the Old Testament, Reuben and Simeon are named as tribes and that they received inheritances when the land of Canaan was divided. How did Ephraim and Manasseh become tribes and still there were only twelve?

"Another question: which tribes formed the kingdom of Israel and which the kingdom of Judah, when the tribes were divided?"

Answer: 1. The story of the tribes of Israel, their origin, inheritances, divisions, rebellions, and final loss of their inheritances, is clearly recorded in the books of the Old Testament. Jacob, whom the Lord named Israel, had twelve sons, namely: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulun, Joseph, Benjamin, Gad, Asher, Dan, and Naphtali. Each became the ancestor of a tribe in Israel and received patriarchal blessings as such when Jacob went down into Egypt. He also blessed the two sons of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, and adopted them as his own sons, and they were blessed as founders of tribes in Israel.

The idea that these two sons of Joseph replaced Reuben and Simeon springs from the words of Jacob when he chose them for adoption, as recorded in Genesis Chapter 48, verse 5, as follows: "And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, are mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine." A careful reading will show the true meaning to be that they should be sons of Jacob just the same as Reuben and Simeon were, not that they were to replace them. Then again some confusion has come because it is recorded in 1 Chronicles 5:1, that while Reuben was the firstborn, because of his transgression the birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph. The matter of birthright, however, did not have anything to do with a place among the tribes of Israel, and Ephraim was not substituted as a tribe for Reuben.

AUTHORITY OF PRIESTHOOD GIVEN TO LEVITES

When Israel came out of Egypt under the guidance of Moses, the Lord prepared to make of the twelve tribes a royal priesthood and honor them by choosing from among them faithful men to hold the Melchizedek Priesthood. Because of their constant rebellion and murmuring, in which they had Aaron make for them a golden calf to worship when they thought that Moses was dead, the Lord's anger was kindled against them. Therefore he took Moses and the Melchizedek Priesthood from them and left them with another authority or priesthood, which he bestowed upon Aaron and his sons, and chosen men of the tribe of Levi,(D.& C. 84:23-27.) to be the priests and ministers for all the tribes of Israel. According to this calling Aaron and the tribe of Levi, to which Aaron belonged, obtained this great honor, and henceforth the Levites were not numbered as one of the tribes, for the Lord said he would scatter them through all of the tribes to be their ministers and their priests. Therefore he commanded Moses as follows:

But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not numbered among them.

For the Lord has spoken unto Moses, saying,

Only thou shalt not number the tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the children of Israel:( Numbers 1:47-49.)

And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of all the firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of Israel: therefore the Levites shall be mine;

Because all the firstborn are mine; for on the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast: mine they shall be: I am the Lord.( Ibid., 3:12-13.)

So the tribes of Israel lost the glorious privilege of holding and officiating in the Melchizedek Priesthood, and in his anger the Lord added to what he gave them, the carnal law, which continued with Israel until the resurrection of Jesus Christ when it was fulfilled.( 3 Nephi 15:3-6.)

Again it was a rebuke to the tribes of Israel when the Lord said further to Moses:

And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons: they are wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel.

And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on their priest's office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.( Numbers 3:9-10. )

We discover that it was Levi and Joseph who were not numbered as tribes in Israel. Joseph received a double portion through his sons, each inheriting through their adoption by their grandfather, and Levi's descendants becoming the ministers to all the other tribes of Israel.

THE KINGDOMS OF ISRAEL AND JUDAH
