Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

27

The Keys of the Ministering of Angels

Question: "Will you please consider the following question? What is meant by the keys of the ministering of angels as stated in the conferring of the Aaronic Priesthood on Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by John?"

Answer: The answer to this question in brief is that the Lord revealed it to be the privilege of those holding the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood to have the visitation and ministering of angels if the occasion should arise, in relation to the temporal matters of the Church. It is presumed that your question calls for further details in relation to this priesthood and its powers.

When Israel came out of Egypt it was the intention of the Lord to organize the men of all the tribes into a royal priesthood, conferring upon them all the gifts and privileges of the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood which holds the keys of the fulness of the gospel and ". . . holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God."(D. & C. 84:19.) Because of rebellion and unwillingness to hearken to the commandments given by Moses, these great privileges and blessings were denied them, although Moses did all in his power to teach and sanctify them.

But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also;

And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb.(Ibid., 84:24-27.)

ISRAEL BECAME SUBJECT TO "LAW OF MOSES"

If Israel had remained faithful they would have had all the blessings and privileges of the Melchizedek Priesthood, but instead they were confined to the scope of the blessings of the Aaronic Priesthood and also became subject to the measures of the "Law of Moses," which contained many temporal laws, some of which were severe and drastic in their nature. This condition continued until the resurrection of Jesus Christ when this carnal law was fulfilled and was replaced by the fulness of the gospel. The Aaronic Priesthood did not lose the right to the ministering of angels in the days of restoration when Jesus Christ came to fulfil the law, and this power continues in the Church today, which is fully attested in the words of John.

We should understand, however, that while Israel was restricted in the power of the priesthood from the days of Moses to the days of the ministry of our Savior, yet the prophets in Israel, such as Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel, were blessed with the Melchizedek Priesthood, but this priesthood was not given to others. Most of these prophets were not of the tribe of Levi, but were from the tribes of Judah, Ephraim, and others.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "All Priesthood is Melchizedek, but there are different portions or degrees of it. That portion which brought Moses to speak with God face to face was taken away; but that which brought the ministry of angels remained."(Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 180-181.)
