Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

31

What Are Pastors and Evangelists?

Question: "Why do we not have pastors and evangelists in the Church as mentioned in the Prophet Joseph Smith's thirteenth Article of Faith? If they are names for bishops and missionaries, why then don't we call them such?"

The dictionary definition of a pastor is a correct one even from our understanding of this term; it is "a Christian minister who has a church or congregation under his official charge." The term pastor does not refer to an order in the priesthood, like deacon, priest, elder, seventy, and so on, but is a general term applied to an officer who presides over a ward, branch in a mission or a stake, and it could even be applied to a president of a stake. There are several references to pastors in the Old Testament, particularly in the Book of Jeremiah. I quote one or two of these showing that this is a general term applied to the priests and teachers in Israel, and not to an order of the priesthood:

And I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.(Jeremiah 3:15 )

For the pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord: therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered.(Ibid., 10:21.)

As for me, I have not hastened from being a pastor to follow thee: neither have I desired the woeful day; thou knowest: that which came out of my lips was right before thee.(Ibid., 17:16. )

From these passages you will see that it is clear that the Lord has reference to the priests and rulers over the children of Israel and not to an order, or office, in the priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith was following Paul's expression(Ephesians 4:11. ) and had reference to those who had jurisdiction over the flocks(Jeremiah 23:1-2. ) or branches of the Church. We can say truthfully that a bishop is a pastor; so is an elder who has charge of a branch of the Church, or a president of a stake who has direction of a number of wards and branches.

"PREACHER OF THE GOSPEL"

According to the dictionary and the generally accepted view of the word evangelist, it is "a preacher who goes from place to place holding services especially with a view of church revivals." He is a "preacher of the gospel." The term evangel means gospel, or good news.

Now consult your dictionary(See Funk and Wagnalls Standard Dictionary.) further and you will find this: "A Mormon officer of the Melchizedek or Higher Priesthood, whose special function is to bless." After reading this, turn to page 381, Volume 3, of the Documentary History of the Church, or to Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 151, and you will find the Prophet's explanation in relation to the evangelist. In case you do not have these books I will quote the passage for you.

An Evangelist is a Patriarch, even the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham. Wherever the Church of Christ is established in the earth, there should be a patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the Saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his patriarchal blessings unto his sons.
