Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

33

The Keys of Missionary Work

Question: "Will you please tell us which of the ancient prophets came and restored the keys of missionary work?"

Answer: The keys or power to go forth and proclaim the gospel was restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery when Peter, James, and John conferred upon them the Melchizedek Priesthood before the organization of the Church. It is true that John the Baptist had conferred upon them the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood before the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored. This was necessary because the time had come for them to be baptized and hold this priesthood preparatory to the coming of the higher priesthood. We read in the Doctrine and Covenants (D. & C. 84:26-27.) that the Aaronic Priesthood holds the keys of the preparatory gospel; that is to say, the teaching of faith, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins. This authority was given on the fifteenth day of May, 1829, but there was no commandment given for Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to go forth to teach and baptize until the Church was organized, although a few earnest souls who were acquainted with the restoration had sought baptism and had been baptized. It remained for Peter, James, and John to come with the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood to complete the authority to proclaim the gospel to the world.

When the Savior ordained his apostles and seventy at the beginning of his ministry, he gave them the authority to go forth, first to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, saying, ". . . The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give."(Matthew 10:7-8. See Luke 10:1-11.) But their ministry at first, or until after his resurrection, was confined to the "lost sheep of the house of Israel." After his resurrection he said to them:

Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.

He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.(Mark 16:15-16. )

This was their call and the authority he gave to them to carry the message into all the world, with all the keys of authority for the salvation of mankind. It was the Savior in that day who bestowed the authority of the missionary work, and in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, he sent Peter, James, and John to restore this authority and send forth the word of eternal life into all the world.

A REVELATION FROM THE LORD

Even before the restoration of the gospel and the organization of the Church, the Lord called men to go forth as missionaries for the Church, but cautioned them that they were to wait until the Church was organized.(D. & C. 11:21-28.) To the Prophet's father, who came seeking to know the will of the Lord, the Lord gave a revelation which applies to all those who receive the priesthood. In this revelation he said:

Therefore O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength, that ye may stand blameless before God at the last day. . . .

For behold the field is white already to harvest; and lo, he that thrusteth in his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul.(Ibid., 4:2, 4. )

On April 11, 1830, the first Sunday after the organization of the Church, Oliver Cowdery opened the door for the missionary work by preaching the first public discourse in this dispensation. The meeting was by appointment in the home of "Father" Peter Whitmer.(Smith, Joseph Fielding, Essentials in Church History, p. 95.) Early in the month of June, Samuel Harrison Smith, brother of the Prophet, started on what may be called the first missionary journey for the Church.(Ibid., p. 103.) From that time forth others were appointed to take missionary journeys into all parts of the Eastern States, Canada, and many of the Southern states; branches were soon organized in all of these parts. In this same year and the following year many missionaries were appointed to travel two by two to the North, the East, and the South, and even to carry the gospel to the Lamanites. Thomas B. Marsh, Ezra Thayer, Northrop Sweet, Parley P. Pratt, Ziba Peterson, Orson Pratt, and many others were called to the mission field. In the fall of 1830, Oliver Cowdery and Parley P. Pratt and others were sent on a mission to the Lamanites on the western borders of Missouri.(Ibid., p. 112.)

"TEACH ONE ANOTHER THE DOCTRINE OF THE KINGDOM"

In the closing months of the year 1832, the Lord called the missionaries who were out preaching to return that they might be endowed and receive further light, and then they were to return to the mission fields with greater power and knowledge concerning the work of proselyting. They were to teach "one another the doctrine of the kingdom," that they might be instructed "more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God," that was expedient for their understanding. They were to prepare themselves with knowledge, "Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—" They were to do this that they might be better prepared when the Lord should send them out again "to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you."(D. & C. 88:77-80.)

After they had received this endowment, the Lord declared:

Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people, and it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor.

Therefore, they are left without excuse, and their sins are upon their own heads. (Ibid., verses 81-82.)

This commission to go forth which was given in the beginning is still in force and binding on every missionary who goes forth today to declare the gospel of salvation in the world.
