Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

35

Who Are the Gentiles?

Question: "In our class we are studying The Acts of the Apostles, and the question arose, who are the Gentiles? There was a difference of opinion. Are the Gentiles of the blood of Israel? Will you kindly inform us?"

The definition in the Standard Dictionary of a Gentile is as follows: "(1) Among the Jews, a person of a non-Jewish race or faith; one who is not a Jew. (2) Among Christians, one who is neither Jew or Christian; a pagan; heathen. (3) Among the Mormons, one not a Mormon. 2 Gram. A noun or an adjective denoting race or country. 3 A member of a gens or clan."

This definition does not enlighten us in relation to the original meaning, nor does it accurately fit the doctrine of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. There are many races on the earth not members of the Church whom the Mormons do not class as Gentiles. The Polynesians, the American Indians, Jews, Arabs, and other races of Semitic origin who trace their lineage back to Abraham are not Gentiles in the strict sense of the word. The African Negroes, according to Mormon teachings, are not Gentiles.

The first use of the word is found in Genesis 10:5, in reference to the sons of Japheth, son of Noah, and reads as follows:

By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands; every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations.

Both Dr. Adam Clark and Dr. Thomas Scott, in their comprehensive commentaries refer to the people who settled Europe, Asia Minor, England, the United States, and Canada, as being of the Gentiles.

ORIGINAL SIGNIFICANCE LOST

The name Gentile to a great extent has lost its original significance. It was not used in an opprobrious sense and not in derision in biblical times, but referred to certain peoples who had not descended from Abraham. However, in the blessing the Lord gave to Abraham he extended favors even to the Gentiles:

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their Father.(Abraham 2:9-10.)

Before the days of the coming of Jesus in his ministry the Jews looked upon those not of their race as inferior because they were not the seed of Abraham. They boasted of their superiority because they were of the seed of Abraham. When the Savior came in his ministry, he may have lent some color to this thought, for he declared that he was sent only to the house of Israel. One striking example was his answer to the woman of Canaan: "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel."(Matthew 15:24.) Likewise in the call of his apostles he said: "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of Samaritans enter ye not: But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel."(Ibid., 10:5-6. ) The ministry of our Lord was confined to Israel, except in the special cases where those of other nations by exceeding faith sought him for blessings. After his resurrection he commissioned his servants to go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature; thus he widened the field to cover the whole earth.(See Mark 16:15-16.) It was difficult for his apostles to grasp the significance of this commission, so well had they been trained in the thought that the gospel was for Israel only. Following the conversion of Cornelius their views concerning the gospel broadened, and they went forth as they had been commanded to do.

THE FIRST HAVE BECOME LAST

In the Dispensation of the Meridian of Time, the gospel was first preached to the Jews, and when they rejected it, then it was carried to the Gentiles. In this Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, the gospel is first to the Gentiles and then is to go to the Jews. The first have become last and the last first in this dispensation in fulfilment of the teachings of our Lord.

The ancient prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others understood this order and great promises were made by them to the Gentiles. In the restoration of the gospel in our day it came "by way of the Gentile,"(Title page of Book of Mormon; D. & C. 20:9.) and to the Gentile nations it has been taught, and by them it will be carried to the Jews and the scattered house of Israel.

Latter-day Saints pride themselves because they are of Israel; but they are also of the Gentiles. We are the descendants of those members of the house of Israel who were scattered among the Gentiles to be a blessing to the Gentile nations and make them of the blood of Israel through the gospel. The scattering of Israel among the nations was not intended merely as a punishment, but as the leaven which would leaven the Gentile nations and make them of the blood of Abraham, according to the promises given to Abraham. The Book of Mormon came by way of the Prophet Joseph Smith, a descendant of Ephraim, yet it came "by way of the Gentile," and in the time of the Gentiles.
