Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

36

How Was Lehi a Descendant of the Jews?

Question: "In 1 Nephi 5:14, we are informed that Lehi was a descendant of Joseph, and in 2 Nephi 30:4, it states that the Nephites were descendants of the Jews. Since the Jews were descendants of Judah, how can these statements be harmonized?"

Answer: It is true that Lehi and his family were descendants of Joseph through the lineage of Manasseh (Alma 10:3), and Ishmael was a descendant of Ephraim, according to the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith. That the Nephites were descendants of Joseph is in fulfilment of the blessings given to Joseph by his father Israel. The Nephites were of the Jews, not so much by descent as by citizenship, although in the long descent from Jacob, it could be possible of some mixing of the tribes by intermarriage. It should be remembered that in the days of Rehoboam, son of Solomon, ten of the twelve tribes of Israel revolted and were known as the kingdom of Israel from that time on until they were carried away into Assyria. The other two tribes of Judah and Benjamin remained loyal to Rehoboam and were known as the kingdom of Judah. Lehi was a citizen of Jerusalem, in the kingdom of Judah. Presumably his family had lived there for several generations, and all of the inhabitants of the kingdom of Judah, no matter which tribe they had descended through, were known as Jews. The condition is comparable to conditions today, for example: Many members of the Church have been gathered out of England, Germany, the Scandinavian countries, and other foreign lands. Coming to this country they have taken out citizenship papers, and then they and their descendants are known as Americans, being citizens of this country. There is also a comparable example in the case of Paul the apostle. When he was arrested on complaint of the Jews, the chief captain mistook him for an Egyptian who had created a rebellion, and Paul said to the captain, ". . . I am a man which am a Jew of Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, a citizen of no mean city: and, I beseech thee, suffer me to speak unto the people." When the privilege was granted, Paul spoke to the angry Jews and said: "I am verily a man which am a Jew, born in Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, yet brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers, and was zealous toward God, as ye all are this day."(Acts 21:37-39; 22:3.) In writing his epistles to the Roman saints and also to the saints at Philippi, Paul said: ". . . For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham of the tribe of Benjamin."(Romans 11:1; Philippians 3:5.)

Not only in the Book of Mormon are the descendants of Lehi called Jews, but also in the Doctrine and Covenants. In Section 19, verse 27, this is found: "Which is my word to the Gentile, that soon it may go to the Jew, of whom the Lamanites are a remnant, that they may believe the gospel, and look not for a Messiah to come who has already come." Again, in giving instruction to the elders who had journeyed from Kirtland to Missouri, the Lord revealed the place for the building of the temple and gave instruction for the purchase of land "lying westward, even unto the line running directly between Jew and Gentile."(D. & C. 57:4.) This line westward was the dividing line between the whites and Indians.
