Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

37

Administering to the Sick

Question: "If a man were alone with a sick person could he anoint with oil and give the blessing and seal it by himself?"

"Is it proper to anoint the afflicted parts of the body?"

"Is it permissible to administer the oil internally?"

"Is it proper for an elder to take with him a brother holding the Aaronic Priesthood to assist in administering to the sick?"

"If a man and his wife were alone with a sick person, could he anoint with oil and then seal the anointing with his wife assisting using the priesthood she holds jointly with her husband?"

"James says when a man is administered to if he has committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. How does the elder get power to remit his sin?"

Answer: During the past few weeks several questions have been received from different parts of the Church asking these and like questions in relation to the administration of the sick. Therefore a detailed article on the question of administration seems to be in order that these several points which, seemingly, are not understood may be made clear that no confusion may be found among the members holding the priesthood.

Administering to the sick has been an ordinance of the gospel practiced from the beginning when the authority of the priesthood has been found on the earth. The usual procedure is stated by James:

Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing psalms.

Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord:

And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. (James 5:13-15.)

THE LAYING ON OF HANDS

We read in the New Testament how Jesus laid his hands upon individuals and healed them.(Mark 6:5, 13; 16:18; Luke 13:12-13.) At times, because of the abundant faith of the afflicted, the Savior healed them by just a word, but his command to his disciples was that they should lay their hands upon the sick. This ordinance was not one that was introduced for the first time in the Dispensation of the Meridian of Time, for in the Old Testament are numerous cases of healing. Two very interesting cases are the raising of the widow's son by Elijah;(1 Kings 17:19-24.) and the similar restoration of the dead son of the Shunammite woman.(2 Kings 4:25-35.) This great gift was manifest after the resurrection of Jesus during the sojourn of his apostles on the earth. Following their passing the spiritual gifts ceased and the anointing with oil and the blessing of the sick came to an end; not because these gifts were no longer needed, but because faith had departed from the souls of men and the priesthood had been taken from the earth. Henceforth the cry has been heard that these gifts were only intended for the days of the apostles and are no longer needed. Nevertheless, there have been many times when sincere, devout people who have endeavored to observe the commandments of the Lord to the best of their knowledge have been blessed and healed through the prayer of faith. The prayers of honest souls who sincerely seek blessings from the Lord are often answered and the Lord accepts their faith.

In this dispensation the Lord has spoken and given commandment in relation to the administration of the sick in the following words:

And whosoever among you are sick, and have not faith to be healed, but believe, shall be nourished with all tenderness, with herbs and mild food, and that not by the hand of an enemy.

And the elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name; and if they die they shall die unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me.(D. & C. 42:43-44.)

TWO OR MORE ELDERS CALLED

The detail in anointing and blessing the sick is as follows: Two or more elders should be called for the purpose. One elder should pour the oil from the bottle containing pure olive oil, which has been consecrated, upon the crown of the head of the sick person. (One drop taken from a medicine dropper is improper, nor should the oil be poured from a spoon.) The brother anointing should not seal the anointing but leave that to the second elder who offers the prayer of administration. The sick person should be called by name in the anointing, and it should be done in the name of Jesus Christ and by authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood according to the revelation, and to the end that the sick person may be healed. After the ordinance of anointing is finished, the elders present, two or more including the one who anointed, will lay their hands upon the head of the sick and offer a prayer in faith in the name of Jesus Christ, and by virtue of the priesthood which they hold seal the anointing. If moved upon by the Spirit of the Lord, the brother who is voice may rebuke the illness and bless with life and health. Prayers and blessings for the sick need not be of great length, that which is essential should be uttered and then the prayer closed in the name of Jesus Christ. After the administration is finished, it is wisdom for the elders who officiate not to prolong their visit but cheerfully withdraw.

THE ANOINTING AND PRAYER OF FAITH

The following is taken from the MIA Manual of 1902-3, pp. 58-59:

The ordinance of administering to the sick usually consists of two parts: The anointing, and the prayer of faith. The first usually is performed by one of the elders. The sealing of the anointing is performed by all the elders gathered around the person and laying hands on him or her, one of them offering the prayer. The words to be used are not prescribed. In this anointing it is necessary to use the name of Messiah and to invoke the power of the priesthood; witnessing that the anointing is performed for the purpose of healing. In sealing the anointing the same name and authority should be used, and the statement made that the anointing for the healing of the sick is sealed, the disease rebuked, and the blessing of health promised. Any additions, conditions, or promises that are dictated by the inspiration of the Lord, should of course be set forth in the prayer. Those officiating should exercise the strongest possible faith for the patient's recovery, and place themselves thoroughly under the influence of the Spirit of the Lord because in such cases much depends on the faith of the elders and the spirit that accompanies them. Faith to heal the sick is one of the most desirable gifts of the gospel, and should be sought by all the elders; and they should be in readiness at any time to exercise this power in behalf of the unfortunate.

And these things ye shall not do, except it be required of you by them who desire it, that the scriptures might be fulfilled; for ye shall do according to that which is written.(Ibid., 24:14.)

MISCELLANEOUS QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

"If a man were alone with a sick person should he anoint with oil and give the blessing and seal it by himself?"

If an elder is alone and no help available, and he is called on to administer to the sick, he has full authority both to anoint and seal the anointing.

"Is it proper to anoint the afflicted parts of the body?"

No. The anointing should be on the crown of the head. (It could be a matter of impropriety to anoint afflicted parts of the body. )

"Is it permissible to administer the oil internally?"

No. Taking the oil internally is not part of the administration. If persons who are ill wish to take oil internally, they are not forbidden, but many sicknesses will not be improved by oil in the stomach.

"Is it proper for an elder to take with him a brother holding the Aaronic Priesthood to assist in administering to the sick?"

This question has been answered by the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve as follows:

. . . it was the sense of the Council . . . that the practice [of administering] be confined to the elders; but in the case of absolute necessity, that is where an elder finds himself in the situation that he cannot avail himself of the company of another elder, he may, if opportunity affords, avail himself of the company of a member of the Aaronic Priesthood, or even a lay member, but for the purpose only of being supported by the faith of such member or members, the elder alone to officiate in the ordinance of administration; or the elder may administer alone without such assistance of a lay member or one holding the Aaronic Priesthood.(Journal History, Feb. 18, 1903.)

"If a man and his wife were alone with a sick person, could he anoint with the oil and then seal the anointing with his wife assisting using the priesthood she holds jointly with her husband?"

President Joseph F. Smith in The Improvement Era, Vol. 10, page 308, answered this question as follows:

"Does a wife hold the priesthood with her husband and may she lay hands on the sick with him, with authority?"

A wife does not hold the priesthood with her husband, but she enjoys the benefits thereof with him; and if she is requested to lay hands on the sick with him, or with any other officer holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, she may do so with perfect propriety. It is no uncommon thing for a man and wife unitedly to administer to their children. . . .

The wife would lay on hands just as would a member of the Aaronic Priesthood, or a faithful brother without the priesthood, thus giving support by faith to the ordinance. The Prophet Joseph Smith said,

Respecting females administering for the healing of the sick, there could be no evil in it, if God gave his sanction by healing; that there could be no more sin in any female laying hands on and praying for the sick, than in wetting the face with water; it is no sin for anybody to administer that has faith, or if the sick have faith to be healed by their administration.(Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 224.)

Such an administration would not be by virtue of the priesthood, but a manifestation of faith.

"James says when a man administers to a sick person he has power to remit his sins; how does the elder get power to remit sins?"

It is not the elder who remits or forgives the sick man's sins, but the Lord. If by the power of faith and through the administration by the elders the man is healed it is evidence that his sins have been forgiven. It is hardly reasonable to think that the Lord will forgive the sins of a man who is healed if he has not repented. Naturally he would repent of his sins if he seeks for the blessing by the elders.
