Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

38

Why Is Oil in Used in Administering to the Sick?

Question: "Why is it that we use oil in administering to the sick? There is no reference in the Doctrine and Covenants directing its use. In our discussions this question has been raised, and why some other oil would not answer just as well as olive oil? When was this practice of anointing with oil introduced?"

Answer: We use olive oil in administering to the sick because the Lord has instructed it. It is true there is no mention in the Doctrine and Covenants to the use of oil in administering to the sick, but there are references to the anointing with oil in the conferring of authority and sacred blessings. This practice has come down to us from the time of the organization of the Church, according to the pattern anciently given. It was an olive leaf that the dove brought to Noah indicating that the water of the flood was abated. From that time on the olive leaf or branch and the dove have been emblems of peace and purity. In many parables in the scripture, the olive tree is mentioned as symbolic of righteousness and having reference to the kingdom of God or the Church. In the fifth chapter of Jacob, in the Book of Mormon, is found a prophetic parable of the planting of branches of the "tame olive tree," or the house of Israel, in various corners of the earth, and how, when they grew and bore fruit and commenced to decay, the husbandman grafted into these branches of the main tree branches from the wild olive to see if they would revive. This parable portrays the scattering of Israel through the ages and is intensely interesting. Likewise, we find in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 101, there is a parable of the planting of twelve olive trees in the Lord's vineyard. This also has prophetic meaning. In Revelation 11:4, the Lord speaks of his two witnesses as two olive trees, and in Zechariah 4:11-14 is a similar prophetic parable. So we find through all the prophetic writings that olive trees and olive oil are emblems of sacredness and purity.

When the Prophet Joseph Smith sent to the brethren in Missouri a copy of the eighty-eighth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, he prized it so highly that he wrote to them saying: "I send you the olive leaf which we have plucked from the Tree of Paradise," thus applying the thought of purity and wisdom.

ANOINTING WITH OIL AN ANCIENT CUSTOM

The use of olive oil in anointing is from very ancient times. It was the custom to anoint prophets, kings, and holy messengers as a stamp or token of their official calling. In Leviticus, 8:6-12, is an interesting account of the calling of Aaron, and how Moses not only anointed Aaron, but likewise the altar and the vessels, and sanctified them with holy oil. Samuel also anointed Saul and proclaimed him king in Israel, and when Saul transgressed, David was anointed in his stead to be king of Israel. This custom continued in Israel until they were rejected by the Lord and scattered.

The olive tree and its golden oil were among the greatest treasures of Israel. The Lord said to Moses:

And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always.

In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening to morning before the Lord: it shall be a statute for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children of Israel.(Exodus 27:20-21.)

No other kind of oil will do in anointing. It is very apparent that the oil from animal flesh would never do, and there is no other kind of oil that is held so sacredly and is more suited to the anointing than the oil of olive; moreover, the Lord has placed his stamp of approval on it.
