Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

40

Urim and Thummim

Question: "Will you please tell us something about the Urim and Thummim? Was the one used by the Prophet Joseph Smith the one had by Abraham? If so, how did he get it?"

The history concerning the Urim and Thummim, or "Interpreters" as they are called in the Book of Mormon, is not very clear. Abraham had the Urim and Thummim by which he received revelations of the heavenly bodies, as he has recorded in the Book of Abraham.(Abraham 3:1-4.) What became of these after his death we do not know. Aaron also had the Urim and Thummim, and these were, evidently from the reading of the Bible, handed down among the priests of Aaron from generation to generation.(Exodus 28:30; Leviticus 8:8; Numbers 27:21; Deuteronomy 33:8; 1 Samuel 28:6; Ezra 2:63; Nehemiah 7:65.) The Lord gave to the brother of Jared the Urim and Thummim which he brought with him to this continent. These were separate and distinct from the Urim and Thummim had by Abraham and in Israel in the days of Aaron. The account of this set is found in Ether 3:22-28, and, in part, is as follows:

And behold, when ye shall come unto me, ye shall write them and shall seal them up, that no one can interpret them; for ye shall write them in a language that they cannot be read.

And behold, these two stones will I give unto thee, and ye shall seal them up also with the things which ye shall write.

For behold, the language which ye shall write I have confounded; wherefore I will cause in my own due time that these stones shall magnify to the eyes of men these things which ye shall write.

And the Lord said unto him: Write these things and seal them up; and I will show them in mine own due time unto the children of men.

And it came to pass that the Lord commanded him that he should seal up the two stones which he had received, and show them not, until the Lord should show them unto the children of men.(Ether 3:22-24, 27-28. )

LIAHONA WAS NOT THE URIM AND THUMMIM

We have no record of Lehi bringing with him to America the Urim and Thummim. The Lord did give to Lehi the Liahona, which was a ball which directed him the way he should go, and writing appeared on it from time to time, but this was not the Urim and Thummim.(D. & C. 17:1. )

King Mosiah possessed ". . . two stones which were fastened into the two rims of a bow"(Mosiah 28:13. ) called by the Nephites "Interpreters," with which he translated the Jaredite record,(Ibid., 28:11-14.) and these were handed down from generation to generation for the purpose of interpreting languages. How Mosiah came into possession of these "two stones" or Urim and Thummim, the record does not tell us, more than to say that it was a "gift from God."(Ibid., 21:28.) Mosiah had this "gift" or Urim and Thummim before the people of Limhi discovered the record of Ether. They may have been received when the "large stone" was brought to Mosiah with engravings upon it, which he interpreted by the "gift and power of God."(Omni 1:20-21.) They may have been given to him, or to some other prophet before his day, just as the brother of Jared received them—from the Lord.

BROTHER OF JARED AND MOSIAH HAD SAME STONES

That the Urim and Thummim, or two stones, given to the brother of Jared were those in the possession of Mosiah appears evident from the following statements in the Book of Mormon:

The brother of Jared was commanded to seal up his writings of the vision he had when Christ appeared to him, so that they could not be read by his people. This vision was in a language which was confounded, for it was not to go forth until after the resurrection of Christ. The Urim and Thummim were also sealed up so that they could not be used for the purpose of interpreting those sacred writings of this vision, until such time as the Lord should grant to man to interpret them. When they were to be revealed, they were to be interpreted by the aid of the same Urim and Thummim.(Ether 3:21-28.)

The people of Limhi brought to Mosiah a record, ". . . engraven on plates of ore," (Mosiah 21:27.) which record Mosiah translated by the aid of "two stones which were fastened into the two rims of a bow," and which gave an account of the Jaredites.(Ibid., 28:11-19.) In translating this record Mosiah kept from going forth to the people that particular part forbidden of the Lord to be revealed until after he was lifted up upon the cross.(Ether 4:1.) These sacred revelations given to the brother of Jared were kept from the Nephite people, as well as many other things, until after the resurrection of Christ.(Alma 63:12.) After the appearing of the Savior to the Nephites, the vision of the brother of Jared was revealed to the Nephites. When Moroni made his abridgment of the record of Ether, he copied on his record the vision of the brother of Jared.(Ether 4:2-7.) At the command of the Lord, however, Moroni also sealed up the greater things in this vision and the "interpreters"—which were the same "two stones" had by the brother of Jared, so that this vision should not be made known even in our day among the Gentiles, in the day of their wickedness;(2 Nephi 27:8.) ". . . until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord."(Ether 4:6.) So we today do not have the fulness of the account written and sealed up by the brother of Jared and again sealed by Moroni. This part of the record the Prophet Joseph Smith was forbidden to translate. We have, then, received but the "lesser part."(3 Nephi 26:8-11.)

Joseph Smith received with the "breastplate" and the plates of the Book of Mormon, the Urim and Thummim, which were hid up by Moroni to come forth in the last days as a means by which the ancient record might be translated, which Urim and Thummim were given to the brother of Jared.(D. & C. 17:1.)
