Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

41

The Nature of Translated Beings

Question: "I desire some information in relation to the nature of translated beings. It is my opinion that they occupy an intermediate position between mortality and immortality, where they are not subject to the pains and sicknesses common among mortal men. Some of the members of our class express the thought that they have become immortal, but by appointment, granted by the Lord, they remain on earth to accomplish some special work assigned to them. We are anxious to know just what their nature is."

Answer: If you and your friends will take time to read the twenty-eighth chapter of Third Nephi, you will find the complete answer to your question. Jesus granted to each of the twelve disciples he had chosen among the Nephites whatsoever they desired before he left them. Nine of them asked for the privilege of coming to him speedily after their earth mission was finished, and to them he said:

Blessed are ye because ye desired this thing of me; therefore, after that ye are seventy and two years old ye shall come unto me in my kingdom; and with me ye shall find rest.(3 Nephi 28:3)

The three others remained silent fearing to tell him what they desired, but he understood their thoughts, and to them he said:

Therefore, more blessed are ye, for ye shall never taste of death; but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory with the powers of heaven.

And ye shall never endure the pains of death; but when I shall come in my glory ye shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality; and then shall ye be blessed in the kingdom of my Father.

And again, ye shall not have pain while ye shall dwell in the flesh, neither sorrow save it be for the sins of the world; and all this will I do because of the thing which ye have desired of me, for ye have desired that ye might bring the souls of men unto me, while the world shall stand.

And for this cause ye shall have fulness of joy; and ye shall sit down in the kingdom of my Father; yea, your joy shall be full, even as the Father hath given me fulness of joy; and ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one.(Ibid., 28:7-l0.)

THE PROPHET MORMON'S INQUIRY

Later, as he was writing of this event, Mormon wondered just as your friends are wondering, if these three had been changed from mortality to immortality so he inquired of the Lord and thus he recorded his answer:

But behold, since I wrote, I have inquired of the Lord, and he hath made it manifest unto me that there must needs be a change wrought upon their bodies, or else it needs be that they must taste of death;

Therefore, that they might not taste of death there was a change wrought upon their bodies, that they might not suffer pain nor sorrow save it were for the sins of the world.

Now this change was not equal to that which shall take place at the last day; but there was a change wrought upon them, insomuch that Satan could have no power over them, that he could not tempt them; and they were sanctified in the flesh, that they were holy, and that the powers of the earth could not hold them.

And in this state they were to remain until the judgment day of Christ; and at that day they were to receive a greater change, and to be received into the kingdom of the Father to go no more out, but to dwell with God eternally in the heavens.(Ibid., 28:37-40.)

If we would only think, we would realize that translated beings are still mortal and will have to pass through the experience of death, or the separation of the spirit and the body, although this will be instantaneous, for the people of the City of Enoch, Elijah, and others who received this great blessing in ancient times, before the coming of our Lord, could not have received the resurrection, or the change from mortality to immortality, because our Lord had not paid the debt which frees us from mortality and grants to us the resurrection and immortal life. Christ is the "resurrection and the life," and the "first fruits of them that slept," therefore none could pass from mortality to immortality until our Savior completed his work for the redemption of man and had gained the keys of the resurrection, being the first to rise having "life in himself" and the power to lay down his life and take it up again, thus freeing all men from the bondage which the fall had placed upon them.
