Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

42

"There Are Some Standing Here . . ."

Question: "In reading the New Testament I have come upon a passage of scripture that is not clear to me. I would like to have the answer. It is Mark 9:1 and Luke 9:27.

"When Christ said 'Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power,' of whom was he speaking, and when were they to see the kingdom of God, as he had the Church established on the earth at that time?"

Answer: The passage in Luke is similar to that in Mark: "But I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God." This prophecy is more plainly stated in Matthew, as follows:

Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.(Matthew 16:28.)

It is true that the Church or kingdom of God was set up by our Savior in the days of his ministry; but it was not set up at that time in its power and glory. Moreover, the Savior knew that before the great day of his second coming, in power and glory, there would be a "falling away" and the Church would cease to be on the earth during those days of dark apostasy.

This prophecy is a problem that has disturbed the Christian world, for they are without a satisfactory explanation. Infidels have dwelt upon it in ridicule as a sign of the Savior's folly because nearly two millenniums have passed since these words were uttered. To the natural man it is impossible for anyone standing in the group to which the Savior spoke to live until now; therefore, to them his prediction has definitely failed.

To the members of the Church this prophecy holds no problem and is no mystery. In the closing verses of the gospel of John we find recorded an intimation that John, who was evidently in that group, would not die until the second coming at the beginning of the millennium. The Savior informed Peter how death would come to Him, and Peter seeing John standing near said,

Lord, and what shall this man do?

Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.

Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus saith not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?(John 21:21-23.)

TRADITIONS NOT BASED ON FACT

A tradition has come down from early times that John died a martyr like the other apostles, but this is not so. Several novels have been written, perhaps based on the promise to John, of a man cursed to live until Christ shall come because of some abuse given the Lord on his way to the crucifixion. It is possible that there were others as well as John who were given this great privilege who were present when this prophecy was given.

In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section Seven, we have a revelation declaring that John was blessed to tarry until the Lord shall come. When the Lord visited the Nephites, he chose twelve disciples and gave them presiding authority. Three of these disciples wished to remain until the Savior should return. They hesitated to tell him, but he read their thoughts and granted their petition. He said to them,

Behold, I know your thoughts, and ye have desired the thing which John, my beloved, who was with me in my ministry, before that I was lifted up by the Jews, desired of me.

Therefore, more blessed are ye, for ye shall never taste of death; but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory with the powers of heaven.(3 Nephi 28:6-7.)
