Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

43

The Marriages of Abraham, Joseph, and Moses to Egyptian Women

Question: "It seems to be the general opinion in our group that Hagar, being an Egyptian, had Negro blood. I was of the opinion Abraham would not take a wife with Negro blood, and I thought the Egyptians were of the white race, but a member was present who stated that Ishmael could not hold the priesthood, and it was on account of Negro blood. There is also an account of Joseph and Moses marrying Egyptian women. It did not seem to affect their standing in the priesthood, and I thought they also must have been of the white race. Will you kindly straighten us on this matter?"

Answer: If Abraham, Joseph, and Moses had married Negro wives their descendants would have been denied the priesthood according to the word of the Lord to Abraham.(Abraham 1:21-27.) Had such a thing happened the Lord would not have called Israel as a chosen people, neither would he have chosen the Prophet Joseph Smith and given him the keys of authority for the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, as he was a descendant of Joseph and of Abraham.

For many years preceding the time of Abraham the descendants of Egyptus occupied and governed in Egypt. They extended their dominion into the land of Canaan and oppressed the people, but the time came when the people of Asia, who were of the Semitic race, rebelled and made war on the Egyptians and conquered the country, driving the original inhabitants farther south and up the Nile. These Semitic people known as Hyksos, or shepherds, for they had many flocks and herds, were in possession of the land of Egypt for many years before the time of Abraham. Their rule lasted for some five hundred years, and they were in possession of the land when Joseph was taken into Egypt. It was a Hyksos king who befriended Joseph and who was friendly with Abraham and Isaac. While these people occupied the land of Egypt, they were called Egyptians, although they were relatives of Abraham and Joseph, being descendants of Shem, the condition being similar to the early settlers in the United States. Most of these settlers were English, but after the Revolutionary War they were known as Americans, and all who come to this land from England, Germany, Scandinavia, and other countries, who become citizens are called Americans.

A ROYAL LINEAGE

The wife of Joseph was Asenath, daughter of Potipherah, the high priest of On. Dr. A. H. Sayce, an English scholar and archaeologist, states that the name of this priest means "the gift of the sun-god," and the name Asenath probably is not Egyptian. He further says Egyptian law prevented the marriage of Joseph with the daughter of the king as "None but those of the royal blood of Egypt might marry one of the solar race. But the priestly head of the state religion ranked next to the Pharaoh, and in marrying his daughter, therefore, Joseph was taken into the very heart of the royal circle. It placed him at once on a footing of equality with the highest nobles of Egypt."(Joseph and the Land of Egypt, p. 62.)

So Abraham, Joseph, and Moses married women of their own race, and we need have no worry over our lineage, because we are of that same race.
