Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

45

Satan's Power to Perform Miracles

Question: "Does Satan have power to perform miracles? The question arises out of the fact that a preacher is apparently performing healings and demonstrating his power (by television and radio), thus advertising his meetings and the work he is doing. There are some actions and expressions which he uses that impress me and some others that his work does not come from the Lord. We feel that they do not harmonize with the teachings of our Savior. He seems to represent no church but invites his hearers to join some church and attend their meetings. We have no solution to this problem, can you help us?"

Answer: All down through the ages and in almost all countries, men have exercised great occult and mystical powers, even to the healing of the sick and the performing of miracles. Soothsayers, magicians, and astrologers were found in the courts of ancient kings. They had certain powers by which they divined and solved the monarch's problems, dreams, etc. One of the most striking examples of this is recorded in Exodus, where Pharaoh called "the wise men and the sorcerers" who duplicated some of the miracles the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron to perform. When Aaron threw down his rod, it became a serpent. The Egyptian magicians threw down their rods, and they also became serpents. When Aaron stretched his rod over the river, it became like blood, and the fish died. "And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments:" and when Aaron stretched forth his rod over the streams, the rivers and ponds, there came forth frogs that covered the land. "And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt."(Exodus, chapters 7-8.) Beyond this point the magicians of Egypt could not go. The magicians failed in the days of Joseph to interpret the dream of Pharaoh because it was a dream from the Lord, but Joseph, because he held the priesthood, interpreted it. Likewise in the dream of Nebuchadnezzar of the image, the astrologers failed to give the interpretation because the dream came from the Lord, and Daniel, who held the priesthood gave the interpretation. Even to this day the magicians of India perform many wonderful works.

SATAN HAS GREAT POWER

There is no doubt about Satan having great power and that he can appear as an angel of light. In this form he appeared on the banks of the Susquehanna River to oppose the restoration of keys, and was detected by Michael, and his plans were thwarted.(See D. & C. 128:20. Compare also Section 129:8.) Jacob, son of Lehi, in his teachings, stated that if there had been no atonement, our spirits ". . . must have become like unto him [Satan], and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself; yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents, who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness."(2 Nephi 9:9.)

Korihor, who tried to deceive the Nephites, admitted that Satan appeared to him as an angel and told him what to teach the people.(Alma 30:53. )

When the Prophet Joseph Smith and a company of brethren were journeying to Kirtland from Missouri, they camped at McIlwaine's Bend on the Missouri River. There Elder William W. Phelps "in open vision by daylight, saw the destroyer in his most horrible power, ride upon the face of the waters; others heard the noise, but saw not the vision."(D.H.C., Vol. 1, p. 203.) The Savior declared that Satan had the power to bind bodies of men and women and sorely afflict them.(Matthew 7:22-23; Luke 13:16.) If Satan has power to bind the bodies, he surely must have power to loose them. It should be remembered that Satan has great knowledge and thereby can exercise authority and to some extent control the elements, when some greater power does not intervene. Paul, writing to the Ephesian Saints called Satan "The prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience."(Ephesians 2:2.)

TRUE PROPHETS HAVE CLEAR DOCTRINES

When a man comes in the name of the Lord healing the sick and performing mighty works, he will not come with the blare of trumpets, nor will he advertise his performance. Moreover, he will not teach an indefinite doctrine. He will not tell the people to join a church—any church; but he will proclaim a clear doctrine of repentance and baptism for the remission of sins and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. When one comes preaching his own doctrine, and though he may perform miracles, if he does all of this to be seen of men and by advertising his deeds to the world, it is a sure sign that he has not been called by divine appointment. On numerous occasions when the Savior healed the sick and gave eyesight to the blind, he admonished them, saying, "See that no man know it."—"And charged them that they should not make him known." Such admonition can be found in the following passages: Matt. 9:30; 12:9-16; Mark 3:10-12; 7:32-36; 8:22-26.

In this dispensation the Lord instructed the elders of the Church that as they went forth in humility and faith, they should in his name "do many wonderful works; cast out devils, heal the sick, open the eyes of the blind, unstop the ears of the deaf, and cause the dumb to speak," but he also said:

"A commandment I give unto them, that they shall not boast themselves of these things, neither speak them before the world; for these things are given unto you for your profit and for salvation."(D. & C. 84:66-73.)
