Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

49

The Divine law of Witnesses

Question: "If the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated were returned and brought to light to be examined, would it not be easier to convert the balance of the world to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints?"

Answer: Questions of this nature frequently are asked. Many tourists who visit the temple grounds ask why the plates of the Book of Mormon were returned to the angel, and they say, "If they were placed in some museum or archive for the deposit of rare manuscripts and could be examined by scholars, the testimony from such a source would convert the whole world." When they are informed that a large portion of the plates was sealed and the Lord would not permit them to be translated at this time because the world is not prepared to receive what is written, the questioner turns away with knowing wink or incredulous smile, feeling that he has struck a vital blow against the truth of the story of the Book of Mormon. The simple fact is, however, that the ways and thoughts of the Lord are not the ways and thoughts of men.(Isaiah 55:8-9.)(Isaiah 55:8-9.)

It is made very clear in the Book of Mormon that it comes to the world with sufficient witnesses. The records on the plates are sacred; a large part of them have not been revealed because even the members of the Church are not prepared to receive what is written. Then again, the plan of the Lord is to reveal his word by the mouth of chosen witnesses. He had Nephi write regarding the publishing of the Book of Mormon that he, the Lord, would raise up three special witnesses, who would behold the plates by the power of God.

Wherefore, at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the things therein.

And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men; for the Lord God hath said that the works of the faithful should speak as if it were from the dead.

Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his word; and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God!(2 Nephi 27:12-14. )

HEARTS OF PEOPLE WERE NOT SUSCEPTIBLE TO TRUTH

Joseph Smith was forbidden to break the seals of the portion of the plates which contain the prophecies of the brother of Jared(Ether 5.) because the hearts of the people were not susceptible to the divine truth which the record contained. Therefore this portion of the record was to remain sealed—

For the Lord said unto me: They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord.

And in that day that they shall exercise faith in me, saith the Lord, even as the brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are.(Ibid., 4:6-7. )

The Lord could not place in the hands of ungodly men a sacred record which contains information far in advance of the thinking of a critical and unbelieving world. Moreover, we are informed that the Book of Mormon as it has come to us, contains the "lesser part of the things which he [Jesus] taught the people," and Mormon wrote:

. . . I have written them to the intent that they may be brought again unto this people, from the Gentiles, according to the words which Jesus hath spoken.

And when they shall have received this, which is expedient that they should have first, to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them.

And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation.

Behold, I was about to write them, all which were engraven upon the plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will try the faith of my people.

Therefore I, Mormon, do write the things which have been commanded me of the Lord. And now I, Mormon, make an end of my sayings, and proceed to write the things which have been commanded me.(3 Nephi 26:8-12.)

THE LAW OF WITNESSES IN ANCIENT ISRAEL

The law given to Israel in the beginning was that in the mouth of two or three witnesses all things should be established. The Jews called Jesus in question, basing their accusation against him on this law:

Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.

The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself; thy record is not true.

Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.

Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man.

And yet if I judge, my judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.

It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true.

I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me.

Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me, nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also.(John 8:12-l9.)

Here the Savior calls attention to the divine law of witnesses. On innumerable occasions had he demonstrated that he is the Son of God and the Redeemer of the world. On many occasions his Father also bore witness that he is the Only Begotten Son of God: once at the baptism of Jesus, again to the three apostles on the Mount of Transfiguration, and once again in the presence of a group when the Lord prayed to his Father.(Matthew 17:1-l3; Mark 9:2-13; Luke 9:28-36.) Then also the Father testified for him at the time of his birth by a glorious opening of the heavens when angels sang and a new star appeared.

The Lord speaks through his appointed witnesses upon whom he has bestowed divine power, not by granting documents to be tested by unbelieving men. No doubt, to many of those who do not understand the way of the Lord, it seems to be a very plausible and understandable argument to say: "How easy it would be for you to prove to the world the truth of the Book of Mormon by submitting the plates for expert examination! If they should find these plates to be genuine, their testimony would help you to convince the world."

TANGIBLE SIGNS DO NOT CONVERT

This, however, is the argument of fools. What would the result be if the plates had been placed in the hands of linguistic experts? They would have quarreled and contended among themselves. Then, how could the Lord place in their hands records which are withheld from the world because of the hardness of their hearts and their unbelief? The things of the kingdom of God which are so marvelous, as are these records which are sealed, would not be understood and hence would not be believed. If only pure minds could understand them, how could the impure eyes of the scholarly critics understand them? By such critics they would be condemned because they were written in a language that was "sealed" and which no man can read until the Lord gives to him in his own due time the power to break the seal. If they were to be passed on by the scholars, they could not value them, and even members of the Church would reject them. Too many members of the Church today, to say nothing of those who are not members, fail to heed these "lesser things" which have been given to try our faith.(3 Nephi 26:7-12.)

Why do not these critics who demand that the plates of the Book of Mormon be brought forth for critical examination raise their voices in condemnation of our Lord because after his resurrection he appeared only to his disciples and not to the world? The logic of their contention should be that Jesus after his resurrection should have appeared, first, to Pilate, and he should have said: "Here I am; examine the wounds in my hands and feet and side. Did I not tell you that I was the Son of God and that I would rise again?" Why did he not go to the assembled Sanhedrin and there appear before the high priest and that august body and say to them: "You scourged me, spat upon me, and delivered me to be crucified because I told you I would live again. Now see that what I said is come true!" This he did not do! But he appeared to his disciples—a few humble fishermen and a few women who believed on him.

This smirking remark implying that Joseph Smith did not have the plates because he did not display them to the world and permit conceited scholars to examine them, does not come from the mouths of wise, intelligent men. Yes! How easy it would be for the Lord to send forth his host of angels crying in heaven to all mankind, calling on them to accept his gospel. How much suffering it would relieve! How many days and years of toil it would save his mortal advocates and messengers.

If he would preach his gospel in this way whom would it save? Men are to walk by faith in humility, seeking from the Lord the knowledge of the gospel which saves. The Lord declares his word through his chosen witnesses, and woe to those who fight his truth and put his work to open shame.
