Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 1 ( 1957)

51

The Apostle Paul And Genealogical Research

Question: "The Prophet Joseph Smith said, 'The greatest responsibility the Lord has laid upon us is to seek after our dead.' (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 356.) The Genealogical Society workers come to us saying that it is our duty to search the records of the dead and obtain all the genealogical information that we can, that we may go to the temples and do work for them. Now I would like to know how we can square this with the doctrine of Paul, as found in the epistles to Timothy and Titus, in which he condemns genealogical research. Is it because the work was not for Paul's day?"

Answer: The counsel given to Timothy and Titus by Paul and the commandment given by the Lord to Joseph Smith appear in conflict only when Paul's remarks are misunderstood. The Lord revealed to Joseph Smith the glorious principles of salvation for the dead who died without the opportunity to receive the gospel when they were on the earth. Elijah was sent to restore the sealing power by which families may be united eternally and to turn the hearts of the fathers to their children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse.(See D. & C. 27:9.) Because of the restoration, the spirit of research has taken hold of thousands of persons in all parts of the civilized earth, and the Latter-day Saints have been commanded to prepare the records of their dead and go to the temples, there to perform vicariously all the ordinances of salvation for them. This promise was made through the prophets anciently as well as in this dispensation. The dead who will accept the work done for them shall receive eternal life.(D. & C. 1:1-3; D.H.C., Vol. 3, p. 280; Isaiah 42:7 and 61:1-2; Malachi 4:5-6.)

THE LORD INSPIRED PEOPLE TO KEEP RECORDS

The Lord inspired people anciently to keep records and histories of their people. If there had been no genealogical records kept, we would be without a great fund of knowledge in relation to the nations of the past and their relationship to the people of this generation. Record-keeping of this kind has been a common practice in almost all nations, especially was it so of the Israelites. Some of the most interesting and important records on which we rely are found in Genesis and the books of Moses in the Old Testament. The Lord commanded that a census be taken as the Israelites were about to enter the land of their inheritance.(Genesis, chapters 10-11; Numbers, chapters 1, 2, 3, and 16; 1 Chronicles, chapters 1-8.) If these records had not been kept, we would not have the genealogies of our Redeemer in Matthew and Luke. When the Jews returned from Babylon, after the captivity, they were judged out of the records, and those with clouded lineage were denied the privileges of the priesthood and the temple.(Ezra and Nehemiah.)

The keeping of genealogical records is essential to the accomplishment of the work assigned to the Latter-day Saints that they may become saviors on Mt. Zion by performing the ordinances for their dead. This would be impossible without records of our dead being available.

Many of the sayings of Paul and other prophets have come down to us in imperfect form due to faulty translations and misinterpretations. Perhaps we do not have the full text of Paul's instruction to Timothy and Titus. We may be sure, however, that he would not take a stand in opposition to the teachings of the prophets who went before him. Genealogical research must have been done in the days of Paul which he did not condemn, for salvation for the dead was practiced in his day, and he called attention to this fact, using it as an argument in favor of the resurrection.(1 Corinthians 15:29.) However, there was no vicarious work done before the resurrection of our Lord. Paul's reference to "fables and endless genealogies" infers that he was condemning a practice that had been perverted, or he would not have called the practice "fables."(1 Timothy 1:4.) We may conclude, then, that there was a practice among the Jews in which the preparing of genealogies was fraudulently done. Bible commentators so declare this to be the fact. Dr. Adam Clark in his Commentary calls attention to this fraudulent practice and gives the reason for it in the following words:

FRAUDULENT PRACTICES IN RECORDING GENEALOGIES

The Jews had scrupulously preserved their genealogical tables, till the advent of Christ; and the evangelists had recourse to them, and appealed to them in reference to our Lord's descent from the house of David: Matthew taking this genealogy of the descending, Luke of the ascending line. And whatever difficulties we may now find in these genealogies, they were certainly clear to the Jews; nor did the most determined enemies of the gospel attempt to raise one objection to it from the appeal which the evangelists had made to their own public and accredited tables. All was then certain; but we are told that Herod destroyed the public registers: he, being an Idumean, was jealous of the noble origin of the Jews: and that none might be able to reproach him with his descent, he ordered the genealogical tables, which were kept among the archives in the temple, to be burned. . . . From this time the Jews could refer to their genealogies only from memory, or from those imperfect tables which had been preserved in private hands; and to make out any regular line from these, must have been endless and uncertain. It is probably to this the apostle refers; I mean the endless and useless labor which the attempt to make out these genealogies, must produce; the authentic tables being destroyed.(Clark's Commentary, Vol. 4, p. 555, on Timothy 1:4.)
