Brother Snow writes to Elder Pratt.--Baptisms.--A hint to the wise.--Caution and instruction.--Writes to the Star.--Increase in the Church in London.--Good word for Bedford.--Baptisms.--To Elder Pratt.--Sad news.--Sister Morgan's Death.--Her faithfulness and benevolence.--Her triumphant departure.--Her Husband is comforted.--Conference.--Lorenzo informs how subscriptions are obtained.--Singing in Tongues.--L. appointed First Counselor.--P. P. Pratt speaks.--Stanza.--Queen Victoria.--Presentation of the Book of Mormon to Her Majesty and the Prince Consort.

Extract of a letter written from London on the third of May, 1841:

Elder Pratt:

I improve a few moments in communicating some few items in reference to the prosperity of our Redeemer's kingdom in this metropolis.

I feel happy in having the privilege of stating that the prospects of Zion's extension and enlargement in this city are far more encouraging now than at any former time since I located in London.

Though surrounded with high-handed wickedness of every description, Zion begins to break forth, and, I trust, ere long will become a shining lamp in this city.

Many people in various directions are inquiring the way of salvation, and thanks to her glorious King, Zion is beginning to array herself in her beautiful garments, even with light and intelligence, faith and power, and her children are pointing out in plainness the one and only pathway that leads up into the holy, celestial mansions of eternal rest.

On Sunday, our preaching room is crowded to overflowing. Yesterday morning I had the pleasure of baptizing eleven into the fold of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Others, also, will soon follow the glorious example.

Lorenzo Snow.

    A HINT TO THE WISE.

    London, May 13, 1841.

    The Savior has commanded not to cast pearls before swine. I am
    sorry to say that this instruction is not always sufficiently
    regarded by those to whom our Lord has given, through the
    Everlasting Covenant, His pearls of wisdom, knowledge, and precious
    gifts. The consequence is, we lose blessings instead of retaining
    them--a decrease of the Holy Spirit follows, instead of an
    increase, and our minds become darkened.

    What I allude to is this: we too frequently engage in conversation
    concerning things of the kingdom of God, with persons of a wrong
    spirit; and feeling over anxious to make them see, understand, and
    acknowledge the light presented, we urge on, and persist in the
    conversation until we partake of the spirit of those with whom we
    are conversing. We ought to be particularly guarded against falling
    into errors of this kind.

    It is very easy to understand when conversation is attended with
    profit. We then feel our minds enlightened, and the power of God
    resting upon us through the Holy Spirit--ideas flow into our minds,
    and we express them with ease, freedom, and calmness.

    Conversation conducted in this spirit proves highly profitable,
    not only to ourselves, but also to those with whom we converse;
    and after its close, our hearts are drawn out in gratitude to the
    Most High for the privilege of imparting the glorious truths of the
    Gospel to the children of men.

    L. Snow.

The following is from the Millennial Star of September, 1841:

Elder Snow writes from London, under date of August 21, as follows: Dear Brother--This morning I occupy a few moments in communicating a general view of the present state and prosperity of the London Conference.

Six months since, when I took charge of this conference we numbered less than one hundred members; since then we have increased to two hundred and twenty.

I recently had the pleasure of spending three weeks in Bedford and vicinity. My heart truly rejoiced to witness the good order, peace and love prevailing there. The zeal and untiring perseverance of the officers of the Church in Bedford, in leaving their homes on Sunday morning, after having labored with their hands all the week, and then walking eight and ten miles to proclaim the fulness of the Gospel, is truly worthy of commendation and of imitation by all who labor in the name, and by the authority of Jesus Christ. During the time I was in Bedford, twenty-three persons were baptized into Zion's fold, in that place and vicinity.

London, October 28, 1841.

Elder Pratt:

Dear Brother.--In a moment our joys are turned to sorrow, our pleasures into pain. Death has entered this part of Zion's fold, and taken one of her best and most worthy daughters.

This morning, our beloved sister, Elizabeth Morgan, after a short illness, bid adieu to her weeping husband, children and friends, and took her departure to the fair climes of Immortality. She was beloved by all the Saints, and much respected throughout the extensive circle of her worldly acquaintance.

By her faith and knowledge, the curtains of Zion have been extended, and through her benevolence the Saints have been made to rejoice. With herself and husband, our Elders first found a home when they were strangers in London, endeavoring to rear the standard of Zion. Their house has been my home ever since my arrival.

The Church has cause to mourn her loss, especially those who participated in her friendship when laying the foundation of this branch, when dark clouds gathered thickly over their prospects, and all their efforts seemed baffled. But let them not mourn as for one who dies without hope. She died, not only in hope, but in the perfect assurance of future glory; and in her dying moments, wished me to express to Elder Kimball that she blessed the hour in which he baptized her.

One remarkable circumstance connected with this melancholy event, I wish to relate. About two o'clock this morning, we had given up all hopes of her recovery. We saw it was the will of God to take her to Himself. We had continued to offer our prayers in her behalf, and done everything consistent with scripture and the mind of God. She continually expressed a wish that no medicine should be administered to her by a doctor, and particularly requested that "no blame should be attached to, and no reflections cast upon, her dear husband and children, because no doctor had been employed; for she wanted no physician but the Lord."

About two o'clock, she requested me to kneel by her bedside, and, for the last time, offer my supplications, and she said she would depart in peace. I complied with her request, and while calling upon the Lord in presence of her weeping husband, children and friends, the Holy Spirit rested on me in power, and I was moved upon to ask the God of Israel that her disconsolate husband might be comforted, even if it were by the ministering of Sister Morgan's departed spirit, that he might have thereby consolation and fulness of hope.

At the same hour, Sister Bates, of this city--a worthy member of the Church, had an open vision, in which she saw Sister Morgan standing in full view before her, clothed in robes beautiful and white, and around her head were clouds of glory, surpassing in splendor and brilliancy, the sun at noonday. Sister Bates rejoiced in the vision. It was not a dream, but an open vision, continuing some length of time. When the vision closed, she immediately related it to her husband.

When the vision was made known to Deacon Morgan, the bereaved husband, he lifted up his head and rejoiced in sorrow, receiving consolation even in the valley of grief. He has not a shadow of doubt that the companion of his bosom now rests in mansions of peace and glory.

Yours in the Everlasting Covenant,

L. Snow.

In the minutes of a general Conference held in Manchester, commencing on the 5th of May, 1842, published in the Millennial Star, we find the following:

"Elder Snow then addressed the meeting, and stated the method they had adopted in London Conference of raising funds for the Temple, which was by holding tea meetings; at which time any person wishing to appropriate for this purpose, had the opportunity. Elder Snow concluded his address by singing beautifully in tongues."

Just before leaving England, Elder P. P. Pratt, through the Star, in a general address to the Saints in Europe, writes the following--"I therefore recommend and appoint Elder Thomas Ward as my successor in the office of the General Presidency of the Church in Europe, in connection with Elders Lorenzo Snow and Hiram Clark. To these persons I commit the care and government of the Church in this country for the present, trusting that they will conduct and counsel in all things according to the mind of the Spirit, and according to the counsel that shall be given them from Nauvoo from time to time by the Quorum of the Twelve or the First Presidency.

"I sincerely hope that the officers and members in the several conferences will uphold and support these men in their high and holy calling by the prayer of faith, and by a willing, submissive and teachable spirit; and in so doing they will prosper."

STANZA ON THE PRESENTATION OF THE BOOK OF MORMON TO QUEEN VICTORIA.

BY ELIZA R. SNOW.

Before leaving London, Elder Lorenzo Snow presented to Her Majesty, Queen Victoria, and His Royal Highness, Prince Albert, through the politeness of Sir Henry Wheatley, two neatly bound copies of the Book of Mormon, which had been donated by President Brigham Young, and left in the care of Elder Snow for that purpose; which circumstance suggested the following lines:

  QUEEN VICTORIA.

  Of all the monarchs of the earth,
  That wear the robes of royalty,
  She has inherited, by birth,
  The broadest wreath of majesty.

  From her wide territorial wing,
  The sun does not withdraw its light;
  While earth's diurnal motions bring
  To other nations, day and night.

  All earthly thrones are tottering things,
  Where lights and shadows intervene;
  And regal honor often brings
  The scaffold or the guillotine.

  But still her sceptre is approved;
  All nations deck the wreath she wears;
  Yet, like the youth whom Jesus loved,
  One thing is lacking, even there.

  But, lo! a prize possessing more
  Of worth than gems with honor rife--
  A herald of salvation bore
  To her the words of endless life.

  That gift, however fools deride,
  Is worthy of her royal care;
  She'd better lay her crown aside
  Than spurn the light reflected there.

  O would she now her influence bend--
  The influence of royalty,
  Messiah's Kingdom to extend,
  And Zion's "nursing mother" be:

  Thus, with the glory of her name
  Inscribed on Zion's lofty spire,
  She'd win a wreath of endless fame,
  To last when other wreaths expire.

  Though over millions called to reign--
  Herself a powerful nation's boast,
  'Twould be her everlasting gain
  To serve the King, the Lord of Hosts.

  For there are crowns and thrones on high,
  And kingdoms there to be conferred--
  There honors wait that never die--
  There fame's immortal trump is heard.

  Truth echoes--'tis Jehovah's word;
  Let kings and queens and princes hear:
  In distant isles the sound is heard:
  Ye heavens, rejoice! O earth, give ear!

  The time--the time is near at hand
  To give a glorious period birth:
  The Son of God will take command,
  And rule the nations of the earth.
