Lorenzo a Bachelor.--The Prophet instructs him.--He changes tactics.--Marries.--Wives and Endowments.--In the Temple.--Wrath of our Enemies.--Expulsion of the Saints.--Cross the Mississippi River.--Intensely cold.--Snow storm.--Outfit.--Camp organized.--Moves forward.--Song No. 1.--Song No. 2.

Up to this time my brother lived a bachelor. The great work in which he was engaged as a missionary of the Gospel of salvation to the nations of the earth, had so engrossed his mind and engaged the energies of his soul, that virtually he had ignored the first commandment to "multiply and replenish the earth." To devote his time, his talents, his all to the ministry was his all-absorbing desire; and in consonance with this desire, he had cherished the idea that domestic responsibility would lessen his usefulness; and, until the law of Celestial Marriage was fully explained to him by the Prophet Joseph Smith, in a prolonged interview while the two were seated alone on the bank of the Mississippi river, as before related, he had not conceived the idea that marriage was one of the duties of the great mission of mortal life.

With him, this, as well as every other practical doctrine, was only to be understood to be obeyed. It is one of his peculiarities to do nothing by halves; and when convinced of the duty of marriage, and that it was a privilege accorded him in connection with his ministerial calling, he entered into it on an enlarged scale, by having two wives sealed to him in the holy bonds of matrimony, for time and eternity, at the same time; and not long after, another was added to the number, and then another. Thus, all at once, as it were, from the lone bachelor he was transformed into a husband invested with many domestic responsibilities. Probably a realizing sense of the fact that he had arrived at the mature age of thirty-one years in celibacy, suggested to him the propriety of making up for lost time by more than ordinary effort, and out of the old beaten track.

Previous to the administration of those sacred sealing ordinances, he explained to each of the chosen ones the law, obligations and object of Celestial Marriage, and that he might be expected to take others--that the ceremony being precisely the same for each, they would all occupy the same equal position, no one having a higher claim than another.

It was distinctly understood and agreed between them that their marriage relations should not, for the time being, be divulged to the world; but if circumstances should be such that he would wish to acknowledge as wife, before the world, either one of them, he should be permitted to do so.

Early in the winter of 1845-6, the Nauvoo Temple was so far completed that the administration of the sacred ordinances of the Holy Priesthood was commenced, and continued until about the first of February--thousands of the Saints receiving endowments and sealings. My brother and his wives, among the number, had their washings, anointings and endowments, and were sealed at a holy altar, a privilege and blessing which they estimated above all earthly honors. When Lorenzo walked across the inner court of the Temple proceeding to the altar, accompanied by his four wives, all stately appearing ladies, one of the Temple officiates exclaimed, "And his train filled the Temple!"

The wrath and bloodthirsty spirit of our enemies, sustained and encouraged by State authority, at this time predominated to that degree that the labors in the Temple were closed, and the energies of the Saints directed towards a hasty flight, to avoid impending extirpation. Time and circumstances admitted of very little, and in many instances, no preparation for a journey of an indefinite length; and to what point we did not know, but go we must.

I crossed the Mississippi river on the 12th of February; my brother, with a portion of his family, a few days later, after having made the necessary arrangements for the others to follow. On the day in which he crossed the river, the Nauvoo Temple took fire, but fortunately the fire was extinguished before much damage was sustained.

We camped near the bank of the river, in a small grove. We were poorly prepared for the journey before us, especially at this season of the year. A heavy snowstorm occurred, after which the weather turned intensely cold, and caused considerable suffering. My brother had two wagons and a small tent, one cow and a scanty supply of provisions and clothing, and yet was much better off than some of our neighbors in our general encampment.

On the 7th of February, 1846, Brigham Young, our great leader under God, organized the Camp in order for traveling. Lorenzo was, at this time or soon after, appointed captain over the ten in which Parley P. and Orson Pratt and their families were included. On the first day of March, the ground covered with snow, we broke encampment about noon, and soon nearly four hundred wagons were moving to--we knew not where.

As applicable to the circumstances, I here insert two poems which I wrote in Camp:

  CAMP OF ISRAEL.

  No. 1.

  Although in woods and tents we dwell,
  Shout! shout! O Camp of Israel:
  No "Christian" mobs on earth can bind
  Our thoughts, or steal our peace of mind.

  CHORUS.
  Though we fly from vile aggression,
  We'll maintain our pure profession--
  Seek a peaceable possession,
  Far from Gentiles and oppression.

  We'd better live in tents and smoke,
  Than wear the cursed Gentile yoke;
  We'd better from our country fly,
  Than by mobocracy to die.

  CHORUS.--Though we fly, etc.

  We've left the City of Nauvoo,
  And our beloved Temple too;
  And to the wilderness we go,
  Amid the winter frosts and snow.

  CHORUS.

  Our homes were dear--we loved them well--
  Beneath our roofs we fain would dwell,
  And honor our great God's commands,
  By mutual rights of Christian lands.

  CHORUS.

  Our persecutors will not cease
  Their murd'rous spoiling of our peace,
  And have decreed that we shall go
  To wilds where reeds and rushes grow.

  CHORUS.

  The Camp, the Camp--its numbers swell--
  Shout! shout! O Camp of Israel!
  The King, the Lord of hosts is near,
  His armies guard our front and rear.

  CHORUS.

West side of the Mississippi, Feb. 19th, 1846.

  CAMP OF ISRAEL.

  No. 2.

  Lo, a mighty host of Jacob,
  Tented on the western shore
  Of the noble Mississippi,
  They had crossed, to cross no more.
  At the last day-dawn of winter,
  Bound with frost and wrapped in snow;
  Hark! the cry is "Onward, onward!
  Camp of Israel, rise and go."

  All at once is life and motion--
  Trunks, and beds, and baggage fly;
  Oxen yoked, and horses harnessed,
  Tents rolled up and passing by:
  Soon the carriage wheels are moving,
  Onward to a woodland dell,
  Where at sunset all are quartered--
  Camp of Israel, all is well.

  Thickly 'round the tents are clustered,
  Neighb'ring smokes together blend;
  Supper served, the hymns are chanted,
  And the evening prayers ascend.
  Last of all the guards are stationed--
  Heavens! must guards be serving here?
  Who would harm the houseless exiles?
  Camp of Israel, never fear.

  Where is Freedom? Where is Justice?
  Both have from this nation fled;
  And the blood of martyred Prophets
  Must be answered on it's head!
  Therefore, to your tents, O Jacob!
  Like our Father Abra'm dwell;
  God will execute His purpose--
  Camp of Israel, all is well.

March 1st, 1846.
