Amalickiah was a wicked man. He promised the Nephites many things if they would make him the king. Many people believed him and turned away from righteousness.

Moroni was the captain over the Nephite armies. He was righteous and believed in Jesus Christ. When Moroni heard that many people were being led away by Amalickiah, Moroni became angry with him. He knew the people were in danger of losing their freedom.

Moroni tore off a piece of his coat and wrote on it, “In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our wives, and our children” (Alma 46:12). He fastened the fabric to the end of a pole and called it the title of liberty. Then he prayed for the people and visited them, waving the title of liberty and calling on the Nephites to join him in protecting their freedom. (See Alma 46:1–21.)

You live in a day when there are people like Amalickiah who want to lead us away from following Heavenly Father’s plan. One of the most important parts of that plan is families.

Heavenly Father wants members of the Church to understand His plan for families. The First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles wrote “The Family: A Proclamation to the World” to declare what we believe about families. Like the title of liberty, the proclamation can encourage us to remember and explain what we believe.

Remove page F4, and mount it on heavier paper. Hang the proclamation in a place where your family can see it and remember the importance of strengthening each other.

Open PDF

1.  “The Family: A Proclamation to the World” is modern-day revelation. Have the children listen for how many times they hear the words “reveal” or “revealed” as they repeat the ninth article of faith together. Teach that God continues to reveal His will to His children. This communication from God is called revelation. Give a copy of “The Family: A Proclamation to the World” to each child, and explain that the proclamation is revelation given in our day through God’s chosen servants. Provide each class with a different sentence or phrase from the proclamation with some words missing. Have them work together to fill in the blanks with the correct words. For example: “The ___________ is ___________ to the Creator’s _________ for the eternal destiny of His children.” Invite each class to stand and recite their completed phrase or sentence. Sing the first verse of “The Family Is of God” (Liahona, Oct. 2008, F12–F13). Emphasize that the proclamation on the family is revelation from God and that we need to understand and live its teachings. Gather the copies of the proclamation; you will use them again in week three.

2.  “The Family: A Proclamation to the World” teaches the importance of marriage. Invite a few members of the ward or branch approved by the bishop or branch president to participate in a panel discussion on the importance of marriage (see “Panel Discussions,” Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 175–76). Ahead of time, give them the questions you will ask. Examples: How has Heavenly Father blessed you and your spouse? Could you share a story about a gospel teaching that has helped you be a good wife (or husband)? What can children do now to prepare for being married someday? You may want to suggest that the participants review “The Family: A Proclamation to the World.” Let the children take turns choosing and reading a question. Have the panel members volunteer their answers. Bear testimony of the importance of marriage in Heavenly Father’s plan.
