Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

The Patriarchal Priesthood

After the organization of the Council of the Twelve Apostles in Kirtland in 1835, the members of that council were called to go into the mission field. March 28th of that year they came to the Prophet seeking a revelation in relation to their duties that they might understand more perfectly what the Lord required at their hands. In answer to this request, the great revelation on priesthood (D&C 107) was received. In this revelation certain knowledge was revealed concerning the Patriarchal Priesthood and its descent from the beginning of time. Regarding this priesthood the Lord said:

It is the duty of the Twelve, in all large branches of the church, to ordain evangelical ministers, as they shall be designated unto them by revelation—

The order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made.

This order was instituted in the days of Adam, and came down by lineage in the following manner:

From Adam to Seth, who was ordained by Adam at the age of sixty-nine years, and was blessed by him three years previous to his [Adam's] death, and received the promise of God by his father, that his posterity should be the chosen of the Lord, and that they should be preserved unto the end of the earth;

Because he [Seth] was a perfect man, and his likeness was the express likeness of his father, insomuch that he seemed to be like unto his father in all things, and could be distinguished from him only by his age. [^1]

Other Patriarchs

In the following verses are named the other patriarchs from Seth to Noah, with the ages of each when ordained. In Genesis we find the descent continued as follows: Shem, Arphaxad, Salah, Eber, Peleg, Reu, Serug, Nahor, Terah, Abraham. [^2] The father of Abraham from what we learn in the Book of Abraham, turned to the worship of idols; therefore he either lost his priesthood or it passed him by; nevertheless the descent came through him to Abraham. From Abraham the birthright went to Isaac and from him to Jacob, who was named Israel. From Israel it went to Joseph, the firstborn son of Rachel. The reason for this birthright not going to Israel's oldest son or to any of Joseph's older brothers was evidently because each had forfeited it by transgression. Therefore the birthright and the Patriarchal Priesthood continued through the seed of Joseph. Just why it was continued through Ephraim rather than through Manasseh, his older brother, we have not been informed, but we may be sure that the Lord had sufficient reason. From that time until now, this birthright has been vested in the descendants of Ephraim. [^3]

In the dispensation of the fulness of times in which we live, the Lord revealed that this birthright of the first-born in Israel belonged to Joseph Smith, the father of the Prophet, and he was the first patriarch ordained in this dispensation. After his death the office and priesthood was conferred upon Hyrum Smith, the Prophet's oldest living brother. There is an interesting statement in a revelation given to Hyrum Smith in April 1830, a few days after the organization of the Church. In this revelation the Lord said to him:

Behold, I speak unto you, Hyrum, a few words; for thou also art under no condemnation, and thy heart is open, and thy tongue loosed; and thy calling is . . . unto the church forever, and this because of thy family. [^4]

Authority of Hyrum Smith's Descendants

This appears to be a clear intimation that he and his descendants after him should hold this patriarchal authority.

After the death of the Patriarch Joseph Smith, Sr., Hyrum Smith, who was serving as second counselor in the First Presidency of the Church, was called to take the office of patriarch, and the Lord said:

And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant William [Law] be appointed, ordained, and anointed, as a counselor unto my servant Joseph, in the room of my servant Hyrum, that my servant Hyrum may take the office of Priesthood and Patriarch, which was appointed unto him by his father, by blessing, and also by right;

That from henceforth he shall hold the keys of the patriarchal blessings upon the heads of all my people.

That whosoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whosoever he curses shall be cursed; that whatsoever he shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever he shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. [^5]

In the same blessing and appointment an additional authority was conferred upon Hyrum Smith, for he was appointed to be an assistant President of the Church in the place of Oliver Cowdery, and all the keys and authorities that were given to Oliver were transferred to Hyrum Smith. [^6]

Today in each stake of Zion a patriarch is ordained, in some cases more than one. The patriarchs are authorized to give blessings to all faithful members of the Church, within the borders of the stake in which they live, who come properly recommended by their bishops.

PATRIARCHS TO THE CHURCH

We have these two great responsibilities—every man holding the priesthood—first, to seek our own salvation; and second, our duty to our fellowmen. I take it that my first duty is, so far as I am individually concerned, to seek my own salvation. That is your individual duty first, and so with every member of this Church.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Sr. Born July 12, 1771, at Topsfield, Mass., ordained December 18, 1833, under the hands of Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams; died September 14, 1840, at Nauvoo, Illinois. D&C 107:39-43.
[^2] Hyrum Smith. Born February 9, 1800 at Tunbridge, Vermont, ordained January 24, 1841 by Joseph Smith, Jr.; died a martyr June 27, 1844, at Carthage Jail, Illinois. Genesis 11:10-26.
[^3] I Chronicles 51:2I Chronicles 51:2; Jeremiah 31:9; D&C 133:30-34.
[^4] John Smith. Born September 22, 1832, at Kirtland, Ohio, ordained February 18, 1855; died November 6, 1911, at Salt Lake City. D&C 23:3.
[^5] Hyrum G. Smith. Born July 8, 1879 at South Jordan, Utah, ordained May 9, 1912; died February 4, 1932 at Salt Lake City. D&C 124:91-93. See also verses 93-125.
[^6] Joseph F. Smith. Born January 30, 1899 at Salt Lake City, ordained October 8, 1942; released October 6, 1946 because of ill health. D&C 124:94-95.
