Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

The Duties of the Priesthood in Temple Work

Every married man stands at the head of his house-hold, that is, his immediate family. Thus I, for instance, will stand at the head of my family group by virtue of the sealing for time and eternity, and my children will belong to me. I will belong to my parents in their family group. My father likewise with his brothers and sisters will belong to his father's unit in that family group, and his father to his father before him—all linked together generation to generation like a chain. So it will be of the righteous from the days of Adam down—Adam standing at the head as Michael, having authority and jurisdiction over his posterity in this large family group who have kept the commandments of God. Now that is the order of the priesthood.

Of course there will be chains that will be broken, links that will be missing, because we cannot force people into the kingdom. Those who are unworthy to be joined in this grouping of families will have to stand aside, and those who are worthy will be brought together, and the chain will go on just the same. This is what was meant by Malachi in saying that Elijah should come to turn the heart of the children to their fathers lest the earth be smitten with a curse.

Elijah Held Keys of Sealing Power

Elijah held the keys of the sealing power. Some of us do not understand what this means. I know a great many people have an idea that Elijah had a mission peculiar to the dead, but this was not so. In his day there was no work done for the dead, but he held the fulness of the priesthood, the sealing power, and by virtue of that sealing power, or the keys of the priesthood which he held, he restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the sealing power by virtue of which in this dispensation the work can be done for the dead just the same as it is done for the living.

The duty of a man in his own family is to see that he and his wife are sealed at the altar. If married out in the world before they joined the Church, or if they have been in the Church and have been unable to go to the temple, it is that man's duty to go to the temple, have his wife sealed to him, and have their children sealed, so that the family group, that unit to which he belongs, is made intact in order that it will continue throughout all eternity. That is the first duty that a man owes to himself, to his wife, and to his children. He receives this blessing by virtue of the priesthood.

Then it is his duty to seek his record as far back as he can go and do the same thing for each unit. He should begin with his father and mother and their children, and his grandfather and his children, great-grandfather and his children, and have the work done in like manner, linking each generation with the one that goes before. That is the responsibility resting upon every man who is at the head of a household in this Church.

Responsible for Our Own Families

The Lord has not placed upon any man in this Church the responsibility of doing the temple work for his neighbor. If you want to help your neighbor, there is no objection. If he needs help and you can help him, he will appreciate it. But your responsibility is to do your own work for your own line, going from father to son or from son to father, clear back as far as you are able to carry this record. When you do that, then you place yourself in line, through the fulness of the priesthood, eventually to receive the fulness of the glory of God.

That is what temple work is for. Temple work is for the purpose of giving to every man and to every woman the blessings of the higher ordinances of the gospel that are essential to salvation in the kingdom of God. There is not an ordinance performed in the temple that does not pertain to this mortal life. When we go into the temple and act for somebody else, we are treating that person as if we were that person living here, doing for him just what he would have to do if he were in mortal life. Thus we bring to pass his salvation, and we learn through these keys the knowledge of God which is made manifest through these ordinances, these blessings, these signs, all that is given to us in the temple of the Lord.

Two Great Responsibilities

We have these two great responsibilities—every man holding the priesthood—first, to seek our own salvation; and, second, our duty to our fellowmen. I take it that my first duty is, so far as I am individually concerned, to seek my own salvation. That is your individual duty first, and so with every member of this Church. Our duty to our fellowmen in the world is a responsibility resting especially on the shoulders of the men holding the priesthood. Our duty is to preach the gospel, to teach the nations of the earth, to go out and bring people into the Church. That duty is upon the Church. The Lord has arranged it so that certain men are called to certain offices in the Church with that peculiar duty on their shoulders. The Twelve, the seventies, are the missionaries of the Church, but every man in the Church has this responsibility as a man holding the priesthood.

Of course, the Lord says that our greatest individual responsibility is to seek after our dead; but as men holding the priesthood our responsibility is—so far as temple work is concerned—to teach, to instruct, to persuade, to prevail upon men and women who are not inclined to take advantage of their opportunities and receive these blessings for themselves, to go into the temple where they can do this work. That is our responsibility as men holding the priesthood. It does not make any difference whether we are high priests, seventies, or elders. We are trying to place this burden especially upon the high priests of the Church. The seventies preach the gospel—that is where they belong—the elders are ministers at home, the high priests are ministers at home, and we are also trying to train them to take upon themselves this responsibility of teaching their fellowmen in all that pertains to exaltation and to help prepare them to go to the temple to do these labors in behalf of their dead. This is our responsibility, and it is a great responsibility.

Vicarious Work Is Foundation of Salvation

Vicarious work is the foundation of salvation. There is no salvation without vicarious work. If Christ had not felt in his heart a love for us, if there had not been that love of the Father to sacrifice his Son for us, and if the Son had not been willing, there would have been no salvation for us. We would be subject to Satan forever, as Lehi says in the Book of Mormon. The Father, through his love for us, called upon the Savior who was willing, of course, to come into this world to act vicariously for me and for you. He came and offered himself as a sacrifice to save me and save you from a condition where we could not help ourselves.

Temple work is a vicarious work. We may, without any suffering so far as we are concerned, act as saviors on Mount Zion by going into the temple and doing for our dead the things they cannot do for themselves. But there are thousands of Latter-day Saints who seem to be uncertain about this. They are willing to go to meeting, willing to pay their tithing, and attend to the regular duties of the Church, but they do not seem to feel or understand the importance of receiving the blessings in the temple of the Lord which will bring them into exaltation. It is a strange thing. People seem to be content just to slide along without taking advantage of the opportunities presented to them and without receiving these necessary covenants that will bring them back into the presence of God as sons and daughters. Now that is our duty as men holding the priesthood: To teach them and make them understand the importance of this.

We will go to them as missionaries; we will labor with them; we will try to show them, we will try to convince them, we will try to persuade them to go to the temple for their own salvation and for the salvation of their dead; and when we have done that, we have done our duty. So I want to say that to all those who are engaged in the genealogical work in the stakes of Zion, that work of persuasion is assigned to you. We want you as men holding the priesthood, and the sisters laboring with you, to persuade, to teach, to do everything in your power by persuasion and by teaching the members of the Church to get them to the temple to do the thing that will bring them the fulness of the glory of God.—(The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, Vol. 30, pp. 1-4.)

Never before in the history of the Church has the responsibility that has been given to the priesthood been more necessary of fulfilment than today. Never before have we been under greater obligation to serve the Lord, and keep his commandments, and magnify the callings that have been assigned to us.
