Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

Ye Are a Chosen Generation

When I was invited to speak tonight, I was furnished a little slip of paper on which was printed the words of Peter, which I shall read. I suppose this is to be my text.

But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light. [^1]

That is a wonderful statement that ought to stir the souls of all the brethren holding the priesthood within the Church.

When Adam was on the face of the earth, the Lord gave him the priesthood—the Melchizedek Priesthood as we call it today, but that was before the birth of Melchizedek. So it was called the Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God. That priesthood continued with the servants of the Lord, the patriarchs, until the flood. It was carried through the flood by Noah and it was the same priesthood that was given to the prophets from that time on until the days of Moses.

When Israel came out of the land of Egypt and was in the wilderness, Moses went up into the mountain and spent some time there with the Lord, and the Lord wrote the law on tables of stone.

Israelites Forgot Promises

Moses was gone 40 days; so when he returned, he found the children of Israel in confusion. They had forgotten the promises of the Lord and his goodness to them in bringing them out of Egypt. They hearkened after the things of Egypt and asked Aaron to make them gods that they might worship them. Moses had disappeared, and they thought he was dead. So Aaron was prevailed upon and he took their gold—gold which they had taken away from the Egyptians when they left—and he made a golden calf. The bull was one of the gods of Egypt, and so they were harking back to the religion of Egypt.

When Moses came down out of the mountain and saw these people, the children of Israel to whom the Lord had shown his hand so many times and whom he had blessed miraculously in the wilderness, he took the tablets and threw them down and demolished them. Then he came in his anger and tried to straighten Israel out; after which he went back up into the mountain again at the command of the Lord, and the Lord wrote some other tablets.

The Bible does not tell us the correct story because of mistranslations. It reads this way:

And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first: and I will write upon these tables the words that were in the first tables, which thou brakest.

And be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount. [^2]

Anger Expressed by the Lord

Moses went up into the mountain. The Lord expressed his anger at Israel, and so he wrote with his finger again on other tablets.

In reading the Bible, you would think that he sent Moses down with the same things on the second tables that were on the first ones. In large measure, that is true; but the Lord made some changes of vital importance.

When he wrote the first tables, it was his intention to make of Israel a royal priesthood and give the Melchizedek Priesthood to all the tribes of Israel. But in his anger, because of their rebellion, he did not send the same writings that he sent before—not in all particulars. The Lord made some changes; and he added the law, which was known as the law of Moses, the law of carnal commandments. He took away from Israel the promises of the Higher Priesthood, the Melchizedek Priesthood, and said in his anger that they should not have it.

And so down through the ages, Israel had to go without the Melchizedek Priesthood. They had the Aaronic Priesthood, but the Melchizedek was withheld from them with some exceptions. There had to be, of course, some prophets in Israel with the Melchizedek Priesthood, because there were certain ordinances that the Melchizedek Priesthood had to perform. But he denied that priesthood to Israel in general.

He called certain men and made them his prophets and gave them keys of authority in the Melchizedek Priesthood to perform such ordinances as had to be performed; but he did not give the priesthood to all the tribes of Israel, as was first intended. He chose the seed of Aaron, the Levites, I should say, because Aaron was one of the seed of Levi. He made the Levites the priests in Israel. He denied the priesthood to all the other tribes of Israel. That priesthood which was given to them was the Aaronic Priesthood, named after Aaron, who became the chief priest of that order. Moses, of course, held the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Israel Restricted in Priesthood

Israel had to be content with the Aaronic Priesthood and with one tribe having the authority to administer. The other tribes were denied this blessing because of their great rebellion. That condition continued until the days of the coming of the Son of God.

Following is a short statement showing what was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith about the priesthood and about the plates that Moses brought back the second time. The Lord said:

. . . I will give unto them the law as at the first, but it shall be after the law of a carnal commandment; for I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my presence, into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage. Therefore do as I have commanded thee, and be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me, in the top of the mount. [^3]

So Moses received these other tables which denied to the children of Israel all the privileges that had been on the first and the authority that had been promised; and this because of the hardness of their hearts and their failure to keep the commandments of the Lord.

Paul has something to say about this in his writings in the book of Hebrews:

Wherefore (as the Holy Ghost saith, To day if ye will hear his voice,

Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness:

When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty years.

Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, They do always err in their heart; and they have not known my ways.

So I sware in my wrath, They shall not enter into my rest.)

Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God.

But exhort one another daily, while it is called To day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end;

While it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation.

For some, when they had heard, did provoke: howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses.

But with whom was he grieved forty years? was it not with them that had sinned, whose carcases fell in the wilderness? [^4]

The Lord's Anger Was Kindled

So the Lord's anger was kindled against them and that was the condition that prevailed from the days that Israel entered into the land of Palestine until the coming of Jesus Christ. When Jesus Christ came, he restored the Melchizedek Priesthood, or the higher priesthood. He called 12 men and ordained them apostles. He called other men and gave them authority in the Melchizedek Priesthood. Again it was restored, and given for the first time to Israel, as a people, since the days when they made the calf and bowed down to worship it.

Following is what the Lord said to the Prophet Joseph Smith as recorded in Section 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants. In the first part of this revelation, the Lord tells us about the priesthood which he gave to the ancient prophets. Then he tells how the priesthood came down from generation to generation:

. . . From Noah till Enoch, through the lineage of their fathers;

And from Enoch to Abel, who was slain by the conspiracy of his brother, who received the priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his father Adam, who was the first man—

Which priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years.

And the Lord confirmed a priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations, which priesthood also continueth and abideth forever with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God.

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God. [^5]

In the Old Testament, back in those early days recorded in the Book of Exodus, the people wanted to see the Lord. But because of their wickedness, he only showed them his back parts. They could not look upon his face. He revealed himself to Moses from time to time, but the children of Israel, because of their rebellion could not look upon his face. They could not stand his presence. Now to continue from the Doctrine and Covenants:

But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also;

And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb. [^6]

Added Keys and Authorities

In the dispensation of the fulness of times, the Lord has not only restored what was given to Israel when Christ came, but he has added keys and authorities which were intended for the dispensation of the fulness of times, and which were not exercised before the resurrection of the Son of God. After his resurrection, these things were, of course, permissible, and the privileges were granted to the people who repented of their sins.

Today the Lord has given us more than has been given to other generations. Not only did he send John the Baptist with the Aaronic Priesthood, the keys of which he held, but he sent Peter, James, and John to confer upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the Melchizedek Priesthood. But for our dispensation these blessings were not quite enough.

The Melchizedek Priesthood is the power of God by which ordinances are performed—ordinances and ordinations. But there had to be in this dispensation other authorities restored. It was necessary, for instance, for Noah to come and restore the keys of his dispensation; and before him, Michael or Adam came with the keys of his dispensation. Then the Lord sent other prophets to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery—always to the two of them—restoring keys and authorities of a special nature pertaining to the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Today we have in the Church all the authority, all the power, all the priesthood, including the keys of authority, that were held by the various prophets of old, for the completion of the work of the kingdom of God in the dispensation of the fulness of times. Everything is here. The ancient prophets came from Adam down to Moroni, each in his turn restoring keys, authorities, and priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, because everything of that nature is essential for the dispensation in which we live.

Now we have the Aaronic Priesthood in addition to that priesthood which was spoken of by Peter. Israel could have this lesser priesthood, and did have it through the Levites before the coming of Christ. Peter called upon the people in his day to receive the royal priesthood, which is the Melchizedek Priesthood, and to magnify their callings in it in that dispensation. In this present dispensation, all the keys and all the authorities of all the ancient prophets from Adam down to the present day have been restored and given to the Church. They were given originally to the Prophet Joseph Smith and to Oliver Cowdery. And from them the keys were given to the Council of the Twelve.

Keys Held by President

There is one thing that I want to say that I think is not generally understood, and that is this: Only one man at a time on the face of the earth holds the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood—just one, and that is the President of the Church. "Well," you say, "do not the Twelve have authority?" Yes. And the Council of the Twelve have had hands laid upon their heads to receive all the keys and the powers and authorities that pertain to the priesthood, but they can exercise them only as that power is delegated to them by the President of the Church. In other words, the President of the Church holds the keys of the priesthood; and we, the Council of the Twelve, with all the authority that is placed upon us, could not act without the sanction of the President of the Church. Neither could a bishop in his ward nor a president of a stake nor anybody else, because the President of the Church holds the keys. And there is only one person on earth at a time who holds those keys.

Here is another thing that I would like to make clear. The Prophet Joseph Smith, before his death, was commanded by the Lord to confer the keys and the authorities and the powers—all of them—upon the twelve apostles. And when a man is ordained an apostle today, he is given all the authority and the power, all the keys and everything. That has been done ever since the days when the Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith to confer the keys. But here is a great point, they can exercise the keys and the power and authority only in their turn. In other words, every member of the Council of the Twelve has the authority in him, should he become President of the Church, to exercise all the keys and powers of the priesthood. As long as the President of the Church is active, he holds the keys and there can not be two holding the same power at the same time.

Any man holding the office of elder in this Church, or seventy or high priest or whatever else it is, holds that authority by the sanction of the President of this Church. All that is recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants:

And verily I say unto you, that the conditions of this law are these: All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, of him who is anointed, both as well for time and for all eternity, and that too most holy, by revelation and commandment through the medium of mine anointed, whom I have appointed on the earth to hold this power (and I have appointed unto my servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred), are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead. [^7]

So, while each of the Council of the Twelve holds this priesthood, and has this authority, it is dormant. He exercises authority that is sanctioned to him by the President of the Church. So does a bishop in the ward and the president of a stake and everyone else. And the President of the Church has the right, if there is reason for it, to withdraw the keys from men who hold keys of authority today. No man can perform a marriage ceremony in the temple unless the President of the Church has given him the authority to do so. The marriage is for time and all eternity. The President is the only one who has that power, and he delegates it. Every man who performs marriage ceremonies for time and eternity in the temple for the living and the dead has the President's hands laid upon his head. The President can delegate that authority for it is his right and privilege; he holds those keys and nobody can exercise them without his sanction.—(Sunday School Conference Address, October 9, 1960.)

Footnotes

There are fundamental teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ that have been expressed many times by the prophets of old and our Redeemer when they were on the earth. It is a fact that no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of God and obtain what is known as eternal life.

---
Notas:
[^1] 3 Nephi 27:19-20.
[^2] Alma 41:10.
[^3] John 5:28-29.
[^4] D&C 29:22-25.
[^5] D&C 77:2-3.
[^6] II Peter 3:10-13.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 68.
