Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

Our Relationship to God

I cannot tell you how happy I am to have this opportunity of meeting with you.

My theme today, that is, the thread that will run through it, is our relationship to God. I want to make a few preliminary remarks. We are all members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I hope, and I think I am right in having that hope, and that we all have a testimony of the truth—that is, of the restoration of the gospel.

There are certain things that must be considered fundamental with us. First we must accept Jesus Christ as the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. We must accept God as our Father, the Father of our Spirits. We must put our faith in and accept the revelations in what we call the Standard Works of the Church. We cannot have in our minds any doubts in relation to the First Vision, the coming of the Father and the Son. That is absolutely fundamental.

We Must Accept Church Teachings

We must accept the coming of Moroni and the revealing of the Book of Mormon and its translation by the gift and power of God. We must believe in the coming of John the Baptist to restore the Aaronic Priesthood. We must believe in the coming of Peter, James, and John with the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood and the conferring of those keys upon the heads of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and the command given unto them to organize the Church.

We must believe, there can be no doubts in our minds, as to the reason for the restoration—that it is because of the universal apostasy, that spread over the Christian world, which made it necessary for the reopening of the heavens.

Now, I have written here a few things that I consider to be fundamental, some of which I want to read to you. These are on pages 50 and 51 in the book. [^1]

Eternal Father Immortal

God, our Eternal Father, is an immortal, exalted man with a body of flesh and bones, and an eternal spirit inseparably connected that cannot be divided and cannot die. That is a fundamental doctrine of the Church.

The presiding authority in the universe is God the Father, his Son, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost.

The earth on which we dwell, at the word of the Father, was created by the Son before he obtained his tabernacle of flesh and bones.

Adam was the first man on the earth, and Eve, his wife, was the first woman. They were created in the image of God. When Adam and Eve were placed in Eden they were not subject to the power of death, and could have lived in the state of innocence in which they were forever, had they not violated the law given them in the Garden.

The earth also was pronounced good, and would have remained in that same state forever had it not been changed to meet Adam's fallen condition. All things on the face of the earth also would have remained in that same condition had not Adam transgressed the law. By partaking of the forbidden fruit and thus violating the law under which he was placed, his nature was changed, and he became subject to: first, spiritual death, which is banishment from the presence of God; second, temporal death, which is separation of spirit and body.

This death also came to Eve his wife. Had Adam and Eve not transgressed the law given in Eden, they would have had no children. Because of this transgression bringing mortality, the children of Adam and Eve inherited mortal bodies and became subject to the mortal death.

Because Adam transgressed the law, the Lord changed the earth to suit the mortal condition, and all things on the face of the earth became subject to mortality as did the earth also.

Need for Atonement

To defeat the power which death had gained, it became necessary that an infinite atonement be offered to repay the debt and thereby restore Adam and Eve and all of their posterity and all things to immortal life through the resurrection.

To accomplish this, Jesus Christ, who created the earth, volunteered, and was chosen to come to earth as that infinite sacrifice. According to eternal law this sacrifice had to be made by a God who was not subject to death, yet had the power to die and take up his body by inherent right. Being the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, our Redeemer obtained from his Father the mastery over death, and from his mother he inherited the power to die.

The atonement by the Son of God is of a two-fold nature. First, it redeems all creatures who are subject to mortality through the fall, and restores them to immortality without any act whatever on their part. Hence, every soul born into this world shall receive the resurrection of the body, the body and spirit being reunited, never again to be divided.

Second, it redeems every soul from the penalties of his own transgressions on the condition that he accepts the plan of salvation and is obedient to all the laws and commandments of God, and that he endures in faithfulness to the end. None but the truly repentant are entitled to this forgiveness of sin.

There are definite laws which are known as the gospel of Jesus Christ, and must be obeyed in order to obtain this salvation. The first or foundation principles, which must be received and obeyed, are these: faith in God and the atonement of Jesus Christ; repentance from all sins; baptism by one having authority in water by immersion for the remission of sins; laying on of hands by one holding authority for the gift of the Holy Ghost; a contrite spirit and a humble heart; obedience to every other ordinance and principle of the gospel appertaining to the blessings of eternal life; and faithfulness to the end.

All men will be judged according to their individual work, and none will be required to pay the debt of another.

All of those things are absolutely fundamental. I have given references for all of the things that I have mentioned.

In the Image of God

We believe that we were created in the image of God, so stated in the Bible, in the Doctrine and Covenants, in the Pearl of Great Price, and also, not quite so definitely, in the Book of Mormon. We are his sons and his daughters. We were created in his image.

I think you have on your papers references from these scriptures, and they are all before you.

Now, children of God also inhabit other earths, and they also are in the image of God. References to that are found in Moses 1, verses 33 to 39; Doctrine and Covenants 76, verses 22 and 24; and Ether, the third chapter, where the Savior appeared to the Brother of Jared and manifested to him his body which is the body of the spirit, and where he taught the Brother of Jared that as he appeared to him in the spirit, so would he appear to men on the earth in the flesh, and that all men were created in that image, and that is a fundamental doctrine of the Church.

The world today, even the so-called Christian world, does not accept that doctrine. To them God is not a personal being. Man is not created in his image. As one great religious teacher said, "If we are created in the likeness of God, it is in reason not in body," then he went on to argue that it must be in reason because God has no body. If you analyze that you will see how foolish it is, because man's reason is very faulty, and every man goes his own way, following his reason, and surely God is not a God of confusion.

Let me spend a little time here in regard to those sons and daughters of God who dwell on other earths. In the vision given to Moses as recorded in the first chapter of the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price we read, beginning with Verse 33—we should go even higher than that to get the full import of this, but I will begin with the thirty-third verse. The Lord says:

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten.

Then further down, when Moses asked him for a little information regarding our earth, the Lord said to him:

The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine.

And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words.

An Interpretation

Before I read the next verse let me make a comment. In regard to earth's passing away, the Lord does not mean to place an interpretation upon the world's passing away like that which is placed upon worlds passing away by our scientific brethren, by our astronomers and others who look into the heavens and see these great bodies and tell us they are dying, that our Sun eventually will become cold, having spent its energy. I am glad to know they are beginning to change their views, some of them, on that. But that has been the doctrine. They teach that this earth will die after a certain great period of years, and will revolve through the heavens a dead, lifeless, cold, useless body.

The Lord has told us otherwise. This earth will not have that end.

I shall not turn to read passages of scripture, but you can turn to Section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants, and therein you will find recorded the destiny of this earth. It is going to die. Peter said it would die, as other earths have died and passed away, but it will receive a resurrection, be glorified and placed in the heavens where it belongs as a celestial body, just like other worlds have done.

Now I am going to make a statement here in contradiction of the teaching of the philosophers and the scientists who set forth that doctrine, that the earth will become lifeless, and I am going to tell you a little incident that took place here at the summer school a few years ago, a conversation that I had with Dr. Carl Eyring.

We were up in the summer school on the mountainside, and he had a telescope in the middle of the day which showed the planet, Venus. He wanted to know if I wanted to see it, and I told him "yes," so I went and had a look at Venus, which through the telescope looked much like our moon in one of its quarters.

As we walked away we talked about the planets, and how wonderful it was that we had instruments which would reveal these things to us, and I said: "Brother Eyring, I do not have the idea that you scientists have about the sun."

"Well, is that so? What is your idea?"

I said, "You have never seen the sun. Neither has any other mortal man."

"Why, what do you mean?"

I said, "All you see when you look at the sun through smoked glasses or any way that you can look at the sun, is the cloud that surrounds it. Every eclipse of the sun shows that."

He said, "I guess that is right." Well, what is the sun?

"It is not a dying world. Of course, it is full of energy. God is full of energy, and should we mortals stand in his presence, unless his spirit was upon us to protect us we would be consumed. That is how much energy there is in a celestial body.

Sun—An Immortal World

I said, "The sun is a body that has gone on to its fulness. It has reached its glory. It is an immortal world." The bell rang and we had no further time for discussion, but that doctrine was taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. I am sorry, I do not have that reference with me.

We look into the heavens and we see worlds that have gone on to their glory. Some of them may be terrestrial worlds, telestial, some celestial worlds, and so the Lord here says worlds after they are created will pass away. Of course they will. This earth will pass away, for God never made anything to be destroyed or come to naught, and so these worlds that pass away receive their resurrection as this earth will receive its resurrection. Now I will read the next verse:

For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. [^2]

This is the great work of the Lord, and so he is peopling worlds and after they have been celestialized or received the resurrection, with their inhabitants, they will endure forever.

Now, let us consider a statement in Section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants. This is a vision given to the Prophet Joseph Smith and to Sidney Rigdon. They say:

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

That by him, and through him, the worlds are and were created, (not this world only) and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. [^3]

If we had the opportunity of visiting some of these other worlds, what would we find? Human beings just like we are, for they were created in the image of God. That is what we would find. Not only would we find human beings, we would find vegetation, we would find animals.

I am not taking time to read from Section 77. You can read it, where the Prophet, interpreting certain passages in the Book of Revelations calls attention to the fact that there are animals that have received their resurrection. These are animals in the presence of God. They get a resurrection. Everything gets a resurrection, for everything that has been created has a soul. By that I mean just what the Lord defines the soul to be—spirit and body—and in the resurrection they become inseparably connected.

Now let us read the third chapter of Moses in the ninth verse. I am passing by references to man being a soul as we find it in Verse 1. I will refer to that a little later. But in the ninth verse:

And out of the ground made I, the Lord God, to grow every tree naturally, that is pleasant to the sight of man; and man could behold it. And it became also a living soul.

Spiritual Creation

Now he is speaking about a spiritual creation, the trees, the vegetation, created spiritually, and then placed on the earth to become living souls just as well as men do.

Now we will turn to another passage. Verse 19 of the same chapter:

And out of the ground I, the Lord God, formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and commanded that they should come unto Adam, to see what he would call them; and they were also living souls; for I, God, breathed into them the breath of life and commanded that whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that should be the name thereof.

So here we find that the animals, and the plants, the vegetation, became living souls, and were created spiritually before they were naturally upon the earth. These are very significant expressions, and I am stressing them as evidence that contradicts and confutes the organic theory of evolution.

What do they teach? That man has evolved, come to what he is, by accident? Some evolutionary scientists have said man is an accident. All life is an accident upon the earth. Sir James Jeans has said that. We are just a by-product, something that happened and likely could not happen anywhere else in the universe. Just a by-product, you people here, sons and daughters of God. That is all they can give you.

Well now, in Section 29 of the Doctrine and Covenants we have something more:

And again, verily, verily, I say unto you that when the thousand years are ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but for a little season.

And the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth. [^4]

That is the celestialized earth.

For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, [and that means the heaven of our earth], and also the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea.

And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of mine hand. [^5]

Word of the Lord

There is the word of the Lord. Do we believe the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, in the Pearl of Great Price, Book of Mormon, the Bible, or are we to discard all that because some men, "educated beyond their intelligence," so Golden Kimball said of them, teach a contrary doctrine? "Educated beyond their intelligence"—there is a difference between intelligence and knowledge. We confuse them, and that which we think is knowledge sometimes is not.

Well anyway, all of these things were created spiritually before they were naturally in the earth, and that is also recorded in the third chapter of the Book of Moses.

Evolution teaches production and development of all things by chance, development of the smallest germ to a man created in the image of God, requiring several billions of years for that development. Moreover, this process would, if true, produce on other earths, passing through similar conditions, beings of a most hideous and dreadful nature imaginable. As they teach it has produced some very hideous beings on this earth.

There could be no intelligence in a Supreme Being who had each time an earth is formed to leave everything to chance hoping that in some great period of time from an amoeba, creatures would be developed, fit to possess an eternal spirit in his image.

I want you to get that! The idea, for us, sons and daughters of God, to be led astray by these theories of men into thinking that things began way back in that far distant time by some chance, suddenly appearing. Why, conditions today are far more favorable to spontaneous life than they were according to the teachings of science, millions of years ago, and have not men struggled and done everything that they knew how to do to find spontaneous life, and in searching for it they have always been defeated.

Man, His Origin and Destiny

So I state, and have the evidence in this book. They have never found life coming only from antecedent life. God is the author of life, and that is one secret he has not revealed to man. It is absolutely ridiculous to think this universe created by God as he tells us here, came by chance, and that every time a new earth comes to take the place of one that has gone on, he has to start by hoping that some time some germ will happen to appear spontaneously upon it.

You cannot believe in a God like that, can you? We are transplanted beings. Adam was transplanted. I do not want to get a misunderstanding when I say that. He did not come here a resurrected being. He did not die on some other earth and then come here to die again, to be changed to mortality again, for the resurrected being cannot die. The Lord has told us so in the eleventh chapter of John, in the 63rd Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, in the 88th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, in other places he has told us—in the eleventh chapter of the Book of Alma, the twelfth chapter of the Book of Alma, and in other places—that the resurrected being does not die.

Christ says that they who believe in him pass from death unto life, celestialized, immortalized, and Adam got his body from the dust of the earth. Read the 12th verse in the 77th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants. Read the first two or three verses and you will find that every creature on the face of the earth has a spirit, and that his body was created in the image of his spirit. Things do not come by chance. All living things are entitled to the everlasting life through the restoration from mortal death based on the statement of Jesus Christ.

All Creation Restored

The Savior is not going to save only mankind. Everything God has created must be restored, and so I read it to you in the 27th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, and it is all going to be restored—everything the Lord has created that has been changed and become mortal and subject to death through Adam's transgression. Everything that has life and created in the image of its spirit, and is a living soul, and therefore entitled to the resurrection.

Why? Because when Adam fell the Lord cursed the earth, brought a fall upon it and it is passing through one week, seven days of a thousand years, of mortal or temporal existence. Doctrine and Covenants: Verse 6, Section 77.

In the few remaining minutes, I want to read the seventh verse, which I skipped, in the third chapter of Moses:

And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul, [that is, the spirit and body were united], the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also; nevertheless, all things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word.

And in Verse 5 the Lord tells you that spiritual creation was in heaven. So, Adam was the first man upon the earth, according to the Lord's statement, and the first flesh also. That needs a little explanation.

Adam did not come to this earth until it was prepared for him. The animals were here. Plants were here. The Lord did not bring him here to a desolate world, and then bring other creatures. It was all prepared for him, just according to the order that is written in our scriptures, and when it was all ready for Adam he was placed upon the earth.

Then what is meant by the "first flesh"? It is simple when you understand it. Adam was the first of all creatures to fall and become flesh, and flesh in this sense means mortality, and all through our scriptures the Lord speaks of this life as flesh, while we are here in the flesh, so Adam became the first flesh. There was no other mortal creature before him, and there was no mortal death until he brought it, and the scriptures tell you that. It is here written, and that is the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Men Must Repent

I will turn to the Book of Moses again, and we will discuss here the word of the Lord to Adam as recorded by Enoch. Enoch is telling what the Lord taught Adam. This is in the sixth chapter of Moses. I am going to begin with Verse 56:

And it is given unto them to know good from evil; wherefore they are agents unto themselves, and I have given unto you another law and commandment.

Wherefore [and he is talking to Adam], teach it unto your children, that all men everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; for, in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge, who shall come in the meridian of time.

Therefore I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children, saying:

That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten.

Here the Lord says to Adam that through the fall came death, and other statements of that kind are given in these scriptures.

Now the Lord speaks here about our being cleansed by blood. If I had more than the alloted time, Brother Lee, I could tell them something interesting about blood, but I will cut it short.

Cleansed by Blood

We are cleansed by blood. The Savior had to have blood in his body. He got it from his mother, not his Father. There is no blood in a celestial being, nor an immortal being. Blood is the life of the mortal body. Read the first verses of the ninth chapter of Genesis. Write down also the seventeenth chapter of Leviticus, beginning with the tenth verse. You will find that blood is the life of mortality. There was no blood in Adam's body until he partook of the forbidden fruit, then blood became the life-giving influence, or force, fluid, in the mortal body.

The Savior had to pay the price on the cross to atone for Adam's transgression by the shedding of his blood and giving it back. So, by the blood we are cleansed. The Savior could not have been put to death by hanging on a tree, or by being smothered, drowned, or something of that kind. They had to shed his blood, and he gave back the life-giving power or influence which belongs to mortality. He paid the price, the debt that Adam owed. He paid the debt that we owe. He redeemed every creature from death and has restored them to life that will be everlasting by the shedding of his blood. When you partake of the sacrament think of that. We drink the water in remembrance of his blood, the bread because of his broken body. The blood plays a very important place in our mortal existence, and in the atonement of Jesus Christ, and by it we are blessed.

We are sanctified by the Spirit but it is the blood that cleanses us—his blood. Not mine, not yours, but the giving back what Adam received in the fall. That was the punishment. The Lord said "You shall surely die, From earth you came. To earth you shall go," speaking of his body. He had to die.

If you will read in the second chapter of Second Nephi, and in the ninth chapter of Second Nephi, you will find that after we die we would remain dead an awful long time—forever—if it had not been for the atonement of Jesus Christ.

Now, evolution leads men away from God. Men who have had faith in God, when they have become converted to that theory, forsake him. Charles Darwin was a religious man when he started out. I have told in this book something about what happened to him, and how his feelings changed, and what was beautiful to him in the beginning ceased to be beautiful to him thereafter.

Let us seek for the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord, and we will be taught and will be led in all truth, the truth that will make us free—(Lecture to seminary and institute teachers held at Brigham Young University, June 25, 1954.)

Footnotes

No judge in this world in any court of the land can annual a marriage for time and all eternity. He may separate the husband and wife by legal enactments, but he cannot separate husband and wife so far as the next world is concerned. Only the President of the Church has authority to cancel sealings.

---
Notas:
[^1] Matthew 19:3-6.
[^2] Ephesians 3:14-15.
[^3] Matthew 19:7-10.
[^4] Matthew 19:9.
[^5] D&C 29:24-25.
