Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

The Salt Lake Temple

April 6, 1953, commemorated one hundred years since the laying of the cornerstones of the Salt Lake Temple. This was a solemn occasion, for the members of the Church understood the significance of temples and the eternal nature of the ordinances to be performed in them. The Saints had been driven from their homes after erecting a sacred temple to the name of the Lord in which the ordinances of exaltation belong, and they longed for the time to come when another house of the Lord should stand in which they could go and receive these sacred blessings.

During the westward journey the building of a temple was frequently discussed. On the evening of July 28, 1847, President Brigham Young, with some of the apostles and Thomas Bullock, the clerk, walked from the camp in Salt Lake Valley to the site chosen for the temple. There President Young raised his hands and said: "Here is the forty acres [^1] for a temple, and the city can be laid out perfectly square north and south, east and west." Ground was broken in February 1853, for the foundation, and on the morning of April 6, 1853, several thousand members of the Church assembled where President Young made some preliminary remarks after which the General Authorities and other officials took their places around the foundation, and the ceremonies proceeded as follows:

The First Presidency with the Patriarch, John Smith, laid the first, or southeast cornerstone, in accordance with the pattern, given by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and President Young gave the oration saying:

We dedicate the southeast cornerstone of the temple to the Most High God. May it remain in place till it has done its work, and until he who has inspired our hearts to fulfil the prophecies of his holy prophets, that the house of the Lord should be reared in the "tops of the mountains" shall be satisfied, and say it is enough.

Dedicatory Prayer

President Heber C. Kimball offered the prayer of dedication at this stone, and the assembly then gathered at the southwest cornerstone, which was laid by the Presiding Bishopric, followed by the oration by Bishop Edward Hunter and a prayer of dedication by Bishop Alfred Cordon. Then the northwest cornerstone was laid by the presidency of the high priests, and President John Young of that quorum delivered the oration. Elder George B. Wallace offered the prayer of dedication. The last, or northeast cornerstone, was laid by the Council of the Twelve Apostles. Elder Parley P. Pratt delivered the oration, and the prayer of dedication was offered by Elder Orson Hyde.

At the afternoon services President Brigham Young made the following remarks:

I scarcely ever say much about revelations, or visions, but suffice it to say, five years ago last July [1847], I was here and saw in the spirit the temple not ten feet from where we have laid the chief cornerstone. I have not inquired what kind of a temple we should build. Why? Because it was represented before me, I never looked upon that ground, but the vision of it was there. I see it as plainly as if it was in reality before me. Wait until it is done. I will say, however, that it will have six towers, to begin with, instead of one. Now do not any of you apostatize because it will have six towers, and Joseph only built one. It is easier for us to build sixteen, than it was for him to build one. The time will come when there will be one in the center of temples we shall build, and on the top groves and fish ponds.

A Grand Edifice of Stone

As a boy I used to go up to the temple block and watch the men carving the hard granite stones and raise and place each in its chosen spot, and to me this was indeed a slow process. In my boyhood anxiety I wondered if I would live to see the temple finished. I also frequently visited the blacksmith shop farther up the street on North Temple where the tools were sharpened. In the summers much of my time was spent in Little Cottonwood Canyon, and there I watched the men digging and blasting the great granite blocks and preparing them for delivery to the temple. I can remember the days of the ox teams and how they tugged with their heavy loads, and how at intervals down the canyon road rough-cut blocks had skidded from the wagons and were lost. As I grew, my patience became more reasonable, and I saw the grand edifice rise stone upon stone until all were laid perfectly in their places, and the building was ready for dedication.

It was my privilege to be present in April 1892, at the ceremonies of the laying of the capstone.

In the general assembly in the Tabernacle, President Lorenzo Snow of the Council of the Twelve explained to the congregation the order of the ceremony to be held at the laying of the stone and taught the assembled Saints how to proceed with the Hosannah Shout. After remarks by President Wilford Woodruff the congregation proceeded to the southwest corner of the temple where a platform for the General Authorities had been built. After appropriate exercises, President Woodruff pushed an electric button, and the capstone was laid. Then followed the Hosannah Shout. Elder Francis M. Lyman of the Council of the Twelve moved that efforts be made to finish the temple so that it could be dedicated on April 6, 1893. This motion was received with enthusiasm by the vast assembly of about forty thousand.

On April 6, 1893 the temple was ready for dedication. President Wilford Woodruff offered the dedicatory prayer which was followed by the Hosannah Shout led by President Lorenzo Snow. These services were repeated almost daily until April 24. Thirty-one meetings were held, and a total of seventy-five thousand people had the privilege of attending. As a young man holding the Aaronic Priesthood, it was my privilege to be present at the opening session. With others holding the Aaronic Priesthood I had a place in the gallery on the north side of the assembly room. I was greatly impressed with the wonderful spirit of these exercises and have looked back to that day many times with deep feelings of satisfaction.

Commencement of Ordinance Work

Tuesday, May 23, 1893, the temple was opened for ordinance work under the direction of the First Presidency, Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, and Joseph F. Smith, and the great wish of President Brigham Young had been fulfilled. This, of course, was not the first temple in Utah to be erected, but it was the one above all others for which the members of the Church had longed. Nor was it the last to be built, and President Brigham Young predicted that the time would come when temples would be erected all over the land of Zion and in foreign lands.

Why do we build temples? It is because the Lord commands it. For what purpose are they built? In order that sacred ordinances and covenants necessary to the exaltation in the celestial kingdom may be bestowed upon all those who are worthy of the exaltation. In relation to these blessings the Lord has said:

That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power;

And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who just and true.

They are they who are the church of the Firstborn.

They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—

They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory. [^2]

None Enter Temples Except Those Prepared

We can discern from this that according to the letter of the commandment, none are entitled to enter the temple and receive these ordinances except those who have prepared themselves for exaltation by the keeping of all of the commandments and have prepared themselves by faith and faithfulness to be so endowed. This strictness is not always followed and many are privileged to receive some of these ordinances on the promise of faithfulness thereafter.

So important did the Lord consider the need of a temple in Israel, he commanded Moses to build one while the children of Israel were in the wilderness. This was built of the most costly materials that the Israelites could produce. It was a portable building that could be taken down and set up as the camp of Israel moved in their journey from place to place. It is frequently spoken of as the tabernacle. It was to this building that Samuel was taken by his mother in his childhood. In the days of Solomon, Israel was commanded to build a permanent temple which served them until through their rebellion and corruption it was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar at the time of the captivity. On the return of the Jews from this bondage, by decree of Cyrus the Persian, the temple was rebuilt. Later it was neglected, and then it was repaired and partially reconstructed in the days of Herod. This was the temple as our Savior found it.

Baptism for the Dead

Since the resurrection of our Savior, baptism for the dead has been performed. This ordinance belongs to the temples as do all the ordinances pertaining to the salvation of the worthy dead. At the time of the building of the Nauvoo Temple, the Lord said:

For therein are the keys of the holy priesthood ordained, that you may receive honor and glory. . . .

For it is ordained that in Zion and in her stakes, and in Jerusalem, those places which I have appointed for refuge, shall be the places for your baptisms for your dead.

And again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name?

For, for this cause I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before the world was. [^3]

Today it is the privilege of the Latter-day Saints to go to this sacred house, and there receive all of these blessings in fulfilment of the promise of the Lord through Jeremiah.—(The Improvement Era, April 1953.)

Footnotes

It might seem to some that the Lord was rather harsh with Israel by . . . leaving them with the law of Moses but denying them the fulness of the gospel. However, a closer study of the situation will show that the Lord used wisdom in making these restrictions. Evidently the time had not come for the complete restoration. . . .

---
Notas:
[^1] Exodus 34:1-8, Inspired Version of the Bible.
[^2] D&C 84:19-27.
[^3] D&C 124:34, 36-38.
