Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

The Two Tables of Stone Written by the Finger of God

It is true that when Moses broke the first tables, the Lord prepared other tables "like unto the first." It is unfortunate that the Lord had to modify the second tables, because in some respects they were not exactly like the first. We have learned through modern revelation that parts of the first recorded counsel were changed. For instance, here is part of the counsel the Lord gave to Moses after the breaking of the tables, found in the scriptures revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

And the Lord said to Moses, Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law, according as they were written at first on the tables which thou brakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them.

But I will give unto them the law as at the first, but it shall be after the law of a carnal commandment; for I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my presence, into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage. Therefore do as I have commanded thee, and be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me, in the top of the mount.

And no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.

And Moses hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and he rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as the Lord had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.

And the Lord descended in the cloud, and stood before him there, and proclaimed the name of the Lord.

And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth.

Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the rebellious. visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, unto the third and to the fourth generation.

And Moses made haste, and bowed his head towards the earth and worshipped. [^1].

Agreement in Scripture

So we read in the Prophet's edition of the Bible. This agrees perfectly with what the Lord has given us by revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants:

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances hereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also;

And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the keys of the ministering of angles and the preparatory gospel;

Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb. [^2].

Restrictions Were Necessary

It might seem to some that the Lord was rather harsh with Israel by making this decree, leaving them with the law of Moses but denying them the fulness of the gospel. However, a closer study of the situation will show that the Lord used wisdom in making these restrictions. Evidently the time had not come for the complete restoration, and it was divine wisdom to restrict the Israelites and give them a "schoolmaster" until the coming of our Redeemer, when the gospel's fulness was restored.—(The Improvement Era, January, 1967.)

Footnotes

The proper interpretation of this wonderful prophecy is that the Lord has set up his Church (or kingdom) for the last time; it is to grow and increase until it shall fill the earth, and, according to the prophetic interpretation of Daniel, this kingdom shall stand forever.

---
Notas:
[^1] Daniel 2:32-35.
[^2] Daniel 2:37-45.
