Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

Nebuchadnezzar's Vision of the Kingdom

The great King Nebuchadnezzar had a wonderful dream in relation to a great image that was terrible.

This image's head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass,

His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay.

Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces.

Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth. [^1]

Daniel's Interpretation

Daniel gave the interpretation of this vision in these words:

Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head of gold.

And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth.

And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things: and as iron that breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.

And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters' clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed with miry clay.

And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.

And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men; but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.

And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure. [^2].

A Wonderful Portrait

This vision of the kingdom is a wonderful portrait of historical events down through the ages of time, from the day of Daniel to our present dispensation. Let us not forget that the promise of the Lord in this vision was that in the latter days of these kingdoms the Lord was to set up a kingdom that was not to be left to any other people, "which shall never be destroyed," but which was to endure and consume all other kingdoms and stand forever.

The proper interpretation of this wonderful prophecy is that the Lord has set up his Church (or kingdom) for the last time; it is to grow and increase until it shall fill the earth, and, according to the prophetic interpretation of Daniel, this kingdom shall stand forever.

Now, let us speak plainly and clearly in relation to this remarkable vision and Daniel's interpretation.

Great Kingdom Is the Church

This great kingdom is verily the Church of Jesus Christ, which has been established in the earth for the last time. It is not to be destroyed but is to continue to endure and increase until it shall fill the earth in the due time of the Lord.

From time to time there have been apostates withdraw from the Church. There have been attempts to set up opposition organizations, but they do not prosper, nor can they.

This remarkable prophetic vision that was interpreted by Daniel is bound to be fulfilled. The Lord set up his kingdom, or divine Church, through the ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The stone cut out of the mountain is indeed The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which is to endure through all time, or "stand for ever."—(The Improvement Era, February 1967, p. 4.)

Footnotes

The Lord himself, had called and ordained, beside the twelve, seventies, and sent them forth throughout Judea bearing the message of truth. . . . That the Twelve Apostles were empowered to set in order all things pertaining to the church, is, nevertheless, beyond dispute.

---
Notas:
[^1] Ephesians 4:11-13.
[^2] Ephesians 4:16.
