Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

Dedication of Holy Land and the Return of the Jews

At the general conference of the Church held April 6, 1840, Elder Orson Hyde was called to take a mission to Palestine. Two days later Elder John E. Page was called to accompany Elder Hyde on this mission, but unfortunately for him, he failed to go. The purpose of that mission was to dedicate that land for the return of the Jews according to the promises of the Lord to them.

This land was given to Abraham by the Lord as an everlasting inheritance for himself and his seed after him. Abraham was a resident of Ur of Chaldea, a land that was given over to idolatry and wickedness. Abraham's father had fallen under this spell, but notwithstanding this, Abraham prayed earnestly seeking to be a follower of righteousness and a possessor of great knowledge of the things of God all the days of his life.

Because Abraham refused to worship as his father did, his life was sought as a sacrifice to the false gods of that land; but the Lord preserved him. "Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew thee," was the word of the Lord to him. Obedient to this commandment Abraham gathered his substance and taking those of his kindred who would accompany him, set out from Ur for the land of Canaan. As he journeyed the Lord again instructed him, saying:

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. [^1]

Blessings Conferred Upon Abraham

When Abraham arrived in Canaan the Lord said:

Lift up now thine eyes, and look from this place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward:

For all the land which thou seest to thee will I give it, and to thy seed forever. [^2]

Not only was Abraham given all the land which he could see with the natural eye, but all the land from "the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates," was included in the land grant deed to him by the Lord. These blessings were re-conferred upon Jacob, or Israel, unto whom the Lord said:

And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south; and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed. [^3]

However, the seed of Jacob were not to possess this land as an inheritance until "the iniquity of the Amorite" is full, the Lord said to Abraham. When the time arrived and the "iniquity of the Amorite" was full, the descendants of Jacob, known as the twelve tribes of Israel, came out of Egypt where they had grown into a powerful nation through Egyptian bondage. Under the leadership of Moses and later Joshua, and with the blessings of the Lord upon them, they took possession of the land. In course of time they established a kingdom but failed to keep the commandments of the Lord, although they had become by covenant the chosen people of the Lord.

Before the Israelites entered their possessions the Lord warned them through Moses that if they forsook his laws and failed to heed his sacred commandments he would punish them with bondage and affliction and if then they continued to ignore the words of their prophets, he would drive them out of the land and it should cease to be a residence for their children as they would be scattered in all parts of the world. Among these warnings the Lord declared in all kindness but emphatically the following:

I am the Lord your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you go upright.

But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these commandments,

And if ye shall despise my statues, or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments, but that ye break my covenant;

I also will do this unto you; I will even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.

And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you; and ye shall flee when none pursueth you.

And if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times more for your sins. . . .

And I will make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, and I will not smell the savor of your sweet odours.

And I will bring the land into desolation; and your enemies which dwell therein shall be astonished at it.

And I will scatter you among the heathen, and will draw out a sword after you; and your land shall be desolate, and your cities waste.

Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye be in your enemies' land; even then shall the land rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.

As long as it lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it. [^4]

Importance of Keeping Commandments

In this manner the Lord endeavored to impress upon the children of Israel the need of keeping his commandments. However, he also promised that he would still remember his covenant made with their fathers. Said he:

Ye shall be left few in number among the heathen, whither the Lord shall lead you. And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell. But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul. When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice (for the Lord thy God is a merciful God); he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them. [^5]

For a short time these commandments of the Lord impressed their minds; but soon the people began to forget the warnings. To remind them of the dire consequences of this rebellion, many prophets were sent among them, but the voice of the Lord went unheeded. At first the Lord permitted their neighboring tribes to oppress and punish them, but this was not severe enough, and so it became necessary to bring upon them the major calamities which had been predicted. At the beginning of the reign of Israel's fourth king, Rehoboam, the nation became divided forming two kingdoms; one known as Israel, or Ephraim, and the other as Judah. The kingdom of Israel rebelled and became extremely wicked, and therefore it was destroyed and its inhabitants carried captive into Assyria by Shalmaneser, about 730 B.C. From this captivity they never returned and are known as the lost Ten Tribes of Israel. The kingdom of Judah continued to exist until about 600 B.C., when it also was practically destroyed and its inhabitants carried captive into Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar. In Babylon they remained 70 years and were then restored by Cyrus, the Persian, to their former inheritance. From that time forth they have been known as Jews. Under the protection of the Medo-Persian kingdom they were privileged to rebuild Jerusalem and its temple, and again spread over much of the land which they formerly occupied. Again they were guided by divinely appointed prophets; however they never again exercised unrestricted freedom as they had done before, and most of the time were subject to foreign oppression.

Corruption among Jews

At the time of the birth of our Savior, the Jews had again become very corrupt, notwithstanding the fact that outwardly and apparently, they followed more strictly than ever before the laws given through Moses. This was outward service only, for spiritually as a people, they were dead. The mighty works performed by our Savior failed to penetrate their hardened hearts, and only made the leaders of the people more bitter towards him, resulting, finally, in his crucifixion for the sins of the world. Shortly before his death, Jesus severely rebuked the leaders of the Jews saying:

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous.

And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.

Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them that killed the prophets.

Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.

Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? [^6]

Jesus predicted the destruction of Jerusalem and the scattering of the Jews, saying:

And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. [^7]

This destruction predicted by our Lord fell upon Jerusalem and the Jews in the year 70 A.D., and the Jews were scattered over all the face of the earth. They have been persecuted, murdered, driven, abused and hated by all peoples, and yet they have prospered in material things: and they have maintained their identity as a race, which is a marvelous miracle.

After the destruction of Jerusalem, and the scattering of the Jews from their possessions in Palestine, a curse was placed upon the land. Jerusalem was practically destroyed and has been trodden down of the Gentiles. The mountains of Canaan, once very beautiful, and covered with trees and vegetation became denuded, and the soil, having no protection from the rains, was washed down into the valleys making stagnant pools. The once thriving villages and pleasant farms and vineyards disappeared and the land became barren and unfruitful. The surface of the earth was so stricken until very recent times that it has been the general opinion that the land can support but a very meager population. Yet in the past, when the blessings of the Lord were upon it, it supported millions of people. Isaiah predicted that this condition would come to pass, but in the latter days the Lord would send swift messengers to gather these people who were "scattered and peeled," a nation meted out and trodden down, "whose land the rivers have spoiled," and again they would be gathered from the lands of their dispersion.

Conditions Are Changing

Today conditions in Palestine are changing. The curse has been removed from the land and the Jews are returning in fulfilment of the many promises of the Lord made through the prophets. There are some people among us today who feel that the prophetic declarations in relation to the return of the Jews, must fail because all physical conditions are against the fulfilment of the word of the Lord, and to restore the Jews is "an utter impossibility." Yet the Lord said it shall be done!

Fear not; for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west;

I will say to the north, give up; and to the south, keep not back; bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth. [^8]

Go and proclaim these words towards the north, and say, Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord: and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you; for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I will not keep anger forever. [^9]

Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord God; Although I have cast them far off among the heathen, and although I have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to them as a little sanctuary in the countries where they shall come.

Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord God; I will even gather you from the people, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel. [^10]

Numerous Predictions in Scriptures

There are numerous predictions of this kind in the scriptures. The Lord, because of his promises to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and to Israel in later years, even in this present dispensation, is bound to restore the Jews and Israel to their "everlasting" possessions. And that day is now at hand.

As previously stated, Elder Orson Hyde was called to go to Palestine and dedicate the land for the return of Israel. Sunday, October 24, 1841, Elder Hyde ascended the Mount of Olives and dedicated the land of Palestine by prayer for the gathering of the Jews.

It is a curious fact that in the year 1841, there were in all of Palestine less than 12,000 Jews, and down through the ages since their dispersion the Jews had never ceased to mourn and wail for the loss of their heritage and to look forward to the day when they shall be delivered from bondage and be privileged to return. Under Gentile rule this return was denied them. Jerusalem, from the time of its destruction by Titus until the close of the World War, had ceased to be a Jewish city and Palestine a Jewish home. It is also a curious fact that following the dedication of this land there was a greater impetus given to the activities in relation to the return of the Jews. In the hearts of both Jews and Gentiles there seemed to be a feeling that something should be done to colonize these ancient people.

In 1844, Warden Creason, the United States consul in Palestine, lent encouragement to such a movement. Among English Jews, Disraeli and Sir Moses Montefiore became champions of such a movement, but the British Government could do little in the matter as Palestine was under the dominion of the Sultan. England did, however, send an expedition to explore the part of Sinai which lay within the Egyptian frontier, but nothing of importance came of this undertaking.

In 1903, through the efforts of Joseph Chamberlain, then colonial secretary for Great Britain, Lord Landsdowne was authorized to offer the Zionists a tract of land in the highlands of British East Africa for the creation of a Jewish home, with full powers of autonomy under the British Government's control. The Jews, however, had their eyes set on Palestine as their home, which is according to the revealed word of the Lord, and they vehemently opposed this offer to settle in Africa.

Lovers of Zion Societies

In the sixties David Gordon, Hirch Lalischer and Moses Hess, with others, aided in the creation of the foundation of the "Chovevei Zion (Lovers of Zion) societies, the chief object being the colonization of Palestine by the Jews. The Zionist Federation was commenced in 1896, and was supported by Theodore Hertzl and Baron Rothschild. The first congress of this federation was held in Basel, Switzerland, in 1897. Since that day the efforts on the part of leading and influential Jews has increased, to bring to pass a national home for the Jews.

The first modern settlement of Jews in Palestine was established in 1876, by the International Association of the Alliance Israelites. This organization established an agricultural school, Mikweh Israel (the Gathering of Israel) a few miles from Jaffa. All colonization in Palestine by Jews before the World War was undertaken in the midst of great difficulties. The Turks placed many restrictions upon those who endeavored to gather there, and about all the Jews could do was to look with longing eyes towards their ancient heritage with uncertain hopes.

It was not until the land had been freed from Turkish rule in 1917, that the return of the Jews appeared on the horizon as a coming reality. However the result of the earlier movements did bring an increase in Jewish population. In 1881, there were about 25,000 Jews in all of Palestine and by 1914, the number had grown to nearly 80,000. At the close of the war Great Britain was given the mandate over Palestine and France that over Syria. This was indeed a significant sign. Palestine was freed by General Allenby from the Turks in December 1917. In 1920 Sir Herbert Samuel, a Jew, was sent to Palestine by Great Britain, as its governor, or high commissioner, and a civil government was set up under his direction. It is very significant that from the days when Christ predicted the downfall of Jerusalem and Palestine, until the close of the World War, there never was a time when a Jew held authority as governor or commissioner, or any other authority in that land.

Rehabilitation of Jerusalem

Immediately following the war the rehabilitation of Palestine commenced. Following the freedom of Palestine from the Turkish yoke, Sir Arthur Balfour, in behalf of the British Foreign office, wrote to Lord James Rothschild the following memorable declaration:

His Majesty's Government views with favor the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavors to facilitate the achievement of that object, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country.

As the United States had taken part in the war, that government claimed the right to be consulted in the terms of the mandates in relation to Palestine and Syria. To this request the British Government agreed. The draft of the Palestine mandate was submitted to the United States Government, and at its request certain minor changes were made in it. On June 30, 1922, the following joint resolution was adopted by Congress, favoring the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people:

Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the United States of America favors the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of Christian and of all other non-Jewish communities in Palestine, and that the holy places and religious buildings and sights in Palestine shall be adequately protected.

The Balfour Proclamation

The Balfour proclamation thus endorsed by the United States Government, brought great joy to thousands of downtrodden and persecuted Jews throughout the world, and under the protectorate of Great Britain they commenced to gather there in great numbers. Before this time things in Palestine were most primitive. Wooden ploughs, water-wheel irrigation, the use of germ-infested wells and streams, the carrying of water in skins as anciently, and many other primitive customs prevailed. Sanitation was in a deplorable condition, but the British endeavored to change all of these conditions. Now the sacred Sea of Galilee forms a great reservoir, and flood waters from the various streams are being diverted into this beautiful body of water. Canals have been built in all parts of the land, and the Jordan has been turned from its natural channel into artificial concrete canals on each side of the original stream. These are being used to irrigate nearly 7,000,000 acres which would not be under cultivation otherwise. Hydroelectric stations have been erected on the streams. One power plant is located about eight miles below the lake of Galilee, where a dam, similar to the Hoover Dam in Arizona, has been built. This contains about ten billion cubic feet of water for irrigation and power purposes. After passing through the turbines most of this water is returned to the Jordan. The power plants are ample for a territory the size of Vermont. The Palestine Electric Corporation which supplies electric power and light for all of Palestine, except Jerusalem and its vicinity, in 1934 sold 34,348,515 KWH in electrical energy. The fall of the Jordan from the Sea of Galilee to the Dead Sea, is about 690 feet through a depression below sea level.

The mountains which lost their vegetation during the years of "Sabbath rest" which the Lord gave to them, are now becoming covered with trees and vegetation. Afforestation has been conducted by various interests. Great Britain has spent in this work upwards of $45,000,000 up to 1934. Many other millions have been spent by the Zionists and other organizations. Before the war there were in Palestine 1,235 industrial undertakings, most of them by Arabs. In 1933 there were 5,390 of which 3,900 were Jewish, with a capital of over $22,500,000 and employing 16,000 workers. The area of land possessed by Jews increased from 102,150 acres in 1920 to 251,970 in 1934, of which 28,374 are orange groves. Agriculture has increased with great rapidity. Flour mills flourish and many kinds of cereal products are manufactured. There are now established factories of many kinds. Salt, potash and nitrates are obtained in vast quantities from the Dead Sea.

The Zionist Movement

The Zionist movement from the beginning has been associated with the revival of the Hebrew language as a popular tongue among the Hebrews who are assembling there. Before the World War the Hilsfverein der Deutschen Juden pressed their claim for German as a language to be spoken in Palestine among the Jews, but the teachers in the schools "struck" and refused to teach German and many of the children withdrew from the schools until the Hebrew language was restored.

The Jewish National Home is created for a place of refuge for Jews who desire, under regulations, to go to Palestine. This does not include, however, all the Jews who have gone and are now going there. Fourteen years ago this National Home was considered as an experiment, but today it is a reality. During these years its numbers have increased fourfold. In 1925 the number of Jews was 121,000, but today there are about 500,000 [1940] who have gone into that land under this plan. During the long dispersion the Jews were forced into channels of trade and barter and away from the soil. Originally they were tillers of the soil. Strange as it may appear the amount of land now in Jewish ownership for agricultural purposes in 1936 was 1,333,000 dunums. A dunum is about one quarter of an acre. There are now 203 agricultural settlements containing some 100,000 people. The city of Tel Aviv, wholly Jewish, has a population of over 150,000, and covers more than 1,500 acres. The population of Jerusalem has grown to include 125,000 Jews. Other towns have also been settled by Jews for habitations. They have a national flag and a national anthem, a cultural system including schools, a university and other civic organizations. The internal affairs are managed by a National Assembly and Council and a Rabbinical Council.

In 1929-30 the value of the fruit exported from Jewish orange, grapefruit and lemon enterprises, was valued at $1,500,000. In 1937 it was estimated to have increased to $20,000,000. During the same period the productions of the industrial enterprises of the Jewish people rose from $11,000,000 to over $40,000,000. From 1898 to the present the sum of over $70,000,000 has been invested in Palestine through the "national funds" and roughly the sum of $315,000,000 by private investors, nearly half of this sum in the course of the past four or five years.

It is estimated by the Palestine Royal Commission (British) that if the present rate of immigration continues until 1950, ten years, there will be in Palestine a population of 1,280,000 Jews. [^11] While there are many skeptical people who, when looking at the natural conditions which prevail today, declare that it is impossible for the Jews to ever return to Palestine, we may be assured that the word of the Lord will not fail. It is true that today the Arabs and others occupy much of the land and that too most of the choicest sections. It is true that they bitterly oppose the return of the Jews, and this may lead to serious and bloody strife. Whatever the outcome may be we may have the perfect assurance that the Jews will return in sufficient numbers to fulfill the word of the Lord. The day is near at hand when Israel will again flourish in that land; when the Lord will again build his temple there; when his sanctuary will be found among the people and when they shall be cleansed from all their iniquity. The Lord has spoken it! His word will not fail! "And the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them forevermore," declared the Lord through Ezekiel. [^12]

In our own dispensation the Lord has commanded:

"And let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountain of the Lord's house." [^13] When the remnant which is designed to return is established in that land, and the nations have gathered to battle against them and they are in sore distress, then will Jesus of Nazareth appear to them as their Deliverer for whom they have looked for all these many years. Then will the prophecy of Zechariah, be fulfilled as repeated to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Lord shall set his foot upon the Mount of Olives and it shall cleave in twain, "and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake. . . .

And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king. [^14]—(Church Section, The Deseret News, April 6, 1940.)

Footnotes

The missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are modern miracles. . . . They do have one thing that the world does not have, and cannot have, and that is a testimony and the determination to go out into the field, as unprepared as they are, and spend two or maybe more years bearing witness to the restoration of the gospel, expounding the scriptures, as they learn them.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 88:80-82.
[^2] D&C 88:83.
[^3] Genesis 28:14.
[^4] Leviticus 26:13-18, 31-35.
[^5] Deuteronomy 4:27-31.
[^6] Matthew 23:29-33.
[^7] Luke 21:24.
[^8] Isaiah 43:5-6.
[^9] Jeremiah 3:12.
[^10] Ezekiel 11:16-17.
[^11] In 1970 the population of Palestine was listed as 2,745,000. The above article was written in 1940 commemorating 100 years after dedication of the Holy Land for the return of the Jews. Statistics quoted reflect situation as of that date.
[^12] Ezekiel 37:28.
[^13] D&C 133:13.
[^14] D&C 45:51-53. Read verses 48-53. For further information on this subject see also The Signs of the Times, Lesson Three, pp. 50-71.
