Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

Missionaries—Modern Miracles

The missionary of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a modern miracle. In the world the idea prevails that a man must go to school, college, get an education, be trained and get a degree to qualify him to preach and to teach the gospel of Jesus Christ, as he understands it. We call our young men and women at the beginning, really, of life, when they are just budding into manhood and womanhood. We send them out into the world untrained, with no degrees, with a common school education, in most cases, (maybe not even that) but depending upon the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord.

These missionaries come from all walks of life—from the farm, from the factory, mostly from the schoolroom. They are unprepared, insofar as education and knowledge are concerned. Most of them have never read the Book of Mormon, a great part of them, if not the greater part, have never read the New Testament. They are not familiar with the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. I find this out when I interview them. But they do have one thing that the world does not have, and cannot have, and that is a testimony and the determination to go out into the field, as unprepared as they are, and spend two or maybe more years bearing witness to the restoration of the gospel, expounding the scriptures, as they learn them.

Importance of Section Four

One thing that I have been impressing upon missionaries for a number of years is that they make themselves familiar with section four of the Doctrine and Covenants above everything else. That is a revelation that, I tell the missionaries, is my revelation. The Lord gave it to me. Originally, it was given to my great-grandfather before the Church was organized, but it is a revelation that uses the plural pronoun, and thus it applies to every soul that goes into the mission field. I ask each group of missionaries as I meet with them to read section four of the Doctrine and Covenants about every two weeks. I suggest that they sit down, each pair of missionaries, and just consider it very carefully. The Lord here states what it is that is necessary to qualify a missionary. The Lord holds out to them blessings through their faith and the punishment which they bring upon themselves should they fail. I think we ought to become very familiar with this section of the Doctrine and Covenants. There are only seven verses, and they do not need to bother with the first because I think that has very well been fulfilled, but I try to impress upon them the need of remembering particularly what the Lord says in the second and the fourth verses.

Therefore, O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind, and strength, that ye may stand blameless before God at the last day. . . .

For behold the field is white already to harvest; and lo, he that thrusteth in his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul.

I think that ought to be impressed upon every missionary who goes into the field. They volunteer their time, they are not forced, therefore, when they go out into the field to preach the gospel they become the servants of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, voluntarily, and they should understand that they have made the promise or covenant with him to serve him with all they have—heart, might, mind and strength. If they fail, then there may be a penalty. If they do not put forth every effort to serve the Lord, the Spirit of the Lord will withdraw from them, and they may lose the faith.

I think that a missionary and his companion should sit down together frequently, read these verses, then consider the sixth verse, for there the Lord points out the qualifications of a successful missionary:

Remember faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, charity, humility, diligence.

Now these are the qualifications they should seek, and with the Spirit of the Lord they can obtain them. If they have no faith, then they are useless in the mission field. Missionaries should be instructed to pray—pray together, pray secretly, seek the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord on their knees quietly and alone, and together. Every week or two they should get their Doctrine and Covenants out and go over this revelation and ask themselves, "Have we increased in faith since we came into the mission field or in the last two weeks?" Virtue—that term means more than just keeping the body clean from evil. A man can be unvirtuous in his thinking. The Lord made that clear. Therefore, missionaries' thoughts should be pure. They should think virtuously as well as act that way.

What Have We Gained?

Knowledge? They can ask each other, "What have we gained the last week or two? Have we learned something that helps us, that makes us better missionaries than we were two weeks ago?"

Temperance—not just refraining from drinking liquor! I think this word has a different meaning as it is used here. I think they should be temperate in their language and in their actions—not make extravagant statements in their proselyting and never quote anyone unless they have absolute assurance of the source of the substance of their quotation. Teach the elders to be temperate in what they say, wise in their counsel, and patient.

When they get out in the world they associate with people who have been trained in the traditions of the so-called Christian world in doctrines that have come down for hundreds of years. But the missionaries go out fresh with the understanding and the testimony of the restoration of the gospel. They may be a little impatient with these poor people when they are not ready to accept our views or doctrines readily, even though they are earnest and sincere, just as earnest and sincere as we are. Let missionaries learn patience, brotherly kindness—I heard a missionary in a foreign country express himself in regard to the people to whom he was carrying the message in an uncomplimentary manner. Well, they were different from us in many of their habits, in their looks, and in the teachings that they had received. We must know, that as missionaries, we have to learn to love the people whether in Japan or China, the South Seas, South America, no matter where it is on the face of the earth. The Lord scattered Irsael to every part of the earth according to his predictions, and we are sending our missionaries out to preach the gospel and gather them in, so we should have a brotherly feeling. If we have the right spirit, we will.

Try To Be Like God

Godliness—means that we should try to be as nearly like God as we can. If we keep that in mind, that will help to keep us humble.

Charity—we should have charity for these poor people. It was my privilege to go down through Central and South America a few months ago. I saw the conditions there. Brother Tuttle and I went into some of the great churches. We saw those poor people in the midst of their poverty coming in, putting their coins into receptacles, kneeling down, and praying. They were sincere in all their ignorance. I could not go out of one of those buildings and say something mean or unkind about those poor people. I felt sorry for them. My heart went out to them because they did not know any better, and in the humility of their souls they were doing those things faithfully and ignorantly. I felt more like weeping than making unkind remarks. I could make the unkind remarks about the people who led them to do it.

Humility—we need to keep ourselves humble, and then last of all—diligence. Our missionaries should prepare themselves by study and by faith.

In Section 88, verse 79, the Lord gives some instructions intended for missionaries as well as others on which we should be prepared "Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—."

More particularly I want to call attention to the next verses—

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you.

Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people, and it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor.

Therefore, they are left without excuse, and their sins are upon their own heads. [^1]

Our mission is not just one of gathering out the honest, bringing into the Church the repentant, but we have the duty and responsibility of warning the world and leaving them without excuse.

Bear Your Testimony

When they are warned, if that is all you can do with them, bear your testimony of the restoration of the gospel, and when they are in the hands of the Lord, you are clear. "Therefore, they are left without excuse, and their sins are upon their own heads."

Now, you good mission presidents, be kind to these young, inexperienced missionaries. A young man can be ruined in the first month or six weeks of his mission. He can become discouraged, disappointed. He needs your sympathy; he needs your guidance; he needs your help and encouragement to lead him along, because of the opportunities he is to receive as he goes forth to teach the gospel. He will meet with people who apparently know more than he does, and sometimes the first few months are months of discouragement. Help him, buoy him up, and strengthen him that he may, through the help of the Lord, have humility to perform the labor that he is sent there to perform.

Encourage these young men; help them. If they are a little weak in the beginning, help them to become strong. Do not force them too greatly. Every missionary does not have the same ability, the same personality. Some of them are more or less plodders, but their hearts are right. We cannot place them on the same level. Some are quicker to learn. We must take all of these things into consideration. Be kind and considerate and encouraging. Because some other missionary makes a far greater success, let nothing happen, as far as we are concerned, by way of discouragement to the young missionary who does not have quite the same ability.

I am going to read to you the covenant of baptism that the Lord has given us. I don't think people should be brought into this Church before they know something about it. It is in Verse 37 of Section 20 in the Doctrine and Covenants:

And again, by way of commandment to the church concerning the manner of baptism—All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness before the church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received by baptism into his church.

That is the covenant of baptism.

Then this other verse which does apply to every missionary and every member of the Church.

He that seeketh me early shall find me, and shall not be forsaken. [^2]—(The Improvement Era, October 1961.)

Footnotes

The reason for the Bible's great influence for good is because it is inspired, containing the word of the Lord delivered to his prophets who wrote and spoke as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost. . . .

---
Notas:
[^1] The question of authorship of the books of the Bible. The Accuracy of the Bible, pp. xx-xxi of the introduction.
[^2] The question of the antiquity of the writings in the Bible. The Accuracy of the Bible, pp. 24-32.
