Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

Authority of the Bible Supported by Archaeology

The Holy Bible has had a greater influence on the world for good than any other book ever published. It has been printed in more editions and translated into more languages and read by more people than any other book. No other publication has been more severely and critically examined. The reason for the Bible's great influence for good is because it is inspired, containing the word of the Lord delivered to his prophets who wrote and spoke as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost since the world began. It has drawn the fire of adverse criticism for the self-same reason. Had it not been an inspired record less attention would have been paid to it by the opposing critics, who have drawn their inspiration from the author of evil, who in the very beginning swore in his wrath that he would endeavor to destroy the work of God.

Nearly six hundred years before the birth of Christ, a prophet on this western hemisphere predicted that in the last days criticism of the sacred record of the Jews would arise. The Lord revealed to this prophet that the record of his people, the Nephites, would be brought to light from the dust to speak as a witness for the record of the Jews, and by the means of this second witness the truth of the first would be established. Another prophet among the Nephites, writing some four hundred years after the coming of Christ, when about to hide up the record of his people in the earth also declared that it would again come forth in the last days to the convincing of both "Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations."

Criticisms against the Bible have been going on for centuries, but in a sporadic fashion. There was no concerted effort until about the middle of the nineteenth century. The man who is considered to be the founder of modern criticism was a French physician, Jean Astruc, who was born in 1684, and died in 1766. Others at different times followed in his wake, but it was not until after the restoration of the gospel that the attacks upon the Holy Scriptures took definite form.

Criticism Rages

It remained for the second half of the nineteenth century and the first quarter of the twentieth, for this concerted effort to reach its full force in the endeavor to destroy the word of God. During these years this criticism raged with great intensity, and it continues on even to the present day, notwithstanding these theories are now as dead as the extinct dodo.

The work of Charles Darwin and his followers gave impetus to this work of higher and lower criticism of the Bible, for the same methods have been employed as were employed by Darwin in his researches. Unfortunately these theories, like that of organic evolution, have found their way into the curriculum of the universities and colleges of America and Europe, and through them the minds of the youth have been and are being poisoned.

This modern criticism, of which Julius Wellhausen, (born in 1844, died in 1918) was the great high priest, is known as the Later Documentary Hypothesis of the Development Hypothesis. Among the varied criticisms loudly proclaimed by these men who pose as great scholars, we find the following:

While these do not cover all the criticisms, they are, nevertheless, the outstanding ones indulged in by those who have taken it upon themselves to enlighten the benighted people in the world who have for so long accepted the Holy Scriptures as the inspired word of God, but which criticisms are nothing better than a compilation of fable and myth.

During the closing years of the nineteenth century and in recent years of the present century, there have arisen a great many scholars who have taken these matters in hand with the idea of discovering the truth rather than the establishing of a pet or malicious theory. These impartial researchers number among them some of the world's greatest scholars. They have not made their discoveries, as Sir Charles Marston has said, sitting in "armchairs," but out making the actual research. Among these scientists may be mentioned the following: B. P. Grenfell, Arthur S. Hunt, Edouard Naville, Adolph Deissmann, W. F. Albright, Dr. Gerstang, Dr. Langdon, Leonard Woolley, Camden M. Coburn and A. S. Yahuda.

Reference to Deity

One of the puzzling problems in the Bible which had given a large handle to this criticism, is the fact that in the early part of the Book of Genesis God is spoken of in the Hebrew as Elohim and also as Jehovah. Therefore the critics have hit upon the unique thought that this record is the composite writing of two different authors who wrote at widely different times, and in the joined account we have a composite record of the creation.

Moreover, they declare that this record in Genesis was composed long after the days of Moses, and is not his account at all. The claim is made that these writings belong to a time as late as the ninth or eighth centuries before Christ, while much of the Pentateuch could not have been prepared before the time of Ezekiel, at the time of the Babylonian exile which commenced in the sixth century, B.C.

The Prophet Joseph Smith has pointed out the fact that the name Elohim is the plural form of the name of Deity, which all scholars admit. It is, they say, however, used in the singular although being the plural form. We have also learned from modern revelation that Jehovah is not the Father, but the Son Jesus Christ, and we are taught that the Father and the Son, were both concerned in the creation of the earth.

The meaning, therefore, of the expression, "And God said, Let us make man in our image," becomes perfectly clear. The Book of Genesis was written by Moses. This we know from modern revelation, and Christ when in his ministry confirmed that fact. He also declared that the Pentateuch was the work of Moses; such is the testimony of the Son of God.

These supposed mixed accounts are known by the critics as the Elohistic and the Jehovistic. The books of Moses are further divided, and we are given the Priestly and the Deuteronomistic, as being the main sources of the Pentateuch. These are usually referred to as the "E" and "J" or "JE," the "P" and the "D" sources from which this record is obtained which we have cherished, and which was accepted by our Lord when he was in his ministry.

Denies Authorship

This criticism declaring that the entire Pentateuch was written long after the time of Moses, denies to him, of course, the authorship of these books. The "Law of Moses," as mentioned so frequently in the Bible, and by the Savior himself, as being the word of God given to Moses, under such a criticism if it were true, would lose its significance. This criticism is largely philological and based upon the study of ancient languages and the endeavor to show from the use of words the time and place when they were in current usage. It has been truly said that it would be just as consistent for a critic to rise up—and who can tell when he will—who will contend that the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, each is the composite work of several authors, one writing of our Lord as Jesus, another of him as Christ, another as Master, another as Messiah, and so on, since these several titles are given to him in these accounts.

Dr. Yahuda says of these destructive methods of Bible criticism:

No one, and the present writer least of all, would make the slightest attempt to belittle the great merits and achievements of Biblical criticism. But it must be said that, so long as modern views prevailed, there was a sane and sound method of Biblical research. Unfortunately this method has since deteriorated through the more radical views adopted by the modern school of Higher Criticism, especially under Wellhausen and his followers.

The whole system has degenerated into a mass of far-fetched hypotheses and haphazard theories, which only fitted within a frame of preconceived ideas about the history, the development and the composition of the scriptures. In the long run it became customary to consider it as highly scientific to challenge everything biblical and to alter the text at one's heart's desire.

The whole Pentateuch is represented as a conglomeration of various sources. In many cases one chapter is attributed to two, three, or more sources. Even in each one of these sources two or more underlayers are discerned. Thus, taking the whole Pentateuch as it is made to appear, the impression is left of a patch-work stuck together by stupid authors and ignorant scribes, the result being a most disproportionate and inharmonious composition.

Indeed, the mania of seeing everywhere a wrong text and detecting all kinds of interpolations, glosses and anachronisms, and likewise the zeal to heap emendations upon corrections resulted in creating a new specialty for speculative 'experts' to exert themselves in the art of text alterations and source-hunting. [^1]

Dr. Campbell Quoted

That the reader may have a clear idea of the nature of this Bible dissecting the following is taken from The Bible Under Fire, by Dr. John L. Campbell. This is a representation taken from the Polychrome Bible, in which the different writings of the supposed authors are printed in different colors. The difference is here given in different kinds of type:

THEN HE DIVIDED HIS THREE HUNDRED MEN INTO THREE COMPANIES AND FURNISHED THEM ALL WITH HORNS, and empty jars, and said to them: Ye must watch me, and do as I do; when I come to the edge of the camp, ye must do just what I do; and when I and all those who are with me give a blast on the horn, then ye also must blow your horns all about the camp, AND SAY: FOR JHVA AND GIDEON! Now Gideon and the hundred men who were with him reached the edge of the camp at the beginning of the middle watch (the guards had just been posted), and they blew their horns, AND BROKE THE JARS THEY HELD IN THEIR HANDS. Then the three companies blew their horns, and shattered the jars, grasping with their left hands the torches.

These super-critics can tell to the very letter where to draw the line between the writings of these ancient scribes, but they are absolutely unable to segregate in like manner any modern writing, such as the writings of Alexander Hamilton and James Madison, who wrote in the Federalist, or even a composite editorial in a modern newspaper. This Dr. Campbell has pointed out. This criticism of segregation has been thoroughly examined by Dr. A. S. Yahuda, and its ashes thrown to the four winds. Some of these critics have declared that the Israelites were never in Egypt, that the story of Joseph is a myth. Dr. Yahuda, who has devoted a careful study to these charges, is most emphatic in his statement, giving the direct evidence, that these stories are all true. The language of the Old Testament and the history of the times, both prove beyond any doubt that the accounts in the Bible are accurate in the very details. This eminent scholar has written two wonderful books within the last three years. The first, The Language of the Pentateuch in Its Relation to Egyptian, is a technical work dealing with this subject; the other is for the lay-reader, and is, The Accuracy of the Bible. This book should be read by every Bible student.

Dr. Yahuda also declares:

Now, Assyriologists long ago discovered Assyro-Babylonian elements in the Bible, and established more especially the relation between the Babylonian myths of primeval times and the Genesis stories. Egyptologists have also found a certain number of words of Egyptian origin in the Joseph and Exodus narratives. But my investigations have led me to establish that, on one side, the influence of Assyro-Babylonia was much less than has been assumed, and that, on the other side, the influence of the Egyptian language is far more discernible in the Pentateuch than Egyptologists have ever admitted.

Influence Shown

That influence is, indeed, very palpable, not only in the Joseph and Exodus narratives, but even in those portions of the Pentateuch, which most strongly disclose Assyro-Babylonian influence, such as the Flood story; and this is so to such an extent that the language of the Pentateuch cannot be explained except as a new creation of a common Hebrew-Egyptian environment, when the Hebrews lived for a long period in a constant and most intimate contact with the Egyptians.

As there is no other period in which this could have happened than the time assigned by the Pentateuch to the sojourn of Israel in Egypt, this process can only have been the result of a long stay in Egypt itself. . . .

All this will contribute to demonstrate that the presence of Egyptian elements in the Pentateuch is the best indication that the Books of Moses have actually been composed in the epoch, in which the Hebrews were still under the immediate influence of their connections with the Egyptians, just as it is stated in the Pentateuch itself. [^2]

In March, 1935, Dr. E. L. Sukenik, professor of archaeology at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, translated the writings on some recently unearthed pottery, which he declared to be the most valuable find since the Siloam inscriptions in 1890. This writing is in the Masoretic text, the form used by the Jews today throughout the world. This inscription dates back 2,500 years and records historical events of that day corresponding accurately with the Bible. Dr. Torcznyer, another Hebrew scholar, who examined these writings, declared that they of themselves were sufficient to "destroy the theory of Higher Criticism."

Answers Exodus Stand

Another charge of the Higher Critics has been that the Exodus from Egypt could not possibly have taken place at the time indicated in the Bible record. The history of this event informs us that the Israelites wandered in the wilderness for forty years before they were permitted to cross the Jordan under Joshua, after Moses had been taken away.

One of the first cities to fall after the crossing of the Jordan was that of Jericho. The skeptics have laughed at and ridiculed the story of the fall of Jericho. The idea of the walls falling down at the blast of the trumpets of the army of Israel! It was made to appear absurd. Moreover the time of the destruction of that city, it was said, did not correspond with this account. This story of Jericho illustrates the many other charges and their through refutation which have come about through modern research.

Sir Charles Marston, who financed and accompanied the expedition to some of these old ruins in Palestine, has written a book giving some account of the excavations of this expedition in 1932 and 1933. The title of the book is New Bible Evidence. In this book Sir Charles Marston tells of the excavation at the city of Jericho. This was done under the direction of Dr. Garstang.

According to this story, the archaeologists discovered in their research that the walls of Jericho had the appearance of having suddenly fallen on three sides of the city, as if they had been thrown down by an earthquake. This confirmed the story in the Book of Joshua. A careful examination of the ruins revealed to the workmen the very date when this happened.

To illustrate how this was done I give the following example. Suppose that the city of New York should suddenly be destroyed and that a thousand years later the ruins were discovered and a scientific investigation by archaeologists of that day should be made. They would no doubt discover books written at various times as well as magazines and other periodicals. Coins would likely also be found. These might date back to very early times, but they would all come to a sudden end at the time of the destruction of the city. There would not be found any newspapers, magazines, or books, bearing dates later than the time of the destruction; but they would be found down to the very year.

So it was in Jericho. The excavations found scarabs in the ruins, and writings on the pottery, which declared that the destruction corresponded accurately with what is written in the book of Joshua. Of this find, Sir Charles Marston writes:

Evidence Cited

As the series of dated scarabs all came to an end with the two royal seals of Amenhetep III, there is evidence, quite independent of the pottery, that the city also ceased to exist during that period. For the two centuries that followed there were no interments, the very distinctive pottery and decorations of the time of Akhenaten and Tutonkhamen was not represented at all. Thus everything pointed to the reign of Amenhetep III (1413-1377 B.C.) as marking the period when Jericho fell. [^3]

Another serious doctrine of the modernistic critic is the teaching that the idea of God is of gradual development. They have emphatically declared that the earliest men were polytheistic. That their gods in the beginning were very cruel and had all the characteristics of human beings, some of them even being subject to death. They tell us that even among the Hebrews the idea of God was progressive, that the God of the early Hebrews was a very different personage from the God of the later years.

Sir James George Frazer, a leading advocate of this school of critics, has in a most blasphemous manner depicted the Hebrew God in his books entitled Folk-Lore in the Old Testament. He has ridiculed the story of creation and practically all else in the Pentateuch, in his endeavor to show that the development of worship was gradual and came out of the folk-lore and mythology of the distant past. Similar writers could be named by the legion; but what of the facts?

Unchangeable God

The scriptures teach us that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who was also the God of Adam, Enoch and Noah, is from everlasting, "the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them." He taught the gospel first to Adam and it was through transgression that it was lost among men.

Recent explorations among peoples of the earth and the history of tribes and nations of antiquity, have revealed the fact that in the very earliest times men worshiped, but their worship was their worship of one Supreme God. They were not polytheistic.

Dr. W. Schmidt has said that the earliest tribes of which we have any knowledge had the worship of The Supreme Being, or one Supreme God.—The Origin and Growth of Religion. This doctrine is confirmed by Dr. Langdon, Sir Charles Marston, on this point has this to say:

But the outstanding feature of all this remote civilization in its relation to the Bible is the evidence it affords that monotheism (the belief in one supreme God) preceded polytheism, or the belief in many gods. This is the very careful and deliberate conclusion of Dr. Langdon, Professor of Assyriology at Oxford, probably the greatest living authority on cuneiform literature, and this very remote period of civilization. [^4]

The New Testament has undergone similar attacks, but space will not permit a proper presentation of this matter, although it is a very interesting story. It is sufficient for this writing to say that the discoveries which have been made under the close of the nineteenth century thoroughly and emphatically refute all the claims of the Higher Criticism. Tons of records have been collected dating from the first century which prove the authenticity of the Gospels and the Epistles of the New Testament. Dr. Edouard Naville, professor of archaeology in the University of Geneva, in the introduction to Dr. Camden M. Coburn's work The New Archeological Discoveries, and Their Bearing Upon the New Testament, has said:

Truth will best be reached by the concurrence and the mutual help both of literary and archeological evidence. Considering only what is within the limits of this book—the New Testament—the recent discoveries compel us, as we said, to replace the authors of its different parts in the time when they are said to have lived, and among their readers or the hearers to whom they spoke. This seems to the present writer the best answer to the radical criticism and the most telling way of showing how insufficient and often misleading are its results, which are generally brought forward as being above discussion.

If we put side by side the Gospels, the epistles of Paul, and the writings which have been discovered of the first century, we shall find in those 'as it were a new autobiographic commentary,' the explanation of many expressions showing that 'the New Testament writings were not theological treatises, but were mostly composed in the non-technical and rather careless language of the street and home.' This comparative study has led Dr. Milligan to declare that 'in view of all the new light coming upon the question from recent discovery, it is safe to conclude that 'with the probable exception of 2 Peter, all our New Testament writings may now be placed within the first century,' though the collection called the New Testament may be of much later date.

This goes a long way to disprove many of the critical theories, attributing parts of a book like the gospel of John to a later epoch, and cutting it up between various authors, some of them quite unknown and mere literary creations.—(Church News, January 2, 1937.)

Footnotes

I started to read the Book of Mormon before I was old enough to be a deacon, and I have been reading it ever since. I know that it is true. Every member of the Church ought to be prepared with an answer to all of these critics who condemn it.

---
Notas:
[^1] Ether 12:26.
[^2] Moroni 10:27-30.
[^3] 3 Nephi 26:3.
[^4] 3 Nephi 26:8-10.
