Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

The Forgotten Witness

This is the anniversary of the birth of the forgotten man—the man who held the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times jointly with the Prophet Joseph Smith. I do not suppose there is a ward in the Church holding a meeting today where he has been remembered—the man who stood second in the dispensation of the fulness of times; who took the place of Oliver Cowdery because Oliver lost it, and who held the keys of the gospel in this dispensation jointly with the Prophet Joseph Smith. I just thought I would like to call attention to that, and repeat that he is the forgotten man—seldom thought of—who had to die by the shedding of his blood.

I said "had"—had to die by the shedding of his blood, as well as the Prophet Joseph Smith, because he was the second witness, taking the place of Oliver Cowdery, who could have had that honor.

I had placed myself on record, at the April Conference, 1930, that if Oliver Cowdery had remained true and faithful to his end, he would have died a martyr with the Prophet Joseph Smith and would have stood as the second elder of the Church—a man holding the keys jointly with the Prophet for the dispensation of the fulness of times. But Oliver Cowdery lost that place. Hyrum Smith received it. And it was just as necessary that Hyrum Smith die a martyr, as a witness, as it was for the Prophet to so die. That is in fulfilment of a law which the Savior stressed in speaking to the wicked Pharisees in Jerusalem. There had to be two witnesses, divinely appointed, to testify. Oliver Cowdery lost his place. It was taken by Hyrum Smith.

"I Do Not Stand Alone"

One day the Savior stood before the Jews. If I remember correctly it was in the temple. They said this to him after he had been speaking to them, "We do not have to believe you because you stand alone. Nobody will speak for you." The Savior's answer to them was, "I do not stand alone. There is another witness—my Father in Heaven." [^1] No one else could be a witness for the Son of God but his own Father.

Was his Father ever a witness to the Jews? Yes. He served as a witness for his Son Jesus Christ at the birth of the Savior; at the time of his baptism, when his Father spoke and the Jews heard him bearing witness that Jesus Christ was his only begotten Son. One day in the company of the Jews—they were accusing the Savior, "We do not have to believe you because you stand alone." And the Savior said, "I do not stand alone. There is another witness—my Father testifies for me." And the Father did testify for him on a number of occasions. The Father testified at the time of the birth of the Son of God; he testified at the baptism; he testified in the company, that is, in the group—and spoke out of the heavens to them and bore witness that the Savior was his Son; and they said it thundered. And there were a number of occasions when the Father spoke to the assembled people and bore witness that Jesus Christ was his Son and he was the only witness the Son could have. But there is that divine law that there must be at least two witnesses.

If Joseph Smith had come out of the woods and said, "I went in to pray and I saw the Father and the Son," and he was the only one who could bear witness to that and if he had come out and said that, they would have said, "We do not have to believe you." If he had said, "The angel came to me and gave me commandments," and at no time had anybody else been called to witness, being a divine manifestation, the Jews could have said with good cause, "We do not have to believe you because you have no witness and nobody could be a witness for Christ except his own Father.

A Witness on Several Occasions

Therefore, at the baptism the Father spoke and called attention to the fact that the young Man being baptized was his beloved Son. There were a number of such occasions that took place, and so when the Jews said to the Savior, "We do not have to believe you because you are alone. Nobody testifies for you," they failed to recognize the truth and there were a number of occasions when his Father's voice was heard. And he spoke from the heavens declaring that Jesus Christ was his beloved Son.

So the Savior fulfilled the law of witnesses. If Joseph Smith had been the only one to testify of the opening of the heavens and the coming of holy messengers, then everybody could have said, "We do not believe you because your testimony is not true." He would have had no defense. But he had witnesses. Oliver Cowdery was called to be a witness who stood with the Prophet in the presence of Jesus Christ. He was with the Prophet when there was a restoration of the keys. He was with the Prophet on a number of occasions. And when Sidney Rigdon became a counselor in the Presidency of the Church the heavens were opened to him, and he testified with the Prophet Joseph Smith of the presence to them, of the coming of the Son of God, and they bore witness together of the restoration of this gospel. So brethren and sisters, nothing was overlooked. This Church was established in accordance with divine law—commandments.

Now today is the birthday anniversary of Hyrum Smith. I repeat, if Oliver Cowdery had remained faithful and true, he would have died with the Prophet Joseph Smith; but the Lord transferred the keys and authorities that had been given to Oliver Cowdery to the head of Hyrum Smith to make him the second President of the Church and the second witness of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Two Presidents

I think there are a few members of the Church who know that we had to have two Presidents in the beginning. Oliver Cowdery was chosen to be one of them and he lost his place, could not take it, and turned away. Fortunately, in his defense, I am glad to say he came back again. He humbly repented and died faithful to the Church, but he lost his place as the second witness. Hyrum Smith was called to take it, as you find recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, and there had to be two witnesses of the restoration of the gospel. And I am mentioning this because this is the ninth day of February, the birthday of Hyrum Smith. Hyrum Smith had to die by the shedding of his blood with the Prophet, and thus they sealed their testimony against the world for all mankind and made that testimony binding upon this world.—(Remarks in Salt Lake Eighteenth Ward, February 9, 1964.)

Footnotes

I understand that many of you plan to return to your homes after graduating. By partaking of the activities here you will be able to serve your own people. Then the promises of the Lord to your forefathers "that he would preserve their seed "and in the future generations" make them "a righteous branch unto the house of Israel" will be fulfilled.

---
Notas:
[^1] 2 Nephi 9:53.
