Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

The Prophesied Future of the Indian People

My dear brethren and sisters, I am very happy to be here with you this evening. I was asked to come and speak to you tonight, and I hope and pray that the Lord will bless me with his Spirit, that I might give you something, that will build your spirits.

I understand you have a wonderful organization down here at this school in the student ward, and I am very happy to learn of this, because you young men and women have a great work to perform for your people. If you seek out the love for the gospel, the Lord will reward you. I understand that many of you plan to return to your homes after graduating. By partaking of the activities here you will be able to serve your own people. Then the promises of the Lord to your forefathers "that he would perserve" their seed "and in future generations" make them "a righteous branch unto the house of Israel will be fulfilled." [^1]

I understand that during the school year 1966, that ninety percent attended sacrament meeting, 75 percent of the elders attended priesthood meeting and that 75 percent of the ward attended MIA and 70 percent regularly attended Sunday School. This record and training, along with the experiences you get, and the testimonies that come by doing these things, will enable you to assume responsible positions of leadership, and help bring about the temporal and spiritual redemption of your own people. Read Helaman 15:12-13. This shows the love that the Redeemer has for them, and again the promises of the Lord are being fulfilled, as in the days of Samuel the Lamanite, the Indian people are being "brought to a knowledge of the truth" and are becoming "firm and steadfast in the faith. . . ." [^2] When you return to your people go to them with this new home teaching program so they will be able to study in their own homes, but do not neglect your duty. These young women can also teach them about Relief Society work and its benefits.

Colonization by Chosen People

From time to time the Lord has colonized various parts of the earth with remnants of the chosen people. The scattering of Israel commenced before the captivity of the Ten Tribes, and continued after the captivity of Judah by the Babylonians, at the time when Lehi was called from Jerusalem.

The promise had been made from the beginning of the Nephite nation that when Christ should rise from the dead he would pay a visit to the people on this hemisphere. After his resurrection the Lord fulfilled this promise. Immediately before the crucifixion the people had destroyed the unity of their government and had broken up into tribes and petty kingdoms. Wickedness ruled supreme in most of the land, and the corruption and violence was appalling. When Christ was crucified there were three days of darkness upon the American continent. This was preceded by a severe tempest such as had never been known, and the whole face of the land, we are informed, was changed. Many cities were buried in the depths of the sea, others were burned with fire, and still others carried up, upon the tops of new mountains which were formed by the sudden convulsions of the earth. In this manner the more wicked part of the people, and that was the greater part-of them, were all destroyed. All who survived were granted the privilege of a visitation from Jesus Christ. The account of his visitation and his teachings to the survivors among the people is a very interesting and profitable story. He established his Church among them and for two hundred years there were neither Nephites or Lamanites, or any manner of "ites" in the land. All of the people became united in one kingdom and one church. Their kingdom was the kingdom of God, a theocracy, and they were ruled by twelve disciples comparable to the twelve apostles of the Savior who were ordained in the Church in the land of Palestine. Following the appearance of the Savior, for a period of two hundred years the Church of Jesus Christ ruled, and the people lived, as did the people in the city of Enoch, the law of consecration.

Historian's Account

The historian says of these people during this time:

And it came to pass that there was no contention among all the people, in all the land; but there were mighty miracles wrought among the disciples of Jesus. . . .

And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people.

And there were no envyings, no strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God.

There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God.

And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings; yea, even they were blessed and prospered until an hundred and ten years had passed away; and the first generation from Christ had passed away, and there was no contention in all the land. [^3]

From that time forth the Lamanites divided into bands and tribes and fought among themselves. Their greatest civilizations, at the time of the discovery of America, were in Mexico and Peru.

Promises Yet To Be Fulfilled

However the Lord has not altogether cast them off. There are promises made to them which are yet to be fulfilled. The day will come when they shall again rise up and be a blessed people, white and favored of the Lord. That day will come when they in all sincerity accept the fulness of the gospel.

Moroni hid his records in the hill known as the Hill Cumorah, which is located in western New York. It was here where Joseph Smith, in our present dispensation, was led by this same Moroni—who had by then received his resurrection—to obtain and translate the abridgment of this ancient history made by Moroni's father Mormon, and by himself. Today that record speaks as from the dust from those who are dead, with a warning voice to all who are living, that they may, upon this land, avoid the pitfalls and the rebellions which brought destructions upon the peoples who formerly dwelt here, and thus escape a similar destruction. The decree has gone forth that no people may possess this land indefinitely in rebellion against God, for when their cup of iniquity is full they shall be swept off the face of the land, for the Lord has decreed that "wickedness shall not stand." The Lord said, my kingdom pertains to the life to come. I am here to teach people the way which will lead them back to God, where they will attain to everlasting life, and where they may be crowned as kings and priests of the Most High. Latter-day Saints are perhaps more directly interested in this than any other people in the world. Some of these countries have the majority of their citizens, whom the world call Indians, but to whom the Latter-day Saints refer to as Lamanites, people whom we believe to be of the chosen and promised seed of Abraham, brought to this continent and established here under the direction of God our Father, under the leadership of their inspired prophets.

Words of President Anthony W. Ivins

In October conference of 1926, President Anthony W. Ivins said, "Let the young men of Israel, the descendants of this Joseph, look upon their ancestor and be inspired to die rather than to be defiled that they may be worthy to come into the great heritage that God has for his faithful sons and daughters. For if this generation shall keep themselves clean and undefiled they shall reap honors and distinction like unto which their fathers who subdued the deserts and made it blossom never attained." About 1960, when Sister Smith and I went into South America, we stood on the ground that was dedicated by Brother Melvin J. Ballard, Brother Rey L. Pratt and Brother Rulon Wells, and it was a glorious experience. That date of dedication was December 25, 1925, and then to see how the Lamanite people were responding to the gospel was delightful. We are thankful to the Lord for this. We feel a desire to continue our labors and to work zealously for the redemption of that particular branch of the house of Israel with which we are laboring, namely the Lamanite people, who are descendants of Joseph and who have resided upon this land of America. While in Lima, Peru, Brother Vernon Sharp took Sister Smith and me to visit a nonmember of the Church. He had in his possession gold in different sizes. We had the privilege of going into his home, and in the glass cases there were many wonderful pieces made into different items like vases and candle holders. We noticed sheets of gold and the pile was about as high as half a dozen Juvenile Instructors. They were a pure gold leaf, and all that would need to be done would be to insert a ring through the edges of this set of plates, and they would be like the plates that the Prophet Joseph handled. It really was a glorious sight and made it more convincing that the Book of Mormon is true.

I spoke to Brother Sharp just a few days ago. He told me that the man had passed away but that his wife had possession of the gold display. She invited Brother Sharp to visit again, and this time she opened the glass case and took out piece by piece. Brother Sharp took pictures of all in the case and he has them—about 70 colored slides—so we can see just what can be done in teaching the gospel. So young men and young women, teach your people the principles of the gospel, and the Lord will bless you and magnify you in this work. Remember what the Lord has said, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise." [^4] I want to tell you that the Lord will fulfill his promise if we fulfill our promise. These prophecies and promises are valid. Elder Rey L. Pratt said, "The Lord intends to redeem that people. He intends to redeem them through those of us who are brought out from among the Gentile nations and who in very deed believe the words of the book that has come to us. It has been revealed through the instrumentality of the greatest prophet that has resided in this world, save it be the Son of God himself; and it will stand the test of time. It will stand the test of any investigation that can be brought to bear, and in the end it will triumph."

The Lord bless us and help us in carrying out the duty assigned to us in this great work of the Lord.—Address at Indian Students Ward, BYU, April 28, 1967.)

Footnotes

What is the doctrine of the kingdom of God? It is that every soul through the mercy of God should have an opportunity to hear, repent, and receive the gospel. . . . It is the word to all who have sojourned upon this earth. . . . If it is applied universally, it must reach out to those who have died without the opportunities of repentance, to every soul who never heard of Jesus Christ. . . . Anything short of this would be an injustice.

---
Notas:
[^1] John 3:3, 5.
[^2] Catholic Encyclopedia, Vol. 2, p. 265. See also p. 267.
[^3] D&C 29:46-47.
[^4] D&C 82:10.
