Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

The True Meaning of Salvation

I want to preface what I say by making a few remarks in regard to salvation as it is generally applied. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a peculiar Church. It has to be, because it is the only church on the face of the earth that does not belong to this world. We have people in it who do belong to this world, but the Church does not belong to this world, and it has been recognized by our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, as his Church. Of course, in a church organization, and especially the Church of Jesus Christ, there must be laws and ordinances that are fixed and unchangeable because God is unchangeable, and the plan of salvation is the same today as it was in the days of Adam. It is the same plan that has been adopted in other worlds, because this plan is eternal, therefore, members of the Church are subject to eternal regulations, laws, rules, and decrees that were instituted before the foundation of the world for the government of the Church and for the salvation of men.

Same Plan Since the Beginning

I think the idea prevails throughout the so-called "Christian" world that the plan that was given from the days of Adam until the days of Jesus Christ was a different plan—something other than what our Savior gave—and that the gospel of Jesus Christ as introduced by him is another system entirely from that which was in force or required of mankind before the coming of our Lord in his ministry. But that is not true. The decrees of the Almighty are unchangeable so far as the laws pertaining to the kingdom of God are concerned. They always were what they are today. We have not changed them. They are not different from what the people had to subscribe to from the days of Adam on down.

I am presenting that to you without presenting any arguments. I do not intend to argue for them, and I ask you to accept it by the statement I have made. I could turn to the scriptures and prove it.

Every man lives for himself. Adam was able to open the way of the world and dress the Garden. Noah was born to save seeds of every kind when the world was washed of wickedness by the flood, and the Son of God came into this world to redeem it from the fall. But, except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God. This eternal truth settles the question of "every man's religion." Now listen to this. A man may be saved after the judgment in the terrestrial kingdom and in the telestial kingdom, but he can never see the celestial kingdom of God without being born of the water and of the spirit. He may receive a glory like the moon—that is, that which the moon is typical of; or a star, that is, of which the light of a star is typical. But he can never come unto Mount Zion and the City of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem.

Man Must Be Saved with Ordinances

"Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." And then when he (Nicodemus) did not understand, "Jesus answered, Verily, Verily, I say unto thee Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." [^1]

That brings us to the point. If a man cannot be saved without the ordinances of baptism by water and the baptism of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, what is going to become of all the dead who have died or who may yet die without a knowledge of the gospel? The Lord has given the only correct answer, and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only Church upon the face of the earth that has accepted it. I am not going to take the time to read the statements of the Catholic Church and the Protestant churches, so-called, covering that point. They have no salvation for the dead who died without a knowledge of the gospel, without having heard the name of Jesus Christ. The Catholic Church and some of the Protestant churches even declare that infants dying without having been christened—sprinkled with water—are forever damned.

This is the doctrine of the Catholic Church. The absolute necessity of this sacrament, or this baptism, is necessary for infants. St. Irenius says Christ came to save all who are reborn through him to God. St. Augustine says, "If you wish to be a Catholic, do not believe, nor say, nor teach, that infants who die before baptism can obtain the remission of original sin." A still stronger passage from the same doctor reads: "Whoever says that even infants are vivified in Christ when they depart this life without participation of his Sacrament (Baptism) both opposes the Apostolic preaching and condemns the whole church which hastens to baptize infants, because it unhesitatingly believes that otherwise they cannot possibly be vivified in Christ." [^2]

Catholic theologians are unanimous in declaring infants are excluded from the beatific vision of Christ unless baptized. As to the exact state of souls in the next world they are not agreed.

If a little infant who could not help itself is to be damned and denied vision of the Son of God, then what about grown people who are unbaptized? They, too, are forever damned. That is the doctrine of the world. Without going into all the arguments to the contrary, the Savior declares—you read it in the eighteenth and nineteenth chapters of Matthew—that little children are alive in Christ, that is, they belong to the kingdom of heaven. It is not necessary for me to continue the argument any further. We have plenty of evidence.

So, throughout the world, the idea prevails that they who have died without a knowledge of the gospel of Christ, or lived when they could not hear of him, that they are consigned to some degree of punishment and cast out of his presence.

The Doctrine of the Kingdom

What is the doctrine of the kingdom of God? It is that every soul through the mercy of God should have an opportunity to hear, repent, and receive the gospel. That is very emphatically referred to in the First Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, which is the Preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, and in the words of our Savior, Jesus Christ. Of course the doctrine of salvation for the dead was not a doctrine understood even in the Church when this revelation was given. I will begin with Verse 2.

For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated.

And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed.

If this is the word of the Lord to all men, it is the word to all who have sojourned upon this earth. And how are they going to hear? How are their eyes to see and ears to hear and their hearts to be penetrated, when billions of people upon this earth have died in places and under conditions where it was not possible for them to hear the message of the gospel of Jesus Christ? They have died without hearing his name. They never had the opportunity to be baptized, because there was no one with authority to officiate in that ordinance. There was no one to teach them. There are millions upon millions of people upon the face of the earth today who have never heard, and they are dying every day.

Now I want to ask this question. Is it fair, is it just, is it according to divine mercy to declare that all these people who have so died, at times and in places where the gospel did not penetrate and where they have never had the opportunity to repent of their sins, that they should be forever damned and denied the blessings, the opportunities for the blessings of the gospel of Jesus Christ? And the answer to that—there is only one answer, is NO! It would not be just, it would not be merciful, it would not be in accordance with the divine law, and so the Latter-day Saints stand in a peculiar position, peculiar to the world.

The thing that makes us peculiar is the fact that we do not belong to the world, that we do not believe in the doctrines of the world, but we accept and believe in the doctrines of the Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

Father in Heaven Is Merciful

I believe that our Father in heaven is merciful, and I believe he is just. I believe with all my soul that he has revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and he revealed it to the apostles of old, the doctrine of universal salvation—that is, salvation applied universally. If it is applied universally, it must reach out to those who have died without the opportunities of repentance, to every soul who never heard of Jesus Christ. Therefore, they who are dead must have the opportunity of having their ears hear, their eyes see and the privilege of repenting of their sins. Anything short of that would be an injustice.

To condemn the poor innocent little child who is helpless because its parents or some other individual had not sprinkled it with water before it died is the most damnable of all doctrines upon the face of the earth. I have good backing for that. It is not original with me, but I believe it. If you read the eighth chapter of Moroni, it says it as definitely as I would be able to do it. He said that those who teach that kind of doctrine will be damned unless they repent.

When I was in the mission field, I had a poor mother appeal to me for a little sympathy and a little help and comfort, for the doctrine she had received was gnawing at her soul. She had a child die in infancy. It had not been sprinkled, and when she asked the priest to give this child a burial, he refused, saying since it had not received baptism it could not have a Christian burial. He told her her child was forever lost. That thought had been preying at her heart, and she had been weeping and mourning and was in the depths of anguish of soul because of what this priest had told her. He refused to have anything to do with the funeral. She had to get somebody else to hold the funeral and the burial. I was in her home. She asked me if she could put a question to me that had been troubling her, and I said, "certainly."

She told me the circumstances of her child's death and how she had been treated and asked, "Is my baby forever lost?" That gave me the best opportunity in the world to preach the gospel to her. I turned to Moroni and read Mormon's instructions.

I turned to the Doctrine and Covenants and read what the Lord has said regarding infant death and told her her infant was not lost. I turned to the New Testament and read what the Lord set forth in it regarding little children, and I said, "Just forget the advice that the priest told you, for it is of the devil." I read her this,

I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten;

Wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me. [^3]

The idea of a little child being tied with Adam's sins of 6,000 years ago! Adam transgressed the law of God, and these people say this little infant born in the year 1951 must pay the price? Don't you believe it.

Every Man to Be Given a Chance

And so the Lord has made salvation a universal salvation, and he gives to every man a chance. The fact a man dies without having been baptized, without having heard the name of Jesus Christ does not condemn him. His actions will condemn him. If he has lived a faithless life and guilty of all manner of evils—murder in his heart—he will have the same kind of feeling over there. They are not all going to receive the gospel, but they have the right to hear it.

We are only a little handful considering the people upon the face of the earth, yet the Lord has placed upon us the burden of looking after our dead and preparing the records, going to the temples, being baptized, being confirmed, being endowed, performing the sealing for husbands and wives and children as far back as we can go. Does that mean every person for whom we have been baptized and every person who is confirmed and endowed and sealed is going to receive salvation in the kingdom of God? No! Not any more than if we would force people to be baptized here. We could not force them. If we do the work and they accept it with all their hearts, the Lord will count it the same as if they did it for themselves.

They cannot be baptized over there because water is an element pertaining to the mortal existence. You cannot take spirits and baptize them and you cannot ordain them, you cannot confirm them and you cannot present them to the altar in the temple of the Lord and seal husband and wife, because they belong to a different world. They have left this sphere of action. But the Lord has given unto us the privilege of acting for them vicariously. He has commanded us to go into the temples of the Lord and perform the labor for them that they cannot do for themselves.

We cannot figure out all our progenitors who have gone before and have a clear understanding of who will or will not receive the gospel. We do the work for everyone, and the Lord will do the segregating. But it is our duty to go back and do the work for all we can search out.

Not Much Time to Redeem Dead

I have a statement here from Joseph Smith which says, "If we do it with all our might we would hardly get through." The Saints have not too much time to save and redeem their dead.

Now think of these things. I think from what I have read and said perhaps I have said enough to point out to you the responsibility that rests upon us. There is no greater responsibility (and the Prophet has said it) resting upon us as individuals and families than to seek after our dead. The man who will not seek after his dead and go to the temple and try to perform the labor to the best of his ability as far as he can do it will find himself barred. He will have to stay on the sideline of eternity—at least until somebody does the work for his kin. For we cannot be saved without our dead who are likewise worthy of salvation, and if we fail to do the work we will stand condemned.

The time is drawing to a close. We are getting pretty close to the coming of our Savior. All the sings point there, and we are supposed to do all we can to show the Lord by our works and faith that we are interested in our dead. If our hearts are not turned to our fathers, then we are not living the gospel of Jesus Christ. Their hearts have turned. The righteous who are dead, their hearts have turned to us. They are seeking our help, and if we do not help them we will be condemned.

Now somebody will raise the question—"But what about all the people who lived beyond the time we can find the records?" There is not anything to prevent us from searching the records we can find. I want to tell you what is going to happen. When we have exhausted every source and every facility, and have done all in our power to perform the work for our dead relatives and cannot go any further and no records are obtainable, the Lord will come to our rescue. The great work of the millennium will be the performing of work in the temples of the Lord for the dead who are entitled to salvation.

How is that going to come about? They who have passed to the other side and received their resurrection or will have received their resurrection after Christ comes will come to people who dwell in mortality and bring the names, bring records and say, "Now go in the temples and do this work, perform these labors for these people. These are of your lineage. Now do the work, and when you have done all of this we will bring you more." So the work will be done for every soul worthy to receive salvation.

Righteous Will Not Be Overlooked

The Lord is not going to overlook a single soul or anyone who is entitled to receive it. We do not need to worry for fear the Lord is going to forget somebody. The Lord will furnish the record when we cannot do it until every soul is ferreted out and every worthy soul has the privilege of the ordinances of the house of the Lord. Now that is the gospel of Jesus Christ.

So, let us get a proper understanding of salvation and what it means. Let us seek for exaltation in that celestial kingdom.—(Excerpts from an address in the Ogden Tabernacle, September 2, 1951.)

Footnotes

The Lord has never withdrawn or permitted his authority to be withdrawn absolutely from this earth, and so down through the years and through the great apostasy, which developed until the so-called Christian era, there have been individuals on the face of the earth holding divine authority.

---
Notas:
[^1] John 3:3, 5.
[^2] Catholic Encyclopedia, Vol. 2, p. 265. See also p. 267.
[^3] D&C 29:46-47.
