Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

This World Has Never Been Surrendered to Satan

The Lord has never surrendered this world to Satan. He tells us that. And there has never been a time when he did not have somebody on the earth to contend for righteousness. You do not know what I am referring to, but I am going to tell you. John the Revelator was given the promise that he should remain until the second coming of Christ. He is here on the face of the earth. There were a number of men among the Nephites, whom he chose to be among his Twelve for those people, who also wished to have the privilege given to them to remain here until the second coming of Christ. They have been here on the face of the earth from that day until now and will be until Christ comes. I am not acquainted with them. Neither are you. Maybe there will never be an occasion when any of them will come to me and tell me who they are—or you—but they are here, nevertheless, and will be until the time of Christ.

The Lord has never withdrawn or permitted his authority to be withdrawn absolutely from this earth; and so down through the years and through the great apostasy, which developed until the so-called Christian era, there have been individuals on the face of the earth holding divine authority. But it has not been their privilege to go forth among the people proselyting or baptizing. They have been here on the face of the earth to contend against Satan and his followers, adversaries of righteousness, and to hold them in check.

We understand that John the Revelator asked for the privilege of remaining on earth until the coming of Christ, and that was granted to him. Three Nephites asked for the same privilege and it was granted. They have been here on the face of the earth—advocates of righteousness and contending against Satan and his adversaries.

I think we have largely—that is, members of the Church—almost universally believed the Lord fully surrendered this world to Satan, and there were hundreds of years when there was no representative on the face of the earth with authority to contend against Satan and his adversaries. The Lord has never permitted Satan to have absolute control, so there were individuals who were granted the privilege of continued life or the privilege of living until Christ should come the second time. They might come to your door and you would not know them. But they have been here through all these years. They were not authorized to organize the Church. They were authorized to contend against Satan and hold him in check; but they do not have the privilege to organize wards and stakes and set up upon the face of the earth these organizations.—(Remarks at Ensign Stake Conference, January 30, 1966.)

The world does not comprehend the revelations of God. It did not in the days of the Jews; yet all that the prophets had spoken concerning them came to pass. So in our day these things will come to pass. We cannot draw a veil over the events that await this generation.
