Joseph Fielding Smith, Seek Ye Earnestly ( 1970)

The Resurrection

The doctrines of the fall of man and the atonement of Jesus Christ are two fundamental principles of the gospel which are greatly misunderstood. The erroneous idea prevails throughout the Christian world, that Adam was placed on this earth with a definite mission in which he shamefully and sinfully failed.

Bible commentators have spoken of Adam's act as "Man's shameful fall." They decry it as a deplorable wicked rebellion which brought upon Adam, Eve and all their posterity, a condition of sin and evil that could have been kept from the world perpetually so that all mankind could have lived in love, peace and happiness, without sin or death, in a lovely world free from pain and sorrow. Those who hold this view fail to grasp the significance that such a condition, if it were possible, would have precluded the necessity for the coming of Jesus Christ as the world would have been without a reason for a Redeemer.

In the scriptures we are instructed that the plans of the Almighty were not destroyed or changed. Jesus Christ was appointed as "the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world," [^1] and we were redeemed "with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot; who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world but was manifest in these last times. . . ." [^2]

Fortunately the correct doctrine in relation to Adam's transgression, or the fall, was restored to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Information beyond what is found in the Bible states that after the fall, an angel made known to Adam and to Eve the true nature of their transgression. Adam rejoiced and said: "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God." Eve, also received the true vision of the consequences of that transgression, and exclaimed: "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." With this knowledge "Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters." [^3]

Of Greatest Value

Surely this was information of the greatest value, and a condition greatly to be desired, notwithstanding all the vicissitudes of mortality and the evils that have come into the world. The Lord has made it clear that in order for mankind to obtain salvation and exaltation it is necessary for them to obtain bodies in this world and pass through the experiences and schooling that are found only in mortality. The Lord has said that his great work and glory is, "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^4] Without mortality this great blessing could not be accomplished. Therefore worlds are created and peopled with the children of God and they are granted the privilege to pass through the mortal existence, with the great gift of agency in their possession. Through this gift they choose good or choose evil, and thus receive a reward of merit in the eternities to come. Because of Adam's transgression we are here in mortal life. It is written:

And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the Garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end.

And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin.

But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.

Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy. [^5]

Blessing in Disguise

We learn from the scriptures, then, that the fall of man came as a blessing in disguise and was the means of furthering the purposes of the Lord in the progress of man, rather than a means of hindering them. Adam's transgression did, however, place him and all things upon the earth, under the curse of death, the separation of the spirit and the body. Without the means of escape from this condition all mankind would have been lost forever and the purposes of the Lord would have been destroyed.

To obviate this threatened disaster our Savior was chosen and fore-ordained to mend the broken law caused by Adam's fall. In other words, Christ came to restore mankind and all creatures to life through the resurrection of the dead. Paul made it very plain that ". . . since by man came death, by him came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even as in Christ shall all be made alive." [^6] With the true understanding of this mortal existence and the need of death in order that through the atonement of our Lord there will come a re-uniting of spirit and body, never again to be divided, the sting of death is removed. Jacob, the brother of Nephi, made this clear in the following words:

For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the Great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.

Flesh Would Rot

Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement—save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself; yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents, who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness.

O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit.

And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal, shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave.

Deliver Up Dead

And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell; wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men will be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel. [^7]

It is refreshing to learn, as we do in the teachings of Jacob, that death has been decreed upon all men "to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator." This is a better thought than to look upon death as the overthrowing of the plan of the great Creator, making it necessary for him to change his plan because he failed to foresee the disaster of the fall. Moreover, we are informed that through the atonement of Jesus Christ, is made possible for every creature the restoration of spirit and body, which were disturbed by the fall. Again we read:

And he cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belongeth to the family of Adam.

And he suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon all men, that all might stand before him at the great and judgment day. [^8]

Resurrection Universal

From these and other scriptures we learn these two great and important truths, that there shall be a universal resurrection of every creature that has ever lived upon the earth, and that mankind will receive the remission of their sins only through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ and faithful obedience to his laws. The resurrection of the dead is a gift of God that is given to every creature through the atonement of Jesus Christ, just as death is a condition which came to every creature through Adam's transgression. We are taught that every thing that has life has received it as a gift from God.

Every creature had a spiritual existence. The spirits of men, beasts, and all animal life, existed before the foundation of the earth was laid, and are living entities. [^9] As death, through the fall, has passed upon all, so the resurrection through the mission of Jesus Christ, comes to all. Alma said to his son Corianton:

I say unto thee, my son, that the plan of resurrection is requisite with the justice of God; for it is requisite that all things should be restored to their proper order. Behold, it is requisite and just, according to the power and resurrection of Christ, that the soul (spirit) of man should be restored to its body, and that every part of the body should be restored to itself.

And it is requisite with the justice of God that men should be judged according to their works; and if their works were good in this life, and the desires of their hearts were good, that they should also, at the last day, be restored unto that which is good.

And if their works are evil they shall be restored unto them for evil. Therefore, all things shall be restored to their proper order, every thing to its natural frame—mortality raised to immortality, corruption to incorruption—raised to endless happiness to inherit the kingdom of God, or to endless misery to inherit the kingdom of the devil, the one on one hand, the other on the other—

One to Happiness

The one raised to happiness according to his desires of happiness, or good according to his desires of good; and the other to evil according to his desires of evil; for as he has desired to do evil all the day long even so shall he have his reward of evil when the night cometh.

And so it is on the other hand. If he hath repented of his sins, and desired righteousness until the end of his days, even so he shall be rewarded unto righteousness. . . .

Now, the decrees of God are unalterable; therefore, the way is prepared that whosoever will may walk therein and be saved. [^10]

While unconditional salvation will be given to every creature, which is the redemption from the grave, conditional salvation will come only to those sons and daughters of Adam who fully repent of their sins and accept the gospel of Jesus Christ. It is written:

Must Be Baptized

And he commandeth all men that they must repent, and be baptized in his name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God.

And if they will not repent and believe in his name, and be baptized in his name, and endure to the end, they must be damned; for the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, has spoken it. [^11]

Wherefore redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah; for he is full of grace and truth.

Behold he offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and contrite spirit; and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered. [^12]

But behold, and fear, and tremble before God, for ye ought to tremble; for the Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against him and die in their sins; yea, even all those that have perished in their sins ever since the world began, that have wilfully rebelled against God, that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them; these are they that have no part in the first resurrection.

Ought to Tremble

Therefore ought ye not to tremble? For salvation cometh to none such; for the Lord hath redeemed none such, yea, neither can the Lord redeem such; for he cannot deny himself; for he cannot deny justice when it has its claim. [^13]

For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I.

Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men. [^14]

In his great mercy, love and justice, we see our Father in heaven has provided that all his children who have gained mortality shall live again. The soul cannot be destroyed. The spirits of all men are eternal. They lived before this mortal life came, and through the atonement of Jesus Christ, they shall live after this mortal life is ended. Our Redeemer told Martha,

I am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:

And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this? [^15]

Dead Shall Hear

The Savior's teachings and mission went still further than this. On one other occasion he said to the Jews:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. . . .

Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in their graves shall hear his voice,

And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation. [^16]

The soul (spirit) shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul (spirit); yea, every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame. . . . And then shall the righteous shine forth in the kingdom of God.

But behold, an awful death cometh upon the wicked; for they die as to things pertaining to things of righteousness; for they are unclean, and no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of God; but they are cast out, and consigned to partake of the fruits of their labors or their works, which have been evil; and they drink the dregs of a bitter cup. [^17]

Earn Redemption

It has been taught by some that the resurrection would not be universal among those who have received mortal bodies; that some known as sons of perdition would be denied the privilege of the resurrection. It is very strange that such a doctrine could be entertained in the face of the many instructions and revelations coming from the Lord and his holy prophets. They universally testify, that ALL shall come forth from the dead. Justice demands this because men are not responsible for death and hence are entitled to redemption from its grasp. Alma has clearly stated this:

. . . we must come forth and stand before him (the Lord) in his glory, and in his power, and in his might, majesty, and dominion, and acknowledge to our everlasting shame that all his judgments are just; that he is just in all his works, and that he is merciful unto the children of men, and that he has all power to save every man that believeth on his name and bringeth forth fruit meet for repentance.

And now behold, I say unto you then cometh a death, even a second death which is a spiritual death; then is a time that whosoever dieth in his sins, as to a temporal death, shall also die a spiritual death; yea, he shall die as to things pertaining unto righteousness.

Then is the time when their torments shall be as a lake of fire and brimstone, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever; and then is the time that they shall be chained down to an everlasting destruction, according to the power and captivity of Satan, he having subjected them according to his will.

Doctrine Confirmed

Then, I say unto you, they shall be as though there had been no redemption made; for they cannot be redeemed according to God's justice; and they cannot die, seeing there is no more corruption. [^18]

From this we learn that those who are to be cast out into outer darkness with the devil and his angels, will remain in their resurrected bodies, which can die no more, "seeing there is no more corruption," as though there had been no redemption made for them: that is redemption from their fallen, or banished, state.

This doctrine is confirmed by the leaders of the Church. I quote a few of these teachings:

What will every body be resurrected? Yes, every living being; but every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits; afterwards they that are Christ's at his coming. Then cometh the end. That is, the Saints shall live and reign with Christ a thousand years: One of the apostles says, "But the rest of the dead live not again until the thousand years are expired." But all must come forth from their graves, some time or other, in the self-same tabernacles that they possessed while living on the earth. It will be just as Ezekiel has described it. [^19]

With regard to redemption, Paul said all the children of Adam are redeemed from the fall by the atoning blood of Jesus. [^20]

All Made Alive

Then all the bodies that lie in the grave are called forth; not all at the first resurrection, nor in the morning of the first resurrection, but some perhaps in the last resurrection, and every soul will be required to go before the bar of God and be judged according to the deeds done in the body. If his works have been good, then he receives the reward of well doing. Nevertheless, he is an immortal being, because he possesses his resurrected body. Every creature that is born in the image of God will be resurrected from the dead, just as sure as he dies, you can write that down if you please, and never forget it, or ever allow yourself to have any unbelief on that account. "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." [^21]

Those who commit the unpardonable sin are doomed to Gnolom, to dwell in hell, worlds without end. As they concocted scenes of bloodshed in this world, so they shall rise to the resurrection which is as the lake of fire and brimstone. Some shall rise to the everlasting burnings of God; for God dwells in everlasting burnings; and some shall rise to the damnation of their own filthiness, which is as exquisite a torment as the lake of fire and brimstone. [^22]

The second, or spiritual, death is not as some suppose, the annihilation of spirit and body, for neither spirit or body can be annihilated. After they are united in the resurrection they become inseparable and eternal. The spiritual death is banishment of the individual who partakes of it from the presence of the Lord into "outer darkness" with the devil and his angels. How terrible this punishment is, only those know who receive it, but we are informed that it is most severe.

Banish Only a Few

There is some happiness in knowing that only a few out of the many are to receive this punishment, and then because they have sinned against the light of truth and crucified Christ again in their acts and desires. The Lord loves all of his children. He has said that "the worth of souls is great in the sight of God." He weeps over their transgressions and wickedness and has said: "How often would I have gathered thy children together even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not!" [^23]

Of necessity there are eternal laws by which mankind are governed. These laws cannot be changed or abrogated; but through the mercy and justice of the Lord sinful men may repent, and through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ obtain a remission of their sins. For all such he, our Redeemer, paid the price on condition of true repentance and faithfulness to gospel laws, but for no others is the remission of sins granted through the blood of Jesus Christ. It is only just that men should receive according to their works the rewards decreed in the heavens.

The Lord has provided different kingdoms, or glories, to fit the capacity and merits of every soul. In the great day of judgment, when these rewards and punishments are meted out, every knee shall bend and give reverence to God the father and his Son Jesus Christ, and every soul will acknowledge and "confess before God that his judgments are just," even though many will be deprived of the exaltations and the joy of the eternal presence of the Father and the Son.—(Church Section, The Deseret News, Feb. 15, 1941.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Revelation 13:8.
[^2] I Peter 1:19-20.
[^3] Moses 6:6-12.
[^4] Moses 1:39.
[^5] 2 Nephi 2:22-25.
[^6] I Corinthians 15:22.
[^7] 2 Nephi 9:6-12.
[^8] 2 Nephi 9:21-22.
[^9] D&C 29:22-25; Moses 3:4-9.
[^10] Alma 41:2-6, 8.
[^11] 2 Nephi 9:22-23.
[^12] 2 Nephi 2:7.
[^13] Mosiah 15:26-27.
[^14] D&C 19:16-19.
[^15] John 11:25-26.
[^16] John 5:25, 28-29.
[^17] Alma 40:23-26. Compare Alma 11:40-45.
[^18] Alma 12:15-18.
[^19] President John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, 18:333. Ezekiel 37:1-14.
[^20] President Wilford Woodruff.
[^21] President Joseph F. Smith, The Improvement Era, Vol. 19, p. 386.
[^22] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 361.
[^23] Matthew 23:37.
