Joe J. Christensen, Barbara K. Christensen, Making Your Home a Missionary Training Center ( 1985)

Preface

A good friend of ours was asked, "Doug, how did it feel to say good-bye to your son when he left for his mission this morning?"

After a moment's reflection he responded, "You know, it was a lot harder than I thought it was going to be. You can't have someone around the house for nineteen years, learn to love him and even in some ways rely on him, and then have him leave without missing him a great deal. It is tough. I guess the best way to describe the feeling is that it is 'miserable joy.' We're suffering a little, but what a joy it is to have a member of our family serving the Lord as a missionary!"

We have come to know those parental feelings of "miserable joy" as our three sons have departed for their missions. We have come to know those feelings even more personally as we have had the privilege of responding to three mission calls—once when we were both single, and twice as a couple to preside over missions. We treasure our memories from the Missionary Training Center of more than 58,000 missionaries—young and older—who touched our lives and left us blessed far beyond our capacity to repay.

To collaborate in the writing of this book has been a special experience. It has been a challenge to go back into memory—which is, as someone said, "that garden of Eden out of which one need never be cast." Just to remember our experiences with so many missionaries has been a revitalizing journey.

Working together on a book brings the blessings of a continuing critique that has been stimulating and helpful in getting the manuscript to a condition that, with good typing and editing help, could be brought to publishable form.

At times, however, joint authorship may be challenging to the reader as well as to the writers. Occasionally, you may need to sort out whose the experience may be. We struggled now and then with whether the experience should be told in first person singular or plural. Some examples and experiences we have shared and others came into our lives individually. Many we observed or had reported to us. Usually, names have been omitted, and in a few cases names have been changed where it seemed appropriate to preserve anonymity. We hope that the style will not be confusing. Substance is more important than form, and who had the experience is of less importance than what the experience can teach.

Making your home a missionary training center, whether you live alone or with a family, whether you are younger or older, can be a revitalizing experience. There is a spirit and influence that accompanies the process, and you can help others as well as yourself to prepare for the greatest sharing experience one can have.
