Joe J. Christensen, Barbara K. Christensen, Making Your Home a Missionary Training Center ( 1985)

1

The Importance of a Mission

"You ask me, what is the single most important developmental experience a young man or woman in the Church can have? A full-time mission, of course," stated a former bishop and father of several children. "I don't have the slightest doubt in my mind. Young people need ideals and challenges that stretch them. Sharing the gospel with others provides young people with the opportunity to get involved with something bigger than they are and to have the privilege of serving others, which they can't get in any better way. I've seen it happen over and over.

"When I was serving as a bishop and long before our own children were old enough to go on missions, I saw the changes in those called from the ward. In so many cases, they were boys when they left, and they came back as men. Now I've seen it in our own family. Their entire lives have been changed for the better. Their life's goals were elevated. Their sights were raised.

"I remember one young man in the ward who said he really hadn't enjoyed school and didn't plan to go on to college for any more training. He could hardly make it through an entire sentence without some obvious grammatical problem, but when he came home from his mission, all that had changed. He was 'on fire,' and not only with the gospel; he wanted to better his life. He went on to college and now holds a Ph.D. degree from a noted university. He sent me a copy of a book he had written. You could have knocked me over with a feather. He's even recently been named head of his academic department at the university where he works. The change is phenomenal!"

His response was supported by what we learned when it was our privilege to serve as chauffeur for Elder LeGrand Richards when well into his nineties he came down to the Missionary Training Center to enthrall the missionaries. As we traveled, we asked him, "Elder Richards, after all the years you have lived, all the places you have been, and all you have done, what do you consider to be your most impressive experience in the Church?"

Without a moment's hesitation he said, "Why, without a doubt it was my first mission to Holland! That's when I learned how important it is to share the gospel. That's where I gained confidence in my abilities to learn and serve. Everything that's important in my life has been influenced for good by the experiences I had during that first mission. There is absolutely no question about it."

A tall lady missionary walked into my office not long ago to let me know that she had returned from her mission. I remembered her as she introduced herself, since we had become acquainted at the Missionary Training Center, but I recognized her more by name than by appearance. She had changed. She was more radiant, vivacious, and self-confident and evidenced that fresh and powerful spirit that generally accompanies recently returned missionaries.

With deep conviction and a contagious smile, she said, "When I think that at one time I actually wondered if I should go on my mission, I shudder to think that I may have missed it. It was wonderful! It changed my life. I'll never be the same again. My whole outlook on life is so much more centered on things that matter most in the long run. I've even decided to change my major at the university so I can get into something where I will be more able to serve people and, in the future, better serve my own family."

Recently, a mother who had been left alone to rear and provide for her seven sons said, "It hasn't been easy. A lot of the time I had to hold down a second job to make it financially, but now six of my sons have served their missions, and before long my youngest will enter the MTC."

"You at least deserve the Purple Heart!" I said.

She responded with a pensive expression of satisfaction, most likely occasioned by a host of rich memories. "No," she said, "I don't need any reward. I've already received mine."

A Church member who had been active all his life said with genuine feeling, "I think I always knew that missionary service was important, but an experience the first time I went to Jerusalem really impressed it indelibly on my mind.

"We had one day that was to be free in Jerusalem to do anything we chose. Even though the previous day had been full and tiring, I got up long before daylight and had an impressive series of experiences. The stars were still visible, and the morning pockets of mist were hanging in the valley. I walked down the cobblestone road from our little Arab hotel to the old north wall that surrounds the ancient city of Jerusalem and then followed the road that circles the city on the east side. As I came to the bridge that crosses over the Brook of Kedron, there on the right at the base of the Mount of Olives was the Garden of Gethsemane. I spent twenty minutes or so among those gnarled ancient olive trees. For me, it was one of those solemn moments of personal spiritual growth. I thought of the Savior and what he had suffered there just before the betrayal, trial, and crucifixion. I know I don't understand all involved that would cause one to bleed from every pore, but I was so grateful for the Savior and the atonement.

"I was subdued when I left to continue my hike up the Mount of Olives on my way to Bethany and the tomb of Lazarus. I felt as though I were straddling the centuries as I met Arab merchants with their donkeys loaded with all kinds of merchandise walking to market in the Old City much as they had done for thousands of years.

"When I arrived on top of the Mount of Olives, the sun was just coming up and illuminated the Old City in a magnificent way. The Dome of the Rock on the temple mount reflected its rays, and it was not difficult to think of Abraham, Isaac, David, Solomon, the Savior, the Twelve, and so many important events associated with Jerusalem from Old and New Testament times.

"But without doubt, one of the most impressive thoughts had to do with missionary work. It struck me with great force that somewhere between where I was standing and Bethany, Jesus had been with his intimate disciples after his resurrection and just before he ascended to his Father in heaven. His final message was, 'Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.' (Mark 16:15.) That message must have been extremely important since it was the last instruction he chose to leave with them as he concluded his brief mortal ministry.

"Somehow, the importance of that responsibility still sticks in my mind. I can understand why the modern prophets have been so missionary oriented, since they have received the same charge from the Lord in our day. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read, 'Go ye into all the world, preach the gospel to every creature, acting in the authority which I have given you, baptizing in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.'" (D&C 68:8.)

One father of a missionary read part of a letter from a son who had wondered whether he should go on a mission. The son had written, "This is the greatest thing I have ever done in my life. I can't believe I ever hesitated for a minute to come. We're teaching some of the neatest people I've ever met, and the Spirit has been so strong. There's no doubt about it, the gospel is true. It really is! And I want you, Mom and Dad, to know that I've now come to appreciate how much I love you and the great example you always set for all of us in the family. I hope all the rest of the kids are planning on coming into the mission field. There's nothing like it! I'll never be the same."

As the father folded up the letter to return it to its envelope, he said, "That letter alone is worth the separation and the cost of his mission."

"I never knew a person could feel like this," a newly called missionary at the Missionary Training Center said. "The spirit around here is so strong you could cut it with a knife. There's no doubt the Lord is behind this program. I've never felt like I have received so much help from the Spirit. The gospel is true, and no sacrifice is too great to share it with others."

A recent convert, with misty eyes, said, "There is no way I could ever repay the missionaries for bringing us the light of the gospel. I know that one of the elders who taught us came from a very poor home where his widowed mother would milk the few cows and sell the extra eggs to help send him money for his mission. Sometimes he would receive his monthly mission money parceled out in more than one small check as the egg or the milk check would come to his home. His family sacrificed to bring us the greatest of blessings. Everything of most worth in our lives has come since we joined the Church. There is no way we can ever repay those missionaries for what they have done for us. Maybe one of the best things we can do is to share the gospel with others and do all we can to see that our children are prepared to serve when their opportunity comes."

A former All-American basketball player spoke to a group of teenagers about the value of his missionary experience. He said, "You know, it's exciting to go out on the basketball floor in a home game and hear everyone cheer and then, if things have gone well, to read your name in the sports page the next day. It's nice to receive the title of All American and after college to have some professional offers. Just the thought of the money and being a professional reminded me of dreams I had had as long as I remember. But with all this, I want you to know that there is no title, there is no experience that even comes close to what I experienced when I reached down into the baptismal font and took the hand of a newly baptized convert and heard him say, 'Thanks, Elder.' That's the greatest title I'd ever received up to that point in my life. Being named All American didn't even compare to the feelings I had while serving as a missionary."

President Spencer W. Kimball has said, "I'm asking that we start earlier and train our missionaries better in every branch and every ward in the world. . . . Young people will understand that it is a great privilege to go on a mission and that they must be physically well, mentally well, spiritually well, and that the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance. I am asking for missionaries who have been carefully indoctrinated and trained through the family and the organizations of the Church, and who come to the mission with a great desire. I am asking. . . that we train prospective missionaries much better, much earlier, much longer, so that each anticipates his [or her] mission with great joy." ("When the World Will Be Converted," Ensign, October 1974, pp. 7-8.)

A common question among parents is, "How can we best help prepare our children for missions?"

Only one verse in the entire Bible tells us anything about how the Savior developed between age twelve and the time he began his ministry. Luke simply and succinctly recorded, "Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man." (Luke 2:52.)

In other words, the Savior increased or developed intellectually (in wisdom and knowledge), physically (in stature), socially (in favor with man), and spiritually (in favor with God). Our goal is to have our children develop in these same areas.

Our charge is to become like our Father in heaven and the Savior. Jesus asked, "What manner of men ought ye to be?" and then answered his own question, "Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Nephi 27:27.)

It is an acceptable and logical goal to try to develop in the same areas he developed if we wish to become like him. If you want to develop your children as effective human beings and well-prepared missionaries, see that they grow in all four of these areas:

Included in the chapters ahead are practical suggestions to help you as you move toward these important objectives. Your home can and should become a "missionary training center" of the highest, most effective order.
