Joe J. Christensen, Barbara K. Christensen, Making Your Home a Missionary Training Center ( 1985)

2

Intellectual Development

Children who are provided with a stimulating learning environment grow intellectually. A mother of several children described their family's efforts in this area: "We checked all the places for learning in our area that are fun and cost little or nothing for admission. My husband would also write substantive questions on our little home chalkboard where all could see. Then we'd go together on learning outings to find the answers. We visited the power plants to see how power got to our house. We went to the phone company and asked to see how the telephone worked. We had the children give reports in family home evening on their findings. We made trips together to the library and studied together. We tried to pique the curiosity of our children. I thought that one good motto for families today could be 'Turn off the TV and begin to learn.'"

Children who grow up being intellectually stimulated come to their missionary experience anxious to learn and ready for more adventures of the mind.

Barbara recalls an experience she once had in a certain class:

I remember one teacher, a university professor, who made the statement that children coming from a large family were less intelligent and less likely to succeed in life. This statement did not sit well at all with me, coming as I did from a family of thirteen children. I sat there boiling inside, and you can probably guess that all of the boiling was not confined within me. I suggested that intelligence is not at all affected by the number of children in a family, but that it is affected by the attitude toward education held by the parents, and especially the mother. Two of my family didn't live to college age, but of the eleven living, all had the opportunity to go to college and did so. We were happy that seven of the eleven graduated from college and also that all of the sons and four of the daughters filled missions. Learning was important in my home as long as I can remember.

My father was the twelfth of thirteen children. They were very poor, and each child had to work to help support their immigrant family. In those days they felt it their duty to work and develop a good trade rather than spend more time in school. While my father was still in elementary school, he decided that he was through with school, which was not uncommon in those days when school would often be interrupted by dropping out to work to help support the family. He wrote in his personal history, "Then a new teacher came to town. He met me downtown and asked if I was going to school. When I said no, he said to me, 'Why not try it for three or four days and see if you won't like it?' I was like a great many other boys, restless, and education didn't mean much. My parents were very poor and my father encouraged me to learn a trade and not worry about school. But I couldn't resist the new teacher's challenge. He brought a new awakening in me. He never answered a question outright but rather told us where to find the answer in a book. He would write the name of the book on the board. My urge for information-finding has never left me. When I read a good book, I am in a new world." My father continued to learn. He had a real thirst for learning, cultivated by his teacher's love of books. One of my cherished memories of both my parents is of them with a book in their hands. They both became very well educated—beyond most earned degrees.

As I grew up there was never a birthday nor Christmas at our home without our receiving the gift of a well-chosen book. Mother always wrote some appropriate lines in the inside cover. When we were young and money was hard to come by, and also because some of my mother's favorite books were out of print, I remember going with her to secondhand stores to buy books. We would look through stacks of them and sort out the ones she wanted to use as gifts. Then we would take them home and sterilize them in the oven before she made the presentation. I have listened by the hour to my mother recite poetry and stories with great morals.

Helping our children to develop intellectually is of prime importance. Aristotle said, "All who have meditated upon the art of governing mankind have been convinced that the fate of empires depends upon the education of youth."

A young mother of three, the oldest of the children in her family, and a university graduate, said, "I appreciated the fact that from my earliest memories, we always had a set of good reference books in our home. I still go to the World Book Encyclopedia first to find answers, and now when my own children need to know what koala bears eat or the difference between camels and dromedaries, we can find the answers in the set of encyclopedias we just stretched ourselves to afford to buy for our home. We keep them on a shelf in our family room right next to our kitchen where we can go whenever questions arise. Our oldest child is now six, and already she is figuring out how the alphabetical listings work—that 'bear' comes before 'bees,' and so on."

A father noted, "The other day, our second grade son sat intently studying a small calculator. His fingers moved over the raised numbers, and I could see his lips move slightly as he repeated their names and reviewed the numbers and the signs of the mathematical functions. He experimented with simple addition and subtraction problems. Obviously, his intellectual development was being stimulated far beyond anything I had experienced at his age. With calculators and all that is available to children these days, this is a new era of opportunity for learning."

Modern technological developments bring with them both challenges and opportunities. Computers can become merely enticing ways to waste vast amounts of time in meaningless games, or they can provide exceptional opportunities for intellectual and cultural growth. Parents can help determine whether the technological revolution will be constructive or destructive for their children.

A sensitive father described how they are solving two problems: "When we became aware of how many hours each day our children were watching TV programs of little or no value, and some that were actually extremely sordid, vulgar, and violent, we decided that some changes needed to be made. We invested in a video recorder and then made an agreement that each week we would go through the TV listings and together with our children select the programs we considered to be of greatest educational and cultural worth. We would program the recorder to record them. Then on Saturday, the children could look forward to a few hours of choice entertainment and learning. In the process we built up a good library of excellent programs. We noticed that immediately our children's grades shot up. The children were happier. Their self-esteem increased because they were accomplishing more and they didn't seem to miss the hours they used to spend with trashy movies, game shows, and cartoons. Television has become a tool for progress in our home rather than a mammoth negative intrusion in our lives."

A PTA president described how a relatively inexpensive computer and word processor changed the life of a handicapped boy. "The young man was severely spastic. He could not control his body movements, and his fingers assumed unnatural configurations. His nervous system did not allow him even to hold a pencil. He didn't have the muscular strength to raise or lower his fingers to press an ordinary typewriter key, but he could point straight down and activate the keys of a computer. Before long, he learned to run a computer. This marvelous instrument allowed him to begin to express himself through the word processor and printer. His intelligent mind was unlocked from captivity in an extremely handicapped body."

Educators and technicians are just scratching the surface of what computers can do to help you and your children develop intellectually. You should not ignore the developments that so rapidly seem to make obsolete what was new and current only yesterday.

However, even with all the emphasis on the visual media, your children should come to prize the value of good books. Books continue to hold their unique position in intellectual development.

Horace Mann said, "A house without books is like a room without windows. No man has a right to bring up his children without surrounding them with books, if he has the means to buy them. It is a wrong to his family. Children learn to read by being in the presence of books. The love of knowledge comes with reading and grows upon it. And the love of knowledge, in a young mind, is almost a warrant against the inferior excitement of passions and vices."

Charles Kingsley said, "We ought to reverence books; to look on them as useful and mighty things.— If they are good and true, whether they are about religion, politics, farming, trade, law, or medicine, they are the message of Christ, the maker of all things—the teacher of all truth."

One of our teenage daughters said as she first visited and observed the huge Library of Congress, "For me it was an inspirational experience. I turned and looked at the row after row of books on shelves that reached floor upon floor. They told us that there were many millions there. I can't even comprehend how many a million are."

Help your children realize that they should select their reading material wisely. Let them know that if they were to read a book a week (and few will) for the next seventy years, they would read 3,640 books in that period of time. A remarkable number, they might reasonably think, until they learn that there are already more than 15 million volumes in the United States Library of Congress and that new books are spewing from the presses of the world at the rate of a thousand titles a day, which means there will be more than 25 million additional volumes in seventy years. The message: There is no time for trash or for reading anything in print that is not helpful and uplifting.

Paxton Hood said, "Be as careful of the books you read as of the company you keep; for your habits and character will be as much influenced by the former as by the latter."

Sir Francis Bacon said, "If I might control the literature of the household, I would guarantee the well-being of the church and state."

Remember that whatever you and your children read is there to stay. The marvelous mental computer in the mind retains everything, good or bad. Whatever enters is subject to and ready for recall at any time.

What we store in our minds becomes our mental food storage. How foolish it would be for a mother to can spoiled apricots and beans, and how much more serious it would be to store in our minds the garbage so prevalent in our society today.

Remember that even the latter-day restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ began with a boy reading the Bible. And the organization of the Church centered around the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, which required serious intellectual development to translate and which led to a host of other books of scripture. In the Carthage Jail, during the hours just preceding the martyrdom, the Prophet Joseph, his brother Hyrum, and the others had with them, among other literature, a no less stimulating volume than the writings of Josephus.

The scriptures admonish, "Seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom." (D&C 88:118, italics added.) They also tell us to "become acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people." (D&C 90:15, italics added.)

A few years ago a Gallup poll showed that 56 percent of Americans never completely read a book all the way through following their schooling. Every Latter-day Saint parent should set a more positive example. Buy books to the extent resources permit. Become more like Erasmus, who said, "When I get a little money, I buy books; and if any is left, I buy food and clothes."

With public libraries, bookmobiles, and school collections of all kinds, one does not need to be wealthy to enjoy the best that is in print.

We have a family tradition that every birthday and Christmas each child receives a book as a gift. We think this helps to satisfy their natural desire to own things and reinforces the value of reading good books.

Children who come to feel the value of good books and to read them develop intellectually, and from then on any educational experience at school or on a mission will be easier and much more enjoyable. Remember Mark Twain's observation that "the man who does not read good books has no advantage over the man who can't read them."

Among all these books, none are as valuable as the scriptures. Don't overlook the importance of having your children enroll in seminary classes, where they receive daily opportunity to study the scriptures in a highly motivational setting with excellent curricular materials.

A friend who has had a few challenges with a teenage son recently commented, "Joe, I can't believe it. You know our son Jim and that we have had our struggles. I went downstairs the other night to check on the kids and noticed his light on in his bedroom. If you can believe it, there he was reading the scriptures, and I found out that he reads them for a few minutes every night. I can't thank his seminary teacher enough for that kind of motivation. It is really making a difference in his whole attitude."

Another important area of training for children is that of learning a second language. We noted that with few exceptions, the missionaries who came to the Missionary Training Center having studied a second language were more confident, adjusted easier, and learned everything more rapidly.

Encourage your children to study a foreign language. Even if it is not the language of the mission to which they are called, the experience will still be invaluable to them in terms of learning, mental discipline, and cultural understanding. A noted linguist said, "No one truly knows his own language until he has learned another."

Particularly in the United States of America, we have some serious challenges in the area of language study, as indicated in the following items selected from a Report of the President's Commission on Foreign Language and International Studies:

— Nine out of ten Americans cannot speak, read, or effectively understand any language but English.

— Only 15 percent of entering college freshmen said their high-school programs prepared them very well in foreign languages.

— One fifth of public high schools offer no foreign language at all.

— Only 14.3 percent of college freshmen could actually speak a second language.

— Only 17 percent of American students of foreign languages taught wholly in this country can read, speak, or write those languages easily.

— There are approximately ten thousand English-speaking Japanese businessmen operating in America, but only one thousand Americans operating in Japan, and few of them can speak any Japanese at all.

As members of the Lord's church, we have a solemn obligation and responsibility to share the gospel in all the world. To do so requires that we teach the people in their own language. The Lord has said that "every man shall hear the fulness of the gospel in his own tongue, and in his own language, through those who are ordained unto this power, by the administration of the Comforter, shed forth upon them for the revelation of Jesus Christ." (D&C 90:11.)

In addition to sharing the gospel, a practical advantage of knowing a second language became evident when over twenty five hundred returned missionaries served as volunteer interpreters during the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, California.

Here are some practical suggestions from linguists to help children learn to speak more effectively the second language they are studying:

Fortunately, now there is at least a partial reawakening and more encouragement for language study in the public schools than there has been in the recent past. As more young people acquire second language skills, the task of taking the gospel to every man "in his own tongue and in his own language" will become easier to accomplish.

Parents and all who have influence on children should stress the importance of the intellectual growth from learning well one's own tongue. A great part of the leadership power exerted by such giants as Winston Churchill came from their command of language. The pen and the tongue in the long run are indeed more powerful than the sword. Children who develop skills in reading, writing, speaking, and listening are much better equipped for their missions and for their lives generally.

Children should be taught not to be content with just any level of expression; they should not be like the young man who said, "It don't make much difference, cuz if I say I ain't a' goin', ya' know I ain't a' goin'." They should be brought to a point somewhere between that level and the stilted level of language illustrated in the Churchill quip about dangling prepositions: "This is the sort of English up with which I will not put."

Elder Adam S. Bennion, while serving as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, remembered with fond appreciation the fact that his mother was willing to sacrifice a portion of their scanty means to acquire an unabridged dictionary for him to have at his fingertips and then encouraged him to make good use of it throughout his life.

Children should be taught, as President Hugh B. Brown paraphrased, that, "What one knew at 21 or 35 or 60 is never enough to last a lifetime. The degree of our achievement in business, profession, home, family life, social affairs, civic duties—in fact, our religious and personal philosophy—is largely determined by our education." (As quoted in Continuing the Quest [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1967], p. 328.)

President Brown was further impressed by this inscription on the base of a monument of a falcon protecting her young: "Man's flight through life is sustained by the power of his knowledge." (Ibid.)

It is estimated that one out of five high school students has reading or learning difficulties. Some suffer from dyslexia, which is a neurological abnormality that occurs more often in young men than women. Many with the problem are otherwise very intelligent and have learned to cope with their disability to the extent that other people are usually not aware that they have it. Among the common symptoms is that as they attempt to read, the words appear backward on the page.

Others are learning impaired due to some birth injury that causes mental retardation to one degree or another. This was true of an elder we knew at the Missionary Training Center. From all outward appearances he was as normal as anyone. His father privately explained to me, "When our son was born, there was an oxygen deprivation to his brain cells due to some problems that occurred. As a result, he never was able to learn quite as fast as our other children or others of his age. We have wondered about a mission for him. He has always wanted to go. I think it is best for you to know that at the outset. We hope there is something that can be done to help him experience some success. We love him very much and would not want him to be hurt in any way due to the rigors of a mission."

He came to the Missionary Training Center to prepare for his mission in the eastern part of the United States. He was very nervous but was ready to do his best. With the capable assistance of understanding teachers and companions and using some excellent new methods of testing and diagnosing learning strengths, he was able to learn the missionary discussions in a simplified form. His mission president later wrote to me, "We are pleased to have Elder ________ here. He has a fine spirit and really wants to be successful. His companion is a winner, and they work together well. They had their first baptisms last Saturday."

His father later said, "The mission is the best thing that ever happened to our son. His self-image has really improved since he discovered that he can actually experience success where learning is involved."

Some children have handicaps so severe that serving a full-time mission may not be possible. Even so, every child can perform some kind of missionary service informally.

One young elder said good-bye to a teenage paraplegic sister who was required to move about in a wheelchair. They had been very close over the years, and many tears were shed as they hugged and he went to get on the airplane. In response to her brother's urging that she could be involved in missionary work as she had always dreamed, even if she were not able to serve full-time, she determined that she would make it a point to engage acquaintances in conversation about the gospel, and several responded to her invitations.

There are many elders and sisters who have been able to serve in spite of handicaps. We will always remember the elder who arrived as a quadriplegic in his motorized wheelchair. When he was about seventeen years old, he trained on a trampoline to become a ski-acrobat. He was trying to perform a triple forward somersault, which he had performed successfully on various occasions. On his last attempt, he came down in such a way that his spinal column was injured, and he became paralyzed from the neck down with limited use of his arms and hands.

In many ways, it seemed that much of his life had ended. A mission, athletic endeavors, marriage, and education seemed out of the question.

Then a good friend in his ward went to the bishop and said, "Bishop, if the Brethren would be willing to call my paralyzed friend on a mission, I would be willing to go with him and be his companion all the time, because I know how to help take care of him."

In this case, the Brethren were willing to extend the Lord's call, and the two elders arrived at the Missionary Training Center in a specially equipped van. They worked diligently together to overcome many challenges, including pressure sores the elder developed from long periods of sitting in his wheelchair in classes as they worked on the discussions. They completed their training and then left for their field of labor. We heard later that this elder had even performed baptisms with the help of companions standing on each side of him in the baptismal font so that he could stabilize himself on his paralyzed legs.

If the right spirit of missionary service has been created in the home, then, regardless of physical and mental condition, service can be rendered whether at home or on a full-time mission. Anyone's life can be strengthened as a result of diligent efforts.

Commit yourself to continue to teach your children and to do all you can to make your home an intellectually motivating environment. Your children will bless your name forever. They will become more interested and interesting. They will be more effective missionaries and sharers of important ideas. Regardless of where they serve, they will be able to experience as much success as they possibly can.
