Joe J. Christensen, Barbara K. Christensen, Making Your Home a Missionary Training Center ( 1985)

3

Physical Development

Healthy people are happier people! That really isn't news to anyone. Parents should do all they can to help their children develop physically healthy bodies. It is difficult to think of much else when you don't feel well. Health does not come to us automatically; we must work for it. It is appropriate that in Primary, children sing songs that teach that their bodies are temples and that they are responsible to care for them properly. The time will likely come when we will be called upon to report what we did to guard our health and care for this mortal tabernacle. Missionaries need the best health they can possibly have to fulfill their callings as well as they can and should.

A wise young woman or man would never be foolish enough to tamper with such harmful substances as alcohol, tobacco, and drugs. However, there are so many pressures on youth to do so. Billions of dollars are invested to entice them to become slaves to habits that can impair or destroy their health. Young people often rebel when others tell them what to do—yet some choose to become virtual slaves to alcohol, tobacco, or drugs. These substances dictate what their user does after a very short time of using them. Consider this description of the power of habit:

I am your constant companion. I am your greatest helper or your heaviest burden. I will push you onward or drag you down to failure. I am completely at your command. Half the things you do you might just as well turn over to me, and I will be able to do them quickly and correctly. I am easily managed. You must merely be firm with me. Show me exactly how you want something done, and after a few lessons, I will do it automatically. I am the servant of all great men, and alas, of all failures, as well. Those who are great, I have made great. Those who are failures, I have made failures. I am not a machine, though I work with all the precision of a machine, plus the intelligence of a man. You may run me for profit, or run me for ruin, it makes no difference to me. Take me, train me, be firm with me, and I will place the world at your feet. Be easy with me, and I will destroy you. Who am I? I am habit. (Author unknown.)

Thanks to mass media and some sports idols, chewing and spitting tobacco are considered manly by some. It is hard to imagine a more filthy practice—the chewing, the spitting, the brown saliva oozing out of the corners of the mouth. Children should be taught to look long and hard at any harmful substance and ask, "Are you important and great enough for me to become a slave to you?" It is rare to meet anyone who has become addicted to any of these things who would say that he is happy he started using them. One young college girl tearfully said, "When I started smoking, I'm sure I did it hoping to be accepted by my friends, and I'm sure in part, to rebel against my folks. But, oh, what I would give if I had never started. It is so hard to quit!"

Children should be taught that they do not have to experience everything for themselves. How much wiser it is to accept the experience of others as valid and profit by their mistakes. No one can live long enough to make all the mistakes of others. We need to teach our children that it is not easy to give up the use of harmful substances. It is very difficult. The longer one uses them, the more difficult it is.

For the sake of their children, adults who use these things should banish them from their lives, even if they have not previously thought enough of their bodies or lives to do so. One mother became extremely upset when she discovered that her son was drinking beer. It was hard for her to understand any correlation between his consumption of beer and her consumption of coffee, as she considered beer to be so much worse than coffee. The most powerful teacher, for good or ill, is always example.

One young missionary insightfully remembered the time he fought to eliminate destructive habits from his life: "I was tired of hearing all the time about lung cancer and what those habits would mean to me physically. Those threats seemed very remote at the time. I was sure that it happened to other people, not to me. It was of great assistance to me when my bishop helped me to see how those habits were removing me from close association with things I had held dear—my former friends, my family, my Church, and my plans for a successful future. Only then was I able to begin the introspection that helped me to change." Parents need to be careful to teach rather than preach when it comes to the Word of Wisdom.

Among many areas that could be stressed, future missionaries and future parents need to realize the extreme importance to their health of at least the following five areas: positive mental attitude, regular and effective exercise, good nutrition, a proper amount of rest, and cleanliness.

Positive Mental Attitude

One day a computer salesman came to the Missionary Training Center and demonstrated a small computer about fourteen inches by twelve inches. He told us that the little computer cost about $3,000. He then said, "This little computer will do more, more rapidly than a several-million-dollar computer that filled a large room could have done a few years ago."

He then went on to say, "In spite of how great this little computer is and all the other computers that have been developed, even the biggest and most complex cannot compare with your brain or mine. Those are the truly great computers."

If we eat excessively or take poisons internally, the body will often use its rejection or regurgitation system. Not so, apparently, with the brain. It will store whatever is programmed into it. We add to its store daily, and we get back exactly what we program in. So, if we constantly program in negative ideas about ourselves and about life, we will get negative thoughts in return. Parents must be careful to do all they can to fill their children's minds only with positive things.

It is important to assure your children and have them reassure themselves that they are worthwhile, that you love them and so does their Heavenly Father. If your children think they are failures or suppose that they do not have any ability, they will not rise to their potential. Emerson has said, "Remember, you are what you think about most of the time."

When children come to understand their divine potential even in a limited degree, they will always be striving to overcome faults in order to become more worthy of living one day with our Heavenly Father. An essayist reminds us that we all need to experience some "divine discontent" in our lives. There is much left to accomplish, there are mountains to climb, but with effort we have what it takes to ultimately succeed. Being positive in our approach to life makes many things possible and brings happiness along the way. Being positive does not mean that we should be unrealistic with our children, but as they face the realities of mortality some positive self-talk can be helpful. It would be healthy for a young person to be taught to say to himself as he looks in the mirror in the morning, "I am a healthy person. Everything inside me operates very well. I will do everything I can to help myself remain healthy." Attitude determines altitude. It molds us. It directs us.

When our children were young, we liked to encourage them to spend enough time grooming themselves so that they looked modest and attractive. Then they could go out, forget about themselves, and turn instead to serving others. Only then could they be happy and only then could they feel good about themselves. People who are the total center of their own attention live in a constricted world and are most unhappy. We think a good question to ask oneself is: "How do people feel about themselves after they have been in my presence for a time?" We probably choose to spend time with certain people because we feel so good about ourselves during that time.

Over the years we have presented our children with books that can help develop a positive attitude. Some of our old favorites are I Dare You, by William H. Danforth; As a Man Thinketh, by James Allen; The Power of Positive Thinking, by Norman Vincent Peale; Psycho-Cybernetics, by Maxwell Maltz; and Gift from the Sea, by Anne Morrow Lindbergh.

Exercise

Children probably won't think exercise is important if you don't. Exercise should be regarded as fun and necessary throughout life. Help your children enjoy several kinds of exercise and sports. This will help develop their fast-growing bodies and also help them develop a positive self-image. Be careful, though, that a child does not consider himself a failure if his talents do not lie in sports.

There are many exercises that do not require special skills. Brisk walking is great exercise and is possible for almost everyone. We have noticed, however, that when our teenagers reached the age of sixteen and received a driver's license, they suddenly forgot how to walk. Extra reminders may be needed for older children. Parents can show the value of physical exercise by example. They can walk to church or to the store instead of driving. They can follow their own exercise routine and involve the children when they can. Also, parents should be sure their children are taught to swim at an early age, both for their own protection and for the enjoyment of the exercise.

Take time to do athletic things together as a family. Some children are content to sit most of the time (in school, at meals, or in front of the television) unless encouraged by Mom and Dad to do something physical. Children will participate in a sport much more happily if they become skilled at it. Young children learn much faster than older ones. They also seem to be more daring and less aware of failure. Start as early as possible to teach them to swim, ski, skate, play ball, ride bicycles, and so on. Doing so accomplishes several things: it brings the family closer together, and it develops healthier bodies and higher self-esteem. It has been found that some forms of depression can be diminished by exercise. It is surprising how much better one feels if he goes out for a brisk walk.

Barbara notes, "Walking is my favorite exercise. I remember once taking a nature walk with our youngest son in fulfillment of a Cub Scout requirement. We walked several blocks together. We had driven the area many times in the car. We were both surprised to observe things of which we had been totally unaware while driving.

"Groups of us have walked together for years. At one time there were twelve of us who walked together in the mornings. Our children all knew that as soon as they went out of the door to school, we would be behind them beginning our morning walk. On our route was a large dog (about the size of a Shetland pony, or at least it appeared so to me). I told my husband that we might have to change our route because the dog frightened us, but he assured me that no dog would dare attack that group of women. I guess we looked as if we meant business."

Parents need to help one another find time for exercise. For instance, Dad can tend the children while Mom goes to the gym. This teaches children the importance of exercise in a powerful way.

There are several indoor exercises that are effective—doing aerobics with the television or with tape programs, jumping on a mini trampoline, or riding a stationary bicycle. It would be difficult, though, for these to become a family affair, but they are helpful when getting outside is not possible.

Exercise develops discipline. One mission president was optimistic about missionaries who had been Eagle Scouts, grown up on farms where they learned to work, participated in competitive sports, or played a musical instrument. He knew that these missionaries had probably learned some discipline, and he was seldom disappointed.

Many think they do not have time to exercise. Parents should teach their children that in the long run they will have more time for other things if they exercise first. Again, the example set by the adults is paramount. If you are not exercising regularly in your family and decide to begin, it will open up a new way of life to you. You'll love it—or at least, you'll love how it makes you feel, and you'll probably rear children who like to exercise.

Nutrition

The eating habits of the majority of our youth (and we might add, many adults) are shocking. Children should be taught from infancy how food relates to health.

Children can be taught the principles of good nutrition. Simple foods should be emphasized. Children should learn to enjoy raw foods and simple dishes. The lament of many mothers is, "My children just won't eat vegetables." Usually the mother has not emphasized early enough the positive counsel in the Word of Wisdom about using grains, vegetables, and fruits. If children are taught the importance of good nutrition from the time they are tiny, they will grow up remembering those principles and will likely follow them on their missions.

It is not wise to tell our children at meals, "If you don't eat your vegetables, you can't have dessert." In other words, "If you don't eat the undesirable item, you can't have the desirable one." Many also bribe children with goodies. How much wiser it would be to say, "If you finish your work in an hour, you may choose the largest apple at the grocery store." An even better tactic would be to reward children by reading to them from a favorite book or giving them something other than food. As a society, we often make food a prize and then wonder why some people fight obesity throughout life.

Careful planning and purchasing of food is great training for future missionaries. Children can be taught to write up a balanced menu for a week's meals and then make a shopping list based on the menu. Then they could be taken to the store to help buy the items while learning how to comparison shop for the best bargains. Later they could help prepare a few of the meals. These skills will be invaluable on their missions.

Many authorities suggest that we should cut back on the consumption of salt. It is interesting to watch some people before they begin eating. Out of habit, some ask for the salt without tasting the food first. They salt down their whole plate of food and then begin to eat. Using salt sparingly is another habit a child can develop.

Sugar can become an addiction. Many of us consume far more than our share. A nutrition counselor noted, "If you don't think sugar can be addicting, just try cutting it out of your diet." For health and economic reasons, it would be wise to reduce significantly the amount of soda pop children consume. How much better to give them natural fruit and vegetable juices. Again, these habits will carry over into adulthood.

Some Latter-day Saint customs could be changed to nutritional advantage. For example, at most firesides and social gatherings we feel obligated to serve some high-calorie dessert. One observer of this phenomenon said, "What is interesting to me is that we have the nerve to ask the Lord to bless the refreshments and help them to nourish and strengthen our bodies. Come to think of it, I guess we need the blessings then more than at a regular meal."

We likely place too much emphasis on eating. An acquaintance who values good nutrition said, "Sometimes I think we feel obligated immediately after an introduction to respond, 'How do you do? When can you come to dinner?' If someone drops in for a short visit, we feel we have failed as hosts if we cannot offer at least cookies. I went to a fireside recently where they didn't serve anything. I was so pleased I made it a point to compliment the chairman. It truly is possible to say hello without shoving food into each other's hands."

We should take the Lord at his word and use meat sparingly in the home. Authorities on nutrition these days are urging more poultry and fish and less red meat in our diets. If one were to ask you what you were fixing for a certain meal, you would probably name the meat dish. "Oh, we're having roast beef." We are in the habit of building meals around the meat dish. We could wisely change that practice. Especially since we started planting our garden, some of our family's most satisfying meals have included a variety of freshly picked vegetables such as corn on the cob, tomatoes, beets, or string beans along with some good home-baked whole-wheat bread and fresh fruit for dessert. We don't even miss the emphasis on meat we used to have.

It is important to begin training both sons and daughters in the basics of preparing and cooking nutritional foods at an early age, even though it is generally easier and much less messy for you to do all the cooking yourself. Children will not learn by osmosis—they learn primarily by doing. Many missionaries know almost nothing about cooking and nutrition and as a consequence do not eat well while on their missions.

Rest

Children seem to differ in the amounts of sleep they need. Some sleep too much. The scriptures teach that we should cease to sleep longer than is needful, that we should retire and arise early. (See D&C 88:124.) Nowhere do the scriptures say, "Thou shalt sleep eight hours." Nor do they say, "Retire early unless you happen to be a night person." There must be an excellent reason for the injunction to retire and arise early. You and your children will profit by this counsel if you heed it.

President Marion G. Romney shared with us this powerful advice given to him by President Harold B. Lee when President Romney was first called as a general authority:

"If you are to be successful as a General Authority," Elder Lee counseled, "you must be in tune with the Spirit. You must receive personal revelation. When you are assigned to help reorganize a stake, you will need the benefit of the Spirit in order to know whom the Lord has chosen to become the new stake president. You must receive inspiration. My friend, I will give you one piece of advice: Go to bed early and get up early. If you do, your body and mind will become rested and then in the quiet of those early morning hours, you will receive more flashes of inspiration and insight than at any other time of the day."

From that day on, I put that counsel into practice, and I know it works. Whenever I have a serious problem, or some assignment of a creative nature with which I hope to receive the influence of the Spirit, I always receive more assistance in the early morning hours than at any other time of the day. Following that counsel has helped me a great deal through the years. (Joe J. Christensen, To Grow in Spirit [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983], pp. 27-28.)

Parents can teach children the importance of arising early. In fact, most children will avoid staying out late at night if they know they have to get up early the next morning.

The world is a more beautiful place early in the morning. Life is so much more calm. Much more can be accomplished in a shorter amount of time. Still, getting up early is not easy. Parents have to set the example. Arriving places on time is closely related to early rising. Many missionaries struggle with this, and, consequently, their companions also suffer.

Teaching children the value of arising early can also help them have a more meaningful Sabbath day, as illustrated by a young mother's experience: "When we were in graduate school in a neighboring state, I struggled with having my little family of five children and myself ready in time to go to Sunday School. My husband left before we did and drove the several miles to the church for priesthood meeting. I finally decided that I would have to make some changes—both to be ready on time and also to have a more calm Sunday morning. Our oldest child was seven at the time. I decided first of all to try the advice of the song that the Primary children sing: 'Saturday is the day we get ready for Sunday.' I found that I could do much more on Saturday. I made sure our Sunday clothes were all ready on Saturday. I even scrubbed the potatoes and wrapped them in foil and cooked other items for the Sunday dinner.

"On Sunday morning, I fed the children and then bathed and dressed them and me, putting on all but the top layer of clothing. Next, I put a robe on each of us. I was then able to continue doing the necessary duties of Sunday morning and to read scripture stories to the children. About five or ten minutes before I knew my husband would be home from priesthood meeting to pick us up, I slipped the robes off all of us and put the top layer on everyone. From that time on, we were always ready on time and arrived before the meeting started. President David O. McKay once said that when a meeting is due to start, the Lord's Spirit is there and that it is an affront to Him for one to come in late."

If in your home you arise and retire early and are punctual for meetings and appointments, your future missionaries will grow up with these habits in their own lives. They will also leave home with the good feeling that comes only from being in control and on time.

The physical aspects of life are intimately connected with all the other dimensions of life that lead to happiness. They should not be overlooked as you work to make your home a missionary training center.
