Joe J. Christensen, Barbara K. Christensen, Making Your Home a Missionary Training Center ( 1985)

4

Social and Emotional Development

Successful missionary service does not occur unless the missionary has learned how to work well with others. Getting along with companions, friends, and acquaintances in the mission field can be a real challenge, but it is absolutely essential. Developing skill with people is necessary for success. Imagine living twenty-four hours a day with someone you cannot get along with. There are several things you can do to help your children adjust socially and be able to relate to others effectively that we will consider in this chapter.

First, teach children the value of service. Sometimes children are so used to thinking of themselves that it is difficult for them to give much thought to serving others. Developing love of service to other members of the family is essential.

Barbara remembers excellent advice given by her mother during one of her visits in our home: "Remember, if you would have your children love you, have them do things for you. One of the reasons a mother loves her children so much is that she spends much of her time in loving service to them. Your children will also learn to love those whom they serve. Don't rob them of that blessing by doing too much for them."

You may often find yourself running from child to child doing things for them that they could and should learn to do for themselves. Sometimes you can do a task more quickly yourself without bothering to teach the child. That can be a mistake. Don't underestimate what a little child can begin doing in the way of chores around the house. Use positive reinforcement. Children love rewards. One mother observed, "We found that a simple chart with each child's chores listed can be posted on the wall. If the child completes a job without being told, he is given two stars for the chart. If he completes the chore but must be reminded, one star is his reward. When our children are up in the morning and have completed their chores before leaving for school, they depart feeling good about themselves, and I'm not left to take care of everything."

An observant mother of several growing children noted, "Children who keep their bedrooms organized and help with organization in the home often seem more calm. Everyone enjoys order. It helps bring about serenity. If a child, or an adult, enters an orderly bedroom, he is more likely to hang up his coat and put away his books. Neatness leads to more neatness."

A child who is waited upon constantly and does not learn to love to serve others will likely grow up with a poor self-image and be most unhappy. We need to provide many experiences to help our children feel good about serving others. It will probably not come naturally. One mother worried through an entire temple session because she was afraid she wouldn't get home in time to iron a dress for her high-school-age daughter. Sometimes we become slaves to our children. When that occurs, they are not likely to respect us for it. In fact, they probably see it as a sign of weakness.

As a child learns to serve in the home, he will probably continue that attitude of service in the mission field and throughout life. We know that "where much is given, much is expected." (See D&C 82:3.) We should not overlook the reverse that "where much is expected, much is given." In fact, from the moment a child is born, there is not only the challenge of teaching him to do things for himself so that by the time he is nineteen and ready for a mission he is pretty well independent, but also of teaching him to become less self-serving and to think of others.

One mother noted, "We help our children plan fun surprises for other members of the family. What fun for a little child to slip into his sister's bedroom and make her bed for her and then wait for the cheers from sister and the hugs, kisses, and praise from Mom and Dad.

Service outside the home also needs to be cultivated at an early age. We should teach our children to be sensitive to the needs of others. Empathy can and should be taught. Even with the remote possibility that Sister Jones down the street doesn't enjoy your whole-wheat bread, your child needs the joy that comes from taking it to her.

In one ward, many prospective missionaries learned to serve when their quorum adviser and Scoutmaster arranged for the young men to arise extra early on the days it snowed and see how many could shovel the snow off sidewalks of preassigned widows' homes so quietly that those in the home wouldn't even know who did it.

One family discovered that among the best ways to serve outside the home was to encourage children to see which children at school needed a friend. They encouraged their children to report in family home evening on how they went about including someone who needed them and how they brought happiness to them.

A father reported, "In a world where so much emphasis is placed on money and what it can buy, we found it helpful to teach children the joys of doing little chores for neighbors without the thought of being paid. We suggested that they ask themselves, 'What can I do to make someone happy today?' Some of our best family experiences came when we heard reports from them of how it went."

When our children had birthday parties, they knew that it was a policy in our home that they invite all the boys or girls in their school class. We did not want them to leave anyone out and cause them pain. We asked our children to imagine how they would feel if someone else had a party and did not invite them.

Social adjustment is aided greatly by the development of a healthy self-image. One of the best ways to build a good self-image is to help children develop at least one talent or skill that they do better than most people. This can be in art, sports, scholastic achievement, sewing, cooking, building, or any other worth-while area. It is important for a child to know that others know he excels. Sports can be helpful in the formative years but usually will not be as useful in the future as some other accomplishments. If a child has difficulty choosing an area, you should help him discover his talents and interests. As he works diligently to excel in some area, he will also develop another necessary ingredient of a happy life—self discipline. One cannot excel as a missionary without it.

Another important ingredient in a home that is a successful missionary training center is to teach children to have respect for others' opinions, for their property, and for their culture. In the Missionary Training Center and in the mission field, much is done to help the missionaries learn respect for and adjust quickly to new people, but more could be done before they arrive.

Sometimes a young person's experience has been so narrow that he imagines everyone lives about the way he does. Expose your children to other cultures through travel, if possible, and through books and magazines.

Before entering the Missionary Training Center, a missionary called to serve in another culture receives a book explaining the background of the people living in the area where he will serve. This allows the missionary and his family to learn about the area before he leaves home. When the missionary enters the Missionary Training Center, he has the privilege of attending classes taught by natives or returned missionaries from his particular mission. As a result, adjusting to the new area and the people becomes much easier for him.

Much can be done to help children adjust to being away from home. One father said, "We thought it important for our children to spend some time away from home on various occasions before they would enter the Missionary Training Center. It is hard for some to make the break if they have not had that experience."

The challenge of homesickness is illustrated by an elder who came to the Missionary Training Center from a dairy farm in Utah. Almost every day he would come by the office about 5:00 P.M. to discuss his painful homesickness. After several visits, he said, "Boy, I don't know if I can take this."

"Being away from home is really tough for you, isn't it?" we asked.

"Yes, I never dreamed it would be so hard."

"You really miss your folks, don't you?"

His chin started to quiver, tears ran down his cheeks, and finally he was able to communicate. "Yes," he said, "especially the cows at this time of the day!"

This elder eventually learned to enjoy his days in training and went successfully into the field.

One elder was so desperate in his loneliness for his parents that he felt he must leave his mission and go home to help on the farm because, as he explained, "My father is getting older now."

"How old is your father?" we asked. Then we struggled a little to keep a straight face when he responded with a quavering voice, "He's almost fifty-four!"

Whatever the reason, homesickness is real, and some missionaries even become bedridden because of it. As difficult as it may be, parents should help children decrease their dependency on them so that by the time they are nineteen or twenty-one it is not so difficult for them to move into the new and exciting experience of serving a mission that may be on the other side of the world with living conditions far removed from their home background.

Many city families have discovered help for their children by arranging an opportunity for them to work for a time on a farm or ranch. This generally accomplishes at least two things: children learn to adjust to being away from home, and they learn to work. These are both valuable ingredients to success in the mission field. Also, one from a rural area can gain a great deal from spending time in a city with carefully selected friends or relatives.

Successful missionary preparation begins long before young people are of age and includes teaching them to obey those in authority. Of course, this begins with teaching them to obey their parents. They then can develop a desire to obey teachers, Church authorities, and other responsible leaders. This does not mean that they should never question or that they should obey blindly. However, learning respect for authority starts any young person onto the road of success in the mission field. One mother said, "We do not allow our children to raise their voices or to speak disrespectfully. And we try to control ourselves and set a good example. We take the time to discuss things and allow them the opportunity to express their feelings so that they don't feel it necessary to be rude or disrespectful.

"I remember so well watching a Little League ball game one day. Our sons were on a team with a young man who had a violent temper. It got to be a habit for the boy to throw his bat when he was angry and to show a great display of temper. One day, as he threw the bat and began making a terrible fuss, his father jumped up from the bleachers and ran onto the field screaming, 'Mark, if you don't stop losing your temper while you're playing, I'm going to see to it that you really get straightened out when you get home!' It was a classic poor example. As they say, 'The apples don't fall far from the tree.'"

In actuality, everyone has a temper. The difference comes in the degree to which we learn to control it. No one should ever think that merely saying "I have a terrible temper" excuses him from responsible behavior. Each of us must accept responsibility in that area, and helping children learn to control their tempers is crucial for their future success as missionaries.

Children should learn to make decisions and do things on their own from the time they are tiny. Of course, at early ages, they begin with tiny things. They very soon learn the consequences that follow decisions. We met missionaries who suffered with indecision. They had rarely had to make a decision at home. One elder said, "Frankly, it's a little embarrassing. I couldn't even decide what to put into my own suitcase. My mom did it all for me."

Parents should allow children to do everything possible for themselves. Often, it is easier for you to do it than to deal with the mess or the trouble of teaching. However, it is imperative that children learn as early as possible. All teenagers should know something about cooking. They should learn elementary sewing, washing, and how to iron clothes. One day a young elder came to the office, obviously very upset. He quietly asked, "Sister Christensen, could you come down to the laundry and show me how to wash my clothes?" He had no idea how to go about it. Sister Christensen gave him instructions about how to sort the clothes, how much soap to use, and other details. He was one extreme. The other extreme was also common, those who felt no need for advice and had received none. They were the ones who threw everything into the washer at once—jeans, underwear, white shirts, colored socks—everything.

Future missionaries should be taught economy. Saving for a mission should begin when each child is very young. This also reinforces the idea of "when I go on a mission" instead of "if I go on a mission." Missionaries who save all or a good share of their own mission money are usually better missionaries than those who simply receive a handout. Help your children plan projects and find jobs to earn money. Also, help them learn to budget that money and care for it. Some mission presidents complain that a few missionaries run out of money in the second week of the month, and many can't account for what happened to it. Teach children to be prudent but not stingy, generous but not careless. One mother described her family's experience: "Our family worked to earn money for missions. We parents worked along with the children to build a family mission account. At the time one of our sons approached nineteen years of age, he surprised the family by announcing that he was not going on a mission but rather had decided to buy a car. Calmly and with all the love we could muster, we told him that the money had been earned and earmarked for a mission. So, if he did not care to go, we would take the money to the bishop to be used for someone who would choose to serve. A little later, after thinking it over, our son decided he would go."

President David O. McKay was once asked by a mother of a young son, "What is the most important thing I can teach my son?" He quickly replied, "Teach him to deny himself." The happiest children know what it is like to go without some things. Happy children know what it is like to contribute to the welfare of the family and to earn their way—at least to a point. It is not doing a child a favor to attempt to fulfill his every desire. If we try to do so, sooner or later the child will become frustrated, for every desire cannot be satisfied.

Many of life's rough edges can be removed if children are taught to be grateful. President George Albert Smith gave great emphasis to gratitude. Teach your children the importance of saying thank you. Teach them how much it means to people to receive thank-you notes. Some missionaries had learned these lessons superbly before arriving at the Missionary Training Center and their mission fields. A choice young elder wrote a note of gratitude to an anonymous benefactor for a much-needed new suit he had received:

Dear Brother Sir,

I would like to take this opportunity to thank you very much for allowing me to serve my mission with the utmost dignity. I grew up on my dad's farm and ranch, and before I came to serve my mission I was leasing my own feedlot. Financing was hard to get as I just used my savings. I paid my lease for three years and only got to use one year of it before I heard that still, small voice that had been growing inside that said it needs be I serve my Heavenly Father through a mission. So, I tried to sell all my animals, and so I did to pay off my debts. When I got them sold, my savings account was $690 in the black. I had my horse and two sows and one boar left and couldn't get anyone to buy them; then the two sows had babies a few weeks before I was to leave. So, I gave the whole litter to my little brother to raise until they were old enough to wean and then sell them.

I am twenty-four years old and am the only one of a family of six that is a member. My dad said I was foolish to "waste" two years of my life like that, and my mom barely understood. They are not supporting me, so I took all of my retirement out from when I taught school to help my mission fund. I now have about $2,600 for my mission.

I don't know who you are personally, but I'm sure I can accurately guess who you are spiritually: you're my brother, and I hope and pray to God that you and yours will be blessed many times over. It is brothers like yourself that make my heart swell with the love of my fellow-men and all else God has created. I know my mission is called of God and truly inspired through our Lord to our prophet Spencer W. Kimball. I know this work is true and am so thankful to be a part of this program.

An elder who arrived at the Missionary Training Center with a cast on his arm had learned some important lessons about being grateful. He wrote:

Last Wednesday, my companion and I had to go to the orthopedic clinic, he for his knee and I for my wrist. My wrist had been in a cast for three and a half months prior to this visit. The doctor had X rays taken of my wrist. When he saw the X rays he could see that the bone hadn't healed. He was talking to one of the people that worked for him and I heard him say that the bone was separated about three millimeters. The X rays showed that when my fist was clenched the bones would completely dislocate from each other.

The doctor told me that I would have to have the operation. I was afraid that would happen. He said he could do the surgery that afternoon at 1:30. So I hurried back to the Missionary Training Center.

I went to my room and got some things to take with me to the hospital. I told the people in my district what had happened. Then we all got together and they gave me a blessing. One companion anointed and another sealed the anointing and gave me a blessing. Then I was off to the hospital. Soon I was in the operating room and all was ready. Then I was put to sleep.

The next morning the doctor came in to talk to me. He said that the usual routine for this operation was to take the graft chip from the hip and then open the wrist and do the graft. He said that for some reason he decided to open my wrist and look at the break first. When he got inside he found that the bone was completely healed together. He said it was one of those things we can never understand or explain. Then he left. Well, I can explain it, and I am very thankful to my Heavenly Father for the power of the priesthood.

Another missionary who had lost some valuable property reached a depth of gratitude beyond even what he had known when he left home. He wrote this message from his mission field:

My mother just wrote me about all the help you gave her in getting my stolen scriptures replaced. Thank you very much. I felt pretty lost myself without them and the rest of those things—like an oil vial—that are so peculiar to missionaries. I worried that the distance would rule out ever seeing those precious "side-arms" again. Thank you for bridging the gap, and for making it so easy.

I more than most desperately needed this mission, and more than most needed my scriptures to get me through it alive, and well, and better than before. I never knew how much I could miss those scriptures that were so new they had hardly ever been cracked open, but I learned once they were gone.

I also received my glasses safe and sound, and now with these contact lenses I should be moving about without a cane—what a time and place to stumble into such bad luck, here in Peru, blind without my lenses, mute without scriptures.

I have the greatest mother anyone could ask for—keeping her vigil at home, at my beck and call to help me out of my bad luck. I never really realized just who she was—and is—until I came to a place thousands of miles from home and then needed her help. She flew into action.

I want you to know, I sat down that Sunday you talked to us, and I wrote my mother and told her how much I loved her. But I didn't know just how much until now, reading her letters about her flowers at home, canning fruit, pride for a son who wants to live up to that love. They bring spring.

Thanks to you, and your husband, and the MTC.

Prepare your children socially and emotionally by teaching them the value of service, teaching them to work, helping them feel comfortable away from home, helping them obey those in authority, teaching them self-control, helping them learn to make decisions, teaching them to manage their money, and helping them develop gratitude. All of these things will be needed on their missions, and they are important parts of making your home a missionary training center.
