Joe J. Christensen, Barbara K. Christensen, Making Your Home a Missionary Training Center ( 1985)

5

Spiritual Development

Young people can become successful missionaries if they cultivate an adequate degree of spirituality in their lives. Without the development of sufficient spirituality, they will never have the full, personally rewarding experience a mission can be nor will they be able to teach in a way that will help people want to join the Church. It is just as the Lord said: "If ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach." (D&C 42:14.)

A good share of the missionaries who arrived at the Missionary Training Center showed great spiritual development. One deeply spiritual elder obviously came from a family that was not affluent. The elder's suit was of double-knit tweed with multiple snags.

Joe called him into his office to see if he would like to receive a new suit from an anonymous donor. This brief conversation ensued:

"How is it going, Elder?"

"Tremendous, President. This is the best thing I have ever done. The language is tough, but I'm going to get it if it kills me because I want to teach the gospel to those great people over in Korea."

"I heard from your teachers that they are pleased with your progress. They say that you are really working at becoming a good missionary. We're proud of you."

He glanced down at his hands he had clasped in his lap where his thumbs rotated self-consciously. Joe proceeded a little cautiously.

"Elder, I have a friend in Salt Lake City who wants to give a suit to a missionary. He doesn't want anyone to know who he is. Could you use a new suit? You would really make him feel good by letting him be of assistance to you."

He looked down at the sleeve of his suit and inspected some of the multitudinous snags and said, "Sure. That would be great! My brother used this suit and the other one I have while he was on his mission. He's such a good man and I guess the best friend I ever had. It was good of him to let me take his suits. But maybe if I get another one, I could give this one to somebody else who could use it to good advantage."

As it turned out, the anonymous donor agreed to provide two new suits to this young elder. When they were delivered, the elder was invited into the office to try on one of them to make sure that the alterations were correct. When he stepped back into the room, he had on all three pieces—vest and all. They fit well.

Since it was summertime and his missionary group in their classroom were wearing the usual white shirts and ties, Joe thought the elder might not want them to know anything about how he had acquired the new suits, so he suggested, "If you would rather, Elder, you may want to change back into the other clothes you were wearing before you go to your class. You could carry your new suits in this clothes bag."

After a quick moment's thought, the elder replied, "No, I think I'll just go ahead and wear it." He braced his shoulders and with all the dignity a nineteen-year-old could muster walked out of the office and back to his colleagues in their classroom.

Even though this elder's home was not affluent, it must have been one of those that provided "everything that money couldn't buy." He had learned to love and respect the gospel. He had developed a testimony of its truthfulness at an early age. He had an uncommonly high regard for his parents, his older brother, and others of his family. He was going out into the mission field with a humble and determined attitude to rise—snags and all—to the full stature of his calling. He somehow had captured much of what matters most for success in life.

Creating a home where spiritual values are adequately communicated to children has to be of high priority for committed parents, whose responsibility is immense. One recent convert expressed it this way:

Just after my wife and I were baptized, the bishop talked to us about our responsibilities as new members of the Church. The part that really got to me was when he opened the Doctrine and Covenants and read, "Inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents." [D&C 68:25.]

At the time, our daughter was just three years old and our son was not quite one, and I kept wondering about what we should do to help them grow up learning right from the start some of these great values we had discovered through our conversion. How do you teach all those spiritual things to your kids?

This new member of the Church, like most parents, sought answers to a great challenge. Regardless of one's particular faith, responsible parents everywhere want their children to grow up as decent, mature human beings who are committed to high moral standards and spiritual values.

For years we have been impressed with Barbara's devoted mother, who boarded a bus in Salt Lake City and left her large family in Midway, Utah, just before Thanksgiving to ride thousands of miles across the United States in order to help Barbara, who had just given birth to our first child. As we all rode home from the hospital, she said, "Joe and Barbara, with the birth of this baby you have assumed a responsibility you can never entirely relinquish."

That thought has weighed upon us for years. Even now that all our children are grown, we can never entirely relinquish the responsibility we assumed as parents, nor would we want to. We still feel some responsibility for what our children become and how they teach their own children.

Of all the areas of development in the lives of children, none is more important than the spiritual. If children have accepted lofty spiritual values, their lives are built on a firm foundation that will enable them to meet life's challenges effectively.

A group of spiritually committed young adults were asked, "What were the experiences and practices in your home that most influenced you to develop spirituality in your life?" By far the most frequent answer was, "The example set by my parents."

The example you set, for good or ill, communicates your love for the Lord much more powerfully than any words you can say, regardless of how eloquently they may be expressed. The devastating effects of hypocrisy have no greater negative effect than on children as they observe parents whose actions do not square with what they verbally attempt to teach their children.

Sancho Panza, the rotund traveling companion of Don Quixote, had just listened to him make a long preachment on the divinity of man. He yawned and said, "Bien predica quien bien vive, y yo no se otras teologias," or "He teaches well who lives well; that is all the theology I understand." (Miguel de Cervantes, Segunda Parte del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha, ed. Martin de Riquer [Barcelona: Editorial Juventud, 1968], pp. 686-87.) Parents could receive no more important counsel than this.

Elder James E. Faust has said, "We cannot hide what we are, try as we will. It shines from within us. We are transparent. When we attempt to deceive, we deceive only ourselves." ("Stand Up and Be Counted," Ensign, February 1982, p. 71.)

Give yourself the test on the next page to determine about where you are in ten areas that can make a great difference in your own spirituality. As you consider each question, rate yourself candidly and with incisive honesty. No one else need know how you responded, so you should feel no need to appear better or worse than you actually are. Ask yourself these questions now, and then again in a month to see if you are making progress. If you have improved, you are probably setting a more effective example of spirituality for your children.

Ten Ways to Cultivate Personal Spirituality

Rate yourself on a scale from 0 to 5 on each item with 0 meaning "no," 3 meaning "sometimes," and 5 meaning "yes, always, or completely."

We should "feast" upon the word and not just "nibble." (2 Nephi 32:3.)

Am I really communicating and not just repeating trite expressions? (Alma 34:17-27; Matthew 6:7.)

Do I do more than just get hungry? (D&C 59:13-23.)

"Retire to thy bed early . . . ; arise early." (D&C 88:124.) President Harold B. Lee taught that more flashes of inspiration come early in the morning than at any other time of the day.

"Lift up your heart and rejoice." (D&C 31:3.)

"Be of good cheer." (D&C 68:6.)

"Thrust in your sickle with all your soul." (D&C 31:5.)

Remember that even the Savior performed the humblest acts of service. (John 13:1-17.)

"Love one another as I have loved you." (John 13:34-35.)

"Be one, and if ye are not one, ye are not mine." (John 17:20-24; D&C 38:27.)

The Lord is pleased with us when we "open our mouths" and share with others the conviction we have. (D&C 60:2.)

There is a relationship between industry, honesty, and spirituality. Parents can influence their children for good in these areas by the power of their example. One of Joe's most cherished experiences occurred many years ago when he had just turned seventeen and was a relatively small, young-looking new freshman at what is now Utah State University but was then Utah State Agricultural College. He went into the bank to cash a check and get some change. He must have appeared very young and maybe a bit nervous as he wrote out one of his first checks on his newly established account. The teller, after carefully examining the cheek and seeming to look right through him, said, "You'll have to receive approval from the management before I can cash your check."

Joe was ushered into the office of one of the officers of the bank, who peered over his glasses that had slipped down on his nose. He studied Joe and then the check for what seemed to be a long time. He then looked Joe in the eye and up and down with a gaze that made him feel like he was in the final judgment. The officer slowly rubbed his chin and, like the most solemn judge in any courtroom, asked, "Who is your father?"

"Joseph A. Christensen."

"Where do you live?"

"Banida, Idaho, just north of Preston." (Joe had no idea he would even know where his little hometown was.)

His eyes brightened up.

"Oh, so you're Joseph Christensen's son! Well, that's different, I know him. He is an honest, hardworking man. You can make out a check here anytime for any amount you need." He initialed his approval and Joe went back to the teller.

Words can't describe how grateful Joe was for his father's example. Our feelings of appreciation for sterling characteristics in our parents continue to grow over the years.

Several committed young married men and women with children of their own were also asked, "As you look back on it now, during your growing years what were some of the specific experiences or practices in your home that helped develop your spiritual values?" Some of their responses are instructive and helpful to parents.

One son said, "I always knew that to my parents, the family and the Church were most important, and I grew up feeling the same way. On Sundays there was never any doubt in my mind that they and we would be attending church. That decision had been made long before, and it was a standard expectation in our family. It reminds me of the story I heard from a friend in another family, where one of the children was balking at going to Sunday School. She said, 'Dad, don't we have our free agency?" The father replied, 'Yes, you have your free agency. Now hurry up and get dressed for church.' She did, and they went with a regular family expectation reaffirmed."

A daughter who had been involved in her share of family conflict said, "Our parents taught us early on that the Spirit will not be present in an atmosphere of contention. They had the two children who were arguing spend time in another room discussing the disagreement. This helped them settle the argument quickly rather than letting it fester, grow, and become explosive. They would regularly read to us these words of the Savior: 'He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another. Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of men with anger, one against another; but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away.' [3 Nephi 11:29-30.] As a result, I'm sure our family had fewer arguments and fights than we would have had otherwise. I remember this emphasis especially now when I see my own children square off in one of their arguments. I try to help settle it as soon as possible, as did my parents."

Another daughter added, "I've come to appreciate the fact that my parents taught us to be fiercely loyal to each other. We learned to support other family members in their activities. If I were doing something at school or church or wherever, I knew that as many members of the family who could come would be there to back me up. Just knowing they were there supporting me gave me a sense of belonging to an eternal family unit. I was important to them and they to me. I'm sure that helped us to become best friends now that we've married and have left home. There's no one I'd rather be with than other members of the family. They are a strength to me socially and spiritually."

Barbara cherishes an experience that occurred when she was very young: "When I was in the first grade, I used to sing duets with another friend. Our family was large, and my friend was one of two children, the only girl in her family. When we would perform on special occasions, she would regularly receive a new dress. Once they asked us to sing on what seemed to be an important program in a town several miles away. As usual, my friend had a new dress for the occasion and I didn't. We lived on a farm about two miles outside of town, and there was only one car, which my dad was using. Just before we were to leave for the program, my mother came down the road hurriedly prodding along one of our horses she had bridled by herself. I was surprised to see her riding bareback (my mother was no horsewoman). She was bringing me a dress she had worked on through much of the night and had just finished making. That experience helped me understand the importance of family support and loyalty, and I've tried my best to communicate this value to our own children. I know that where loyalty, love, and a willingness to serve other family members—even when it isn't convenient—exist, there is a real stability and spirituality."

One son said, "I always knew that other people's names were safe in our home. We learned from our parents that we should not be critical of Church leaders, teachers, or neighbors. Whenever I thought I had a real case against a teacher, I usually could count on my folks sitting down with me and helping me to see the teacher's side. I'm sure that that respect for authority and other people's names has helped me make some very important adjustments for the better in my life."

A daughter who is a voracious reader observed, "My folks taught us that life is too short for the shoddy in reading, movies, television, and associations with others. My folks had a philosophy that if the book, movie, or television program wasn't appropriate for us as children, it likely wasn't good for them either. Dad used to stress that there are millions of books and thousands more printed every year. If we were to read a book a week for the rest of our lives, we could read only a small fraction of the total. I learned that we need to be very choosy about that with which we spend our time."

"For me," another son mentioned, "the scriptures and family prayer were always there. We were only eight years old when we received our first personalized copy of the scriptures. Many other copies were all around the house. Frankly, there were times when I didn't feel too excited about reading scriptures together early in the morning, and sometimes I wasn't much in tune when Dad would call us together for family prayer, but now that I look back on my life, those have to be some of the most influential practices that helped me develop spiritually. It gives me some satisfaction now to see our own son, who is just a little over a year old, kneel with us, fold his arms, and bow his head during family prayer. I hope that someday he will feel about prayer and the scriptures as I have come to appreciate them."

A mother of two recalled, "Especially during some of my painful teenage times, or when I was sick, I don't know what I would have done without those father's blessings, receiving the spiritual strength from them and witnessing the operation of priesthood power in our home and family. I think children are influenced for good spiritually when they witness the practice of priesthood ordinances such as blessings and administering to the sick. Although it was humorous in a way, I was pleased to hear about my little niece, Rebekah, who is not quite two, being discovered by her parents with her hands on her own head saying, "My dear Becka." She obviously had experienced priesthood ordinances in their family and had been influenced by them at a very early age. I was proud of my brother for the spiritual influence his priesthood was having on their family."

A young woman recalled, "One of the important spiritual influences for me was the personal concern and interest shown to me in a one-on-one monthly interview or visit with Dad when we would discuss how I was getting along in my school studies, my social life, and my spiritual development. Just knowing that in about a month we would be having another interview helped me make better decisions during the days in between. I didn't want to let my folks down. I knew they expected a lot from me and there would be the opportunity and responsibility of discussing in those times together how my life was progressing."

If parents want to communicate spiritual values to their children, they will incorporate four additional essential principles into their relationships with them. They are respect, confidence, trust and love.

Respect

One university student said, "My parents helped me understand they respected me and that it was not merely exaggerated idealism when Jesus said, 'Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.' [Matthew 5:48.] It is a commandment and a possibility. From that time on, I saw myself as someone who was worthy of respect, and it made a real difference in how I considered myself. I didn't want to let down my earthly or heavenly parents. Somehow, problems like acne, whether I was dressed in style, or whether I had a date for the big dance seemed to fall into a more realistic place in my life. I was special. I knew my parents knew it, and that helped me to believe it."

Children who grow up knowing that they are respected as individuals and valuable human beings are more likely to incorporate positive spiritual values into their lives than those who experience constant criticism, sarcasm, cynicism, and demeaning comments. One mother said, "If I had it all to do over again, I'd do everything I could to build my children's self-image and criticize them less." Conscious efforts to cultivate self-esteem are necessary in order to help children realize that they are special. After all, they are children of our Heavenly Father, in whose image they were created and, through the process of eternal progression, in whose likeness they are commanded to become.

"When I think of our children, I feel that they truly are an improvement on the 'old stock,'" a father of several children said with some emotion. "They have so many outstanding talents that exceed my own abilities at their age. I feel at times more like they are truly my brothers and sisters. I can't look or talk down to them. When I treat them as if they are mature and their opinions and feelings matter, they act differently. They are much more responsive and responsible. The truth is, it is not just make-believe. I really feel that way."

When children are treated with respect, they more readily come to know who they truly are and catch a glimpse of what their immense potential is. One young man said, "To me, this is one of the most significant spiritual truths and values my folks taught me. I knew the words and how to sing "I Am a Child of God" as far back as I remember anything."

With this knowledge of divine parentage, praying becomes more than mere form. The instructions received in scripture can be taken more personally as counsel from a loving Father in heaven. When one knows he is an 'insider,' one of an immense divine family, and that everyone else is a literal brother or sister, a foundation is established for self-respect and respecting others. All of us need to feel recognized and respected if we are to incorporate spiritual values into our lives most effectively.

Confidence

Show that you have confidence in your children's abilities. Something positive happens when we show our children that we have confidence in their being able to rise to the best that is in them.

When Elder Vaughn J. Featherstone was a teenager and becoming active in the Church, his Scoutmaster said to him: "Vaughn, you have a lot of leadership ability, but we cannot use you because you are rowdy in troop meeting. When you get squared away, we need you." Elder Featherstone said, "Having come from a large inactive family that was poor, I had little personal attention. My father had never told me that I could be anything. I gave a great deal of thought to my conduct. I decided to change. The following Tuesday I hardly moved an eyeball. I was as near perfect as I knew how to be.

"Bruford Reynolds was true to his word. I became an assistant patrol leader, a patrol leader, assistant senior patrol leader, then senior patrol leader. He believed in me and had a profound impact on my life." ("Called As If He Heard a Voice from Heaven," Ensign, November 1983, p. 38.)

You can help incorporate spiritual values into the lives of your children by making sure you communicate that you have confidence in them and that if they will exert themselves, they can become the best that is in them.

Trust

Let your children know that you trust them to become responsible and independent. President David O. McKay often said, "To be trusted is more important than to be loved." A young mother who had recently given birth to a baby reasoned, "I don't think I will ever forget the thrill in the hospital when the nurse brought our baby to me for the first time. There she was. Such a miracle! Her eyes, nose, mouth, and whole body were perfectly formed. I studied every finger, toe, and feature. Then it struck me with an almost overpowering force. Here she is, so alive but absolutely dependent. If we withdrew all care, even for a few hours, there is no way she could independently survive. Now our job as parents is to see that she grows up and develops independence so that by the time she becomes eighteen, nineteen, or twenty-one, she can be totally independent. That is a lot of development in a relatively short period of time!"

Parents can help bring about this development by showing trust in their children and in their capacity to become independent. Children must be allowed to make decisions as early as they are able and with increasing levels of significance and complexity.

Years ago, one young man experienced some of the growth that comes to a son when his father recognized this need in his life to be trusted to become independently responsible. He said, "My dad was a good mechanic. I thought he could fix anything, and he usually could. Then one day he left me alone to take care of some tractor work when he was gone, and the job had to be done. Mid-morning, the implement broke down, and I had to figure out how to take it apart, discover the problem, drive to the implement store, buy a replacement part, return, put it all back together, and then get the job done.

"Later on, my parents left on a three-week trip in the middle of the summer. Being the oldest son, I was left in charge. I felt trusted, responsible, and didn't want to fail. Suddenly I gained an incredible appreciation for my parents and all they had done to keep all of us and everything going. I understood more why my father would spend many early-morning hours planning who would be doing the milking and irrigating and the who, what, where, when, and with which tractor or implement."

Giving children some room to make responsible decisions can help them to grow more in self-confidence, self-esteem, understanding, appreciation, and independence. Being trusted by parents to be responsible helps children develop from an infant's dependency to adult independence. It is a very important element in communicating spiritual values to children. When you communicate trust to your children to be able to develop into responsible human beings and grant them the latitude to make decisions and even mistakes, you have communicated to them a central purpose of life. The whole plan of salvation rests solidly on the fact that our Heavenly Father trusts us to come into this world away from his presence with guidelines taught and freedom given to make our own decisions. We learn through being trusted. Life is real. This is not shadowboxing. We must be allowed to go through the experiences ourselves. We can't live on borrowed light forever. We learn to be responsible for our own decisions and to cope with their consequences. The trust and responsibility we extend to our children is at the heart of the spiritual values we should communicate to them.

Love

Create an atmosphere of love in your home and among family members. Although it may be "more important to be trusted than to be loved," it is imperative that love exist within the home and family if spiritual values are to be communicated best. In fact, it could be argued that showing trust toward another is a kind of love.

Even though at first it may seem awkward, say to your children, "I love you." Let them also hear you make similar expressions to your spouse. Joe recalls that his father is a man of few words. He wrote his entire autobiography on part of one page. In it, he included this line: "After forty-four years of marriage, my wife is still the greatest woman I have ever known." Someone said, "The greatest gift a father can give his children is to love their mother." As children, how blessed we are if we receive that gift. We are even more blessed if we can feel like the young man who said, "My folks always let me know that they loved me, and even though I may be actually quite ordinary, they caused me to feel that I was special. I hope I can do the same for my future family."

Parents' love for children can and in some ways should be irrational. As Dr. Urie Bronfenbrenner said, "Every child should spend a substantial amount of time with somebody who's crazy about him. . . . There has to be at least one person who has an irrational involvement with that child, someone who thinks that kid is more important than other people's kids, someone who's in love with him and whom he loves in return. . . . 'You can't pay a woman to do what a mother will do for free.'" ("Nobody Home: The Erosion of the American Family," Psychology Today, May 1977, p. 43.)

We noted at the Missionary Training Center that the missionaries who felt that they were loved by their parents seemed to have increased self-confidence, could love and express love to others more readily, and had greater emotional reserves to cope with challenging times. Those deprived of love often struggled to adjust, cope, and grow in spirituality.

Jesus emphasized the importance of love and its relationship to determining whether or not our children are really Christians—whether or not they have incorporated essential spiritual values into their lives. He said, "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:34-35; italics added.)

If you demonstrate your love to your children, then when they are far from you and life is challenging, the spirit and reality of your love will become a stabilizing influence and a spiritual strength. And your children will better understand such scriptures as "God is love" (1 John 4:8), "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son" (John 3:16), and "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends" (John 15:13).

Yes, we should teach our children to pray, fast, read the scriptures, be chaste, keep the Word of Wisdom, and be obedient. But with all this, we should meet our parental responsibility to teach all these things in an atmosphere of respect, confidence, trust, and love, being sure that we are setting a good example. Your example will be your most powerful ally in fulfilling your responsibility to communicate spiritual values to those most precious to you—those for whom you have assumed a responsibility you can never entirely relinquish.
