Joe J. Christensen, Barbara K. Christensen, Making Your Home a Missionary Training Center ( 1985)

6

Missionary Manners

While our manners will probably not get us into or keep us out of the celestial kingdom, they are very important in effective missionary work. Children should see and learn good manners from the time they are babies. By the time young people are nineteen or twenty-one, their habits have become somewhat set. However, if they have learned poor manners, they can still change and thus have a much easier time in life and certainly be more impressive in the mission field. Someone has said that having good manners simply means doing the kindest and most gracious thing.

In a talk she shared with the missionaries soon after they entered the Missionary Training Center, Barbara included some thoughts about manners. Since customs vary from country to country, a missionary would do well to check with the mission president and his wife to become informed at the time he arrives in the field. Still, manners can be taught in the home so that the missionary will be well prepared when that day comes.

Table Manners

Some people seem to think that eating is something to be done as quickly as possible. Perhaps we should all be forced to eat in front of a mirror for a time so that we can see how we appear to others. Here are some helpful suggestions for prospective missionaries:

General Manners

President Spencer W. Kimball mentions many things that will help missionaries be more polite:

Our young people should know also that it is hard for them to hide their upbringing, their inner thoughts, their weaknesses. There is nothing criminal about grammatical errors or careless speech or even slang. But such do reveal the character of the user and reflect upon his home life. It may be an unwarranted and weak demand for attention which one feels powerless to stir otherwise. The chewing of gum in public certainly gives no suggestion of culture or refinement and certainly will not build confidence in or esteem for the one who indulges. Inappropriate clothes, extreme makeup, fantastic hairdos, gum chewing, slang, ugly speech, bad table manners and other such irregularities brand the individual at once as weak, uncouth, cheap or careless, and thoughtless, and his family is judged by his weaknesses. Such expressions open wide the book of one's life for both friend and foe to read. It is doubtful if one ever gains advantage through such lapses either in employment, in business, in social life, or otherwise. (MIA June Conference, 1965.)
