Joe J. Christensen, Barbara K. Christensen, Making Your Home a Missionary Training Center ( 1985)

7

The Power of Music

After observing thousands of missionaries, we have become convinced that for a variety of reasons, a young person who has been trained musically or has come to appreciate good music has an easier time becoming a successful missionary and leader in the Church.

Barbara relates how she learned a powerful lesson from President Spencer W. Kimball through his music and willingness to serve:

In the days when stake conferences consisted of two sessions during the day and a stake fireside in the evening, the visiting general authority always attended the 10:00 A.M. and the 2:00 P.M. sessions and occasionally remained as the speaker for the evening fireside. On one particular day it was our good fortune in the Wasatch Stake (Heber City, Utah) to have Elder Spencer W. Kimball as the guest for the day. Our family had been somewhat acquainted with Elder Kimball and were overjoyed when he accepted our invitation to have dinner with us and remain at our home until time for the evening meeting.

My eight sisters and I did a great deal of singing during the time we grew up and were accustomed to invitations to sing that didn't give us a great deal of time for preparation. On that conference afternoon, the telephone rang, and I heard the voice of our stake president, H. Clay Cummings, on the other end. He told me that the person previously asked to sing for the evening fireside couldn't perform, and he wondered if our family would provide some music. I placed my hand over the phone while I relayed the message and asked the others for their opinion. I mentioned to them that it was extremely short notice and that perhaps we should tell him no.

While a short discussion ensued, our guest taught us all a great lesson: "Tell President Cummings we'd love to," Elder Kimball remarked. "Your father and I will do the men's parts and two of you girls can do the others, and we'll sing them one of the beautiful hymns."

I sheepishly gave the message to President Cummings and hung up the phone. Immediately we gathered around the piano and prepared our presentation for that evening.

Can you imagine the thrill of singing that number with a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, the future president of the Church? It was an experience I shall never forget.

The missionary who knows how to play the piano at least well enough to be able to respond affirmatively to a leader's sincere plea "Is there anyone here who can accompany the hymn?" receives the benefits of personal reinforcement, appreciation, and respect. He seems to stand taller and receives a boost to his self-esteem.

With few exceptions, the missionary who has been trained musically is often more self-disciplined, confident, aesthetically sensitive, spiritually in tune, and capable of being of genuine service in many settings where music contributes so much.

There is power in the right kind of music that goes far beyond what we usually think about. Music can bless us in many areas of our lives and in a missionary setting particularly. An ear trained to be sensitive to musical tones can even be of help in learning a language.

Music is one of the best means of cultivating the Spirit. It is such a widely important part of human experience that it is no wonder that it is considered the universal language. It is such a blessing when young people are exposed to excellent music that can help them avoid or overcome the addiction to the trashy variety that is often so popular.

In missionary preparation there is a special power in the hymns. Elder B. H. Roberts, as he instructed the leaders of the seventies quorums of the Church, said:

Singing is a training that our Elders very much need to equip them for their mission work. . . .

And in the selection of hymns and songs, and choruses, appropriateness should be carefully considered. Let the strong, stalwart hymns of the present dispensation be practiced in the quorums, and not the namby, pamby, childish hymns that sometimes find their way into the repertoire of songs sung by our Elders in the mission field. Let us have such hymns as,

"The morning breaks, the shadows flee; Lo! Zion's standard is unfurled! The dawning of a brighter day Majestic rises on the world."

A trumpet blast within itself. Such hymns as,

"An angel from on high, The long, long silence broke," etc.

Also,

"Israel, Israel, God is calling, Calling thee from lands of woe," etc. . . .

Also,

"O say, what is Truth? 'Tis the fairest gem," etc. . . .

Mormon hymns that . . . are vibrant with the spirit of the latter-day work because it produced them—inspired them, and they are more appropriate . . . for missionaries. . . . Let us learn to sing Mormonism as well as to preach it. (Seventies Course in Theology, first year [Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1907], pp. viii-ix.)

The Church was only a few weeks old when the Prophet Joseph was inspired to commission his wife, Emma, to make a collection of hymns for use by the members. The Lord said, "My soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads. (D&C 25:12.)

President Brigham Young said:

Some wise Being organized my system, and gave me my capacity, put into my heart and brain something that delights, charms and fills me with rapture at the sound of sweet music. . . . Who gave the lower animals a love for those sweet sounds, which with magic power fill the air with harmony, and cheer and comfort the hearts of men, and so wonderfully affect the brute creation? It was the Lord, our Heavenly Father, who gave the capacity to enjoy these sounds.

President John Taylor said:

Consider for a moment how much sacred music enters into the very life, exercise and progress of religion!. . . The very spirit of religion is breathed into music. . . . Never, indeed, do we feel so near heaven as when listening to the performance of some grand anthem, in which the angels themselves might fitly take their parts.

President Wilford Woodruff said:

Singing exercises can be made a great attraction and also a valuable addition to the education of the young. The interest that is now taken among us in vocal and instrumental music is a marked feature of the times.

President Lorenzo Snow said:

Every unfoldment of the nineteenth century in science, in art, in mechanism, in music, in literature. . . was prompted by His Spirit which before long will be poured out upon all flesh that will receive it.

President Joseph F. Smith said:

Good music is gracious praise of God. It is delightsome to the ear, and it is one of our most acceptable methods of worshipping God. And those who sing . . . in all the choirs of the Saints. . . should not sing merely because it is a profession, or because they have good voice(s); but they should sing also because they have the spirit of it. . . and (can) praise. . . God who gave them their sweet voices.

President Heber J. Grant said:

The singing of our sacred hymns, written by the servants of God, has a powerful effect in converting people to principles of the Gospel, and in promoting peace and spiritual growth. Singing is a prayer to the Lord.

President George Albert Smith said:

I am grateful for a Church that teaches the joy and encourages the sweet influences that come from music. . . . We do have excellent hymns in this Church. . . . What a comforting, uplifting influence there is in sincere music!

President David O. McKay said:

The LDS life is an abundant life as it embraces all that is beautiful and worthwhile. Music, often referred to as the divine art, is a part of this abundance, bringing joy to all.

President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

It delights my heart to see our people everywhere improving their talents as good singers. Everywhere we go among our people we find sweet voices and talent for music. I believe that this is a manifestation to us of the purpose of the Lord in this direction toward our people, that they will excel in these things.

President Harold B. Lee said:

My experience of a lifetime. . . convinces me that the most effective preaching of the gospel is when it is accompanied by beautiful, appropriate music.

President Spencer W. Kimball said:

The responsibility for producing, selecting and performing music for the Church requires discrimination, taste, knowledge and the proper spirit; in short, it requires the best efforts that our best musicians can give inasmuch as we are using gifts which the Lord has given us for the purpose of building up His kingdom. . . . We are in a position, as musicians, to touch the souls of those who listen.

(These quotations were included in "Music: 'Gracious Praise of God,'" Church News, August 28, 1983, p. 2.)

There are some important practical steps parents can take to ensure that young people receive the value of good music in their lives:

The story is told of the door-to-door salesman who came to the open door of a house one summer morning.

Peering through the screen door, he observed an eleven-year-old boy practicing scales on the piano. He asked, "Young man, is your mother home?" To which the boy replied, "What do you think?"

Obviously, it takes effort, patience, and discipline to encourage a youngster to develop skills on a musical instrument, but generally the rewards are ample pay for the struggle.

Hardly a week goes by without our remembering the moving experience of having the congregation join in singing "There's Sunshine in My Soul Today" at our mothers' funerals. Our mothers loved music. They helped others appreciate music, and it brought warmth and spirit into their lives that made the lyrics seem very appropriate: "There's sunshine in my soul today,/ More glorious and bright/ Than glows in any earthly sky,/ For Jesus is my light." (Hymns, no. 174.)

Missionaries who have come to appreciate good music, particularly the hymns, are better able to sense the Spirit, withstand temptation as they recall uplifting music and lyrics, and generally be more successful in their service.
