Joe J. Christensen, Barbara K. Christensen, Making Your Home a Missionary Training Center ( 1985)

8

What about the Daughters in the Family?

Recently, a university professor, Church leader, and convert of about fifteen years commented at the conclusion of a sacrament meeting as the congregation was beginning to move out of the chapel, "Joe, look out there among the members. Notice the returned lady missionaries and consider what they are doing in this ward and stake in terms of leadership. Almost without exception they are the 'pillars of the Church' as far as female leadership is concerned. That is one of the things I've noticed most since joining the Church."

A returned missionary husband and father of several children remarked, "I'm sure I'm biased in favor of lady missionaries more than the average because I married a returned lady missionary, and I've seen what her mission meant in the lives of our children as they grew up and what it now means to our grandchildren. I feel especially blessed and privileged. Because of her understanding and testimony of the gospel, I always felt comfortable knowing that she was at home teaching and encouraging our children. As a result, they have grown up wanting to serve wherever or whenever called."

Missionary service is one of the most important responsibilities of the priesthood, and the leaders of the Church have given clear instructions that every young man who is able should prepare well and serve a mission. For them, it is a personal priesthood obligation of the highest category. For the young women who reach the appropriate age and are still single, missionary service can become a choice opportunity.

Parents often ask, "We know about the obligation young men have to serve missions, but what about young women?"

After observing thousands of lady missionaries at the Missionary Training Center, our enthusiastic feeling is that if every daughter were to grow up in a home that really was a missionary training center and as a result were to catch the missionary spirit, much good would be accomplished. Young women who are thus prepared in gospel learning, attitude, and spirit will add much to the future quality of their own homes and families even if an opportunity does not come to them to serve a full-time mission.

Women who are called as missionaries render outstanding service, and they have been doing so for a long time. The Apostle Paul received help on his mission from Lydia and other sisters in Philippi. When he wrote his epistle to the Philippians, he asked them to "help those women which laboured with me in the gospel." (Philippians 4:3.) Early in this dispensation, in the August 1840 Millennial Star, Parley P. Pratt emphasized, "It is their privilege. . . to labour with us in the gospel, like the holy women in the days of Paul."

Today, lady missionaries occupy a distinguished place of service. Their ratio has increased in the last decade or so from about one in ten to almost one in five. There are more of them. They are on the average younger (now between twenty-two and twenty-three years of age), intellectually and spiritually mature, and serving for the right reasons.

While we were presiding over the mission in Mexico City, a pair of lady missionaries had thirty-six of their investigators join the Church in one month. As far as we knew, no other pair of missionaries in that mission had had so much success in one month.

A sample of missionaries whose mothers had served missions were asked to list all the members of their family by first name and age and to indicate which family members had served or were serving missions. Another sample of comparable size whose mothers were not returned missionaries were asked to do the same.

It was found that almost all returned lady missionary mothers had married husbands who also had served a mission and that practically all of their sons of age had served or were serving missions.

When both the father and mother had served, it was almost a foregone conclusion that their sons would choose to serve and also that a larger proportion of their daughters would serve full-time missions.

The influence of a returned lady missionary mother on her daughter is illustrated in a letter from one of the attractive, enthusiastic, and outstanding lady missionaries in training at the Missionary Training Center:

I have an older brother who served in the Utah Salt Lake City Mission. I have a younger sister who is at this time considering a mission. I also have a younger brother who is planning on a mission.

My mom did influence my decision to go on a mission. My sister-in-law who went to Taiwan on her mission was also a great influence. I could just see a special radiance in their faces.

Many girls feel they need the years before twenty-one to prepare to be the kind of mothers they want to be. What better way to prepare than serving a mission?

I'm thankful that the Lord chose to call me on a mission. I hope I will be able to successfully fulfill my responsibilities. I'm proud to be able to serve a mission like my mother did. Maybe I'm prejudiced, but I think returned lady missionaries make the best moms.

In future years we would see an increased proportion of our young men serving missions if their future mothers were better prepared in gospel learning, attitude, and spirit. Their future sons will be much more inclined to accept calls to serve.

Another benefit of having a home where the girls are influenced as much as the boys to prepare for missions is that later on when they begin to date and the time comes when their boy friends come of age to go on missions, they will be more encouraging rather than discouraging to the prospective missionary.

Parents whose son had finally decided to fulfill his mission, leaving behind a beautiful sweetheart whom he loved very much, said, "We regularly include in our prayers expressions of gratitude for our son's girl friend, who encouraged him to serve a mission. She could have made it go either way."

If every young woman were to influence a young man toward a mission rather than away from one, much good would be accomplished. A home that is a missionary training center for young women as well as young men could help accomplish the task.

Lessons learned by lady missionaries while on a mission can help them greatly in the future. We remember well the experience of one sister whose visa didn't come to allow her to leave the Missionary Training Center with the rest of her class. She described how she learned a very important lesson:

When I first found out that my visa had not cleared and that I would be delayed, I was very disappointed. I had looked forward to that day from my first day at the Missionary Training Center. Then I became bitter. It didn't seem fair that my traveling group would be going and leaving me behind. I prayed to Heavenly Father for a miracle: "Please cause something to happen so that I will be able to fly to New Zealand as scheduled." But my miracle never came. You see, I was asking for something that I wanted and was not even thinking about "Thy will be done." The day came when my companion and the others departed for the field. "Now what are they going to do with me?" I thought. I had all of my discussions completely memorized and knew every scripture that we had to know for use with the discussions. I had learned everything that I needed to know to be well prepared for my mission—or at least that's what I thought!

That afternoon, my branch president called me into his office and said that there was a sister coming in a couple of days early from a small South Pacific island. He asked if I would be her companion until her assigned companion came on the following Thursday. I said okay, and as I got up to leave, he said, "Oh, by the way, she doesn't speak English very well, and she doesn't have any clothes except for the ones that she is wearing."

"Oh great," I thought. "This is all I need." I had my mind on my visa and when it would be coming, and I wasn't in the mood for this charity case!

I was introduced to my new companion that evening. She was a beautiful Polynesian girl, and she did pretty well with the language, I thought. She showed me a book about her home in the Micronesian Islands and told me about her family and some of her customs. I admired her for her courage to come to this country on a mission. Her lifestyle was so different from ours! (She was already shivering in the air-conditioned halls of our dorms. How was she going to survive a winter in Des Moines, Iowa?)

She became my shadow. She watched me dress in the morning and do my hair. She stood right next to me in the mirror as I put on my makeup! At the breakfast table, she mimicked my actions perfectly—even wiping her mouth with her napkin at the same time I did! I was able to serve as her escort when she went to the temple for her endowment. I was so proud as I watched her come into the celestial room!

The day she was to leave me and move in with her assigned companion, I helped her get all of her stuff together, and then I dug down into the bottom of my purse to find an old keychain to give her for her key, because she had misplaced it a number of times and I didn't know how she was going to make it through the next week without losing it! As I handed it to her, her eyes filled with tears as she thanked me for her "present." "Present!" I thought. "But it wasn't anything more than a piece of junk to me!" She went over to her suitcase and bent down to get something out. Then she walked over to me and presented me with a purse that had been made by a native of her country completely out of small seashells that had been strung together with bamboo twine. It was beautiful. "This is for you," she said.

That day I learned something that will be more valuable than any of the discussions. I learned what it really means to love! She really touched me! I'm grateful for the opportunity I had to associate with her. It was truly a blessing!

There are spiritual dimensions and sensitivities that are learned by lady missionaries and that can bless them personally as well as any children they may have the responsibility to teach and influence. A lady missionary who had had some discouraging days as she trained for her mission in a second language shared this special experience:

I was going into my third week at the Missionary Training Center. The previous week had been very hard for me with many trials, depression, and a lot of repentance.

The sisters in our branch were scheduled to sing in sacrament meeting that Sunday. We were practicing for the last time before going into the meeting when some of the sisters decided the ending would be much better if a higher harmony was sung with the last few notes. I was chosen to sing that part because I could hit the notes and because my voice carries.

We sang the song through one last time, and since I was unsure of the part (it was not written on the music), I sang it wrong. We did not have time to go through the song again. It was already time for the meeting to begin.

The meeting seemed to be a special one that day. The Spirit was so strong that many had trouble holding the tears back. One of the sisters spoke on the life of Christ and prepared everyone for this beautiful song.

I was very worried. If I sang my part incorrectly, it could ruin the whole song. I didn't know what to do. Should I just give up and sing with the other sisters, or should I try it and hope I got it right?

I began to pray, telling Heavenly Father my problem and asking for his help. I prayed in my mind as we sang the song. As the end approached, I paused for just a moment; as I did, I heard a voice near my right ear singing the first note. I blended my voice with the other voice. The notes came out clear and pure and in harmony with the other sisters.

Later I wondered which of the sisters had been prompted to sing with me. I asked each one of them only to find out that none of them had sung my part. I was the only one who had sung that part, and I was the only one who had heard that other voice.

At that time, I had a strong feeling that my mother, who had died twelve years before, had helped me sing those notes. I felt that Heavenly Father had given me this blessing so that I would not feel I was serving my mission without his help.

After the meeting, some of the elders complimented the sisters by saying that we sounded like angels singing that song. They didn't realize how true that statement was, and they couldn't understand why several of us began to cry.

If you want your daughters to be well-taught, encourage them to prepare to go on a mission. When they are prepared, they will serve more effectively if they are called, and if they are not called as full-time missionaries, they will still be able to live more fulfilled lives and bless their own children with a wholesome missionary spirit.
