Joe J. Christensen, Barbara K. Christensen, Making Your Home a Missionary Training Center ( 1985)

9

If You Are Alone

Making your home a missionary training center applies not just to those who have children at home. The same principles apply if you are living alone. Some of the most innovative and successful applications of the principles in this book have been made by those who, for whatever reason, find themselves alone.

One widowed sister said, "For about a year or so after my husband passed away, I had a hard time adjusting. There seemed to be too many memories getting in the way. I must have been almost denying that it had really happened. I didn't even move his clothes out of the closet. I tried to leave everything the same. Finally, I realized that I had better face reality and get on with life. One of the greatest helps to me was getting involved in missionary work—both at home and now here on this mission. From the time I stopped feeling so sorry for myself, my enthusiasm for life, which I thought might never return, began to grow. I find that I'm happiest when I'm involved in anything that has to do with sharing the gospel—whether at home in the ward or here in the mission field. In some ways, it seems like my husband's presence is closer when I'm so involved than at any other time. I'm not nearly so lonely."

A sister who never had married described her feelings: "For quite a while it pained me to think that I was not married when I looked around and saw all my friends from school with their husbands and children. I suffered, and I probably caused others around me to be uncomfortable. I even got to the point that I was getting quite morbid about the whole situation.

"For some reason, going on a mission had not really crossed my mind. It didn't seem like the Church leaders were all that encouraging, and I had even heard that some mission presidents didn't particularly appreciate lady missionaries. Now my feelings have changed. I know that I am here for the right reasons, and all I want to do is my part to share this message that is of such great value. I know that if I can do what ought to be done, the day will come when all those blessings they talk about will be mine also. The gospel and missionary work help give me a perspective that goes far beyond any of my here-and-now problems."

Data show that in the Church, of those over eighteen 97 percent marry at some time, but at any give time 30 percent of all those over eighteen are single for one reason or another. Among the women, by the time they reach sixty years of age, 11 percent are widows and 35 percent are divorced. With the 3 percent who never marry, the total comes to 47 percent living without husbands by age sixty. A sobering statistic that indicates a need for a lot of personal development in marketable skills is that about 49 percent of the women in the Church will, before age sixty-five, be the primary breadwinner in their households. (See Church News, November 6, 1983, p. 4.)

There are a variety of meaningful activities in which a person living alone can become involved. Homes can be made a missionary training center to the benefit of all. Here are some suggestions:

Develop a personal gospel study program. If you have not selected something else that you consider to be working for you, try the Missionary Gospel Study program that has been developed (stock number PBM18348, available at Church distribution centers). It is simple, inexpensive, and provides an organized system of getting through the scriptures sequentially. It also permits studying the doctrines of the gospel in topical form. One member responded after using the plan for several weeks, "It has changed my life. I always thought I knew the gospel fairly well, but since I started reading the scriptures and learning more about the gospel, I'm finding I have much more of a desire to share it with others. I guess this is in part because I feel more confident about what I would tell them if they were to ask me a question. That study is different from any other form of study. I know that the Spirit is there, and I'm grateful for it. Since I started thinking more about the scriptures and the needs of others, I don't have as much time to think about my own problems."

With little effort, any singles who were so inclined could find young people in their area who could benefit from reading the scriptures together. Such an activity could help create an influence that would make anyone's home a missionary training center.

One choice sister made it a point to open her home for the full-time and stake missionaries to teach the gospel to her nonmember friends and others of the missionaries' contacts who needed a warm, hospitable place to meet.

One group of single and widowed sisters are finding companionship as well as growth by meeting at each others' homes to study the scriptures, share book reports on topics of common interest, and share the gospel through writing their testimonies in copies of the Book of Mormon, which they then give to missionaries to share with investigators. As a result of their efforts in this area, one sister said, "I've been thrilled with the response from the missionaries in the field as well as from some of the investigators. I'm now carrying on a correspondence with several in a variety of locations. Some of them will be making my home their headquarters at my invitation when they come to Salt Lake City to visit. I'm even getting some invitations to visit them in a wide variety of locations. It's a lot of fun."

A widower said, "From the time I started paying attention to some of the things I could do to help support the missionary program, things have gone better for me. Although I can't afford to do all I would like to, I get a lot of satisfaction out of knowing that there are young missionaries receiving the opportunity to serve missions in Latin America who otherwise could never afford to serve. In a way, it seems like I'm doing a lot more that really matters than I was before. There is a spirit that accompanies this work, and I can't deny it."

Another widower whose grandchildren come often to his home shared this idea: "When my grandchildren come, I talk with them about some of the faith-promoting experiences I had when I was a missionary. I want them to know of the reality of the spirit that operates in the mission field and to help create in them a desire to have some of the same kinds of experiences themselves. Before my wife passed away, we would see to it that there was a little money given to our grandchildren at the time of their birth with the suggestion that right then they start a missionary fund. I'm continuing to carry on with the tradition."

A single sister who is accomplished in her profession said, "It looks like I will never have the opportunity of having children of my own in this life, so I have decided to adopt every young person in the ward and make sure that when they are preparing to leave on their missions they receive a little gift of a book or something they need to take with them. Then I make sure that I write encouraging letters to them throughout their missions. At Christmastime a good share of my budget for gifts goes into a check for a few dollars that I tuck into a Christmas greeting. With the missionaries and others I've adopted, I find my life to be more full of meaning than ever before. On Mothers' Day, I used to almost cringe at the thought of attending Church Mothers' Day programs, but now even they are a lot more enjoyable."

There is a special spirit that accompanies missionary work. Though you live alone, your home can be blessed by its influence if you do all you can to make your home a missionary training center.
