Joe J. Christensen, Barbara K. Christensen, Making Your Home a Missionary Training Center ( 1985)

10

How Grandparents Can Help

In the window of a handicraft shop, a needlepoint pillow displayed the message, "There's no place like home—except Grandma's." Any grandchild who feels that way is very fortunate, because that indicates they have another person who can serve as a rock of refuge and an example and who will build their self-esteem.

President Marion G. Romney quipped, "If we had known how delightful grandchildren would be, we would have started there!"

Grandparents are in the unique position to be of unusual help in preparing your children for missions. Grandparents can validate all the positive values that parents are trying to communicate to their children. There does come a time in most young people's lives when they will listen more readily to someone outside their own immediate family.

One missionary said, "When I was growing up, there was no place I would rather go to visit than to my grandparents' home. They always made me feel like I was really someone special, and Grandma always had so many good things around the house to eat. Even though I loved my mom and dad a lot, I can remember, when I was about three or four, running to hide under my grandparents' bed when I knew that my mom had come to get me. I wanted to stay there so much. Some of the warmest memories I have are the times when I was allowed to spend the night there."

At least part of the reason grandparents are in such a powerful position to help a grandchild grow spiritually, socially, and emotionally is that they don't have to provide continuous discipline and care. One grandfather remarked, "I love my grandchildren's faces, and I also love their heels." Another quipped, "When they visit, I feel twice blessed—once when they come and another when they leave. We can just enjoy them, love them, or even spoil them a little, and when they have a stomach ache or some other problem, we can send them home to their parents to take care of them."

One older gentleman in conversation with another asked, "Say, have I told you about our grandchildren?" The other replied, "No, and thank you very much!" The mere fact that grandparents ordinarily have a tendency to want to discuss their grandchildren or share a picture of them with others demonstrates how much grandparents care about their grandchildren. When grandchildren are helped to know how much their grandparents love them, they have an emotional foundation, an anchor, a safe port amid the storms of life.

While growing up, children need love and models much more than they need critics. Grandparents can provide much of this. A mother of three children said, "I love it when my children can spend time with their grandparents. I know that they really care and that all the things I have been trying to teach my children will be reinforced while they are there. I consider them to be real allies in our efforts to succeed as parents."

Grandparents can help prepare their grandchildren for missions just by talking about missionary work. An attractive young lady missionary said, "When I was growing up and would spend time at my grandparents' home, my grandpa would often tell me about his mission experiences when he served in England so many years before. His experience became more real and valuable to me than any example in the scriptures. From the early days of my life, I decided that I wanted to be a missionary someday, and I'm so glad things have worked out so I could be here."

Grandparents can set an example by serving missions themselves. Senior missionaries do a great deal of good in the mission field sharing the gospel and providing leadership training to relatively new members of the Church. In addition to all of this, perhaps their greatest influence for good is in the lives of their grandchildren back at home.

A young elder at the Missionary Training Center remarked, "When I saw my grandparents leave for their mission, I decided that if it was important for them to go, it was important for me to do the same. If they could serve at their age, I was sure I could serve also."

One couple came to the Missionary Training Center and described some of their experiences. They said, "You know, we never thought we would be able to afford to come on a mission. Then one day we received a call from our oldest grandson. He said, 'Grandma and Grandpa, we want you to go and see your bishop.'

"When we asked why, he said, 'Because we want you to go on a mission.' We told him that we would like to go but knew that we couldn't afford it, but he said, 'Oh yes you can, because we have just had a meeting of all the grandchildren. I was elected treasurer, and we decided that we would join together and send you on a mission.'"

She continued, "And that's why we're here. What they send us each month makes the difference that makes it possible for us to have this glorious experience."

Undoubtedly this couple accomplished much good in their mission far from home, but an equally important missionary work they accomplished was in the lives of their own grandchildren. There will probably be a desire in all their hearts to serve when their time and opportunity come.

The positive interaction between grandparents, parents, and grandchildren is illustrated by a couple who were just beginning to train for their mission in the eastern United States. They said, "When we received the call to go on a mission, we were pleased and yet very nervous about it—especially when the mission president contacted us and asked if we could bring our car. My husband knew it was in bad shape. We didn't know if it could make it across the United States, let alone serve us during our mission. He spent weeks working on it, trying to get it into as good a condition as possible. Then one night, not long before we came to the Missionary Training Center, after going to bed, we heard some commotion out in front of the house. I wondered what could be happening and was a bit worried. Then a knock came on the door. It was our youngest son, who had just recently married. He said, 'Mom and Dad, I think you'd better get up and get dressed and come outside.' By then, I was really worried that something was wrong—maybe the police were there, or an accident had occurred.

"We got up, and when we opened the front door, there on the lawn in front of the house were all of our children, their spouses, and the grandchildren. They shouted, 'Surprise!' In the driveway was a lovely new car for us to take on our mission.

"When the kids started talking about the possibility of getting the car for us, they all wanted to help. Years ago, unfortunately, one of our sons had become inactive in the Church. As a result, he had become estranged from the family, although he wanted to be a part of it. One of our sons who is fairly well-to-do said, 'I probably could have financed the whole thing myself, but everyone wanted to participate, including my inactive brother. We have noticed that he has started to come back to church and has begun to associate with the family again.'"

In nearly everything they do and say, grandparents can help their grandchildren want to serve missions. Besides serving missions themselves, they can read the scriptures with their grandchildren, help them memorize scriptures, and teach them the beautiful truths of the gospel. Grandparents can be one of the greatest influences for good any child can have!
