Thank you for Elder Richard G. Scott’s article, “Do What Is Right,” in the March 2001 issue of the Liahona (Spanish). When I learned that my daughter and a young man were falling in love at a very early age, I became angry and said some things that were unfair. But that night I prayed for a way to help these young people. The next day I read the article and found the answer.

I talked with my daughter, and we both cried together when I shared some paragraphs in the article. Then I talked with the young man, read him the paragraphs, and asked him to forgive me. He had also read the Liahona, and he understood that this advice wasn’t just my opinion. An Apostle had given this counsel. This experience united the three of us. I don’t know what I would have done without Elder Scott’s advice.
Rosario Colmenares,
Chorrillos Ward, Lima Perú Chorrillos Stake

Some time ago I visited a friend who belongs to another church. I have talked to him about our Church on many occasions, but he isn’t interested. So it surprised me when he told me he was reading a manual titled Teaching, No Greater Call: A Resource Guide for Gospel Teaching. He was fascinated with the content. I asked him how he had obtained it, since as a member and leader in the Church I didn’t have it yet. He replied that he had gotten it from his nephew who, in turn, had received it from someone else.

I am very grateful to my Heavenly Father for the standard works and for all the Church publications. They are helping not just Latter-day Saints but the whole world.
Felipe Urbina,
Rubén Darío Branch, Managua Nicaragua Rubén Darío District

I’m 16 years old. Today I was reading an issue of the Liahona (Spanish) that somebody loaned me, and it reminded me how much the prophet’s counsel has helped me. I know the Church is true, but my parents don’t want me to be baptized. So I’ve been helping with missionary work and going to church for a year and a half.

It’s good to know there’s a prophet who speaks with God and reveals His will to us. I’ve seen him several times in general conference and on satellite broadcasts, counseling the youth to be pure and to be good examples to others. This counsel has helped me show my classmates that the Church’s teachings are true and will help anyone who puts them into practice.
Mateo Pereyra,
Alto Alberdi Ward, Córdoba Argentina West Stake
