Wicked men became judges over the Nephites. They punished righteous people but not wicked people. Hel. 7:4–5

Nephi’s heart was full of sorrow to see such great wickedness among his people. Hel. 7:6–7

Nephi’s garden was by the highway that led to the chief market in Zarahemla. He went to his garden tower and prayed. Hel. 7:10

People passing by on the highway heard him praying. A large group gathered, wondering why he was so sad. Hel. 7:11

When Nephi saw them, he told them that he was sad because of their wickedness. He told them to repent. Hel. 7:12–14, 17

He warned them that they might lose their homes and cities, that the Lord would not help them fight their enemies if they did not repent. Hel. 7:22

He told them that they were more wicked than the Lamanites, because they (the Nephites) knew the commandments but would not obey them. Hel. 7:24

He said that the Lord would not destroy the Lamanites. However, if the Nephites did not repent, they would be completely destroyed. Hel. 7:23, 28

Some of the wicked judges were there. They wanted the people to seize Nephi for speaking against them and their law. Hel. 8:1–4

Some of the people agreed with the wicked judges; others believed Nephi. They knew that he was a prophet and spoke the truth. Hel. 8:7–9

Nephi told the people that they had turned away from God and would be punished soon if they did not repent. Hel. 8:25–26

Their destruction was already starting, he said: “Behold, your judge … lieth in his blood; and he hath been murdered by his brother, who seeketh to sit in the judgment-seat.” Hel. 8:27

Five men from the crowd ran to the judgment-seat to see. They did not believe that Nephi was a prophet of God. Hel. 9:1–2

When they saw Seezoram, the chief judge, lying in his blood, they fell to the earth in fear. Now they knew that Nephi was a prophet. Hel. 9:6–7

Seezoram’s servants had already found him murdered and had run to tell the people. They returned and found the five men lying there. Hel. 9:3–5

The people thought that the five men had murdered Seezoram. Hel. 9:8

They threw the five men into prison, then sent word through the city that the chief judge had been killed and that the murderers were in prison. Hel. 9:9

The next day the people went to where the chief judge would be buried. The judges who had been at Nephi’s garden asked where the five men were. Hel. 9:10–12

The judges asked to see the accused murderers. Hel. 9:13

The judges learned that the five men were those who had run to the judgment-seat from Nephi’s garden. Hel. 9:14

When the five men said that it had happened just as Nephi had said, the judges accused Nephi of sending someone to murder Seezoram. Hel. 9:15–16

Knowing that Nephi was a prophet, the five men argued with the judges. The judges would not listen. They had Nephi tied up. Hel. 9:18–19

The judges offered Nephi money and his life if he would say that he had plotted to have the chief judge killed. Nephi refused. Hel. 9:20–21

He told the judges to repent of their wickedness. Then he told them to go to the house of Seantum, Seezoram’s brother. Hel. 9:22, 26

Nephi told them to ask Seantum if he and Nephi had plotted to murder Seezoram and that Seantum would say no. Hel. 9:27–28

Nephi told them to then ask Seantum if he had killed his brother, that again he would say no, but that they would find blood on his cloak. Hel. 9:29–31

Nephi told them that Seantum would shake and turn pale, then confess that he had killed his brother. Hel. 9:33–35

The judges went to Seantum’s house, and everything happened as Nephi had said. Nephi and the five men were set free. Hel. 9:37–38

As the people walked away from Nephi, some said that he was a prophet, others that he was a god. He went home, still sad about their wickedness. Hel. 9:40–41; Hel. 10:1–3
