James E. Faust, Reach Up for the Light ( 1990)

Chapter 5

SIX KEYS TO HEALTHY SELF-ESTEEM

One of the greatest needs of every human being is the O need for positive self-esteem. By this I mean what we think of ourselves, how we relate to what others think of us, and how we perceive the value of our accomplishments.

Some mistakenly confuse self-esteem with vanity. Thomas Carlyle, the famous Scottish author, referred to it as "the sixth insatiable sense." And Robert Browning, the English poet, said that self-esteem is "an itch for the praise of fools."

The self-esteem to which I refer is something different. It is not blind, arrogant, vain love of self, but is self-respecting, unconceited, honest esteem of ourselves. It is born of inner peace and strength.

One day I went to get my driver's license renewed. As I stood in the lines, it was appalling to see the lack of self-esteem in so many who came to this public office. In the name of comfort and informality, many were immodestly dressed and others unkempt. I wondered why they would present themselves in public so poorly. In their manner of speech and their dress, they had greatly shortchanged themselves.

Self-esteem goes to the very heart of our personal growth and accomplishment. Self-esteem is the glue that holds together our self-reliance, our self-control, our self-approval or disapproval, and keeps all self-defense mechanisms secure. It is a protection against excessive self-deception, self-distrust, self-reproach, and plain, old-fashioned selfishness.

After a lifetime of observing, I have found the greatest respect is owed not necessarily to the rich or the famous, but to the quiet, unsung, unknown heroes whose true identity, like the unknown soldier, is known only to God. The unsung often have little of status, but much of worth.

When I was growing up in the Cottonwood area of Salt Lake County, it was a rural area. One of the men in that area who had great dignity and commanded great respect was an old Scandinavian brother who, after walking a couple of miles, traveled by streetcar to work at the Salt Lake City Cemetery every day. His work was to water and mow the grass, tend the flowers, and dig the graves. He said little because he did not speak English well, but he was always where he should be, doing what he should do in a most dignified, exemplary way. He had no problems with ego or with faith, for while he dug graves for a living, his work was to serve God. He was a man of little status but of great worth.

Not far away from our area was an area where some of the more affluent people of our community lived. Many of them were fine, honorable individuals, but some of them who had much status lived lives of debauchery and drunkenness and little worth.

When the Savior called his disciples, he was not looking for men and women of status, property, or fame. He was looking for those of worth and potential. Those early disciples were an interesting group—some fishermen, a tax gatherer, and others. On one occasion, after some of the apostles were beaten, they went "rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name." (Acts 5:41.)

Worth has little to do with age. It has everything to do with service. The Lord has made it clear that worthiness is built upon service, not just to family and friends, but also to strangers and even enemies. The great prophet Isaiah gave an eternal warning when he said: "Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the Lord; and I will heal him. But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." (Isaiah 57:19-21.)

From Milton's Paradise Lost comes this truth: "Ofttimes nothing profits more than self-esteem grounded on just and right well managed."

May I suggest six essential keys to keep our self-esteem healthy:

In Proverbs we read: "He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city that is broken down, and without walls." (Proverbs 25:28.) To completely enjoy our free agency, it is necessary to follow the counsel of Psalm 119, verse 101: "I have refrained my feet from every evil way." As parents, we should follow the counsel of Alma and teach our children to "withstand every temptation of the devil" (Alma 37:33) and to "bridle all [their] passions" (Alma 38:12).

A few years ago I became acquainted with a delightful new friend. He is charming, outgoing, and well groomed. He is a successful businessman. His spirituality shines through his countenance. He was completely honest in our business relationship. After many contacts and several months I noticed that he walked with a slight limp, which had not been obvious before. That led to closer observation. It was surprising that when I looked past the gracious smile, I noticed that my friend was slightly hunchbacked, with a somewhat misshapen spine. These physical defects were so well hidden by natural goodness, warmth, and great charm that they were as nothing in the total man. My friend accepts his physical defects with humility and strength and completely compensates for them with his natural personality.

There is another dimension of humility that must be mentioned, that of being teachable. The prophet Samuel counseled, "Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you." (1 Samuel 12:7.) Proverbs reminds us that "whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge." (Proverbs 12:1.) Any married man should be humble enough to learn from his wife. When Sara Merrill married N. Eldon Tanner, he was a schoolteacher from a farm in Alberta, Canada. Instead of bridling at receiving suggestions from his wife, President Tanner had the humility and the strength to listen.

Some years ago I sat as a spectator in a courtroom drama concerning the custody of some children. The contention was that the natural mother was not a good housekeeper, which was intended to add fuel to the claim that she was an unfit mother. A caseworker testified that when she visited the family home, it was in shambles and the kitchen was dirty.

Then the mother was called to the stand. A middle-aged, heavy, physically unattractive lady came forward, took the oath, and sat in the witness stand. The attorney for the father, who had remarried and wanted custody of the children, followed up relentlessly on the testimony already provided by the caseworker. His questions to the beleaguered mother were penetrating.

"Isn't it a fact," he asked, "that your house was as dirty as a pigpen the day the caseworker came?"

What drama! How could the mother answer in her own best interest and protect her custody of the children? What should she say? There was electricity in the air. She hesitated for a tense moment, and then she responded, calmly, with complete self-assurance: "Yes, my house certainly was a mess that day."

Her honesty obviously surprised even the judge, who leaned over the bench and asked, "What do you mean, 'that day'?" "Well, your honor," she replied, "earlier that morning I had been bottling peaches. I had peeled, cooked, and bottled two bushels of peaches. I had not finished cleaning up the mess when the caseworker came. My sink was still sticky from the syrup that had spilled over when I poured it into the bottles before they sealed. My house certainly was a mess that day. I try to be a good housekeeper, but with three children I can't possibly keep it straight all the time." Her frankness and candor were absolutely disarming, and devastating to the opposition. When she finished, everyone in the courtroom knew the judge would rule in her favor. As she arose and stepped down from the witness stand, she had the bearing and the self-assurance of a queen. Being true to one's own self is the essence of honesty, and a keystone of self-esteem.

In my observation, there are very few people who are of true genius. Many are gifted, but most of the world's work and great accomplishments come from ordinary people with talent that they develop. An ordinary talent can be nurtured and nourished into a great gift through hard work. Some of the artisans of China spend years making one exquisite art object of unbelievable grace and beauty.

Some time ago we went to hear the New York Philharmonic in concert in Salt Lake City. The music was exceptional, the teamwork of the gifted musicians blending to make a superb orchestral sound. Each member of the group possesses great talent. Not everyone, however, has a talent for the arts. Some may have a gift to make others feel important, happy, and special. This gift should also be developed and strengthened.

The spiritual gifts likewise can be refined and enlarged by attentive application to righteous living, to prayer, to study of the scriptures, and to obedience. Film producer George Lucas has said, "It doesn't matter what people say about me or what I say. What matters is what I accomplish." What we accomplish helps our self-esteem. Frequently we hear, "The work I do is unimportant," or "I'm just this or that." Every job that has to be done is important; no matter how minimal it seems, someone has to do it.

During major floods in Utah a few summers ago, a million sandbags had to be filled, tied, and put into place. The former head of one of the biggest companies in Utah wanted to be helpful in his neighborhood. The bishop who was directing some of the work in that area asked this man to find tie strings and to tie sandbags. He found tie strings in many places, including some on the ground, and he went around picking up the strings. It was an emergency. Someone had to do it.

I have to live with myself, and so I want to be fit for myself to know. I want to go out with my head erect; I want to demand all men's respect. I never can hide myself from me; I see what others may never see. I can never fool myself, and so, Whatever happens, I want to be Self-respecting and conscience-free.

A key is given to us: "Hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us." (1 John 3:24.) We can know that we know God "if we keep his commandments. He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him." (1 John 2:3-4.)

The self-esteem of many has been devastated by the loss of loved ones, by divorce, by other personal misfortunes. Some carry an extra burden of guilt from grievous sins. Transgression is devastating to self-esteem, and after transgression usually comes rationalization, and often lying. This is what makes justice so violent to the offending.

Fortunately we have the great principle of repentance whereby sins "as scarlet" can become "white as snow." (Isaiah 1:18.) I am grateful for this principle and pray that no one will hesitate to find the peace that comes from repentance. It is important to remember and never forget that all of us, male and female, were created in the image of God and created by God. Mankind is the noblest of all creations.

"What is man," asked the Psalmist, "that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour. Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet." (Psalm 8:4-6.)

Frequently in my ministry, as I have been setting apart an individual to a calling in the Church, the distinct impression has come to me that the person on whose head I have laid hands was foreordained to that calling. To the prophet Jeremiah came this assurance from the Lord: "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations." (Jeremiah 1:5.)

Not all of us are called to leadership in the kingdom. Yet, is there a greater work than that of teacher, father, or mother? So it is that nobody is nobody. The seeds of divinity are in all of us. There will come a day when we will have to account to God for what we have done with that portion of divinity which is within us.

I testify that God loves each of us, warts and all. I testify that he knows the name of each of us. I testify that each of us has a potential in this life and beyond the grave that exceeds our fondest dreams.
