James E. Faust, Reach Up for the Light ( 1990)

Chapter 13

ENRICHING OUR FAMILY LIFE

As a young man I recall President J. Reuben Clark A pleading time after time in general priesthood meetings that there be unity in the priesthood. He would quote frequently the message of the Lord, "I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.)

Unity in the priesthood should reflect unity in our homes. One wonders why so many homes are now being weakened and why so many families are disintegrating. The reasons are complex. No doubt it has much to do with the social disorders of the day. We are all subjected to sparkling, enticing false advertising. Violence is powerfully portrayed everywhere. Our society is permeated with suggestions that selfishness and instant gratification are acceptable or even respectable conduct. The evils of alcoholism have exploded and been magnified by the other forms of drug abuse. The sexual revolution has been crippling to the spiritual, mental, and physical health of families.

Among the assaults on families are attacks on our faith. Some of this is coming from apostates who formerly had testimonies and now seem unable to leave the Church alone. One, complaining of Church policy, was heard to say, "I am so mad: if I had been paying tithing I would quit." Persecution is not new to devoted followers of Christ. More recently, however, the anger and venom of our enemies seems to be increasing. Brigham Young said, "We never begin to build a temple without the bells of hell beginning to ring." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 410.) With many temples under construction or in the planning stage, there seem to be a lot of bells to be rung.

When I hear of a family breaking up, I question if family home evening and family prayers have been regularly held in that home and if the law of tithing has been observed. Has that family reverenced the Sabbath day? Have the parents murmured against gospel teachings and Church leaders? I wonder what could possibly justify the forsaking of eternal promises made in the temple, or what could warrant the breaking up of a family with children of tender years. Why is one family strong, yet another family weak? The problems are infinitely complex. Yet, there are answers. Abundant evidence shows that the presence of a firm, loving father in the home is far more likely to produce responsible, law-abiding children than if the father is not there, or if he does not function as a father at home. Malachi said the whole world would be smitten with a curse if the hearts of the fathers were not turned to the children, and if the hearts of the children were not turned to their fathers. (See Malachi 4:6.)

Stable, strong families are more likely if the father is present in the home, one or both of the parents are active in the Church, and there is discipline in the home.

Surely, the most important ingredient in producing family happiness for members of the Church is a deep religious commitment under wise, mature parental supervision. Devotion to God seems to forge the spiritual moorings and stability that can help the family cope. Some may say this is an oversimplification of a very complex problem, yet I believe the answers lie within the framework of the restored gospel of Christ.

One of the reasons for weakened families is the lack of absolutes. An absolute has no restriction, exception, or qualification. It is fixed and certain. There must be some things that family members should always try to do, and some activities that family members should scrupulously avoid. Truthfulness should be an absolute in every family.

How can parents and family members introduce and build familial strength? One of my closest boyhood friends died of cancer some time ago. His family decided he would be happier spending his last days in his own home, so they took him out of the hospital where the cancer was diagnosed and cared for him within the familiar walls of his own house. His eighty-one-year-old mother left her home in another state and moved in to supervise the tender, loving care. A sister and a brother left their homes in distant areas several times to help in emergencies. His children, some of whom also lived away, came and set up a twenty-four-hour vigil so that he would never be alone. After a few months he passed away, wasted and emaciated, but contented and happy. He had been loved into death. The family could have left his care to the government and the hospital, with little expense and little personal inconvenience being involved, but they chose to do otherwise.

May I suggest other ways to enrich family life:

Time together is precious time—time to talk, to listen, to encourage, and to show how to do things. Less time together can result in loneliness, which may produce inner feelings of being unsupported, not valued, and inadequate. Self-worth is reinforced in many ways. When parents say to a son or daughter, leaving the home for some activity, the simple but meaningful words, "Remember who you are," they have helped that child feel important.

Some parents find it difficult to express their love physically or vocally. I do not ever recall my own father using the words "Son, I love you," but he showed it in a thousand ways that were more eloquent than words. He rarely missed a practice, a game, a race, or any activity in which his sons participated.

The touch and time of the mother in the home makes that home warm, comfortable, and pleasant. Our wives and mothers deserve special support. President George Albert Smith, addressing husbands and fathers at a missionary conference in 1941, said: "Some seem to think that the woman's responsibility is to take care of the home and everything else while the man goes to meetings. I want to tell you that your chief responsibility is in your own home." This was confirmed by President Harold B. Lee, who told the priesthood, "The greatest of the Lord's work you brethren will ever do as fathers will be within the walls of your own home." (Conference Report, April 1973, p. 130.)

Let there be no ill will or anger between parents and children, brothers and sisters, and kinsmen. Lingering feelings of hurt or disagreement should be settled quickly. Why wait until one party is dying or dead?

May the rich humanness of warm, loving family life be restored and prevail in all our kinship. And may we put our lives and homes in order. We must stay true to the great absolutes of the restored gospel: namely, our Savior, Jesus Christ; the divine restoration of the gospel in our time; the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon; Joseph Smith's divine calling as a prophet of God; and continuing revelation to Joseph's successors, according to the needs of the Church and its members.

If we are united and go forward under the leadership of those who have the keys to the kingdom of God on earth, our homes will be enriched, our lives will be purified, and the gates of hell will not prevail against us. May we follow the counsel of Alma and "stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that [we] may be in, even until death." (Mosiah 18:9.)
