James E. Faust, Reach Up for the Light ( 1990)

Chapter 14

"THE GREAT IMITATOR"

You may have heard the story of the disruptive boys in a Sunday School class who were asked by their exasperated teacher why they bothered to attend Sunday School. One of the more impudent boys replied, "We came to see you perform a miracle." The teacher walked over to the boy and responded, "We don't perform miracles here, but we do cast out devils!" The devil and his angels are the source and mainspring of all evil. I think we will witness increasing evidence of Satan's power as the kingdom of God grows stronger. I believe his ever-expending efforts are some proof of the truthfulness of the work of the Church. In the future the opposition will be both more subtle and more open. It will be masked in greater sophistication and cunning, but it will also be more blatant. We will need greater spirituality to perceive all forms of evil and greater strength to resist it. But the disappointments and setbacks to the work of God will be temporary, for the work will go forward. (See D&C 65:2.)

It is not good practice to become intrigued by Satan and his mysteries. No good can come from getting close to evil. Like playing with fire, it is too easy to get burned. The only safe course is to keep well distanced from him and any of his wicked activities or nefarious practices. We should avoid at all cost the mischief of devil worship, sorcery, casting spells, witchcraft, voodooism, black magic, and other forms of demonism. However, Brigham Young said that it is important to "study . . . evil, and its consequences." (Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 256-57.) Since Satan is the author of all evil in the world, it would therefore be essential to realize that he is the influence behind the opposition to the work of God. Alma stated the issue succinctly: "Whatsoever is good cometh from God, and whatsoever is evil cometh from the devil." (Alma 5:40.)

My principal reason for discussing this subject is to help our young people by warning them, as Paul said, "lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of his devices." (2 Corinthians 2:11.) We hope that they, unfamiliar with the sophistries of the world, can keep themselves free of Satan's enticements and deceitful ways. I personally claim no special insight into Satan's methods, but I have at times been able to identify his influence and his actions in my life and in the lives of others. When I was on my mission, Satan sought to divert me from my future path and, if possible, to destroy my usefulness in the Lord's work. That was almost fifty years ago, and I still remember how reasonable his entreaties seemed.

Who has not heard and felt the enticings of the devil? His voice often sounds reasonable and his message easy to justify. It is an enticing, intriguing voice with dulcet tones. It is neither hard nor discordant. No one would listen to Satan's voice if it sounded harsh or mean. If the devil's voice were unpleasant, it would not entice people to listen to it.

Shakespeare wrote, "The prince of darkness is a gentleman" (King Lear, Act 3, sc. 4), and "the devil can cite Scripture for his purpose" (The Merchant of Venice, Act 1, sc. 3). As the great deceiver, Lucifer has marvelous powers of deception. Paul said to the Corinthians, "No marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light." (2 Corinthians 11:14; see also 2 Nephi 9:9.)

Some of Satan's most appealing lines are "Everyone does it," "If it doesn't hurt anybody else, it's all right," "If you feel all right about it, it's okay," and "It's the 'in' thing to do." These subtle entreaties make Satan the great imitator, the master deceiver, the arch counterfeiter, the great forger.

We all have an inner braking system that will stop us before we follow Satan too far down the wrong road. It is the still, small voice that is within us. But once we have succumbed, the braking system begins to leak brake fluid and our stopping mechanism becomes weak and ineffective.

The prince of darkness is often in very good company and can be found everywhere. Job said, "Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them to present himself before the Lord. And the Lord said unto Satan, From whence comest thou? And Satan answered the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it." (Job 2:1-2.)

Nephi has given us the pattern or formula by which Satan operates: "Others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell. And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance." (2 Nephi 28:21-22.)

The First Presidency described Satan: "He is working under such perfect disguise that many do not recognize either him or his methods. There is no crime he would not commit, no debauchery he would not set up, no plague he would not send, no heart he would not break, no life he would not take, no soul he would not destroy. He comes as a thief in the night; he is a wolf in sheep's clothing." (Messages of the First Presidency, comp. James R. Clark, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75, 6:179.)

Satan is the world's master in the use of flattery, and he knows the great power of speech. In the Book of Mormon we read that "he was learned, that he had a perfect knowledge of the language of the people; wherefore, he could use much flattery, and much power of speech, according to the power of the devil." (Jacob 7:4.) He has always been one of the great forces of the world.

Ernest LeRoy Hatch, former president of the Guatemala City Temple, said, "The devil is not smart because he is the devil; he is smart because he is old." Indeed, the devil is old, and he was not always the devil. Initially he was not the perpetrator of evil. He was with the hosts of heaven in the beginning. He was "an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God." (D&C 76:25.) He came before Christ and proposed to God the Father, "Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor." (Moses 4:1.) This he proposed to do by force, destroying the free agency of man.

Does his statement "Give me thine honor" mean that he wanted to mount an insurrection to supplant even God the Father? Satan became the devil by seeking glory, power, and dominion by force. (See Moses 4:3-4.) But Jesus, "chosen from the beginning," said unto God, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." (Moses 4:2.) What a contrast in approaches! Wrong as his plan was, Satan was persuasive enough to entice one-third of the hosts of heaven to follow him. He practiced a great deception by saying, "I am also a son of God." (Moses 5:13.)

Free agency, given us through the plan of our Father, is the great alternative to Satan's plan of force. With this sublime gift, we can grow, improve, progress, and seek perfection. Without agency, none of us could grow and develop by learning from our mistakes and errors and the mistakes and errors of others.

Because of his rebellion, Lucifer was cast out and became Satan, the devil, "the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto [his] voice." (Moses 4:4.) And so this personage who was an angel of God and in authority, even in the presence of God, was removed from the presence of God and his Son. (See D&C 76:25.) This caused great sadness in the heavens, "for the heavens wept over him—he was Lucifer, a son of the morning." (D&C 76:26.) Does this not place some responsibility on the followers of Christ to show concern for loved ones who have lost their way and "are shut out from the presence of God"? (Moses 6:49.) I know of no better way to do this than to show unconditional love and to help lost souls seek another path.

Satan does perform an important negative function. In 2 Nephi 2:11 we are told, "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." However, Peter warns, "Be sober, be vigilant; because our adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking who he may devour." (1 Peter 5:8.)

Let us not become so intense in our zeal to do good by winning arguments or by our pure intention in disputing doctrine that we go beyond good sense and manners, thereby promoting contention, or say or do imprudent things, invoke cynicism, or ridicule with flippancy. In this manner, our good motives become so misdirected that we lose friends and, even more serious, we come under the influence of the devil. I recently heard this truth: "Your criticism may be worse than the conduct you are trying to correct."

C. S. Lewis gives us a keen insight into devilish tactics. In a fictional letter, the master devil, Screwtape, instructs the apprentice devil Wormwood, who is in training to become a more experienced devil: "You will say that these are very small sins; and doubtless, like all young tempters, you are anxious to report spectacular wickedness. . . . It does not matter how small the sins are, provided that their cumulative effect is to edge the man away from the Light and out into the Nothing. . . . Indeed, the safest road to Hell is the gradual one—the gentle slope, soft underfoot, without sudden turnings, without milestones, without signposts." (The Screwtape Letters, New York: Macmillan, 1962, p. 56.)

Lewis also wrote: "A silly idea is current that good people do not know what temptation means. This is an obvious lie. Only those who try to resist temptation know how strong it is. . . . You find out the strength of a wind by trying to walk against it, not by lying down." (Mere Christianity, New York: Macmillan, 1960, p. 124.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith related from experience, "The nearer a person approaches the Lord, a greater power will be manifested by the adversary to prevent the accomplishment of His purpose." (Quoted in Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 132.)

However, we need not become paralyzed with fear of Satan's power. He can have no power over us unless we permit it. He is really a coward, and if we stand firm, he will retreat. The Apostle James counseled: "Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you." (James 4:7.) He cannot know our thoughts unless we speak them.

We have heard comedians and others justify or explain their misdeeds by saying, "The devil made me do it." I do not really think the devil can make us do anything. Certainly he can tempt and he can deceive, but he has no authority over us that we do not give him.

The power to resist Satan may be stronger than we realize. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "All beings who have bodies have power over those who have not. The devil has no power over us only as we permit him. The moment we revolt at anything which comes from God, the devil takes power." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 181.) He also stated, "Wicked spirits have their bounds, limits, and laws by which they are governed." (History of the Church 4:576.)

So Satan and his angels are not all-powerful. One of his approaches is to persuade a person who has transgressed that there is no hope for forgiveness. But there is always hope. Most sins, no matter how grievous, may be repented of if the desire is sincere enough.

Satan has had great success with the gullible generation. As a consequence, he and his angels have victimized literally hosts of people. There is, however, an ample shield against their power. This protection lies in the spirit of discernment through the gift of the Holy Ghost. This gift comes undeviatingly by personal revelation to those who strive to obey the commandments of the Lord and follow the counsel of the living prophets. Personal revelation will surely come to all whose eyes are single to the glory of God, for it is promised that their bodies will be "filled with light, and there shall be no darkness" in them. (D&C 88:67.) Satan's efforts can be thwarted by all who come unto Christ by obedience to the covenants and ordinances of the gospel. Humble followers of the divine Master need not be deceived by the devil if they are honest and true to their fellow beings, go to the house of the Lord, receive the sacrament worthily, observe the Sabbath day, pay their tithes and offerings, offer contrite prayers, engage in the Lord's work, and follow those who preside over them.

I testify that there are forces that will save us from the ever-increasing lying, disorder, violence, chaos, destruction, misery, and deceit that are upon the earth. Those saving forces are the everlasting principles, covenants, and ordinances of the eternal gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. These same principles, covenants, and ordinances are coupled with the rights and powers of the priesthood of Almighty God. Members of the Church are the possessors and custodians of these commanding powers, which can and do roll back much of the power of Satan on the earth. We believe that we hold these mighty forces in trust for all who have died, for all who are now living, and for all who are yet unborn.

I pray that, through the spreading of righteousness, the evil hands of the destroyer might be stayed and that he may not be permitted to curse the whole world. I also pray that God will overlook our weaknesses, our frailties, and our many shortcomings and generously forgive us of our misdeeds, and that He will bring solace to the suffering, comfort to those who grieve, and peace to the brokenhearted.
