FamilySearch is teaming with a United Kingdom family history Web site to provide online access to records of deceased British soldiers and seamen dating as far back as the eighteenth century.

Findmypast.com and FamilySearch received licenses to digitize the Chelsea Pensioners retired soldiers’ records from 1760 to 1914. Anther project will make available British merchant seamen’s records from 1835 to 1941. Many of the twentieth-century records will include photographs of sailors and personal details of naval voyages.

FamilySearch.org has added England and Scotland to its online collection of Finding Records of Your Ancestors genealogy guides. The free, downloadable workbooks explain each step of the research process and include important Web sites, expert search tips, and information on how to find and use other Church records.

The manuals are part of a series that includes Denmark, Finland, France, Iceland, Italy, Jewish, Mexico, Norway, and Sweden guides. The guides are currently available in English, except for the Mexico guide, which is also available in Spanish. There is also a guide for those searching for African-American ancestors. Access the guides and other helps at FamilySearch.org. Click the Search tab, then Research Helps.

The Preach My Gospel manual used by members and missionaries all over the world can be viewed online or downloaded in PDF format in 42 languages. It is also now available as an English audio recording in MP3 format. To download the files, visit GospelLibrary.lds.org and select Preach My Gospel from the “Shortcuts” menu on the right. Church audio files can also be found at www.lds.org/mp3/newarchive.

The manual Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith is now available to download online in MP3 audio format in 11 languages. The files are available in Cantonese, English, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Mandarin, Portuguese, Russian, and Spanish. Access all the audio files at www.lds.org/mp3/newarchive or by clicking on Listen in the individual text chapters found in the LDS.org Gospel Library.
