y Amillennialists, postmillennialists, and historical premillennialists see that the

rapture and the return happen immediately after one another.

y Dispensational premillennialists take the “blessed hope” and the “appearing of

the glory” to occur at different times. According to most dispensationalists, seven

years or more may separate the rapture of the church from the return

of Jesus.

Three Views of rapTure and reTurn

Dispensational Amillennialism and Historical

Premillennialism Postmillennialism Premillennialism

The rapture of the church and The rapture of the church and The rapture of the church and

the return of Jesus to earth the return of Jesus to earth the return of Jesus to earth

occur at different times. They happen together. This event happen together. This event

are separated by 7 years will occur at the end of will occur immediately before

or more.

the millennium. the millennium.

• The return of Jesus to earth • The return of Jesus • The return of Jesus

will occur some time after to earth will occur to earth will occur

the rapture of the church. immediately after the immediately after the

• Most dispensationalists rapture of the church. rapture of the church.

place the rapture before the • The rapture will occur at • The rapture will occur

tribulation and the return at the end of the millennium. after the tribulation and

the end of the tribulation, • The church will be caught before the millennium.

the millennium. immediately before up to meet Jesus • The church will be caught

(1 Thessalonians 4:13– up to meet Jesus

• The church will be caught up 18; Revelation 19:7–9) (1 Thessalonians 4:13–

to meet Jesus and will then immediately 18; Revelation 19:7–9)

(1 Thessalonians 4:13–18; return to earth as part of and will then immediately

Revelation 4:1–2); the the Messiah’s return to earth as part of

church will return to earth royal retinue the Messiah’s

after the tribulation as (Revelation 19:14). royal retinue

part of the Messiah’s royal

(Revelation 19:14).

retinue (Revelation 19:14).

This is just one page from Rose Guide to the End-Times Prophecy, is an easy-to-understand overview. It helps ©2012 Rose Publishing. You may print

you go through the key portions of Scripture and explains different ways that Christians have interpreted them. 10 copies, but do not post on the internet

Simple charts and illustrations help you see the whole picture. ISBN 9781596364196. Save $5 on your $25 or send via email.Your friends may sign up

for Free Rose Bible eCharts & Newsletters

order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com.

at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Four Views of the End Times

DVD Series

This six-week study shows four different Revelation

time lines and tackles Dispensational Premillennialism,

Postmillennialism, Historic Premillennialism, and

Amillennialism. For each view, Four Views of the End Times

includes a definition, supporting Scriptures, a time line of

the view’s popularity, and a sampling of Christian leaders

supporting that view.

Book 9781596364127

Temple

Pamphlet

The full-color, glossy 12-panel pamphlet covers the

Tabernacle in the wilderness to the Temple. built by King

Solomon, Zerubbabel, and Herod’s Temple, the one Jesus

knew so well. Each of the Temple furnishings are explained

in detail, as well as their functions, purposes, and the

meanings they have for believers today.

End-Times Prophecy

Pamphlet 9781596360013

Jesus talked a lot about the end of time and his second

coming. These are key teachings that every Christian

Rose Guide to The Temple

should know. So why don’t they? is an easy-to-

Book

Rose Guide to the Temple is a full-color overview of the

understand overview. It helps you go through the key

Temple, with more than 100 images, charts, diagrams,

portions of Scripture and explains different ways that

photos, and illustrations, many of which have never published

Christians have interpreted them. Simple charts and

before. Rose Guide to The Temple is a clear and easy-to-

understand examination at the temple and contains clear

illustrations help you see the whole picture.

plastic overlays and stunning posters that no other Temple

guide has. It covers the span of time from Abraham to

Book 9781596364196

modern day.

Book 9781596364684

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
