Following are a few significant events that happened in Church history during the month of April.

3 April 1836: The Savior, Moses, Elias, and Elijah appeared in the Kirtland Temple to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery (see D&C 110).

5 April 1847: The first pioneer company left Winter Quarters for the Salt Lake Valley.

28 April 1961: Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, then an Assistant to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, offered a prayer opening the Philippines for missionary work.

24 April 1999: The Bogotá Colombia Temple was dedicated.

30 April 2000: The Cochabamba Bolivia Temple was dedicated.

29 April 2001: The Guadalajara México Temple was dedicated.

28 April 2002: The Monterrey México Temple was dedicated.

As you plan Mutual activities, remember to delegate. And as you make assignments, if you follow a few simple steps, everything will be more successful:

1.  Identify the tasks that need to be accomplished.

2.  Assign someone to complete each task. Keep a record of who was assigned, and suggest to the assigned people that they write themselves a reminder note and report to you by a certain date.

3.  Follow up on the assignments you made. Following up might involve a quick telephone call or visit.

4.  Always recognize the efforts of those who have helped and thank them for their assistance.

“Fasting and prayer can help develop within us courage and confidence. It can strengthen our character and build self-restraint and discipline. Often when we fast, our righteous prayers and petitions have greater power. Testimonies grow. We mature spiritually and emotionally and sanctify our souls. Each time we fast, we gain a little more control over our worldly appetites and passions.”
Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, “The Law of the Fast,” Liahona, July 2001, 89; Ensign, May 2001, 73.

1.  Who was the father of Amaleki, one of the writers of the book of Omni?
    a. Jarom
    b. Omni
    c. Abinadom
    d. Chemish

2.  When Alma was commanded to return to the city of Ammonihah, who invited him to stay at his house?
    a. Abinadi
    b. Amulek
    c. Zeezrom
    d. Nephihah

3.  Who hid the plates of Nephi in the Hill Shim in about A.D. 321?
    a. Moroni
    b. Mormon
    c. Amos
    d. Ammaron

Answers:
