Liahona

- Feeling peace inside is possible even during times of adversity.

- We can feel peace when we keep covenants and commandments.

- Although we will be tested and bad things will happen, we can have the calm assurance that God is watching over us.

- Peace comes through the Holy Ghost, so we must try to be worthy of His companionship.

- Repentance can free us from sin and guilt and restore peace to our souls.

We live in a world full of fear and frightening events. But feeling peace inside is possible even if everything around us is chaos. Jesus Christ offers each of us the same peace He promised His Apostles: “Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid” (John 14:27).

There are a lot of things we can do to help bring peace into our lives—pray, study the scriptures, listen to uplifting music, go to church and seminary or institute, attend the temple. But it really all centers on one thing: “The price of peace is righteousness,” said President Ezra Taft Benson (1899–1994) (The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson [1988], 703). Or as President Gordon B. Hinckley has said, “You will find peace and happiness if you will live the gospel” (“Words of the Living Prophet,” Liahona, Mar. 1997, 16; “Inspirational Thoughts,” Ensign, Aug. 1997, 6).

That doesn’t mean we have to be perfect to have peace. But we have to be trying our best to choose the right and to get up every time we fall down.

Why does having the Lord’s peace in our hearts depend upon our righteousness? One reason is that we cannot do wrong and feel right. Another reason is that the peace Jesus offers us comes through the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, and we must be living worthy of the Spirit’s companionship. If we have sinned, guilt will keep us from feeling the Lord’s peace. But through repentance we can become free from guilt and sin and be eligible for the companionship of the Holy Ghost again.

It is important to know that Jesus Christ’s promise of peace does not guarantee a life without hardships. All of us will be tested, since that is why we are here. Bad things sometimes happen to us or to someone close to us. But we can still feel peace.

After suffering in Liberty Jail for months, the Prophet Joseph Smith received these words from God:

“My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment;

“And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high” (D&C 121:7–8).

Our trials may seem like they last longer than a small moment, but with God’s help we become stronger.

“It is my testimony that we are facing difficult times,” said President James E. Faust, Second Counselor in the First Presidency. “We must be courageously obedient. My witness is that we will be called upon to prove our spiritual stamina, for the days ahead will be filled with affliction and difficulty. But with the assuring comfort of a personal relationship with God, we will be given a calming courage” (“That We Might Know Thee, the Only True God, and Jesus Christ,” Liahona, Feb. 1999, 5–6; Ensign, Jan. 1999, 5).

Readers

Modern revelation states, “Learn that he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come” (D&C 59:23). We can find peace by living the gospel as taught by our Savior and our modern prophets.
Israel O. Velasco, 17, General Santos Fourth Ward, General Santos Philippines Stake

There have been conflicts in every period of history. But if we obey the commandments and principles of the gospel, the promises of the Lord will be fulfilled, and our souls will be filled with peace. We will be able to withstand difficult times without losing faith if we are diligent and endure to the end.
Carlos Freire, 16, Bolívar Ward, Guayaquil Ecuador Garcia Moreno Stake

Since one of the fruits of the Spirit is peace, one of the things that helps me feel peace is to live a clean life so I can be guided by the Holy Ghost. I love to sing, and this brings me peace. Singing hymns or listening to arrangements of hymns calms me and helps me keep the Spirit.
Óscar Luciano Mackay López, 17, Las Colinas Branch, San Isidro Panamá Stake

I feel peace by reading the scriptures, doing good things, and constantly praying to our Heavenly Father for guidance. He can always make things easier for us, especially during these bad times.
Denise Talaboc, 13, Mati Second Branch, Mati Philippines District

In spite of the challenges and atrocities that so often happen, something that has helped me find peace in my life is knowing that God exists, He has absolute power over everything, He is loving, and He knows each of us. If there is anything we need to fix in our lives, we must do it now so we can enjoy the complete peace the Spirit of the Lord can bring into our lives.
Raquel Iveth Hurtado, 17, Los Repartos Branch, Leon Nicaragua District

“Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me” (D&C 19:23). This scripture tells us how we can find peace despite all that goes on around us. I have applied this scripture to my own life and have found peace in my soul.
Natacha D. Lemire, 14, Laval Ward, Montréal Québec Stake

It is not always easy to feel the peace of the Lord; after all, we are in a probationary period and are tested every day. But if we keep the commandments and live the gospel, we can have peace.
Bjoern T. Kuchel, 20, Langenhorn Ward, Neumünster Germany Stake

It is possible to have peace and happiness even amidst so much adversity. We can withstand anything with our testimony as our shield. The knowledge that Jesus is our Savior and God is our Father is an anchor in the storm of life. No adversity is greater than the happiness and peace that come to us when we have faith and a strong testimony.
Franciélly Aparecidapósta, 19, Guarani Branch, Belo Horizonte Brazil Stake
