Various authors, Henry B. Eyring, On Becoming a Disciple Scholar ( 1995)

Journey to City Creek: Adding Scholarship to Discipleship

Paul Alan Cox

The first goal of the Honors Program at BYU is to model the compatibility of rigorous scholarship with deep commitment to the faith, including institutional aspects of that faith. The development of discipleship in young scholars has been beautifully discussed by Elder Maxwell in the inaugural Discipline and Discipleship lecture. His themes of developing the attitudes of meekness, submissiveness, and consecration in the disciple-scholar will be explored in subsequent lectures. Tonight at this annual Honors Banquet I would like to consider an alternative issue: the development of scholarship in young disciples. Why should young disciples of Jesus Christ pursue an education? Can an education equip young disciples for more than earning a living-can education assist young disciples in better serving the kingdom of God?

Should Disciples Seek Learning?

The word scholar comes from the Latin word scholaris, which translates as "pertaining to a school." Although scholar is commonly used to signify a learned person, the dictionary indicates it also means "a student; a person attending school." It is this second and older definition that I would like to use. Specifically, I would like to address not only BYU Honors students but also all Latter-day Saint students wherever they may be, including many who see themselves as struggling. In using this older definition of scholar, I include many young people who may not identify themselves with the words scholarly or scholarship, those who may not consider themselves capable of securing admission into selective universities or programs, and particularly those who are wondering if they really should continue to pursue an education. I want to tell you why I personally believe that, despite all odds, you should seek learning.

The Church of Jesus Christ, from the time of the Savior even until now, has been largely composed of working people, individuals who pursue honorable professions and trades common to the societies in which they live. Jesus commented on the diversity of people who would be gathered into the kingdom: "Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind" (Matt. 13:47). Unlike some other religions, the gospel of Jesus Christ does not grant special status to theologians, philosophers, or other academics. All are welcome to enjoy the bounteous blessings of the gospel, regardless of educational background or social status (see 2 Ne. 26:24-28). Those called by the Savior to serve in His kingdom represent this broad cross-section of humanity. Jesus Christ, raised by Mary and by Joseph the carpenter, first called as His disciples fishermen and others engaged in common professions. Paul noted this fact in his letter to the Corinthians: "For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty" (1 Cor. 1:26-27).

Academic credentials are not requisite for service in the Lord's kingdom. Indeed there are explicit warnings within the scriptures to both the rich and the learned to avoid pride. Yet we can see within such scriptures an intriguing pattern: the warnings to the learned are often given by prophets and Apostles who have themselves sought learning. Paul, for example, was a student of Gamaliel and an associate of the Sanhedrin. He gained fluency in several languages, and, as demonstrated by his masterful address on Mars Hill, was conversant with Greek philosophy. Given his own educational attainments, is it safe to construe Paul's statement that God hath "made foolish the wisdom of this world" (1 Cor. 1:20) as an injunction for Christ's disciples to remain unlearned?

Examples of learned prophets cautioning the learned against pride can also be found in the Book of Mormon. Consider the familiar warning of Jacob's: "O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish." (2 Ne. 9:28.)

Some may take this warning to mean that disciples should avoid learning at all costs. Yet Jacob's brother and exemplar, the prophet Nephi, in the very first sentence in the Book of Mormon unabashedly tells us of his own obtaining an education: "I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was taught somewhat in all the learning of my father" (1 Ne. 1:1). However, even though Nephi had intensively studied Egyptian and Hebrew, he later chastised "the wise, and the learned . . . that are puffed up in the pride of their hearts" (2 Ne. 28:15). This pattern of learned prophets rebuking the prideful learned was also exemplified by Abinadi, who confounded the wicked priests of King Noah by reciting from memory the complete text of Isa. 53 (see Mosiah 14), knowledge that he likely gained from his own intensive study of the scriptures. The pattern also occurs with Mormon, who tells us that as a child he sought education after the manner of his people, and was "sober" and "quick to observe" (Morm. 1:2). Mormon's son Moroni apparently saw himself as a struggling student, fearing that his latter-day readers might condemn him because of "his imperfection" (Morm. 9:31) and "weakness in writing" (Ether 12:23). Yet he discussed with considerable aplomb the relative merits of inscribing plates in Hebrew and reformed Egyptian, revealing a knowledge of both languages as well as his native tongue (Moro. 9:31).

Even Joseph Smith, who referred to himself as "an unlearned boy" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 371), was able not only to recognize excerpts from Mal. 4, Isa. 11, Acts 3, and Joel 2 when quoted to him by the angel Moroni, but also noticed subtle changes in these texts during Moroni's recitation (see JS-H 1:36-41). Clearly many of the Lord's servants, both former and current, struggled to obtain an education through whatever means was available to them. Should we not then consider Jacob's assertion that "to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God" (2 Ne. 9:29) as an encouragement for those who seek discipleship to also actively pursue learning, rather than as a warning against education?

My Personal Question: Should I Study Botany?

The answer to the question "Should I study botany?" was not apparent to me as a young student attempting to determine my future career. I had a firm testimony of the restoration of the gospel and wanted to pursue a career useful to the kingdom. My father was a park ranger. He built beautiful trails and parks. My grandfather built fish hatcheries and wildlife refuges. The fruits of their labors are very tangible and continue to bless the lives of thousands. Although I loved plants and wanted to study botany, I wondered if I shouldn't follow the path of my father and grandfather and become a park ranger. What good would studying plants do for the world? Wouldn't it be better to avoid esoteric studies and seek training in practical pursuits?

Although the members of the Church early in this dispensation established schools and sought higher education, their skills in farming, blacksmithing, bricklaying, and other honorable trades facilitated the colonization of the Great Basin. Given this emphasis on practical skills, are there ways that scholarship can add to discipleship? Is there a role for scholars in the kingdom of God? Let me share with you a recent journey that gave me some insight into this question, my personal journey to City Creek.

City Creek and the Arrival of the Saints in Utah

On 6 April 1993 I sat alone in a rented cabin attempting to finish a manuscript about my search for new medicinal drugs from rain forest plants. The morning light was bright on the snow, but I was oblivious to my surroundings. My fingers danced over the keyboard as I typed my last paragraph. I was elated. My scientific paper was finished, yet it was only 10:30 a.m. There was time for me to put my plan into action. I changed into a suit, jumped into my vehicle, and headed toward Salt Lake City. I had decided to make a journey to City Creek.

City Creek was first sighted by the pioneers on the afternoon of 22 July 1847 when they arrived in the valley of the Great Salt Lake. They set up camp on its south fork. I have spent a bit of time attempting to locate the precise site of that camp. In those days City Creek immediately divided as it entered the valley (Draper 1988). The west branch cut through a corner of the future temple block beneath where the statue of Christus currently stands in the Temple Square visitors center. It then turned immediately west. The south branch ran where the Main Street of Salt Lake City now is, and then branched again. One branch ran northwest while the other continued south down the current course of Main Street, turning west near Fourth South. As far as I can determine, the campsite of those first pioneers is buried beneath Main Street somewhere near the current site of the Crossroads Mall shopping center.

In 1847 the scene along City Creek was barren: there were only two or three cottonwood trees, and the ground was dry and hard. The pioneers immediately tried to plant potatoes, but several plows were broken in the attempt. To soften the ground, a small dam was built. When Brigham Young saw the dam a few days later, he "regretted the destruction of the willows and wild roses growing on the banks of City Creek" (Roberts, 235). On 28 July Brigham Young walked upstream with a small party to a point between the two upper branches. He struck his cane on the ground and declared, "Here we shall build a temple to our God." Tradition has it that Wilford Woodruff then drove a stake into the ground to mark the spot (Holzapfel, p. 5).

Work on the Salt Lake Temple Commences

Due to the stark demands for survival, the early pioneers could not begin work on the temple for six years. But on Valentine's Day, 14 February 1853, the Saints gathered to the temple site for the groundbreaking. The cold and snow made this a very different sort of occasion than the pleasant ceremonies we associate with current groundbreakings. The poverty of the Saints was appalling. One member of the Church recorded: "I walked [to the meeting] the morning the ground was broken for the foundation of the Temple . . . on the Temple Block. I went through frozen mud and slush with my feet tied up in rags. I had on a pair of pants made out of my wife's skirt-a thin Scotch plaid; also a thin calico shirt and a straw hat. These were all the clothes I had. . . . I was not alone in poverty. . . . There were many who were fixed as badly as I was." (Holzapfel, p. 9.)

The ground itself was frozen and covered by three inches of snow. Wilford Woodruff wrote: "The ground being frozen, President Heber C. Kimball commenced breaking the ground with a pick. . . . Then the ground was broke and President Young took out the first turf." (Holzapfel, p. 10.)

The next week President Young assigned Elder Woodruff to assist in digging out the foundation in preparation for laying the cornerstones. Wilford Woodruff worked hard at this taxing labor. Normally a prodigious diary writer, during one week he made only a single entry in his journal: "March 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19th I spent this week in digging out the foundation for the Temple" (Holzapfel, p. 10).

The value of learning in preparation for service to the kingdom is apparent from the design Brigham Young prepared for the Salt Lake Temple. As a youth, Brigham Young had apprenticed as a cabinetmaker and later studied glazing and carpentry. The economic circumstances of his family made further education impossible, but Brigham Young's 1840-41 mission provided an opportunity for him to be exposed to the great historical and architectural monuments of England. He was fascinated by St. Paul's Cathedral, the Tower of London, and Westminster Abbey, for which he purchased a detailed architectural guide. He also visited Worcester Cathedral with Wilford Woodruff. His self-directed study of British architecture helped prepare President Young to design, through inspiration, the general appearance of the Salt Lake Temple. The importance of his mission study of English cathedrals and monuments was apparent in the way he called the temple architect, Truman Angell, on a mission to England in 1856 to study architecture, prior to drafting detailed plans for the Salt Lake Temple. In his blessing to Brother Angell, Brigham Young promised: "You shall have power and means to go from place to place, from country to country, and view the various specimens of architecture that you may desire to see, and you will wonder at the works of the ancients and marvel to see what they have done" (Hamilton and Cutrubus, p. 52).

Just as City Creek had nourished the early pioneers, it now began to nourish the work of the temple construction. Brigham Young's inspiration in locating the temple adjacent to City Creek became clear when a waterwheel, sixteen feet in diameter, was placed in City Creek to turn the lathes for the temple carpentry shops. That waterwheel also drove an air flume for the blacksmith shop (Raynor, p. 26). Tradition has it that City Creek also powered one of the early versions of the Tabernacle organ.

City Creek changed as Salt Lake City grew. It was only with tremendous difficulty that the massive granite stairways, with each step weighing 1,700 pounds, could be incorporated in the emerging temple. Yet in 1878, steam engines, with water supplied from City Creek, replaced manpower and horsepower in pulling the massive granite blocks, some in excess of 5,600 pounds, to the top of the temple walls. (Raynor, pp. 110-26.)

Dedication of the Salt Lake Temple

Thirty-nine years of sacrifice and backbreaking toil led to the laying of the capstone on 6 April 1892. Salt Lake City was packed: some fifty thousand people, twice the capacity of BYU's Marriott Center, jammed Temple Square and packed into the surrounding streets. Some sat on the tops of houses, and a few even climbed telegraph poles to see the ceremony.

President Wilford Woodruff, who had personally participated in digging the foundation so many years before, now raised both hands above his head and announced to the crowd: "Attention all ye house of Israel, and all ye nations of the earth! We will now lay the top-stone of the Temple of our God, the foundation of which was laid and dedicated by the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, Brigham Young." He pushed a button, and the capstone settled into place.

President Lorenzo Snow then led the Saints in the Hosanna Shout. Imagine fifty thousand people, with tears streaming down their faces, all crying aloud three times: "Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna! to God and the Lamb! Amen! Amen! Amen!"

"The scene . . . [was] beyond the power of language to describe," a Church member visiting from Idaho wrote. "The eyes of thousands were moistened with tears in the fullness of their joy. The ground seemed to tremble with the volume of the sound which sent forth its echoes to the surrounding hills." (Holzapfel, p. 46.)

The capstone was laid. The walls were built, but there remained far more to do: the interior had to be completed. A motion was made to the multitude to complete the interior of the temple in one year's time. A "deafening" roar of "ayes" was returned from the thousands present. Every Saint pledged his or her utmost to the goal. James E. Talmage first pledged an amount equal (and in addition to) his full tithing; then later, in response to a further appeal, he increased the amount by two-thirds. Craftsmen and artisans of every type, including returning art missionaries from Europe, hastened to complete the work in the allotted time. This temple was finished during a period of deep economic recession. The people were poor. But they gave everything they could in time, talents, and funds to the construction of that temple.

Their haste to complete the temple did not mean that they produced shoddy workmanship. They believed that only the best was acceptable to the Lord. Through prayer, fasting, and a tremendous amount of hard manual labor they succeeded in completing the temple interior only the night before the dedication.

A Ticket to the Original Temple Dedication

As I drove from my cabin toward City Creek on 6 April 1993, I owned an original ticket to the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple. The ticket belonged to my grandmother, who as a young girl had attended the temple dedication, and it was given to me by my mother before she died.

Arriving in Salt Lake, I called at the nearby office of a close friend who is a prominent bond attorney. Together we walked down the little artificial stream behind the Church Administration building that runs, much like City Creek before it, toward the temple site. I wanted to worship in the Salt Lake Temple a hundred years to the day from its original dedication.

When we entered the temple I was stunned by the intensity of the Spirit present. Even though the building was packed with people, the Spirit was beautiful and serene. We changed into white clothing and walked into the small chapel. Instead of sitting with the rest of the patrons we sat alone in an unoccupied area. After fifteen minutes a member of the temple presidency announced that the temple was so full that day that not all of us could be admitted for ordinance work. Those seated on the other side of the chapel were invited to attend the endowment session. Although I was not chosen, I was still happy because the Spirit of the Lord filled the temple. I would have been pleased just to sit in the chapel or even in the locker room all afternoon.

And then something extraordinary happened. A counselor in the temple presidency spoke to us and the few other remaining patrons: "I'm sorry we can't accommodate you today in a session. I have never done this before, but this is an extraordinary day. How would you like a tour of the temple?"

Superb Workmanship in the Solemn Assembly Room

We silently ascended the northwest staircase. As we walked, I thought of each granite step, 1,700 pounds in weight, being carved and then hoisted by hand into place. There was a hush as we entered the Solemn Assembly room on the fourth floor.

The room was beautiful. I felt as though I had entered heaven. In each corner stands a beautiful freestanding staircase. The handiwork is exquisite, with small stars carved into the wood even beneath the staircase. Light streams through the large oval windows. Each brass doorknob bears a beehive and the words "Holiness to the Lord." The carving, the painting, the architecture, and the grandeur of the room are overwhelming.

"Where was the actual dedication ceremony held?" I asked the temple president. "My grandmother attended when she was a child."

"Right here where you are sitting-right here in the Solemn Assembly room."

I thought of the labor and the sacrifice and the love that had gone into building the temple. And while I thought about it I was deeply humbled. "I'm not a craftsman," I thought." I can't carve stone. I can't paint. I can't upholster. I can't create beautiful handiwork in wood. What place do I have in the house of the Lord? What could I have possibly contributed to this effort?"

This is hard for me to articulate, but remember that my progenitors were working people who created tangible results with their labor. To contemplate such beauty and sacrifice and grandeur and to realize that I would have had nothing to contribute to such a glorious enterprise was deeply sobering. "What can I contribute?" I prayed silently. "What is there that I as a botanist have to offer the kingdom?"

The counselor invited us to accompany him out of the Solemn Assembly room and through a narrow hallway. We entered a small office. In it sat a small rolltop desk. "This is where James E. Talmage wrote Jesus the Christ," our guide explained.

As I stared at that desk, I suddenly realized that there is a place for scholars in the Lord's house. Our craft is not better than stonecutting or woodworking or painting, but neither is it inferior. All have their place. All have a contribution to make in the kingdom. If we approach the lofty goal of becoming disciple-scholars, as Elder Maxwell discussed in his lecture, our scholarly contributions can become as consecrated as the stone from the temple quarry.

Is there a place for botany in the kingdom? Is there a place for econometrics, and medieval studies, and chemistry, and ancient languages, and all of the other disciplines that we study here? Can acquisition of higher education help disciples contribute to the building of the kingdom? I'm convinced that it can, but only if we adopt the qualities Elder Maxwell so clearly set before us in the first Discipline and Discipleship lecture. Quoting Mosiah 3:19, he told us that we should["[become] as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon [us]."

Are there any individuals who model this high standard? The rush of spiritual insight as I looked at that little rolltop desk in the temple that day inspired me further to examine the life and personality of Elder James E. Talmage. As I returned to BYU, I called a friend in the BYU library to see if we had a copy of Elder Talmage's journals. "We not only have a copy, Paul, we have the originals," he replied. "Come over and we'll let you see them."

James E. Talmage as a Disciple-Scholar

Elder Talmage was a superb geologist who published in the leading scientific journals of his day. Yet he modeled in his life the qualities of meekness, humility, and submission to priesthood authority that Elder Maxwell indicated as characteristic of the disciple-scholar. These spiritual characteristics helped prepare him for his call into the Quorum of the Twelve in December 1911. During his ordination to the holy apostleship Elder Talmage was blessed by President Joseph F. Smith to "have the spirit of humility and meekness even more abundantly than you have ever experienced it heretofore." This humble spirit, combined with his lifelong quest for learning, helped prepare him to write one of the greatest Church books of this dispensation: Jesus the Christ. Let me share with you a few excerpts from Elder Talmage's journals, written during the period when he was writing that book.

On 14 September 1914, Elder Talmage wrote: "I delivered a series of lectures entitled 'Jesus the Christ,' under the auspices of the University Sunday School. . . . I have received written appointment from the First Presidency to embody the lectures in a book for the use of the Church in general. Experiences demonstrated that neither in my comfortable office nor in the convenient study room at home can I be free from visits and telephone calls . . . , and in view of the importance of the work, I have been directed to occupy a room in the Temple where I will be free from interruption."

He devoted all free moments of his time to writing, and even had a little cot placed in his temple room. Like a true scholar, he burnt the midnight oil. "Since I began my work on the Life of Christ," he wrote on 30 September, "I have devoted every possible hour to the lesson, oft-times working in the Temple until a late hour at night."

Elder Talmage worked at the manuscript on Thanksgiving Day, most of Christmas Day, New Year's Day and every holiday. Finally he wrote in his journal on 19 April: "Finished the actual writing on the book 'Jesus the Christ,' to which I have devoted every spare hour since settling down to the work of composition on September 14th last. Had it not been that I was privileged to do this work in the Temple, it would be at present far from completion. I have felt the inspiration of the place and have appreciated the privacy and quietness incident thereto."

But Elder Talmage did not immediately publish his masterpiece. He read it chapter by chapter to the First Presidency and Twelve Apostles, seeking their criticism and approval. As recorded in his diary, between 17 April and 24 June 1915 he met eighteen times with these priesthood leaders, and read them every single word of his book. Only then did he pass the manuscript to the printer.

In the light of Elder Talmage's example, consider again Jacob's warning and his promise to the learned: "O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish. But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God." (2 Ne. 9:28-29.)

One of the meanings of the word counsel is "opinion or instruction given for directing the judgment or conduct of another; opinion or direction given upon request." Although he had written a masterpiece, Elder James E. Talmage meekly sought the counsel of the Lord's servants by reading every single word of his manuscript of Jesus the Christ to the presiding councils of the Church before the work was published. Jacob was right: "To be learned is good," if a disciple hearkens "to the counsels of God." Elder Talmage was learned, but he hearkened to the counsels of God. His actions demonstrated meekness, humility, and submissiveness to priesthood authority, the key attributes of a disciple-scholar identified by Elder Maxwell.

Adding Scholarship to Discipleship

Few disciples will be called to produce written works as significant as Jesus the Christ. But in the temple that day I realized that learning can help me, too, make a contribution, however small, to the kingdom. I realized that the Salt Lake Temple was not built by a single individual, by a Brigham Young or a Wilford Woodruff. They played important roles, but ultimately the temple was built by the sacrifice of many thousands of individuals: those who sewed cloth and those who sowed crops, those who cut checks and those who cut stone. We don't know their names, but Heavenly Father does! Their selfless contributions continue to bless us today.

In a similar way, disciples who seek learning can help contribute to the kingdom. Why should disciples seek learning? The answer is clearly given by the Lord in latter-day revelation:

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms-

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you (D&C 88:78-80).

Learning is important for disciples because it helps qualify them "to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you." In the case of Brigham Young, that calling included determining the general appearance of the Salt Lake Temple. In the case of James Talmage, that calling included writing Jesus the Christ. For all of us, obeying the Lord's command to "seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118; 109:7) will help us increase our ability to serve the Church in many different ways.

Acquisition of learning can also help a craftsman to become a better craftsman. Joseph Bennion and his wife, Lee, began a pottery and art business in Spring City, a small Utah town. In the beginning Joseph made pots for the mass market, selling them mainly at crafts fairs. But although he was a good potter, he felt compelled to return to school. There his study of Native American cultures and values began to influence his philosophy about art. In a university setting he also was forced to defend pottery as a viable art form rather than merely as a craft. As a result his craftsmanship deepened. He began to shift his sights from the mass market and started making pots that have deep spiritual and aesthetic values. Today, though his work is produced primarily for a local market, Joseph Bennion is nationally recognized. His ceramics command increasing attention in serious art exhibitions. A film on his work that emphasizes the wholesome, gospel orientation of his family has won national acclaim.

Another young Latter-day Saint, Kurt Bestor, composes musical scores for the film industry. His father told me that Kurt's tremendous gift for music was obvious even when Kurt was a child. Although Kurt could have begun his profession without further studies, he sought a college degree. Kurt explains that the discipline of a college education honed his craft even further. "Now when I have a client tell me they want something that sounds like Mozart's Requiem, I know what they mean because I studied the score in college. Right now I'm composing some Dixieland music, an idiom I know because I played in a Dixieland band while in school."

On occasion Kurt has been called by the Church to compose music for films that are screened in the seminary program and in other sacred places. Kurt explains what happened during a priesthood blessing: "I realized that I came to earth to help create the best-quality music for the kingdom. If I hadn't pursued an education, the inefficiencies would have gotten in the way of my conveying the Spirit. If I hadn't pursued an education, when called I would have had to say 'I'm sorry, but I'm not ready.'"

Kurt believes that his children have been blessed because of his degree and the degree in humanities that his wife, Melodie, received. "When we talk to our children about literature, art, or music, they understand. Our education has helped us better to prepare our children, which is perhaps the greatest service anyone can render to the kingdom."

Another example of an entire family being blessed by learning is provided by my friends Kevin and Melody Clyde. Although Kevin became a manager in his family's road construction business at a young age, he continued to seek a degree in English literature. Often Kevin would read Longfellow, Wordsworth, and even a little Latin poetry at night in a construction trailer near his work site. His wife, Melody, received a degree in art. Their children have been taught from an early age to value both literature and the arts and can talk knowledgeably about the major events in world history. Because of his skills in both literature and construction management, Kevin was recently offered the opportunity to begin a new career as headmaster of a private school.

City Creek as a Model of Giving

When I think about the examples of Joseph and Lee Bennion, Kurt and Melodie Bestor, and Kevin and Melody Clyde, I reflect on Brigham Young's statement on education: "Will education feed and clothe you, keep you warm on a cold day, or enable you to build a house? Not at all. Should we cry down education on this account? No. What is it for? The improvement of the mind; to instruct us in all arts and sciences, in the history of the world, in the laws of nations; to enable us to understand the laws and principles of life, and how to be useful while we live." (Journal of Discourses 14:83.)

Enabling us to "understand . . . how to be useful while we live" is perhaps the greatest reason for disciples to seek learning. Simply stated, adding scholarship to discipleship better prepares us to build the kingdom. Because of my little journey to City Creek, I know now that learned disciples can contribute to Zion just as surely as trained stonecutters contributed to building the Salt Lake Temple. Most such service will be quiet and largely anonymous, and when performed by "hearkening to the counsels of God" will indeed prove acceptable to Him.

Perhaps in that light we should seek to model our service after that provided by City Creek. No one seems to know much about City Creek today. It was only with some difficulty that I was able to discover its former course. But what an important role that stream played in building the kingdom! City Creek quietly quenched the thirst of the pioneers, watered their crops, powered the waterwheel, provided the compression for the steam engine, gave breath to the Tabernacle organ, and in so many other ways performed a sacred and consecrated service. When I think of this relatively anonymous service of City Creek, I remember the words of the poet Theodore Roethke in his poem "The Longing."

I would be a stream, winding between great striated rocks in late summer . . . Where shadow can change into flame And the dark be forgotten.

Truly along City Creek, where the Lord's house stands, the shadow has turned into flame, and dark has been forgotten. To those of you who are students, who struggle at night to learn from textbooks, who attend classes and lectures-often at great personal sacrifice-in the quest for learning, I assure you that your efforts will indeed be rewarded by an increased ability to serve. City Creek has become to me not only a journey but also a model, a model of giving I learned about long ago in my Primary classes:

"Give," said the little stream, "Give, oh! give, give, oh! give." "Give," said the little stream, As it hurried down the hill; "I'm small, I know, but wherever I go, The fields grow greener still." (Fanny J. Crosby, " 'Give,' said the Little Stream," in Children's Songbook, p. 236.)

I testify that if we become disciple-scholars as outlined by Elder Maxwell, we, like City Creek, can indeed contribute to the kingdom. That we may achieve this lofty goal is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

Sources Cited

Draper, L. W. 1988. M.A. Thesis. Brigham Young University.

Hamilton, C. M., and Cutrubus, C. N. 1983. The Salt Lake Temple: A Monument to a People. University Services Corp., Salt Lake City.

Holzapfel, R. N. 1992. Every Stone a Sermon. Bookcraft, Salt Lake City.

Raynor, W. A. 1965. The Everlasting Spires. Deseret Book, Salt Lake City.

Roberts, B. H. 1930. A Comprehensive History of the Church, vol. 3. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City.
