Various authors, Henry B. Eyring, On Becoming a Disciple Scholar ( 1995)

The Importance of Meekness in the Disciple-Scholar

Elder Cecil O. Samuelson, Jr.

I am honored to be invited by Dean Paul Cox to be with you tonight. I am aware of the quality of your Honors Program and the responsibility this generous invitation brings to me. Dean Cox suggested that I might focus my comments on the importance of meekness for the disciple-scholar. While I'm grateful that I am now old enough to be able to appreciate the importance of meekness in both discipleship and scholarship, I must confess that I am still at an awkward age in that I have yet to become appropriately meek in my own endeavors in either sphere. Nevertheless, with full appreciation that this assignment is really more for my growth than yours, I cheerfully accept the challenges to try to make some sense of this topic in our time together and also make meekness a much more reflexive behavior in my own life.

I have had the privilege of reviewing Elder Neal A. Maxwell's masterful treatise on the disciple-scholar which he shared with you in this lecture series last month. No direct comments from me about it would be appropriate or helpful to you, but it has been of great benefit to me personally. I love and sustain him for being a "master of meekness" in addition to all that his high and holy office elicits from one trying to be faithful in the kingdom. As a master teacher, he catalyzes scholarship in his students that might not occur otherwise, and I suspect that most of you have been beneficially stretched by his ideas as have I.

Even in this special setting at BYU that joins the values of disciples and scholars, I am concerned that there may be a temptation to unbalance the scales toward secular scholarship rather than toward spiritual stewardship. Therefore my focus tonight may be more to the sacred than to the scientific. This may not be your preference and it may provide more insight into my own deficiencies than into yours, should you have them.

Genius Without Meekness

Elder Maxwell has reminded us that "genius without meekness is nothing." Most of us have notions of what constitutes genius, and many of you, by definition of your inborn talents and their effective development, personally experience genius in at least parts of your own lives. These characteristics, or at least your potential to have them, probably played the major role in your admission to the Honors Program. The scriptures teach us, however, that the most important and certainly lasting honors (eternal life) are those much better described by traits such as meekness. Since this is clearly so, should not we then strive to become not only excellent scholars but also practitioners of meekness and companion virtues?

Webster defines meekness as a noun meaning patience and long-suffering. Associated ideas include the capacity to bear pain or trials without complaint; self-control, calmness, tolerance, endurance of offenses, and so forth. The Topical Guide and Index in recent editions of the LDS scriptures link meekness with words like contrite, gentle, humble, lowliness, poor, forbearance, and love. It should be noted that a common syntactical usage that may denote a deficiency in spirit or courage has no place in our meaning or discussion. Likewise, we should not be confused by supposing that by meek we mean timid, tentative, or vacillating.

As you know, meekness is frequently mentioned in the scriptures in various ways. Elder Maxwell described meek Moses and meek Enoch. Jesus taught clearly the special affection He reserves for the meek. Various prophets in all dispensations have linked meekness with other words that sometimes appear to be synonyms and sometimes are complementary with additional meanings. Because of your scholarship and your familiarity with these references I will not detail them further except to commend them for your pondering and consideration. In the main, meekness scriptures are found in three categories: 1) They are taught by Jesus as in the Sermon on the Mount; 2) they describe Jesus as in the Messianic references in Isaiah; and 3) they testify of Jesus or urge emulation of Him, as in King Benjamin's address.

Abinadi, in speaking to a group that I am sure considered themselves to be intellectuals, made a telling observation that deserves our consideration as we strive to meld the sacred with the secular and achieve excellence in both spheres. "Ye have not applied your hearts to understanding; therefore, ye have not been wise" (Mosiah 12:27, emphasis added). Note he did not say "applied your heads," or "your minds." I assume that they did not require that directive. Abinadi reminded his listeners of what we should already know: that is, reason and revelation are not opposites, they are complements. Extremist advocates for either position might reject the other, but there is no place for an exclusionary view in one who aspires to be a true disciple-scholar.

The importance of right "hearts" is repeatedly emphasized in the scriptures. To be true disciples, we need not only clean hands but pure hearts (see Ps. 24). However, even for the disciple, significant scholarship is also a requisite for success. You will recall that Elder Maxwell in his recent tutorial used Oliver Cowdery as a brief case study to illustrate this point. Remember that Oliver was not much older than most of you when he acted as scribe for the Prophet Joseph as the latter translated the Book of Mormon. Oliver Cowdery wanted to do more than that and was not only promised that it might be so but also was instructed as to how his aspirations might be accomplished. "I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart" (D&C 8:2). Unfortunately, basically faithful Oliver did not fully appreciate that the achievement of sacred things of the Spirit often requires great mental effort.

The Lord helped explain Oliver's failure at translation in this way: "Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you: therefore, you shall feel that is right." (D&C 9:7-8.) Elder Maxwell added that Oliver, wonderful as he was, lacked not only scholastic rigor; he lacked meekness as well.

One of your great privileges in the Honors Program at BYU is that you are constantly exposed to those whose hearts and heads are right and who have regularly paid the price, both spiritually and scholastically, to have their "bosoms burn" with eternal education!

Truth from Multiple Sources

No informed person would accuse Brigham Young of rejecting the role of revelation, and yet he also felt strongly about the role of scholarship in the lives of the Latter-day Saints. He said: "It matters not what the subject be, if it tends to improve the mind, exalt the feelings, and enlarge the capacity. The truth that is in all the arts and sciences forms a part of our religion." (Journal of Discourses 1:335.)

Unfortunately, others may not be so gracious in their acceptance of the need for truth from multiple sources. Scholars are often criticized for their narrowness in approach or outlook. While this may be deserved, I would suggest that this limited perspective tells us more about the nature of the natural man than it does about scholarship! If you will, this could be an example of perceptions held about my own profession. "One of the things the average doctor doesn't have time to do is catch up with the things he didn't learn in school, and one of the things he didn't learn in school is the nature of human society, its purpose, its history and its needs. . . . If medicine is necessarily a mystery to the average man, nearly everything else is necessarily a mystery to the average doctor." (Milton Mayer, in Lawrence J. Peter, Peter's Quotations: Ideas for Our Time [New York: William Morrow and Co. Inc., 1977], p. 327.)

Fundamental differences in approaches to knowledge, understanding, and even what knowledge is do exist in secular and spiritual spheres. While these differences are usually emphasized, their similarities are more and greater than is commonly acknowledged. In science, to use the term broadly, truth is usually accepted tentatively with the expectation that we are always awaiting the "better answer." Today's theory, while perhaps the best explanation we currently have, will give way to tomorrow's hypothesis, which incorporates new data not now available.

By contrast, true disciples understand that there are absolute truths, those of highest quality as described by Elder Maxwell, that are, always have been, and always will be the correct answers. We will know more in the future than we do today about the specifics of genetic replication, but we will never need more detail about the law of chastity than we have now or indeed than was emphasized on Mount Sinai.

Learning by Study and Also by Faith

Given these stark differences in approaches to learning and knowledge, why might I suggest similarities? Because each scholar, secular or spiritual, begins her or his quest for understanding by making some basic assumptions. The scientist usually sees these assumptions as building on the discoveries and thinking of scholastic predecessors. The disciple views them as acts of faith or testimony that confirm revelation as a vital, active principle and the scriptures as true records of God's word. Both approaches begin someplace and depend on the antecedent knowledge generated by efforts of others and by means other than their own.

While Korihor-like arguments are frequently advanced by the supposedly learned on most university campuses today to counter the approaches to truth taken by the faithful, these professed dialectics are no more valid now than two thousand years ago and lead their unmeek advocates to the same dismal intellectual dead end.

Whatever one's points of view or biases are about learning, they all depend on faith or assumptions about something. If we expect to get the right answers, then that something on which we depend must be the right thing, and the right thing is the gospel of Jesus Christ, which, according to Brigham Young, "embraces every truth pertaining to mortal life-there is nothing outside the pale of it" (Journal of Discourses 1:336).

We are very fortunate to be here in this time and this place: In this time, because we live when the Restoration is sufficiently mature to accord us the reality of many heroes and models of successful disciple-scholars of our own dispensation for our edification and emulation. In this place, because on the Brigham Young University campus there is an unusual and perhaps unique concentration of scholar-saints who believe that their behavioral dispositions are as important as their academic expositions.

Meekness in Elder James E. Talmage

Dean Cox, in his excellent Honors Banquet remarks of two weeks ago, made detailed reference to one of our common heroes of the Restoration, Elder James E. Talmage. He described "in his life the qualities of meekness, humility, and submission to priesthood authority that Elder Maxwell indicated as characteristic of the disciple-scholar" ("Journey to City Creek," Cox 1994). This same Elder Talmage who with great inspiration wrote Jesus the Christ under the direction of the First Presidency and also excelled as a leading geologist and university president was, as some might describe him, his "own man." Although he modeled meekness and his humility was unfeigned, he also had healthy respect for his own views and preferences and was not easily dissuaded by others. Two interesting stories about Elder Talmage, told by his son John, give an insightful view of Elder Talmage that make his examples of meekness, humility, and submission to priesthood authority even more remarkable.

While serving as university president in the 1890s, Brother Talmage obtained a bicycle, which was then the new wave in transportation.

James acquired one of the new machines, not as a hobby or physical conditioner but as a practical means of transportation. . . .

Some time after James had achieved reasonable proficiency in handling his machine on standard roads, he showed up at the front door one evening a full hour late for dinner and scarcely recognizable.

May [his wife] nearly went into shock, for her husband was a frightening sight. Battered, bruised, and bleeding profusely, clothes torn in a dozen places and covered with dust and mud, James looked as though he had been caught in a riot, or at least a fight of unusual violence. Neither, it developed, had been the case.

Half a block from the Talmage home a single-plank footbridge crossed the ditch of running water that separated the street from the footpath. Until now, James had dismounted when he reached this point in a homeward journey, and crossed the narrow bridge on foot. Today, he had decided that he had reached the point in his development as a cyclist where he should no longer resort to this prudent maneuver, but rather ride over the bridge in the manner of an accomplished veteran of the two-wheeler.

Having so decided, James approached the bridge resolutely, confident that he would negotiate the tricky passage in a manner to be proud of and to impress neighbors, if any should chance to be watching, with his skill and casual daring. He turned sharply from the road toward the bridge with scarcely any diminution of speed. The result was spectacular and observers, if any there were, must indeed have been impressed, but in a very different way from that intended. The professor's bicycle went onto the plank at an oblique angle and quickly slid off the side, throwing its rider heavily into the ditch bank.

Dazed, bruised, bleeding and humiliated, Dr. Talmage was not convinced that the difficult maneuver was beyond his skill. Rather, he was stubbornly determined to prove that he could and would master the difficulty.

For the next hour, the president of the University of Utah might have been observed trundling his bicycle fifty yards or so down the road from the bridge, mounting and riding furiously toward the plank crossing, turning onto it with grim-lipped determination-and plunging off it in a spectacular and bone-shaking crash into the rough ditchbank. Uncounted times this startling performance was repeated, but in the end mind triumphed over matter, will power over faltering reflexes, and the crossing was successfully made. Not just once, but enough times in succession to convince James that he was capable of performing the feat without mishap at any time he might desire to do so. From then on, he never again dismounted to cross the bridge, albeit he never made the crossing without experiencing deep-seated qualms which he kept carefully concealed from any who might be watching. (John R. Talmage, The Talmage Story [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972], pp. 138-40.)

In later years, James' long hours of work, unrelieved by periods of recreation, were cause for real concern among family, friends, and associates. President Heber J. Grant, for one, repeatedly urged Dr. Talmage to take up some form of sport, if only for its therapeutic value. Himself an enthusiastic golfer, President Grant tried to get his friend to try that sport, confident (as are all golfers) that if anyone were once thoroughly exposed to golf he would be captivated by its subtle but powerful attractions.

As President Grant's urgings increased in frequency and intensity, so did Dr. Talmage's demurrers on the grounds of lack of interest and lack of ability to master a complicated skill so late in life. President Grant was certain the skill could be mastered and that interest would automatically follow. Finally a compromise was reached, and a test agreed upon: James would give the game of golf an honest trial, and work at it until he was able to hit a drive which President Grant would rate as satisfactory, "a real golf shot."

"If you hit just one really good drive, nature will do the rest," President Grant assured his pupil-to-be. "You won't be able to resist the game after that."

It was agreed that James would make his own choice after he had acquired the skill to hit the specified shot. If he felt the fascination of the game, as President Grant was certain he would, he would take up golf and play with reasonable regularity. If, after giving the game a fair trial, James still felt no interest, President Grant would cease his efforts to get Dr. Talmage to play.

On an appointed day, the two, accompanied by a number of others of the General Authorities who played golf and who had joined the friendly argument on the side of President Grant, proceeded to Nibley Park for James' first session in what was expected to be a series of lessons.

James removed his coat and was shown how to grip the club and take his stance at the ball. The coordinated movements involved in making a golf stroke were carefully explained and then demonstrated by President Grant and by others. Finally, it came James' turn to try it himself.

What followed astonished all those who watched, and probably James himself. Instead of missing the ball completely, or weakly pushing it a few feet along the grass, James somehow managed to strike the ball cleanly and with substantial force. It took off in a fine arc and with only a minimum amount of slice. Some who saw it described it later as "a truly magnificent drive," which was probably a considerable exaggeration. However, there was consensus that the ball went close to 200 yards and stayed in the fairway. It was a drive that would have gladdened the heart of any golfer short of the expert class, and it bordered on the phenomenal for a novice.

The spectators were momentarily struck dumb, then burst into enthusiastic applause.

"Congratulations," said President Grant, rushing forward, beaming, with outstretched hand. "That was a fine shot you will remember for the rest of your life."

"You mean that was a fully satisfactory golf shot?" James asked, cautiously.

"It certainly was!" said President Grant.

"Then I have fulfilled my part of the agreement?"

"You have-and don't you feel the thrill of excitement? Now you'll be playing regularly. As a matter of fact, we can go into the clubhouse now and I will help you select a set of clubs."

"Thank you," said James, putting on his coat. "If I have carried out my part of the agreement, then I shall call on you to live up to yours. You promised that if I hit a satisfactory drive and did not feel the spontaneous desire to play, you would stop urging me to do so. Now I should like to get back to the office, where I have a great deal of work waiting."

So far as is known, James never again struck a golf ball, or made the attempt. (The Talmage Story, pp. 226-28.)

Part of the genius of Elder Talmage as both a disciple and a scholar was the ability to separate the important from the trivial. While sensitive to the perceptions of others, at least some of the time, he was also comfortable in taking "the road less traveled." He meekly responded to authority, crisply and without reservation, when asked to prepare Jesus the Christ or undertake major missions, but he also could withstand social pressures from conventionally compelling sources, as his brush with the game of golf demonstrates.

Discipleship and the Things that Matter Most

That he liked bicycles and detested golf mattered little, and the basic outcome might have been the same had he played golf regularly with the Brethren and chosen to walk or ride a horse for transportation. He understood that some things such as meekness, humility, duty, solid scholarship, and responsiveness to duly constituted priesthood authority are vitally important not only to self but to the kingdom. Other things like golf, bicycles, how specifically one earns a living, what one's major is, or what color blouse or tie to wear are of significant personal interest but of no permanent or transcendent value in the greater scheme of life. It is fine to like bikes but not golf or the converse, but neither should distract or confuse us in the context of real discipleship and scholarship.

Dean Cox is a well-known and world-class ethnobotanist and I am a rheumatologist physician. While his scientific reputation is much more stellar than my own, both of us enjoy our work and feel we have made contributions to our disciplines. I suspect, however, that we will both need much more than facility in the scientific method to be successful in our new vocations in the eternities when all the answers about botany and arthritis that matter will already be available! I suspect also that no one will care much about what cars we drove or how we spent our leisure or even in what journals we published. But I believe some, particularly our families, might be impacted by our capacity to acquire some of the characteristics, like meekness, of the serious disciple.

As each of you determine your own course in the exciting challenge of developing your own productive mix of discipleship and scholarship, might I suggest you note positive examples from your own experiences and then apply them personally. You might find an experience from my own college days to be of interest.

One of the great scientist-disciples of our time was Dr. Henry Eyring, the father of Elder Eyring, our Commissioner of Education for the Church. Professor Eyring was a truly world-class chemist who was not one whit affected by the considerable honors of men that he received, and thus his scholarship never confused or compromised his discipleship.

He and I were at the University of Utah together. Dr. Eyring was Distinguished Professor of Chemistry and Dean of the Graduate School, and I was a freshman. Although we became somewhat acquainted in later years, I am sure he had no idea who I was at that time. I never had a class from him, although I had heard him speak a time or two with great admiration. I knew of his academic distinction and his gospel devotion. What really impressed me about Henry Eyring, however, related to a very brief chance encounter I had with him in the basement of the Park Building, the main administration building at the University of Utah.

We happened to arrive at the same water fountain from opposite directions at precisely the same time. Fortunately, I remembered some of the things my mother had tried to teach and I attempted to step back and defer to this older gentleman of such significant status. He would have none of it! With a twinkle in his eye and a smile he said: "Young man, please go first. I'm sure that you are busier than I am." I had a short, refreshing drink and have ever since been refreshed by the warm feelings elicited by a simple, thoughtful, generous act of meek Henry Eyring. Professor Eyring is famous for many things, but in my mind and heart I always see him at the Park Building water fountain.

In their recent presentations to you both Elder Maxwell and Dean Cox have reminded us of King Benjamin's description of what is required of us to become Saints or disciples through the atonement of Christ. The qualities of becoming as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love and willingness to submit to all the Lord inflicts (Mosiah 3:19), are understandable for discipleship if sometimes difficult to implement. It is interesting to note, however, that while the "natural man" (an enemy to God) might well describe many scholars, enmity to the Father is not a characteristic of scholarship!

Discipleship and Humility

In fact, the real scholar is meek, and has much to be meek about, because she or he, like Nephi, does "not know the meaning of all things" (1 Ne. 11:17). The dictionary defines a scholar as "a learned person," and the scriptures teach that "to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God" (2 Ne. 9:29). We must remember, however, that the Lord "despiseth" those "who are puffed up because of their learning" (2 Ne. 9:42). We are to be meek and humble because we yet know so little, and yet we can appropriately be anxious in anticipation that if we prove faithful as true disciples we shall, in time, receive and know, as Jesus promises "all that my Father hath" (D&C 84:38).

To be truly meek disciple-scholars we have much to learn, but also sometimes some significant things to unlearn or forget. This is what King Benjamin refers to as putting "off the natural man." The honors of man, the vanities of the world, and the telestial temptations we all face may not be so bad in isolation but are so second-rate in comparison to what really matters most!

Someone once described his own feelings when struggling to reach new scholastic heights. "My mind is like my grandmother's attic. It is filled with things no longer useful, but too good to throw away." In my case, these sentiments may apply not only to things in my own head that are of lesser value but also to habits or traits that I seemingly hold dear, at least behaviorally, but that do not facilitate reaching the goals I have set for myself or the standards established for us by the Savior. A map of the Andes may be beautiful and interesting but it is not much help when backpacking in the Uintas. Both are wonderful mountain ranges, but what significant differences!

Similarly, the books I read, the movies I see, and even the thoughts I think may, in themselves, have some value but cannot and should not replace the scriptures, prayerful contemplation, and the counsel of our living oracles. In large part the quality of our discipleship and our scholarship will depend on what we emphasize in our lives rather than on what we wish had been our focus.

Meekness is required in spiritual as well as in secular endeavors. In President Benson's classic sermon on pride (Ensign, May 1986), I find no limits on the spheres to which his cautions apply. Alma taught that meekness is not only a desirable characteristic but is required by those seeking to be led by the Holy Spirit (see Alma 13:28). Mormon considered meekness to be an antecedent to the first principle, faith (Moro. 7:39)! He further wrote that none is acceptable before God save the meek and lowly. The Lord, through the Prophet Joseph, reminds us that meekness is not weakness but rather is required for us to become strong (D&C 84:106).

Elder Maxwell reminds us that "in opting for discipleship, we have nothing to fear but the disapproval of the natural man and his like-minded, preoccupied friends-with their pointing fingers" ("The Disciple-Scholar," 1994). As they point at us, we should point toward meek Jesus and learn what He has provided for us as we strive to be more like Him. Of His meekness, let me refer briefly to several episodes in His earthly ministry that are already well known to you.

Jesus as the Example of Meekness

We know that Jesus, as a youth, "grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him" (Luke 2:40). We remember the Feast of the Passover episode when He became separated from Mary and Joseph. We can quote easily "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:49), but do we also remember that "he went down with them, and was subject unto them" (Luke 2:51, emphasis added)? Might this be a good lesson and example for those of us who have perhaps exceeded our own parents in terms of educational opportunities and other worldly advantages but still owe them so much for so much that is most precious?

At the time Jesus was baptized He knew who He was, and yet He willingly submitted to proper priesthood authority and discipline (see Matt. 3:13-15).

As Jesus was fasting in the wilderness He encountered Satan, who tried to tempt Him, as the devil does with all of us. Meek Jesus did not brag, He did not argue, He did not perform for others. He meekly declared the truth and faithfully followed His own standard of conduct. (See Matt. 4:1-11.)

Jesus meekly responded to His critics. He was gentle but direct. When asked, "Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners?" He answered, "They that are whole need not a physician; but they that are sick" (Luke 5:30-31).

Jesus advised His followers to meekly underestimate, rather than inflate, their status among others. He suggested that when invited to a dinner or wedding party they sit with the most modest of guests and wait to be invited to come higher rather than cause embarrassment for their hosts or themselves (see Luke 14:7-10).

Jesus taught with amazing patience and meekness. If anyone could be excused for self-aggrandizement, possessive pride, or the explication of complicated dogma, surely it would be the Creator of the universe under the direction of the Father. Yet that was never His style. When asked by the rich young man the key question, "What shall I do to inherit eternal life?" Jesus knew the young man's heart and his specific weaknesses and yet said, "Thou knowest the commandments" and enumerated several of the key ones. When the young man claimed lifelong compliance, Jesus pointedly but gently reminded him, "Yet lackest thou one thing." (Luke 18:18-22.) As Elder Maxwell pointed out last month, the young man lacked meekness.

Jesus' meekness brought out the beginnings of meekness in others. His demeanor and approach-patient, quiet, waiting but direct-not only saved from stoning the woman taken in adultery but also probably saved the souls of those originally intent on being rock throwers themselves (see John 8:3-11).

Jesus modestly and meekly refused to take credit for things that rightly belonged to the Father or to others. "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me" (John 7:16), said Jesus. What are the lessons here for the scholar deeply drenched in the attitudes of our selfish world?

Jesus never expected more meekness from His disciples than He demonstrated Himself. He washed the feet of the Twelve with the reminder that "I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you" (John 13:15).

He responded to individuals, as well as groups, in great need. After the Crucifixion and his resurrection, many of the faithful were confused and depressed and were fearful that the skeptics and critics might be right. Jesus might have majestically confronted the people, declaring His reality, but rather He meekly taught and encouraged and quietly revealed Himself to those who really cared about what had in fact happened. He had risen! You recall the wonder and thrill of the two discouraged disciples on the road to Emmaus when finally "their eyes were opened, and they knew him" (Luke 24:31).

While we, as a special academic community, strive to be both scholars and disciples of quality, we are faced with the challenges of not only the wicked world without but also the temptations and foibles of the "natural man" within. Many of the blessings of the atonement of Christ are made available unconditionally to all people, even the scoffers and critics. Yet some of the most significant blessings are reserved for those who give both allegiance and adherence to the code of discipleship outlined by the Master, Jesus Christ. When asked by one of the faithful how we might solidify our relationship with Him, "Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him" (John 14:23).

May we meekly but energetically balance our scholarship and discipleship in ways that articulate our love for the Savior and give us the realistic hope of entering the abode of the Father and the Son is my prayer.
