Various authors, Henry B. Eyring, On Becoming a Disciple Scholar ( 1995)

Faith, Authority, and Scholarship

Elder Henry B. Eyring

I am deeply grateful to be here with you this evening, and I pray that the Spirit of the Lord may be with us. I know that you had chances to be many places this evening and I'm grateful that you chose to be here. Your faith will help us all.

I learned something about the connection of faith, authority, and scholarship one night not long ago. I was in Hartford, Connecticut. I had come for a stake conference. It was scheduled in such a way that we stopped our conference meetings in the late afternoon and sat in the back of a darkened chapel to watch the Young Women satellite broadcast from Salt Lake City. The room was half-filled with teenage girls who had gathered from across that far-flung stake to be together and to be taught. It went on beautifully, at least it seemed to me. And then, near the end, Elder Dallin H. Oaks stood to speak. You won't understand my emotion now unless you can imagine what it's like to be presiding as a General Authority in a stake conference, trying with all your energy and faith to have the mantle of your call give you power beyond your own, and then to see the mantle of an Apostle on Elder Oaks. I understood, in a personal way, what the philosopher Kierkegaard meant when he said: "Genius is what it is of itself. An apostle is what he is by his divine authority."

Surrender to the Office of an Apostle

I knew I was hearing the Lord's message to me as Elder Oaks began with the words: "The first principle of the gospel is not faith. The first principle of the gospel is faith in the Lord Jesus Christ." In that moment I felt at least a double surrender. I felt a surrender to the office of an Apostle. I knew I was not hearing the words of a former university president or of a Supreme Court justice or even of a brilliant man. I did not so much see the man I have known well; rather, I heard the voice of his office, a voice of authority. And because I felt and knew the words were true, I felt another surrender of my independence. I felt myself surrender to the authority of Jesus Christ. I felt myself want to know what He would have me do.

And then I realized that the Savior Himself, the creator of the universe, described His own surrender in this way, as recorded in the Bible: "I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me" (John 5:30).

And then again in this way in the Book of Mormon: "And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning" (3 Ne. 11:11).

And in this way, even later, in the Doctrine and Covenants: "I am Jesus Christ; I came by the will of the Father, and I do his will" (D&C 19:24).

Now, you may see what appears to be a paradox. The Savior of the world, who is our perfect example in all things, including scholarship, by His own account defers to the authority of His Father. Because we have faith in Jesus Christ, we defer our will to His authority. And because we have faith in living Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, we defer to that authority as well. And yet here is the apparent paradox: most reviewers of any scholarly journal would ask you to edit out of an article, on pain of rejection, any reference to divine authority or to the authority of an ecclesiastical leader, either in the theory you present or in your evidence. I suppose the exception might be an article or a book in which you examined religious ideas or religious people, as long as you kept expressions of your own faith in the preface and out of your argument or evidence.

Submission to Jesus Christ: Scholarly Burden or Strength?

The paradox the world would see is that we aspire to be the best of scholars and yet we will do it with full faith in Jesus Christ and His living servants. My message tonight is that faith in Jesus Christ, including what it requires in submission to authority held by His mortal servants, is not a burden to you as a scholar but is your strength. Let me try to tell you why and how.

We can begin best with words of Elder Neal A. Maxwell, an Apostle of Jesus Christ. In his talk to you last January 27 he said this: "To be a disciple-scholar in our time is a call to high adventure! Just as one's quest for knowledge should be unending, so, too, should the quest for greater love, meekness, and patience. In considering consecration, it is well to remember . . . that nothing is held back-whether turf, attitude, or hobbies. One's will is to be swallowed up in the will of God-just as occurred with Jesus."

He gave a reference to Mosiah 15:7, but he didn't read it. Here is what that scripture says: "Yea, even so shall he be led, crucified, and slain, the flesh becoming subject even unto death, the will of the Son being swallowed up in the will of the Father."

Elder Maxwell then said, "Though I have spoken of the disciple-scholar, in the end all the hyphenated words come off. We are all finally disciples-men and women of Christ. But is consecration asking too much? . . . It certainly involves a submission to authority. But what an Authority!"

And he also said that night, "Most forms of holding back are rooted in pride or are prompted by the mistaken notion that somehow we are diminished by submission to God. Actually, the greater the submission, the greater the expansion!"

Submission, Expansion, and Scholarly Power

That expansion includes expanding power as a scholar. Why that is so is spelled out in some scriptures you know well. I will read them to you, with the hope that your faith will lead you to have the Holy Ghost testify to you that they are true.

For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father (Mosiah 3:19).

And now I would that ye should be humble, and be submissive and gentle; easy to be entreated; full of patience and long-suffering; being temperate in all things; being diligent in keeping the commandments of God at all times; asking for whatsoever things ye stand in need, both spiritual and temporal; always returning thanks unto God for whatsoever things you do receive.

And see that ye have faith, hope, and charity, and then ye will always abound in good works.

And may the Lord bless you, and keep your garments spotless, that ye may at last be brought to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the holy prophets who have been ever since the world began, having your garments spotless even as their garments are spotless, in the kingdom of heaven to go no more out. (Alma 7:23-25.)

Submission to the Lord's Servants

In addition to submission to the authority of Jesus Christ we are asked to be submissive to His mortal authorized servants. "Verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Lyman: Your sins are forgiven you, because you have obeyed my voice in coming up hither this morning to receive counsel of him whom I have appointed. Therefore, let your soul be at rest concerning your spiritual standing, and resist no more my voice. And arise up and be more careful henceforth in observing your vows, which you have made and do make, and you shall be blessed with exceeding great blessings." (D&C 108:1.)

And you will remember that the Lord said this in D&C 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the preface to that book. "What I the Lord have spoken I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same. For behold, and lo, the Lord is God, and the Spirit beareth record, and the record is true, and the truth abideth forever and ever. Amen." (D&C 1:38-39.)

Professor James Faulconer, who is here this evening, quoted Alma when he addressed your devotional. Do you remember? "And now, he imparteth his word by angels unto men, yea, not only men but women also. Now this is not all; little children do have words given unto them many times, which confound the wise and the learned." (Alma 32:23.) Notice that God often, perhaps most often, gives His word to us through messengers.

Frequently, what God wishes us to know squares perfectly with what we would decide is true using our reason alone. That is what you would expect, since God can only speak the truth, and reason applied correctly is one way to find truth. But Leo Strauss, in Studies in Platonic Political Philosophies, had it right when he saw that the prophets give us the greatest gift when they tell us truth which does not square with our reason. He said: "True prophets, regardless of whether they predict doom or salvation, predict the unexpected, the humanly unforeseeable. What would not occur to men, left to themselves, to fear or to hope."

It is crucial which of those prophetic surprises you study first. As a student of geology or biology you might start with the specifics of creation as living prophets have taught them; or as a political science major you might consider what they have said about socialism. I would urge you strongly to start somewhere else: start with the prophecies about how the gospel of Jesus Christ will change you. From that you will see why faith in Jesus Christ and in the authority of His mortal servants will multiply your scholarly powers. Then, when you have acted on that, you will be able to see how the other predictions and sayings of prophets will expand, not contract, your understanding.

Here is the place I would suggest you start. It is a prediction about the future, your future and mine. It is this: Only through submission to the restored gospel of Jesus Christ in faith will you gain eternal life; and by that submission you will gain the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost. You know the power of that promise from this scripture. "And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:4-5.)

Christ as the Example of Submission

I can tell you best about how that voluntary submission comes by a personal story. I was listening to an Apostle speak in general conference. It was Elder Maxwell. In his address he used a visual image which carried me in my mind out of the Tabernacle, where I was sitting. He spoke of the terrible effects of sin in the world. He spoke of the abuse of children, which sometimes ends in their cruel deaths. He said that in even a short period of time the number of victims would fill a classroom. Suddenly I was transported in my mind to a classroom of children who were laughing in their innocence, and I loved them and felt pain at the thought of their being abused and perhaps killed.

But in the seconds it took that picture to form in my mind, Elder Maxwell placed another one there. It was that Jesus Christ in the garden and on the cross knew the suffering of those children, understood their anguish, knew for Himself their terrible experiences in the past and the future, knew the despicable motives of the people who would harm them, and then, out of love, paid the price for those fiendish degradations.

Even as He felt the anguish of the children, He took upon Him the pain a just God would require of the most evil of people. He understood perfectly the most despicable motives of people who did and would do such things. He felt all the terrible consequences. And then, for those perpetrators of all evil, He paid a price that no ordinary mortal could ever pay. He paid the full price of that horror. Then I tried to think of His doing that for all the cruelty and evil in the history of this earth. That's my Savior and your Savior, and that is the authority to which we submit.

In that moment of listening to an Apostle, I wanted to be a better, a more submissive, more faithful servant of Jesus Christ. I can feel what Elder Maxwell meant when he said to you in his lecture here that we must be submissive to authority, "but what an Authority!"

Now, you can see why Elder Maxwell also said that your expansion will be proportional to your degree of submission. I take that statement seriously and literally. Joseph F. Smith said it in this way: "There is no liberty that men enjoy or pretend to enjoy in the world that is not founded in the will and in the law of God, and that does not have truth for its underlying principle and foundation. It is error that makes bondsman. It is untruth that degrades mankind. It is error and the lack of knowledge of God's laws and God's will that leaves men in the world on a par with the brute creation."

Submission to Christ Is Liberating

My testimony to you is this: The effect of the Atonement is liberating and expanding. To submit in faith to Jesus Christ is liberating rather than diminishing, as the world would tell you. It is liberating because this process works: "And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins; and the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God" (Moro. 8:25-26).

That is the "how," the description of how the liberating process of surrender works. If you exercise faith in Jesus Christ enough to desire to repent, and you're not yet a member of the Church, you'd seek for the sacrament of baptism. After baptism you will then be given the right to the companionship of the Holy Ghost. If you then live meekly and humbly enough, you will receive both forgiveness and the companionship of the Holy Ghost. And the companionship of the Holy Ghost will change you and fill you with hope and with perfect love. And I testify to you that it will bring to you the light of truth, and with that an expansion to your understanding and your capacity to feel charity, the pure love of Christ.

Submission as a Process

It is reassuring to know that this is not a one-time thing. If you live faithfully, that expansion goes on and on. And even more exciting, the power to exercise that faith increases as you make the choice in faith to submit, to obey. You will, over time, begin to lose even the desire to do evil.

You know from your experience as I know from my own that you were changed for the better in those times when you submitted to the authority of Jesus Christ. You have said, "Lord, what would you have me do?" In the mission field, it might have been to proselyte. You hit the doors. You got up at the hour the mission president asked you to get up. And in those times you have felt the Holy Ghost come to you as your companion. If you'll reflect on those times, you will also realize that your sensitivity to evil increased. The closer you drew toward God, by obeying, the more you wanted to repent and to avoid evil. The process of submission lifts you toward improvement and expansion of your mind and spirit. I testify to you that is real, not imagined.

You might reasonably ask, "But Brother Eyring, why haven't I kept on spiraling upward and been translated out of this life to a better one, if this process is so self-reinforcing?" It's because Satan knows that this process works in both directions. He knows that all he has to do is to get you to say: "Well, let's not be submissive for a while. Let's disobey."

The process works in reverse. In fact, the scriptures describe people finally becoming so hardened that they can no longer sense what they ought to be or can be. But you will not spiral downward without God reaching out to you, usually through His servants.

Submission Is Not Blind Obedience

It is terrible and wrong to speak of blind obedience, as is so often done to describe the behavior of a faithful Latter-day Saint. Rather than our being blind when we are obedient, the only time our spiritual eyes are blinded is when we are disobedient. So it's a matter of choice. We're not robots but human beings, children of our Father. Satan will pull us toward disobedience and darkness and God will send messengers to invite us to obey and to rise toward the light. But we must choose. Don't believe the lie that says that when you are submissive to God you are losing your agency. On the contrary, submission is the choice to be lifted toward the light, toward freedom, and toward expansion.

When you leave here tonight, you'll make a whole series of choices. The night is young, as they say too often. Who knows what's ahead for you? But you'll choose from many, many alternatives. You're free to choose. God made you free. He enslaves no one. He compels no one.

But after the price the Savior paid for you, won't He reach out to you? He invites. But you choose. Sitting back in your room, or wherever you are heading tonight, there are probably some scriptures. There is a floor you could kneel on. There's probably a neighbor who has some difficulties. There is probably some home teaching or visiting teaching still undone. You may have been given those assignments to care for someone else by a person of ordinary ability. You might see that God called that person and called you through him or her. So you might kneel down to see if God would have you reach out to someone for whom you are responsible. It's your choice. God won't make you do it. Your priesthood leader won't make you do it. No one is going to come and tell you to kneel down and pray and ask if there's someone who needs help. You submit as a choice. I testify to you that if you'll ask it's very likely that you'll receive an answer. If you listen, it's a still small voice.

Invite it! You'll make a choice, whether to do what the still small voice asks or not do it. How little compulsion there is in God's way! He allows earthquakes now and then. There are some compulsory means, but I try to avoid them as much as I can. He has a way to bring us to repentance, but I prefer the free-will way, as do you.

Obedience to God Lessens the Power of Evil

As you regularly choose obedience, the power of evil lessens in your life. This is the way George Q. Cannon said it: "And our minds instinctively recoil from the commission of any act which might grieve that spirit or bring a stain upon our own character or upon the divine cause in which we are engaged."

Now, once you have begun to act on your faith that Jesus is the Christ, and that His servants invite you to do His will, you will have the companionship of the Holy Ghost. That will expand your powers in the pursuit of truth because you will recognize it when you think it, read it, and hear it. But that companionship will bless you in another way. You will also come to recognize true authority, authority you can trust, and to deal wisely with authority you must examine carefully.

All your lives, people will try to assert authority over you. In your schooling, professors will profess, and they will expect you to agree with them to win their favor and to gain the rewards they have power to confer. You will have bosses who tell you what you should value in order to please them. You will have colleagues who tell you that you should do what they say, believe what they believe, because they purport to know something you don't know. You will even have public figures tell you not to follow Apostles and prophets like a sheep, but rather to follow them. You will have professors who are Latter-day Saints who will quote to you what appear to be contradictory statements of the Apostles and prophets to persuade you that you need not follow their counsel in that matter.

But with the Holy Ghost as your companion, none of that will swamp you. With the Holy Ghost, you will have found yourself blessed with two attributes, rarely blended in a scholar except through the fruit of gospel living. They are persistence and modesty.

Some of you have heard me tell of being in a meeting in New York as my father presented a paper at the American Chemical Society. A younger chemist popped up from the audience, interrupted, and said: "Professor Eyring, I've heard you on the other side of this question." Dad laughed and said, "Look, I've been on every side of it I can find, and I'll keep trying other sides until I finally get it figured out." And then he went on with his lecture. So much for looking as though you are always right. He was saying what any good little Mormon boy would say. It was not a personality trait of Henry Eyring. He was a practicing believer in the Lord Jesus Christ. He knew that the Savior was the only perfect chemist. That was the way Dad saw the world and his place in it. He saw himself as a child. He worked his heart out, as hard as he could work. He was willing to believe he didn't know most things. He was willing to change any idea he's ever had when he found something which seemed closer to the truth. And even when others praised his work, he always knew it was an approximation in the Lord's eyes, and so he might come at the problem again, from another direction.

With your faith, you will find yourself working harder because you have confidence that there is truth and that the Lord knows it. You will have to work hard because the truth He will reveal through His prophets to you will cover only a fraction of what you want to understand, and that will be focused mostly on the gospel of Jesus Christ. And when they do speak on something which comes close to some scholarly interest of yours you will listen very carefully, both because you have faith in their authority and because you know God would only prompt them to comment when it matters. The creation of the earth and of mankind must matter. Which forms of government we should prefer must matter. Whether abortions are performed must matter. Whether gambling is legalized must matter. So with a heart guided by the Holy Ghost you will listen carefully, ready to submit when the Spirit clarifies the message for you. And when it is not yet clear, you will be persistent in your pondering, modest in your lack of understanding, and obedient to God's authority vested in His servants.

I testify to you that God lives. Elder Maxwell, when he stood here at this podium, spoke as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ. He came with authority and he spoke the truth when he said to you that the degree of your expansion will be proportional to the degree of your submission. I pray that you may not fear true authority, but seek it. Seek to submit to the authority of Jesus Christ, whom I testify to you is our Savior. He is the Mediator. He would take us to His Father if we would submit and let the Atonement transform us to become like Him and our Heavenly Father.

I pray that you may have no fear in whatever circumstances your great scholarly abilities may lead you. God loves you and knows you and will stay close to you and will expand you as you submit to the gospel of Jesus Christ, of which I testify in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.
