Various authors, Henry B. Eyring, On Becoming a Disciple Scholar ( 1995)

Consecration and Learning

James S. Jardine

I am honored and humbled to be part of this lecture series. I was a student of Elder Maxwell's at the University of Utah, and his kindness and example have had a profound influence in my life. In my experience, notwithstanding the extraordinary faculties of his mind, Elder Maxwell's greatest qualities are those of his heart.

I have also benefitted for many years from my fellowship with Dr. Samuelson, the second speaker in this lecture series. As his counselor in a University of Utah stake I saw him consistently apply his considerable intellect to each issue and, when he had done his very best thinking, humbly turn over the decision to God.

These past few weeks I have read with appreciation the prior lectures in this series. In considering this presentation I have regretted my temporary "delusions of adequacy" in accepting this invitation. In light of these circumstances and setting, I have prayed for the Spirit in addressing this topic.

Consecration for the Glory of God

Dean Cox invited me to speak on consecration and learning. Consecration, doing things "unto the Lord," is both an attitude and an action. When we consecrate ourselves, we consciously reaffirm that our works are for His glory and not ours. We "confess . . . his hand in all" our work (D&C 59:21). We dedicate our talents, including our intellectual skills, to the building up of His kingdom. We ask to be used by Him. There is in the process of consecration a pledge and a petition: we dedicate our talents and our lives to God and pray that He will bless each of our mortal efforts to good effect and use in His cause. When we consecrate our learning, we ask not only to be "ever learning" but also to come to "the knowledge of the truth" (2 Tim. 3:7).

The ideal of seeking "learning by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:119) is honored better here than any other place I know. For those with gifts of intellect or related talents this is a rich environment in which to observe how others have consecrated such gifts and how we can do so.

For you students, your present talents and energy ensure a life with many opportunities. You will have to decide which of your talents should be nurtured and how to marshal them to render the greatest service possible to your family, your church, and your community. In pondering those questions, especially as college students, we often imagine a future life filled with momentous challenges and noteworthy personal contributions. However, for many of us life instead presents tasks and responsibilities which by secular standards seem mundane. If that is our lot, and it is a common one, it may require some adjustment to our expectations. But even if the world does not regard our work, there are other standards by which it is valued. Indeed, your greatest work may not lend itself to being listed on your resumÃ©. And yet spiritual maturity will allow us to see what matters most.

As Latter-day Saints the answer to the question, "Why should we consecrate our study and learning?" is relatively simple. We believe knowledge to be part of a body of eternal truth whose pursuit and understanding is part of our eternal progress. If our noblest endeavor is to seek to become like God, we do so in part, but only in part, by striving to learn of the manifestations of His creations. Indeed, we have been admonished to "become acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people" (D&C 90:15), and to obtain "knowledge of history" and of the "laws of [both] God and man" (D&C 93:53). Moreover, we have a prescribed duty to develop the gifts and talents, including intellectual gifts, bestowed on us by God. For instance, we may have been given the gift of "the word of knowledge, that all may be taught to be wise and to have knowledge" (D&C 46:18). Or we may have been given the talent of expression, that others might "believe on [our] words" (D&C 46:14). If these are our gifts, then we must develop them in order to consecrate them.

C. S. Lewis on Consecration

I would prefer to be entirely original on this topic, but for me the necessary starting point on consecrating our learning is an essay by C. S. Lewis I first read many years ago entitled "Learning in War-Time." It is probably not academically correct in this setting to summarize someone else's work, but I would like to do just that in part tonight for reasons which will surely become obvious.

The essay is actually a talk Lewis gave to students at Oxford in 1939, at the start of World War II. He addressed the question how students could proceed with a collegiate education when a great war for freedom was being fought in Europe. Lewis approached the question by looking at the analogous challenge for the Christian to be in the world but not of it:

[The Christian] must ask himself how it is right, or even psychologically possible, for creatures who are every moment advancing either to Heaven or to hell to spend any fraction of the little time allowed them in this world on such comparative trivialities as literature or art, mathematics or biology. (C. S. Lewis, "Learning in War-Time," in The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses [New York: Macmillan, 1965], p. 21).

Lewis goes on to explain that wartime is in one sense not extraordinary because life is never ordinary; women and men have always had to go on about the tasks of daily life while events or compelling causes swirl around them. Lewis observed about his own life:

Before I became a Christian I do not think I fully realized that one's life, after conversion, would inevitably consist in doing most of the same things one had been doing before, one hopes, in a new spirit, but still the same things (p. 23).

Lewis rejects the notion that the daily activities of life can be shelved in favor of great causes:

If you attempted . . . to suspend your whole intellectual and aesthetic activity, you would only succeed in substituting a worse cultural life for a better. You are not, in fact, going to read nothing, either in the church or in the line; if you don't read good books, you will read bad ones. If you don't go on thinking rationally, you will think irrationally. If you reject aesthetic satisfactions, you will fall into sensual satisfactions. (Pp. 23-24.)

Lewis then describes the essence of consecration:

All our merely natural activities will be accepted, if they are offered to God, even the humblest, and all of them, even the noblest, will be sinful if they are not. Christianity does not simply replace our natural life and substitute a new one; it is rather a new organization which exploits, to its own supernatural ends, these natural materials. . . . I reject at once an idea which lingers in the mind of some modern people that cultural activities are in their own right spiritual and meritorious-as though scholars and poets were intrinsically more pleasing to God than scavengers and bootblacks. . . . The work of a Beethoven and the work of a charwoman becomes spiritual on precisely the same condition, that of being offered to God, of being done humbly "as to the Lord." (Pp. 25-26.)

Having described consecration generally, Lewis warned of a special danger for the intellectual:

The intellectual life is not the only road to God, nor the safest, but we find it to be a road, and it may be the appointed road for us. Of course, it will be so only so long as we keep the impulse pure and disinterested. That is the great difficulty. As the author of the Theologia Germanica says, we may come to love knowledge-our knowing-more than the thing known: to delight not in the exercise of our talents but in the fact that they are ours, or even in the reputation they bring us. Every success in a scholar's life increases this danger. If it becomes irresistible, he must give up his scholarly work. The time for plucking out the right eye has arrived. (Pp. 27-28.)

Notwithstanding that danger, Lewis clearly saw a discipleship role for those with such intellectual gifts, a role he vigorously fulfilled for his entire adult life:

To be ignorant and simple now-not to be able to meet the enemies on their own ground-would be to throw down our weapons, and to betray our uneducated brethren who have, under God, no defense but us against the intellectual attacks of the heathen. Good philosophy must exist, if for no other reason, because bad philosophy needs to be answered. (P. 28.)

This essay is Lewis at his best-insightful, articulate, honest, submissive. It reminds us that there are pearls of great price in oyster beds other than our own.

Students and Consecration

How we consecrate ourselves-our hearts and minds and strengths-is a continuous and continuously evolving endeavor. Certain forms of consecration are relevant while you are formally a university student-for instance, developing a complementary graduate-level knowledge of the scriptures and the doctrines of the gospel. There are different forms of consecration when learning is primarily "on the job"-in the home, in the workplace, in Church work, in personal relations; where, as Elder Maxwell says, "we are each other's clinical material." I would like to suggest several ideas on how we may consecrate our intellectual talents, our learning "unto the Lord."

I can recall thinking, at the student stage of life, of consecrating my life in one grand, heroic gesture. But as life progresses, our moments for consecration are specific, finite, and simple. Given that reality, when we consecrate our learning we must not "look beyond the mark" (Jacob 4:14). We should be ready to consecrate our talents to the task at hand, whether or not it is a task we have envisioned for ourselves. Consecration is not a once-in-a-lifetime event; it is a daily devotion. As Paul says, we "die daily" in the Lord (1 Cor. 15:31). If we have truly consecrated our learning, we will serve with "all our mind," whether it is in organizing the nursery or teaching a Gospel Doctrine class. This is not always easy. Professor Scruggs told me that when, as a relatively recent convert, he accepted a mission call, his sister sent him a poster which read, "Use me, O Lord, in Thy work, but preferably in an administrative capacity." The challenge of consecrating ourselves for less visible or "non-administrative" work increases proportionately as our own skills increase.

We must remember that the university was made for man, and not man for the university. For the educated, we may face the challenge of sustaining Church leaders who use bad grammar. Truly consecrating your learning allows you to look upon the hearts of such leaders and not on the outward appearance of their sentence structure. Our consecrated learning enables us more completely to comfort those who stand in need of comfort-whether they are learned or uneducated, successful or downtrodden, gracious or difficult.

Consecration and the Image of the Altar

We can facilitate our processes of consecration by using the powerful mental image of the altar. For the Old Testament people the altar was a physical place of sacrifice, of consecration and of worship. When we consecrate ourselves we lay our first things-our best gifts-on the altar in renewing acts of humility and worship. We identify our most cherished talents and consecrate them to God and, in doing so, we feel our devotion deepening and enriching. We can enhance these acts by visualizing laying them on the altar in our minds as we do them.

In my experience there is a dynamic principle at work: we not only sacrifice for those we love, but also we love those for whom we sacrifice. I know that Christ, who sacrificed Himself for us, loves us more than we can love Him. That principle explains a phenomenon you will come to know. I realized sometime ago that, in one sense, I love my children more than I love my parents. I felt some guilt about that conclusion until I realized that it resulted precisely because I had sacrificed for my children in ways and degrees that I had not sacrificed for my parents. And I further understood that, in the same way, my parents love me in the same unreciprocated degree, and that all parent-child relations have this nature, i.e., there is a great chain of unreciprocated love running down the generations. That unreciprocated parental love gives us a glimpse of our Heavenly Father's pure and unending love for us, His children.

Thus, one sure way to increase our love for others or other things is to sacrifice of ourselves for them. When we sacrifice our talents or our earthly or academic honors or our increasingly limited time on the altar to God, the act of sacrifice binds our hearts to Him, and we feel our love for Him increase. When we render any service in the kingdom-be it teaching a Relief Society lesson or dry pack canning at Welfare Square-it will be of much less value to us if we only see it as a "To Do" item to be checked off in our Franklin Planner. But if we visualize ourselves laying on the altar to God our talents or our time commitment, such as in attending an inconvenient church meeting, then our sacrifice becomes personal and devotional to Him.

This point was brought home to me at the funeral of Dr. Henry Eyring, one of the most distinguished scientists in the history of the University of Utah faculty. It was reported that his bishop once tried to excuse him from going to the stake welfare farm on the ground that he had more important work to do. Dr. Eyring replied to the effect that while the farm did not need him, he needed the farm. I believe that Dr. Eyring consciously was consecrating his valuable and limited time on an altar to God.

Today we effectively construct altars in our lives by how we prioritize our daily activities. Our priorities become what we "worship." Since we love those things for which we sacrifice, if we devote, either consciously or unconsciously, our best gifts to or sacrifice too much at the altar of professional success or scholarly recognition, we will eventually come to love and be bound to that activity. I have seen a number of lawyers who came to "love the law," not because it was originally a worthy object of their affection but because they have knelt so long and with so much personal sacrifice at the altar of their profession. (See Matt. 6:19-23.)

There is another facet of the process of building altars. The writer Charles Williams observed that "we build our altars one place so that the fire can come down some place else." What Williams means, I think, is that we should not assume that we may dictate or anticipate how and when the spiritual fire comes down into our lives. For example, we may not have a spiritual experience at every sacrament meeting we attend, but if we are not attending sacrament meetings we are not likely to be taught by the Spirit elsewhere in our lives. Thus, when we consecrate our talents on altars to God, we must be patient for Him to bless our labors in His own time and way and to tutor us in His own way.

Consecration of Our Learning

Consecration of our learning also broadens us and helps us avoid the pitfalls of narrow expertise. The Spirit is an expanding influence guiding us into "all truth" (John 16:13). I have a friend who is a wonderful architect. But that specialty is the lens through which he almost exclusively views the world. When we drive down the street together, our conversation is dominated by his constant critique of every building we pass. He sees the architecture and little else. And it has been a special burden for him not to let the contemporary meetinghouse building plans (some of which he does not admire) undermine his testimony. In one sense, he is in the prison of one idea. Because academia often makes us specialists, focusing our learning and education into expertise in a particular field, there is a special challenge not to measure life and others by that expertise alone. That does not mean that specialization should be avoided; only that we should beware of its potential to narrow us. At its best, specialization can develop gifts or talents that allow us to serve others in unique or customized ways.

In my experience, consecrating our learning is an expanding process. It allows us to make connections between our little area of learning and the vast other realms of life. Like Moses, we may simultaneously see that our knowledge, like ourselves, is "nothing" in the immensity of God's creations (see Moses 1:10) and yet know that we are truly His sons and daughters and in the similitude of His Only Begotten (see Moses 1:13).

An illustration of this expanded perspective was related by Elder Dallin H. Oaks some years ago. Between the time of his call and his starting his work as an Apostle there was one month in which he finished his work at the Utah Supreme Court. He said that as he labored during that period to finish his work at the court, his mind would often race forward to his new responsibilities. He said that one afternoon in chambers he was contemplating his new calling when he began to think how well prepared he was for it: he had considerable public speaking experience, he was widely traveled, and he had much administrative and committee experience. He said that as that thought lingered he was suddenly struck with the insight that he was supposing that the calling was to fit him when in truth he was to fit the calling. It was, he said, both a piercing and a lasting impression.

Serving Where Called

You may find that what is asked of you will not always coincide with what you believe you have to offer. It is often the case that just when we are ready to present our talents as a Gospel Doctrine teacher, we are called as a Scoutmaster. If we have truly consecrated our talents it will not matter how we are used, but only whether we are used. Truly consecrating our talents to the Lord means submitting to His use those talents, when and how He wishes. We are told that God uses us "not according to our works but according to his own purposes" (2 Tim. 1:9). Thus when we consecrate our works we must do so to His purposes and not to our preferences.

Related to this attitude of mind is the act of acknowledging God's "hand in all things," including in our intellectual or academic successes. If our motivation is the attainment of academic or secular honors, our eye will be single to our own glory. Consecrating our intellectual talents to God moves us from dwelling on our past honors to focusing on the future work to be done. In his book, Joseph Smith and the Beginnings of Mormonism, Dr. Richard Bushman describes this aspect of consecration in the life of Joseph Smith. In describing the initial publication of the Book of Mormon, Dr. Bushman writes:

For all the effort and trouble he put into the translation, Joseph made little of the book's appearance. Neither he nor his mother named the day when bound copies were available or mentioned any celebration. (Perhaps Joseph was in Pennsylvania on March 26.) The first edition said virtually nothing about Joseph himself. The preface contained one sentence about his part in the work. "I would also inform you that the plates of which hath been spoken, were found in the township of Manchester, Ontario county, New York." His own name appeared only on the title page and in the testimony of the eight witnesses at the back. It was an unusually spare production, wholly lacking in signs of self-promotion. Joseph presented his handiwork to the public and moved on. The book thenceforth had a life of its own. (Pp. 112-13.)

This is a remarkable insight into the character and mission of Joseph Smith. Given his investment of time and energy in translation and the suffering associated with its publication, it is extraordinary that he did not seek personal recognition on its publication. But Joseph went on no book tour; he was busy with someone else's work.

There is a particular challenge for the learned to confess God's hand in all things. That is because one aim of our education is to make us independent, to learn skills to manage outcomes-to control our environments. In the secular world we may come so to believe in our intellectual skills that we confidently try to proceed to design our own futures. Of course, life has a habit of awakening us rudely from this naivete. When I was in law school a friend of mine was a brilliant fourth-year medical student. His earnest belief in the good he would do as a doctor was absolute. Then his wife contracted an extremely rare form of arthritis, a form theretofore diagnosed, as I recall, only six times and only in men. After three painful months in bed she recovered completely with no apparent explanation. Several weeks later my friend rose in fast and testimony meeting, specifically confessing his overconfidence in the arm of flesh and humbly acknowledging God as the great Healer.

Becoming Tools in the Lord's Hand

In consecrating our talents and learning we must avoid conditioning our consecration on the end result we want. Hopefully we learn to recognize in ourselves the human temptation to offer what a friend of mine calls the "architect's prayer"-where we pray for the blueprint and ask God to be the general contractor. Rather, instead of doing our work in His name, we must consecrate ourselves to be used by Him, whether or not we will ever know fully how we were used. Indeed, we may never know.

As a first-year law student at Harvard I was very lonely and overwhelmed. I had never before been east of Denver, I was not married, and I was living in a dorm room not more than ten by twelve feet in dimension. For the first time in my life I was studying every waking minute, weekdays as well as Saturdays. I was homesick.

One Saturday afternoon I was researching a paper in the law school library and feeling particularly low. In this state I was looking for a book in a dark corner of the fourth-floor library stacks when I saw on a shelf an old copy of the Book of Mormon. Surprised, I opened it. On its flyleaf it read, "Donated to the Harvard Law School Library by John A. Widtsoe, 1894." In that moment I felt a flood of brotherhood, of shared suffering and of common belief. A light shone in on my spirit by an act of Elder Widtsoe's done decades earlier when he was a college student at Harvard. I doubt he ever imagined that a beneficiary of his act would be another young Latter-day Saint so many years later. But he consecrated that gift without knowing, or needing to know, how God would use his offering.

When we consecrate our learning we invite the Spirit into our mental processes. As Latter-day Saints, we have special views about this. We believe the Spirit frees us from the limits of our human learning processes. Science and philosophy have come to recognize that "knowledge is tied to the conditions under which it [is] secured" (Eric Erickson, Childhood and Society, p. 17). Even the most objectively designed experiments and searches for knowledge inevitably are distorted by the sensory limitations and the subjective perspectives of the supervising scholars and scientists and of the limitations of the current scientific paradigms (see Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions). This recognition has resulted in a humility about our scientific knowledge and its limitations. As Latter-day Saints we believe that the Spirit can lift us beyond the limitations of our senses. We are told that the Spirit enables us not to "judge after the sight of [our] eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of [our] ears" (2 Ne. 21:3). We are told in several places that by the Spirit we may know things as they "really are" (Jacob 4:13; D&C 93:24). Oliver Wendell Holmes once said that "a mind expanded by an idea can never return to its original dimension." As Latter-day Saints, we believe the Spirit expands and objectivizes our minds in the search for truth (see Alma 32:28, 34-36). By consecrating our learning we invite the Spirit to so expand us and lift us as we gain pure knowledge and truth.

There is a potential danger in devoting our learning to the work of the kingdom. This is illustrated partially by the story of a Primary class of six-year-olds in Montana. One Sunday the Primary teacher asked the class, "What is brown and furry with a big bushy tail and stores nuts for the winter?" An eager little boy on the first row raised his hand and said: "I know the answer is Jesus but it sounds like a squirrel to me." We must not be so eager in our desire to consecrate our talents that we lose sight of our goal. Lewis said: "By leading that life to the glory of God I do not, of course, mean any attempt to make our intellectual inquiries work out to edifying conclusions. That would be, as Bacon says, to offer to the author of truth the unclean sacrifice of a lie." ("Learning in War-Time," The Weight of Glory, p. 27.)

I was in a student stake presidency at the time when Mark Hoffman produced the so-called salamander letter. Most of you will recall Hoffman as the man who murdered two innocent people in Utah nearly a decade ago to cover up other crimes. Hoffman had forged documents relating to Church history, including one purported letter in which Joseph Smith described a white salamander as part of his visionary experiences. This letter created difficulties of explanation for Church members and even caused some to leave the Church. Because I was serving in a university stake setting, I discussed its import with a number of young Latter-day Saints. I began to try to develop various intellectual or historical explanations of the letter, including, as I recall, a reference to the French translation of the word salamander.

One Sunday, our stake invited Dr. Reed Durham, a faculty member at the University of Utah Institute and a wonderful scholar, to speak to our stake priesthood meeting on the letter. Because of his substantial scholarly attributes, I looked forward to Dr. Durham's presentation. But when he spoke he offered no historical or textual analyses or other explanation of the letter. Rather, his message was that we knew very little about the letter or its history, that we should seek to know more, but that having the Spirit as our guide gave us the only sure footing in that journey. He then bore his testimony of the calling of Joseph Smith and the divine origins of the Book of Mormon. Because I expected and perhaps wanted an academic approach, I was initially disappointed in his remarks. But events and subsequent reflection have shown that Dr. Durham knew well not to try to help God out with bad arguments.

If we seek truth humbly, God can use us and will use us when we are willing.

Asking God to Consecrate Our Efforts for Our Welfare

I discovered in the scriptures some years ago a particular way to consecrate my efforts. When I was a young bishop of a student ward, I felt drained by the demands of the calling. I did not so much feel out of tune as I did fatigued. I reached a point where I was heavily laden by the work of the calling and not experiencing the growth I had expected from the service. During that time I reread 2 Ne. 32:9, which struck me with a new meaning. "But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul."

Reading that scripture I realized that my prayers had been only that the Lord would bless those I was seeking to serve. I had not prayed that He would consecrate my performance "unto me" or to ask that my efforts would bless and fill my own soul. My prayers since that time have changed. When we consecrate our efforts to the Lord, He counsels us not only to pray that others will be blessed but also to pray that we will be blessed. In the act of laying our labors on His altar, we should ask Him to consecrate our hearts and minds to our own welfare. That is not a selfish prayer; it is a submissive prayer.

Let me summarize how we may consecrate our learning.

Â We can deepen the experience of devotional love by visualizing our efforts as sacrifices on the altar of God.

Â We must be ready to consecrate daily the simple and even mundane labors in our lives.

Â We should beware of making sacrifices at the altar of professional success or academic honor.

Â When we truly consecrate our talents and our learning, we are expanded beyond our own works to fit God's purposes and lifted beyond the limitations of our senses and biases.

Â When we consecrate our talents to God, we must willingly accept that He may use those talents in ways we could not have predicted and may not have chosen, had it been left to us. In particular, we must not condition our consecration on getting the end result we want.

Â Finally, when we offer our talents to God in His service, we should prayerfully ask Him not only to bless those we seek to serve but to consecrate our efforts to the welfare of our own souls.

When we so consecrate our learning, in my experience, we receive spiritual tutorials. We are then "taught from on high" (D&C 43:16). These teaching moments come to us in unscheduled ways.

Shortly after I had gone back to Cambridge as a first-year law student I was invited to speak in the sacrament meeting of the University Ward. The ward met for sacrament meeting in the afternoon (this was before the three-hour block meeting format), and the Cambridge Ward building had three units meeting in it, so that each of the three afternoon sacrament meetings was timed very carefully and strictly. On this occasion three students were asked to speak for not more than fifteen minutes each. We had three weeks' notice, and so I prepared very diligently for the talk. I wrote and rewrote it and timed it until I had it down to fourteen minutes 45 seconds.

On the appointed Sunday afternoon, shortly before I was to leave for church, I knelt down in my dorm room to offer a prayer that God would bless the talk I was about to give to the benefit of those that attended. While I was praying, the thought came into my mind that one of my motives was that I wanted to impress the people who would be there. This troubled me, and so I continued to pray to try to purify my motives. However, as much as I tried, I could not seem to pray that motive away. Finally, to be on time I had to get up and leave for the meeting without resolving the issue.

At the sacrament meeting I was scheduled to be the third speaker. The first speaker, another student, stood up and began to speak. He had no notes, and his talk seemed to me to be just a stream of consciousness. He went fifteen minutes, then twenty, and finally twenty-five minutes. My muscles began to tense as I could see that we were going to have a time problem. The second student speaker, also a friend of mine, took his full fifteen minutes, leaving me five minutes. As the time contracted, I became more and more frustrated, since I had cut my talk down as tightly as I could and there clearly was not going to be enough time to give it. I felt some anger towards the first speaker, whose inconsiderate use of time seemed attributable to his lack of preparation.

At that point, as the second speaker was concluding his remarks and as my frustration was peaking, the chapel in which we were sitting suddenly began to dissolve in my mind and I felt myself lifted out of it. In what was for me a piercing tutorial, I felt asked the question why I should suppose that what I had to say was more important than what the first speaker had to say, especially when I couldn't even get my motives right. It was a humbling moment, one of many instances where I have been compelled to be humble. When my time came I struggled to the pulpit, bore my testimony, and quickly sat down. That moment has stood as a reminder to me that if we genuinely consecrate ourselves and our learning, we will receive a "higher" education.

I hope and pray that we can obtain this spirit of consecration in our lives.

In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.
