Various authors, Henry B. Eyring, On Becoming a Disciple Scholar ( 1995)

On Learning and Becoming

Elder Dallin H. Oaks

I am grateful to address an audience of honor students this evening. I do so in the confident expectation that BYU students who qualify for academic honors are also specially interested and qualified in the things of the Spirit.

In inviting me to address you, Dean Paul Alan Cox suggested that I might consider speaking on "how faithful scholars who speak with the bilingual voice of both the intellect and the Spirit might best serve the kingdom as it continues to fill the earth." He explained further: "Is there a special way that we, as scholars, can utilize our talents to assist in the establishment of Zion? While an academic life itself presents no special spiritual advantages over the many other honorable professions and vocations that disciples can pursue, perhaps scholastic pursuits offer unique opportunities for service. If so, what are they and how might we best prepare ourselves to grasp these opportunities?" (Letter to Elder Dallin H. Oaks, 16 September 1994.)

Moved by that challenge, I have decided to address the special ways that scholars can help to establish Zion, but I will do so indirectly. I will discuss some general principles that apply to everyone. Scholars will have no difficulty in seeing how these principles apply to their special qualifications and responsibilities.

My topic is "On Learning and Becoming." My thesis is that whereas the world teaches us to know something, the gospel teaches us to become something, and it is far more significant to become than it is to know.

The Difference Between Testimony and Conversion

I begin by reviewing some familiar scriptures in which Jesus taught His chief Apostle the difference between testimony (to know and to declare) and conversion (to do and to become).

You will remember this teaching, recorded in the sixteenth chapter of Matthew: "When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am? And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets. He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 16:13-17.)

Peter had a testimony of Jesus Christ. He knew that Jesus was the Christ, the Messiah, and he declared it. To testify is to know and to declare.

A short time after Peter was declared blessed for his testimony, Jesus taught His Apostles about conversion. Conversion is quite different from testimony. I read from the eighteenth chapter of Matthew. "At the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven." (Matt. 18:1-4.)

Later, in an experience recorded in the twenty-second chapter of the book of Luke, the Savior confirmed this lesson on the importance of being converted. This occurred at the conclusion of the Savior's mortal ministry in the sublime instructions given at the Last Supper. "And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired you, that he may sift the children of the kingdom as wheat. But I have prayed for you, that your faith fail not; and when you are converted strengthen your brethren." (JST Luke 22:31-32.)

In order to strengthen his brethren-to nourish and lead the flock of God-this man who had been with Jesus for over three years, who had been given the authority of the holy apostleship, who had been a valiant preacher of righteousness, and who had been declared blessed by the Master for his faith and testimony, still had to be "converted."

Conversion is obviously a great deal more than testimony.

Elder Marion G. Romney characterized conversion as "the fruit of, or the reward for, repentance and obedience." He described conversion as "an actual change in one's understanding of life's meaning and in his allegiance to God-in interest, in thought, and in conduct." (Conference Report, October 1963, pp. 23, 24.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie contrasted testimony, which he called a personal revelation that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, with conversion, which he said represented a change from one state to another state, as in a laboratory process that changes sugar to starch. "The same elements are present, but there is some rearrangement so that the substance seems to be different than it previously was" ("Be Ye Converted," BYU Speeches of the Year, 11 February 1968, p. 10).

Scriptural Descriptions of Conversion

The scriptures are full of descriptions or allusions to conversion. One of the most prominent is the familiar reference to being "born again" (e.g., Mosiah 27:25; Alma 5:49; John 3:7; 1 Pet. 1:23). Alma described this as being changed from a "carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness,"["becom[ing]" a "new creature" (Mosiah 27:25-26). King Benjamin's hearers referred to conversion as "a mighty change in us, or in our hearts" (Mosiah 5:2). The king illustrated the importance of conversion when he taught that we must["[put] off the natural man and [become] a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord" (Mosiah 3:19).

The Apostle Paul said that persons who have been converted "have the mind of Christ" (1 Cor. 2:16). I understand this to mean that those who have been converted begin to see things as our Savior sees them and to hear and follow His voice instead of the voice of the world. Persons with "the mind of Christ" will do things in His way instead of by the ways of the world.

The Apostle Paul illustrated that meaning in his first letter to the Corinthians: "And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God. . . . And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God." (1 Cor. 2:1, 4-5.)

How had he learned this? "God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit," Paul explained (v. 10). The Lord's way-the way of those who have been converted-is to learn the things of God from the Spirit of God.

For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, except he has the Spirit of God (JST 1 Cor. 2:11).

Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.

Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. (1 Cor. 2:12-14.)

Another familiar scriptural description of conversion is the reference to becoming "perfect" in Christ. Moroni declares: "Come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ" (Moro. 10:32).

Mormon seems to have been describing this same kind of conversion or becoming when he said (echoing the words of the Apostle John):["[P]ray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, . . . that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; . . . that we may be purified even as he is pure" (Moro. 7:48).

The Savior gave His own summary to the Nephites. He told them to repent and be baptized and be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, "that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day" (3 Ne. 27:20). Then He concluded: "Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am" (3 Ne. 27:27).

Conversion as a Process

In a speech given here at BYU more than a quarter century ago, Elder Bruce R. McConkie gave an important insight into the nature of conversion and how it comes about. In some few cases, such as some miracles recorded in the scriptures, conversion is an event. But for "most people," Elder McConkie declared, "conversion is a process; and it goes step by step, degree by degree, level by level, from a lower state to a higher, from grace to grace, until the time that the individual is wholly turned to the cause of righteousness" ("Be Ye Converted," BYU Speeches of the Year, 11 February 1968, p. 12).

Just a few years ago President Ezra Taft Benson gave this same explanation. For most people, becoming Christlike "is a lifetime pursuit and very often involves growth and change that is slow, almost imperceptible" ("A Mighty Change of Heart," Ensign, October 1989, p. 5).

Conversion results from personal choices, reflected in what we do and, more subtly, in the desires of our heart. President Harold B. Lee described this reality when he said that conversion is to act upon eternal truths (Stand Ye in Holy Places [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974], p. 92).

Comparisons with the Scholarly World

With these gospel principles in mind, we can draw some comparisons and contrasts with comparable concepts in the scholarly world.

In gospel terms, testimony is to know and to say. The scholarly world has something precisely comparable. Though the method of obtaining secular knowledge-through study and reason-is somewhat more limited than the method of obtaining the spiritual knowledge that is the subject of a testimony, the object of scholarly research is also knowledge and the result is also declaration. In the scholarly world, a "professor" is one who has acquired a body of knowledge and who declares or professes it.

Scholarship focuses on improving our knowledge of the physical world, of our bodies, and of our social interactions and institutions. Though the scholarly focus is on knowledge, the process of scholarship and teaching obviously contemplates that the learner will act upon the knowledge acquired. That expectation is more explicit in education for the professions than in education in the liberal arts, but it is present throughout.

I suggest that the expectation of modern secular education generally goes no further than enlightened behavior. The goal of that kind of education does not extend to what I have called becoming. This is illustrated in the fact that, in contrast to the goals of their predecessors several generations ago, most modern colleges and universities disclaim any involvement in character education or any concern with the personal moral behavior of their students.

President Ezra Taft Benson contrasted the two different approaches in this familiar description of the Lord's way and the world's way: "The Lord works from the inside out. The world works from the outside in. The world would take people out of the slums. Christ takes the slums out of people, and then they take themselves out of the slums. The world would mold men by changing their environment. Christ changes men, who then change their environment. The world would shape human behavior, but Christ can change human nature." (Ensign, November 1985, p. 6.)

The gospel of Jesus Christ focuses on the conversion of the individual. This kind of conversion is a spiritual experience that results from an accumulation of right choices and righteous actions, not from acquiring a quantity of information or a level of physical skills. The conversion sought by the gospel does not result from a physical event or attainment that can be measured by scientific analysis. Men and women who have been converted have become something, but it is something that cannot be measured by mortal means.

Latter-day Saints are fond of quoting the Prophet Joseph Smith's statement, "A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge" [Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 217]. This is sometimes used to suggest that the pursuit of knowledge is, by itself, a saving activity, and that all men must learn all things in order to be saved. That was not what the Prophet said. In context, it is clear that his statement referred to a particular kind of knowledge, gained in a particular way.

In the last part of the sentence quoted above, the Prophet explains that without knowledge, a man "will be brought into captivity" by some evil spirit with "more knowledge, and consequently more power." The next sentence concludes the thought: "Hence it needs revelation to assist us, and give us knowledge of the things of God." [Ibid.; see also D&C 130:19. This statement identifies the kind of knowledge that saves and the ultimate method we must follow to obtain it. (Dallin H. Oaks, The Lord's Way [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1991], pp. 72-73.)

Learning the mysteries of God and attaining to what the apostle Paul called "the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ" (Eph. 4:13) requires far more than learning a specified body of facts. It requires us to learn certain facts, to practice what we have learned, and, as a result, to become what we, as children of God, are destined to become. . . .

In inspired words now embodied in the scriptures of the Latter-day Saints, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection" (D&C 130:18). What is meant by intelligence is not mere knowledge, by whatever means it is acquired. This is evident from the following sentence: "And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come" (D&C 130:19).

Note that intelligence is something more than knowledge. And note also the implication that knowledge is obtained by diligence and intelligence is obtained by obedience. Admittedly, the two methods are not mutually exclusive. But we come close to an important mystery of the gospel when we understand that the intelligence God desires us to obtain is much more than knowledge, and it cannot be obtained without obedience and revelation. That is the Lord's way, and it is far beyond the ways of the world. (Dallin H. Oaks, The Lord's Way, pp. 42-43.)

The ninety-third section of the Doctrine and Covenants describes how we can come unto the Father "and in due time receive of his fulness" (v. 19). The process is for a person to "keep [the] commandments" and "receive grace for grace" (v. 20) until he or she "is glorified in truth and knoweth all things" (v. 28). The acquisition of knowledge by obedience and faith is surely a different process than the acquisition of knowledge by study!

The Apostle John spoke of the ultimate conversion when he said: "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is" (1 Jn. 3:2).

Modern revelation refers to this as receiving the fulness of the Father (see D&C 76:56) and as being "gods" (D&C 76:58; 132:20).

Testimony and Conversion in Latter-day Saint Scholars

What do these principles and promises mean to Latter-day Saint scholars?

As noted, the modern objectives of what we call secular education all concern a body of knowledge-to teach it in the classroom and to enlarge it in scholarly pursuits. At Brigham Young University we have a larger mission, which makes us an object of ridicule or pity from those who do not share our vision. Those whose campus is the "great and spacious building" are frequently in the posture of "mocking" and "scoffing" at those who seek to partake of the fruit of the tree of life (see 1 Ne. 8:26-28). This is just one consequence of the reality that the world's way is different from the Lord's way.

In addition to our concern with learning, Brigham Young University is also concerned with becoming, with the conversion of students and also of teachers. I described my vision of that mission in an inaugural address on this campus almost a quarter century ago. "Our reason for being is to be a university," I said. For many, then and now, that is enough, but that is only the element comparable to testimony-to know and to declare. That is blessed but it is insufficient for those like you and me and the Apostle Peter who have been given a more comprehensive challenge than the acquisition and declaration of knowledge. And so I continued: "But our reason for being a university is to encourage and prepare young men and women to rise to their full spiritual potential as sons and daughters of God." (Dallin H. Oaks, Inaugural Address, Brigham Young University, 12 November 1971.) That was my 1971 description of conversion.

Almost a quarter century later we heard the same thought expressed at another inauguration. These are the words of President Howard W. Hunter giving the formal charge to the new president of BYU-Hawaii in November 1994:

We charge you, therefore, to keep the building of character a central educational purpose of this institution. . . .

[A]s you find ways to build character, you will change individuals, families, communities, and nations for the better.

Finally, and most important, we charge you to build faith in God the Eternal Father, in his Beloved Son, Jesus Christ, and in the great principles which lead to eternal life, which come to us from prophets of God, both anciently and in our own time. We charge you to do that as a central part of your educational purpose, not as an addendum to it.

It is the light from heaven which will make students better learners. It is the light from heaven which will make them better people-more loving, more tolerant, more productive, more honest, and thus better citizens of a community. Your students can reach their potential as learners and as human beings only as they learn to let faith in divine truth animate their whole lives. We charge you to find even better ways to invite all who study and serve here to allow this unwavering faith to rule and lift their lives. (Profile Magazine, December 1994, p. 15.)

With prophetic vision President Hunter reminded all of us that the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ are more significant than the curriculum of any university. And the mission of the gospel (and in this sense the highest mission of Brigham Young University) is not just to enlarge what we know, but to change what we are. That truth poses a special challenge to scholars. Those whose professional preoccupation is the acquisition of knowledge can be quite resistant to the idea that there is something infinitely more important than knowing. Latter-day Saints who have chosen the pursuits of scholarship need an extra measure of humility to keep their talents and occupations and honors in perspective and to move faithfully and steadily toward that status of being that we call eternal life, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God. That we all may do so is my fervent prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

1, Elder Neal A. Maxwell is a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He previously served in the Presidency of the First Quorum of the Seventy and as a Commissioner of Education for the Church. Prior to his call as a General Authority he served as Executive Vice President of the University of Utah, where he held a variety of teaching and administrative assignments. He received his B.S. and M.S. in Political Science from the University of Utah and has been awarded honorary doctorate degrees from four different institutions. He has written twenty-four books on religious topics and a variety of articles on politics and government.

2, Paul Alan Cox is Dean of General Education and Honors and Professor of Botany at Brigham Young University. He received his B.S. degree in Botany from BYU., an M.Sc. in ecology from the University of Wales, and an A.M. and Ph.D. in biology from Harvard University. Prior to joining the BYU faculty, he was Miller Fellow at the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science at the University of California, Berkeley. He has written two books and over eighty articles on scientific topics.

3, Elder Cecil O. Samuelson is a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Prior to his call as a General Authority he served as Senior Vice President for Medical Affairs of Intermountain Health Care. He previously served as Vice President for Health Services, Dean of the Medical School, and Professor of Internal Medicine at the University of Utah. He received his B.S., M.S., and M.D. degrees from the University of Utah. He is a recipient of the Hans Schniff Award in Clinical Medicine at Duke University and was chosen as Outstanding Professor at the University of Utah Medical School. He has authored numerous papers on medical topics.

4, Elder Henry B. Eyring is a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and currently serves as Commissioner of Education for the Church Educational System. He previously served as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy and in the Presiding Bishopric. Prior to his call as a General Authority he was President of Ricks College. He was a professor at Stanford University and Sloan Visiting Fellow at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He holds a B.S. degree in physics from the University of Utah and received M.B.A. and D.B.A. degrees in business administration from Harvard University.

5, James S. Jardine is Managing Director of Ray, Quinney & Nebeker and serves as chairman of the Board of Trustees of the University of Utah. He received his B.A. from the University of Utah and the J.D. degree from Harvard Law School. He served as a White House Fellow and as a special assistant to United States Attorney General Griffin Bell. He has taught law at the University of Utah and Brigham Young University. He serves as General Counsel to the Salt Lake Olympic Winter Games Committee and has served on the Executive Committee of Utah Citizens Against Parimutuel Gambling.
