Martha Nibley Beck, John C. Beck, Breaking the Cycle of Compulsive Behavior ( 1990)

Preface

The idea for this book was born on a snowy night in Cambridge, Massachusetts, as we walked home from a visit with one of the most active of the small but tightly knit group of Latter-day Saint students in the Boston area. Earlier that day our friend's older brother had been excommunicated from the Church because of a problem we would later come to call a behavioral addiction, or a compulsive cycle. That night, though, as we talked the matter over with our shocked and saddened friend, we had no such label for the older brother's actions. We had only the vague impression that the story we were hearing shared similarities with accounts we had heard from other Latter-day Saints.

The problems these people described seemed very different on the surface, but the same themes appeared to underlie the stories of many faithful Church members whose lives had become painful or even unmanageable. Whatever temptations troubled them, these people described a similar pattern of behavior related to those temptations. They all felt a growing preoccupation with certain behaviors, a widening distance from loved ones, a profound loss of self-respect, and the feeling of being unable to control their own actions.

We began to recognize these similarities on that cold New England night, but it took four years and hundreds of hours of interviewing Latter-day Saints who were also behavioral addicts to convince us that compulsive cycles lay at the heart of many tragedies that might otherwise seem unrelated. This book considers the stories of three Church members whose compulsive behaviors fell into the most common categories: eating disorders, substance abuse, and sexual addiction; however, we saw compulsive behavior emerge involving many types of activity that do not fall into these categories. What all these behavioral addicts shared was a recognizable cycle of feelings and actions that came to absorb a huge proportion of their personalities and to destroy their happiness. We grew to believe that understanding the pattern is the key to escaping from it.

That is the first reason we decided to write this book.

The second reason is that we saw some of our interview subjects transform their compulsive cycles into a parallel pattern of behavior we call the joy cycle. These people became not only free from their addictions but more able to cope with virtually every aspect of their lives. We wish to share their experiences to reassure those struggling with compulsive behavior that their problems are not inescapable: there is hope.

Finally, this book is a testimony to our belief that "all things which are good cometh of God." (Moroni 7:12.) The process of breaking the cycle of compulsive behavior is contained in the gospel of Jesus Christ. We have never seen an individual, Latter-day Saint or not, who escaped from a behavioral addiction without following the steps outlined in the doctrines of the Church and without the help of a loving Father in Heaven.

This book is meant to assist behavioral addicts and their loved ones in understanding the problem of addictive cycles. We suggest a way in which that problem might be solved. We do not purport to offer a sure cure for any individual's addiction. We have attempted to use some of the training we received as social scientists in conducting our research, but we make no claim whatever to scientific objectivity in analyzing our results. We accept as inspired the teachings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and we have approached the problem of addiction from that standpoint. On the other hand, statements we make about doctrine are our own interpretations and do not represent official Church policy. We make these caveats because we openly acknowledge that there are many imperfections in this book. Nonetheless, if we can convince one person trapped in the seemingly unconquerable grasp of a compulsive cycle that the problem can be overcome, or if we can help one would-be rescuer to understand the problem in a way that might enlighten or assist, we will have accomplished our objective.
