Martha Nibley Beck, John C. Beck, Breaking the Cycle of Compulsive Behavior ( 1990)

1

Introduction

It was six o'clock on Saturday morning. Ellen Schor forced her eyes open and slid wearily out of bed. She had been told that September in Utah would be hot and dry, but the morning air felt clammy and chilly on Ellen's skin. She quickly pulled on her sweatpants and running jacket, shook herself to get her blood moving, and sat down on the hard dormitory carpet to stretch before her run. Her legs were stiff and reluctant. As she pulled her left knee toward her chin, Ellen felt it sending murmurs of discomfort to her brain, requesting that maneuvers be cancelled at least for the day. She pushed the leg a little farther as a disciplinary measure.

At ten past six Ellen arranged her limbs in a delicately uncomfortable yoga position and opened her scriptures. The night before, she had cut down her regular half-hour scripture study to twenty-five minutes in order to finish an English paper. She would make up that time this morning.

"Wherefore," she read from 2 Nephi 9:51, "do not spend money for that which is of no worth, nor your labor for that which cannot satisfy." Ellen nodded emphatically. That was her philosophy. She had worked hard to develop frugality and single-minded determination. In fact, the control she had gained over her time and her energy had become the central fact of Ellen's life.

"Hearken diligently unto me," the verse continued, "and remember the words which I have spoken." Diligence. That was the key. Diligence and absolute adherence to principle. Ellen made a fresh resolution to live the day righteously. She had been taught, and she believed, that perfection itself was not too lofty a goal. She read on. "And come unto the Holy One of Israel, and feast upon that which perisheth not, neither can be corrupted, and let your soul delight in fatness."

Ellen unfolded her still-aching legs, thinking that the problem with Jacob was that you were never really sure what he would say next. "Let your soul delight in fatness." What a revolting concept. Purely metaphorical, of course; that was obvious. And besides, for every scripture in favor of obesity—spiritual or otherwise—Ellen could quote at least ten that recommended fasting, sparsity, discipline, self-denial, and control of appetite. For herself, Ellen knew that she felt much better, much purer, when she ate as little as possible. She knew so few people who had gained real mastery over that facet of their lives. While her fellow Americans had devoured literally tons of appealing poisons over the past four years, Ellen had spent that time mastering her lurid desire for cookies, ice cream, red meat, and the other temptations of the Natural Man. Now, as a sophomore in college, she had succeeded in eliminating all foods except whole grains, fruits, and vegetables from her diet. She scheduled every minute of her day to include only constructive and wholesome activities. She studied harder than anyone she knew. She ran ten miles a day, and she finally felt almost pure, almost clean, inside and out.

Almost. Ellen winced momentarily as she remembered one evening the week before. It had happened again, she had to admit. How had she gotten so out of control? She hardly remembered buying the ice cream and the corn chips, hardly remembered eating them, alone behind the snack shop like a dog skulking off with a stolen bone. All she remembered was the guilt she'd felt afterwards, the sickness of mind and body. How true it was that junk foods were poison. She'd felt like vomiting. In fact, she'd considered it seriously. It wasn't so much the stomachache as the guilt she'd wanted to be free of. Ellen shook her head hard, shooing away the memory. That had been a moral lapse, to be sure, but the incident was over. She would overcome the disgusting tendencies of her wicked body. In fact—think positively, she told herself—she already had.

Her greatest remaining sin was vanity: despite repeated attempts to repent, Ellen could not help feeling unseemly pride in the fact that size one pants dangled loosely from her hips and that her roommate outweighed her by eighty-five percent. Every morning, every night, and during her three other formal prayers every day, Ellen gave thanks for the strength of will which had made her so elegantly thin and prayed for the endurance to become even slimmer. She finished this particular morning's devotions at precisely six-thirty A.M. After a quick weigh-in on her forty-dollar medical scale, which reported ounces as well as pounds on its digital readout, she trotted down the dormitory stairs to the lobby on legs that trembled with weakness and resolve.

Few people were on the street yet, which pleased Ellen greatly. She had once been as gregarious as she had been gluttonous, but now she limited the people with whom she came in contact, just as she did the ingredients for her negative-calorie salads (which cost more energy to chew than they provided and were thus less fattening than eating nothing). True, she sometimes felt lonely, but certainly loneliness was better than indiscriminate association with people who might lead her away from the path she had chosen. Ellen clenched her teeth to shut out the ache that surged briefly from its hiding place beneath her consciousness. It was just hunger, she told herself, just a sign of righteous self-denial. Fasting and prayer could lead only to happiness: the pain was an illusion—there, it was gone. The exhilaration and the energy were back. If she could lose about five more pounds, Ellen thought as she jogged stiffly into the brilliant Rocky Mountain sunlight, she would be light enough to float straight up to heaven.

The buzzing of his alarm clock slammed into Bill Stewart's solar plexus almost before he was aware of hearing it. By the time the sound had fully registered in his ears, Bill's hand was already slapping at the "snooze" button like a hysterical housewife killing a cockroach. When he was sure the sound was dead, Bill closed his eyes and took a long, quavering breath to calm his nerves. Six thirty.

Bill did not want to get up. No. No, no, no. It was too early, and he felt terrible. Terrible! Another deep breath did little to ease the pounding pain in his head and the shivering thud of his heart. He opened one eye and peered at the merciless red numbers changing from 6:31 to 6:32 to 6:33. . . . Get up. He had to get up. The thought made the headache worse and brought on a wave of nausea that intensified with every thunderous quake of his heart. His hand, still clutching the clock, twitched in time with his pulse, and the veins on it bulged blue and sickly gray.

Bill had expected to gain muscle and a tan during the summer, working with Dad on the Idaho ranch. He always had before. The summer after his high school graduation he'd grown two inches and put on nearly twenty pounds. But last summer Dad had suggested that since the younger boys were old enough to help now, Bill might have a better time staying around school and keeping that terrific campus apartment and his job. . . . Of course, Bill had known what Dad meant. With nine children in the family, and everyone getting ready for college and missions and weddings, it was probably a good thing that the oldest child should be independent from now on. Mom and Dad had given him the wings to fly, and while he was testing those wings, the other kids had grown so much they filled the nest without him. That was fine. That was reasonable. That was final. So Bill stayed at school and sold appliances part-time while the smell of summer filled his memory with images of cool mountains, and tall grass, and the bright blond heads of his little brothers and sisters.

That was when the world had begun to go gray, and Bill with it. Everything seemed to be like the screen of an old TV, growing slowly more fuzzy, slowly more ghostly, slowly more colorless and uninteresting. Except, of course, for Jenny. Jenny had worked at the store in the mall across from Bill, and she smiled a gorgeous smile at him every day until he had timidly asked her out. "Finally!" she laughed, confident in her expensive clothes and perfect haircut.

Bill smiled through his morning headache, remembering the first few dates he'd had with Jenny. He still wondered what could have made a smart, rich, beautiful girl like Jenny so generous toward a country bumpkin like him. As the summer wore on, he'd grown more and more glad he wasn't stuck in his tiny hometown, with a family as wholesome as oatmeal and just about as interesting. Jenny brought him into the real world. He had never realized how narrow-minded, how provincial he had been before he met her. She introduced him to new friends and more expansive ways of thinking. He discovered that the sense of humor he'd learned from his mother in their kitchen could be used to make people laugh in places with far more panache. "You're getting pretty interesting for an Idaho potato," Jenny would tease him, laughing. Bill would laugh, too, proud to have escaped his narrow-minded, puritanical, countrified upbringing with some degree of sophistication. Jenny brought out that sophistication. She shared everything with him—friends, jokes, ideas about how he should dress and walk and talk. And cocaine.

It was nearly a quarter to seven. He had to get up. Even if he hurried, he'd have to skip breakfast if he wanted to open the store on time. He'd probably end up running halfway. That was why he was getting so thin, he told himself. He spent half the day running from work to school to Jenny's. Bill had been saving to buy himself a car, but he'd ended up spending a little more on drugs than he'd expected. A lot more, in fact. At first he just took what Jenny gave him, but a guy has to keep some self-respect. And besides, he liked to have the stuff on hand when he had a reason to use it. Because of course Bill didn't just take drugs for no reason, like some sick junkie. That would be disgusting. None of Jenny's friends—his friends—were junkies. As Jenny explained to him, they just used drugs to get more out of life.

Bill hadn't really understood what she meant until school started. One day he went to class high, after a date with Jenny, and was astounded by how acutely he understood everything the professor said. He began to use a little "help" for special occasions, like finals and term papers. But if drugs were useful then, he began to reason, then taking them more often would keep up his batting average, help him learn more, do more—as Jenny had said, get more out of his college experience. He was a little surprised when his grades began to drop, but then again, this was his sophomore year and he'd never heard of a sophomore who didn't have trouble motivating himself to keep working. Bill started taking more drugs to counteract the sophomore slump and considered gratefully that at this rate, without them he'd probably be failing. Of course, as soon as he was out of this academic pressure, he'd stop using the stuff. He only took it when that was the logical thing to do. It cost a lot, but Bill resigned himself to the cost. As an investment in his education, it was worth it.

Six forty-seven. Bill's headache was worse than ever, and the world outside his half-opened lids was pale and out of focus. He had a terrible taste in his mouth. A little chemical assistance would help right now, he thought. But no. It was Saturday. He never took drugs on weekends. For one thing, he didn't need them just for work and church. For another, he had to admit that he was pretty much at the limit of his budget right now. But good grief, he felt rotten! He probably had a cold. It probably wouldn't be good for him to try to go to work without something. Everybody takes something when they're sick, Bill reasoned.

Bill's hand was shaking so hard that he could hardly open the drawer of his nightstand. Clearly, he really needed an extra boost this morning. For a moment he couldn't find the tiny canister of white powder, and his hands trembled even more violently as he rummaged, first methodically and then in something close to panic, through the drawer. Ah! He found it! There it was! He relaxed and his headache felt better already as he inhaled a tiny pinch—just a little, he didn't ever overdo it—and settled back into his pillows.

The gray song of a gray bird wafted through the window on a shaft of gray sunlight. Just for a moment, the sound filled Bill's mind with the gold, blue, and green of an Idaho morning and the cheerful chaos of his family sitting down to breakfast. The shaking and the headache grew worse, but only for a moment: the chemicals began to focus and clarify his world, and the simple lines of his terrific campus apartment took on a clarity that calmed and dimmed his memories. The tears that had incongruously gathered in his eyes dried there, unshed, as his vision grew brighter and his headache vanished. The relief was marvelous. The world was marvelous. Bill was marvelous. With a chuckle of satisfaction and a rueful grin at his susceptibility to silly farmboy sentiments, Bill Stewart threw back the sheets and got up.

At seven A.M. in Los Angeles the air was still relatively clear. Warren White turned off his alarm and looked out his eighth-floor window at the gentle golden hills of the horizon. It was a beautiful morning. Warren rubbed his stinging eyes and ran a hand through his hair. He hadn't slept well, hadn't even felt drowsy until sunrise was underway. Something was wrong, he thought, as he stumbled groggily toward the shower. It had been wrong last night, it was wrong long before that, and it was still wrong. No amount of California sunshine could drive it away.

Warren hung a towel next to the tub. He glanced at himself in the mirror and noted dispassionately that he was very handsome: tall and muscular, with black hair and startlingly blue eyes. His apartment, reflected beyond the open bathroom door, was expensive, immaculate, and furnished with perfect taste. Even his parents, when they'd seen the place, had been impressed enough to comment on Warren's success. They had barely even murmured about how nice it would be to have a woman's touch around the house, and there had been no mention at all of pattering little feet. Five years ago, when Warren had come home from his mission, the hints had rained down on him like hailstones on a tin roof—small, annoying, and promptly deflected. As much as he loved his family, Warren had been glad to move. He wondered if his parents knew what was wrong. They must. It must be obvious. They must be able to see it, hovering around him like his own personal smog bank.

He turned the shower on cold and let it shock the skin on his face and chest. He was so tired. Tired of worrying, tired of guilt, tired of wrestling his own feelings in the desperate hours that preceded sunrise, tired of a constant striving to attain an ideal for which he felt no desire. No, he told himself, that wasn't true. He did want a family. He wanted to build a home as full and warm as his own had been, to give his time, his effort, and his love to his own children as his parents had to him. Warren thought about the passage in his patriarchal blessing that had filled him with new hope when he was seventeen years old. It said that he would find a wife who would understand him, whom he could love. It said that he would be a good father, one who could help his family attain the celestial kingdom.

When he'd received his blessing, Warren had been sure that everything would change. One day very soon he would wake up and find himself the typical, promising Mormon boy everyone thought he was. When he reached nineteen and nothing was different, Warren had decided that his mission would solve the problem. His first few months in Germany almost convinced him that it had. He had felt his testimony growing by the day, along with a deep affection for the people he taught. How ironic that it was one of them who had delivered the final blow to his new and vulnerable optimism.

Warren and his companion had been sure that the young man was Golden. He was sincere, introspective, and sensitive, with a real thirst for truth. He had accepted all the discussions avidly. He had only one argument.

"Eternal marriage is a wonderful concept," he had agreed. "But if I am a Mormon, does it mean that I have to marry a woman?"

Warren and his companion had stared at their investigator, thinking that he must have used a phrase they hadn't learned yet.

"I'm sorry?" said Warren's companion.

"Well," said the investigator, "I believe in eternal companionship, but I would like to marry a man."

There was an awful silence. The young man looked at Warren and his companion. "No?" he said quietly. "I thought not."

Warren cleared his throat nervously. "You're right. If you were to become a Mormon, you would have to marry a woman. It says in the Bible that neither the woman nor the man is complete without the other. Marrying a—what you're talking about would be a serious sin."

The young man looked at them resignedly. "Well," he said, "then your church must not be true. Or if it is—I was beginning to think it was—then I'd be better off not joining it. I would get a worse punishment than I already deserve. I'm homosexual. I was born that way, and nothing will change me. They've done studies, you know. There's no way for me to change."

What Warren remembered most about that moment was that his teeth had begun to hurt. Maybe he'd clenched his jaws or something; at any rate, he had never heard anyone else describe the onset of despair as a toothache. He also recalled thinking that he had never really looked it in the face before, never really thought through the facts. The facts were that he was a homosexual. That he had been born that way. That he could never change. That he would never reach the celestial kingdom. That he was lost.

Warren turned off the shower and stepped into his well-furnished, empty apartment. Even though it was Saturday, he decided to check in at the office to make sure the half-day secretaries weren't having any problems. He dressed carefully in a pin-striped suit, a white shirt, and a subdued but distinctive tie—Warren had always had a conscientious devotion to his work and superb taste in clothes. As he stepped out of his apartment at precisely fifteen minutes to eight, Warren remarked to himself that he really had very little else.

If anyone had been able to see Ellen, Bill, and Warren all at once that Saturday morning, the observer would have thought that they shared very little. Their thoughts, their concerns, their situations, and their actions seem highly disparate. On Sunday, however, the observer would have said that the three had everything in common. That morning, they would all be seated on similar pews in similar churches, bowing their heads for the same sacrament and seeking the comfort of the same Spirit. The need for such comfort, as well as their membership in the Church, would be an invisible link between the three—but they would also have in common the outward appearance of contentment and invulnerability. What the casual observer could not have seen below this facade would be something to which none of the three young people would casually admit: an involvement in a pattern of behavior that had become something like an addiction and that was inhibiting their progress toward becoming like their Father in Heaven. Ellen, Bill, and Warren themselves might have been shocked to discover the similarities in their behavior and in the emotions and conflicts they each encountered within themselves but never expressed to others.

We suggest that there is a common pattern underlying much of Ellen's eating disorder, Bill's substance abuse, Warren's sexual temptations, and a host of other such phenomena that have become horribly familiar features of a troubled world. We call this pattern a compulsive cycle.

We thank the individuals who allowed us to set down in this book the experiences we have described, for Ellen, Bill, and Warren (though not the names we have given them) are real. They are some of the Latter-day Saints who graciously shared their stories with us over a five-year period of research and interviews, which began with a Sunday School class in 1984. As newlyweds, we were called to teach a class in our university ward. Since both of us were fledgling social scientists working on doctorates, we decided to offer our training in research as an extra feature of our calling. We promised the members of our Sunday School class that we would do our best to research their questions and provide information to them appropriately.

The response surprised us. The first class members who called us were usually concerned with questions they had encountered in their dealings with nonmember roommates, friends, and classmates. As we mentioned a few of these in class, more and more telephone calls came in, and the callers spoke more and more candidly about struggles they had observed in Church friends, family members, and even themselves. These were some of the most stalwart, thoughtful, faithful Latter-day Saints we had ever met. Their testimonies were fervent and eloquently expressed. They were devoted to missionary work. They came from exemplary families. They endeavored to eschew all behavior that might impede their spiritual growth, to avoid temptations, and to repent completely if they succumbed. Outwardly, they were ideal young Latter-day Saints. And yet, some of them were engaged in struggles with self that absorbed huge amounts of energy and led them time and time again to the edge of despair.

We approached each new problem raised by our class members from three different angles. First, we listened very hard to the Church members who presented various problems to us. As often as possible, we attempted to interview the individual, Latter-day Saint or not, who was personally struggling with problem behavior. Second, we looked to the teachings of modern-day Church authorities and interviewed Church leaders about insights they had gained in their years of counseling and praying for members who experienced such problems. Finally, we considered the writings of secular social scientists whose work included investigations of the issues raised by ward members.

The research that had started as an adjunct to our Sunday School calling soon became a personal project, one we discussed on long walks, over dinner, and in favor of our schoolwork. We mentioned the project to our Latter-day Saint friends, who mentioned it to theirs, and we continued to receive phone calls and visits from people who were wrestling with what we came to see as various manifestations of a compulsive cycle. Our research soon gave us a clue to why so many of our age group seemed to be struggling with this type of behavior, for we read that the compulsive cycle, in all its many guises, tends to develop most easily during the stage of life when individuals have attained or nearly attained adult status but still have relatively few commitments or structured requirements in their lives. College and graduate school, we read, are typical situations where such behaviors tend to arise.

As we continued to conduct research on and off, through school commitments and the births of our children, the events we observed in the lives of compulsive-cycle victims led us to a conclusion that made us want to write this book. We found that although more individuals may become trapped in a cycle of compulsive behavior during a certain phase of life, the compulsion does not pass with the phase. Simple passage of time is not enough to free the addict from the cycle.

The people we interviewed grew older along with us, and as we encountered them again and talked with them about their struggles—sometimes after years without seeing them—we found that they had fallen into very different paths. We were thrilled to observe some whose lives had changed dramatically. These were the people who had broken out of their compulsive cycles, who felt free at last from their demons, who had turned even the nightmares of their experiences into a source of insight for themselves and others. In these people, the true message of repentance seemed to have reached its joyous realization. Those around them sensed their depth of understanding and their inner strength, without knowing that these qualities were the result of a long and terrible repentance. Tragically, other people we spoke with after long separations seemed to have given up the struggle and embraced their addictions. They looked at us with disdain, disgust, and disbelief if we suggested they might still change. They seemed to have lost the desire to do so. They had resigned themselves to the fallacy that breaking out of their cyclical patterns of destructive behavior was neither possible nor desirable. Finally, we spoke with those who were still locked into behaviors that they knew were inhibiting their progress toward perfection, who were struggling on with exhausted courage, who held despair at arm's length while they looked everywhere for hope.

These individuals and those who love them and counsel them and wish to help them are the people to whom we address this book. We do not know how many such Latter-day Saints exist, for no census can be taken of actions that are often hidden and denied. We do not mean to suggest that the Church is teeming with secret sins, for that is not the case. We believe that the vast majority of Latter-day Saints are, if not quite perfect, at least working effectively to become so. But we also believe that the troubled individuals we spoke with are not the only Church members caught in the terrible conflict between a true and inspired testimony of the restored gospel and patterns of behavior which they do not fully understand and therefore cannot yet fully control.

The implication that understanding addiction is fundamental to controlling it is based on our interpretation of the changes we saw taking place in the lives of recovering behavioral addicts. We hasten to point out that every victim of the compulsive cycle is unique and complex and that there can be no single, pat solution to every addict's problem. Nevertheless, among the subjects we interviewed, we discovered common patterns of behavior that we feel may be instructive to most people suffering from addictions. Generally speaking, the behavioral addicts we spoke with were caught in a repetitive, self-reinforcing cycle of destructive feelings and actions. We never saw anyone simply abandon that cycle. What we did see were individuals who managed to replace each step on the compulsive cycle with a constructive feeling or action. These people were still involved in a self-reinforcing cycle of feelings and actions, but it was a cycle that seemed to propel them upwards into happiness and freedom rather than downwards into misery and captivity. This positive pattern we call the "joy cycle." We came to believe that it is discernible in the lives of all righteous people. It, like every innate element of the human soul, is essentially divine. And, as he has done with every divine aspect of this mortal life, Satan has created a counterfeit—in this case, the compulsive cycle. This book is devoted to describing, in detail and with illustrative case studies, the nature of the compulsive cycle and some of the ways in which the joy cycle may be substituted for it. A quick description here might clarify the general direction of our discussion before it is overwhelmed by specifics—in other words, we will sketch a map of the forest before we plunge into the trees.

The compulsive cycle, as we see it, has four steps. Two of these steps are "feelings" the behavioral addict experiences emotionally; the other two steps are "actions" the behavioral addict performs in response to those feelings. The compulsive cycle begins with what we call "feelings of isolation." Various people we interviewed described these feelings as loneliness, a sense of having been abandoned, the belief that they were unworthy or incapable of being loved, or as a "homesickness for heaven." Perhaps this last definition was the most accurate, for though many of our subjects were surrounded by people who loved them, all of them were living in a world where the unity and oneness that are the natural condition of our spirits had been temporarily replaced by the fragmentations and separations of mortality. Whatever its cause, the behavioral addicts we interviewed expressed an almost universal feeling that a void existed within them. Although they described the void in different words, all agreed that it was an emptiness that cried out to be filled.

In the case of the behavioral addicts, each individual had stumbled across some activity that did not fill this void, yet for a time produced physical or emotional sensations strong enough to block the person's awareness of the feelings of isolation. Because these actions involved the gratification of some immediate appetite at the expense of the person's (and other people's) long-term well-being, we have labeled them "actions of self-indulgence." The most common addictive actions we encountered involved the three areas we have chosen to consider in our case studies: eating disorders, the use of mood-altering substances, and sexual behavior. It seems, however, that almost any pleasurable activity, from shopping to reading, can become compulsive if the individual finds it effective in blocking feelings of isolation. Few of the actions were intrinsically evil. The harm we saw in them came from the addict's loss of ability to control the action. A true victim of the compulsive cycle typically will become more and more absorbed in the action of self-indulgence, will ignore responsibilities and relationships in favor of participating in the activity, and will eventually realize that he or she is unable to stop the behavior, even by the most determined effort.

The loss of self-control and the deterioration of life-style and relationships that accompany a behavioral addiction seem to lead directly into the next step on the compulsive cycle: "feelings of self-hatred." Immediately after the action of self-indulgence has been performed, when the appetite for it has been temporarily satiated, the addicts described experiencing an intense emotional and physical let-down, characterized by sadness, regret, discouragement, and guilt. That was true even when the action of self-indulgence was not considered a sin. But when the behavior was something explicitly forbidden by Church doctrine, the addict's feelings of self-hatred following the action of self-indulgence were overwhelming. Their guilt was not the healthy recognition that their behavior was unworthy of their status as beloved children of God. It was a judgment of self so severe, so punitive, and so absorbing that it all but drowned the addicts in their loathing for themselves. Compulsive-cycle victims at this stage almost always labeled themselves as disgusting, contemptible, and bad.

Feelings of self-hatred move the behavioral addict along to the second action step on the compulsive cycle: "actions of self-concealment." The addict's reaction to the addictive behavior is shame, and the reaction to shame is almost always a life-style of deception designed to hide the addiction. At the root of all actions of self-concealment lies deceit. The lies behavioral addicts tell to protect themselves from the recrimination of others—especially loved ones—may be lies of commission or of omission, of words or of silence, of actions or of failure to act. Because an addiction of any sort often grows to consume huge amounts of the addict's time and attention, more and more lies are required to disguise the compulsive cycle as it progresses. Ultimately, almost every aspect of a compulsive-cycle victim's interaction with those who do not share the addiction may be so riddled with self-concealing lies that even the addict cannot sort out truth from falsehood. At this point, the addict has developed a kind of double identity: a "good" self and a "bad" self. The bad self is seen by the addict as the real self and the good self as a false image carefully projected to others. The addict hides the part of the self that he or she feels is most fundamental from many other people, usually including the family members and friends who love the addict most.

The very real isolation caused by the behavioral addict's self-concealment adds to whatever the original conditions were that made the person feel alone and isolated. The addict's actions of self-concealment thus not only lead him or her back to feelings of isolation but also intensify those feelings, so the void within the person becomes larger than ever. To block consciousness of the feelings of isolation, the compulsive-cycle victim turns again to the action of self-indulgence that brought temporary relief in the past. After engaging in the activity, the addict feels worse than ever—the suspicion that the self is fundamentally bad has been confirmed. It thus seems even more important to keep that "true" nature secret from others . . . and so the cycle continues, growing more difficult to break out of with every turn.

Very often, people who are trapped in compulsive cycles know only that they repeatedly perform actions that they feel are wrong. Attempts to "break the habit" by simply abstaining from these actions seem to intensify the pressure resulting from the remainder of the cycle. The individuals we saw who succeeded in freeing themselves from compulsive cycles did more than simply vow to stop performing the action of self-indulgence. They recognized and addressed the whole cycle at once by a process of substitution rather than by simple abstinence. For every step on the compulsive cycle, recovering addicts must substitute a feeling or an action that moves them toward happiness. That process is not one that can ever be accomplished by the behavioral addict alone. Because so much of the compulsive cycle is related to the addict's relationship with others, the transformation of the compulsive cycle to the joy cycle always involves the participation of people around the addict. Many of the recovering addicts we interviewed gave grateful tribute to professional counselors, although finding the "right" counselor for the individual addict seems to be crucial, and this choice should be made with great care. Others gave part of the credit for their recoveries to family members, Church leaders, or friends. We did not observe one case of a victim overcoming a compulsive cycle alone. The process of replacing the compulsive cycle with the joy cycle, then, is one in which not only the addict but also loved ones and counselors must be determined participants.

For addicts themselves, we believe that the focus of change must be on the two action steps on the compulsive cycle. On the other hand, those who desire to help the addict should turn most of their attention to the two feeling steps of the compulsive cycle, resisting the temptation to place heavy emphasis on restricting the addict's actions.

Because it is impossible to change one's feelings spontaneously without altering one's behavior, victims of the compulsive cycle must alter their actions first and then allow new feelings to arise in reaction to the new patterns of behavior. Actions of self-indulgence must be replaced by what we call actions of progression, and actions of self-concealment must be replaced by actions of self-disclosure. In the simpler terms of the scriptures, addicts must "confess and forsake" their sins.

The particular actions of progression that should replace the actions of self-indulgence will be different for each addict, depending on the personality and preferences of the individual. To qualify as an action of progression, however, an activity must fill two requirements: it must increase the addict's ability to learn or understand, and it must also increase the addict's ability to love. Exercising talents and serving others are the classic general examples of actions of progression. At first, a recovering addict might not find any activities as rewarding as the addictive behavior. Eventually, however, the intrinsic interest and enjoyment of actions of progression will come to seem more appealing than the actions of self-indulgence—provided that the addict is also careful to replace actions of self-concealment with actions of self-disclosure.

Actions of self-disclosure are performed almost constantly by most people. They are simply the small ways in which one shares one's self with other people. Conversations between friends or even acquaintances very often consist largely of individuals relating to each other how they feel and what they are thinking. Countless small self-disclosures tie most individuals to the community of people around them in a way that allows them to feel understood and included. Compulsive-cycle victims, because they hide such a large part of their activities, thoughts, and feelings from those who love them, understandably lack this security. To remedy this situation, we believe that addicts must at some point confess the real story of their compulsive behavior to some person or group of people whom they respect. Eventually, the story should be told at least to every person who has been somehow affected by the addict's actions. In the case of sins serious enough to require official Church action, Church leaders must be included among those to whom the addict discloses his or her "real" self. This disclosure is not to punish or humiliate the compulsive-cycle victim but to dispel the addict's belief that he or she will not be accepted or loved once the truth is revealed.

The positive effect of actions of self-disclosure can be all but destroyed if the person to whom the addict confesses reacts with an attitude of harshness or rejection. Therefore, those who desire to help the addict are most effective when they concentrate on helping the addict replace feelings of isolation with feelings of belonging and feelings of self-hatred with feelings of self-esteem. When a rescuer hears the whole story of an addict's struggle and then expresses interest in and love for the individual concerned, a huge step has been made toward making the first of these replacements. We have never seen a more dramatic transformation of personality than occurred in addicts we interviewed who finally told the horrible truth and found themselves loved nevertheless. On the other hand, the rescuer must avoid what researchers call "enabling" behavior: forgiving the addict so unconditionally that he or she sees no reason to forgo the addiction. To replace the addict's feelings of self-hatred with feelings of self-esteem, he or she must learn to recognize and deal with the social consequences of addictive behavior. The example of Christ, who loved sinners without giving any quarter to sin, is the single greatest field guide for helping addicts overcome self-hatred without giving in to their weaknesses.

If all the steps on the joy cycle can be substituted simultaneously for all the steps on the compulsive cycle, the addict will have begun a repentance that may prove to be the greatest source of happiness he or she has ever known. Usually many attempts at substitution must be made before the compulsive-cycle victim is completely freed from old habits and destructive responses to stress. Nevertheless, if the attempt at repentance is persistent, and especially if loved ones are there to provide unflagging encouragement, the addict can eventually become so firmly entrenched in the joy cycle that the compulsive cycle is all but forgotten. As the person develops the habit of sharing self with others in actions of self-disclosure, the emotional and spiritual closeness to others that follows will manifest itself in feelings of belonging. These feelings, which bring irrepressible happiness, tend to overflow spontaneously in actions of progression, which in turn give the former addict increasing feelings of self-esteem. Self-esteem makes the individual more able and willing to perform actions of self-disclosure, which bring even more feelings of belonging, and so on and on the cycle goes.

The description we have given of the compulsive cycle and its cure may sound convincing—we hope so, because it represents more than four years of careful observation and analysis on our part. Nevertheless, the discussion as it stands is incomplete. Compulsive or addictive behaviors are extraordinarily, frighteningly powerful. They are more than simple human errors: they are some of the destroyer's most effective tools. We believe that to ignore the spiritual aspect of an addict's affliction is to doom any therapy to eventual failure. The single thing of which our research most firmly convinced us is this: only the power of God and the atonement of Jesus Christ are sufficiently powerful to free victims of compulsive cycles. Every recovered behavioral addict we have encountered, either in person or through printed accounts, mentioned a submission to God (however they conceptualized Him) and a spiritual rebirth as turning points in their recovery. Most could recount a moment at which the power of the Atonement (whatever they called it) became clearly manifest in their lives. For others the process had been more gradual but equally unmistakable. The testimony these individuals gained of the Lord's infinite love and of the magnitude of His sacrifice for them became the central reality in their lives. To our surprise, these addicts and their loved ones often expressed gratitude for the very addiction that had led them to this testimony by all but destroying their lives. The knowledge that our Heavenly Father lives and that He loves us was worth more to them than the price they had paid in suffering.

It is our fervent desire that this account of our investigation into the compulsive cycle and its effects on believing Latter-day Saints will provide instruction or at least encouragement to someone whose life is being marred by addiction. Our understanding and our explanation of the compulsive cycle are far from perfect, and for that reason we urge the reader not to accept what we have written without careful thought and earnest prayer. We have seen, many times, the Lord's fulfillment of His promise to those who seek His counsel in understanding: "Be of good cheer, for I will lead you along. The kingdom is yours and the blessings thereof are yours, and the riches of eternity are yours." (D&C 78:18.)

If you think that the long despair of compulsive behavior has irrevocably separated you or a loved one from this promise, you are wrong. The gift of the Atonement is easily within reach and with it is a real, immediate, and immeasurable happiness. Behavioral addicts are no different from other mortals in their absolute need to take advantage of that gift. Nor are they different from others in being infinitely loved and valued by their Heavenly Parents, despite their sins. The destructive force of addiction is impressive, even awesome, but it pales in comparison to the power of the love of God. The reality of that love, rather than the horror of the compulsive cycle, is the central message of this book. We hope that we can somehow communicate the divinity and perfection of the plan of repentance through our own very human and imperfect efforts.
