Martha Nibley Beck, John C. Beck, Breaking the Cycle of Compulsive Behavior ( 1990)

2

The Body and Compulsive Behavior

Before we ever saw our second child and first son, Adam, we knew a great deal about his personality. When he was only an embryo, four inches long from head to toe, we learned that he would be a calm, friendly, sociable baby, eager to please, with a strong sense of humor and a pronounced stubborn streak. Four months after we were given this information, Adam made his entrance into this world. He conformed very closely to the description of his character we had been given before his birth. No one was surprised. There was nothing mystical about the foreknowledge we had gained. The information had come from a photograph of enlarged cells, which were taken from the fluid that surrounded Adam during his prenatal development. The photograph showed that each of our baby's cells contained an extra chromosome—the tiny packets of genetic information that tell an individual body how it should be built. Most human beings have twenty-three matched pairs of chromosomes. Adam has that, plus an extra chromosome in the twenty-first position. This condition, known as Down's syndrome, is understood to influence many aspects of physical and mental development. We were somewhat surprised to find how much it also directed the formation of Adam's personality and the way he responds to objects and events.

During the period that followed Adam's diagnosis and preceded his birth, we learned a great deal about the devastating effects a "genetic accident" can have. We found out more than we wanted to know about the many mental and physical problems that might characterize people with chromosomal anomalies of various kinds. But we also learned to feel lucky that our son has Down's syndrome rather than any number of other birth defects, for his condition carries with it the many wonderful attributes we have already mentioned. We have often been assured, and we have noticed in our own dealings with the handicapped, that Adam's loving, cheerful, buoyant personality is common to a great many people with Down's syndrome. As we awaited his birth, and as we watch his development, we also learned more profoundly than ever before about the nature of mortality and the significance of the physical body for so-called "normal" human beings. We have come to realize poignantly that for us, as well as for Adam and people like him, every aspect of behavior, including personality traits we may think of as completely metaphysical, might very well be influenced by our physical natures. Not only are our muscles and bones, our language ability, and our spatial cognition influenced by our genes but so are our moods, our feelings, and our responses to the world around us.

In our research, we have found that the behaviors we call compulsive cycles focus on some specific action of the physical body, such as eating, using drugs or alcohol, or engaging in sexual activity. As we will point out, we believe that the very potential for behaviors to fall into cycles is in part an attribute of the body. The physical nature of a compulsive cycle is perhaps most obvious in substance abuse, where a recognizable chemical addiction exists, but we found close parallels to this type of addiction in behaviors as diverse as shoplifting and looking at pornography. We also found that many compulsive-cycle victims we spoke with shared concepts about their physical natures that were not congruent with gospel teachings. Instead, their understanding of their physical natures was based on ideas about the body and the spirit that were derived from secular and non-Latter-day Saint religious sources. We found that these misconceptions helped keep individuals locked into addictive behaviors by clouding their understanding of their physical natures and hence of their moral dilemmas. Before we discuss compulsive cycles, then, we would like to point out some of the fallacies about the body and the spirit that pervade our society.

When a Latter-day Saint hears the question, "Why are we here on earth?" the answer is likely to pop out automatically: "To gain a body and to be tested." At the present point in the eternal progression of our existence, these two factors are indeed the focus of our education, and they are inextricably connected with each other. We believe that our spirits were already well-defined, knowledgeable, and intelligent before we were allowed to come to mortality. One primary thing that separated us from God was the experience of living in a physical body to learn to master it. That is an experience we were unable to comprehend in the premortal existence. It is the experience that even Jesus Christ lacked before his mortal ministry. It is this experience that all of us must have to become like our Father in Heaven. And so it is that even the noble and great spirits, whom Abraham saw in the premortal existence, must trail their clouds of glory into the ignominiously awkward and disobedient bodies created by mortal parents. Some spirits, like our son Adam's, find themselves born into bodies that might never fully accommodate them in this world. But even the original Adam, when he first came to the earth, found his incomprehensibly powerful spirit subject to a physical body with an unfamiliar nature of its own. One of his most important tasks was to come to an understanding of the body and its nature that would allow him to work in harmony with its powers and master its temptations. Latter-day Saints believe that all of his posterity share that important task.

The fundamental significance of that objective is matched by its difficulty. Satan has taken great pains not only to tempt the physical man but to mislead his intellectual and spiritual understanding of the body and its role. People who believe the sacred and secular philosophies that surround Latter-day Saints, especially in Western societies, view as strange or nonsensical the Latter-day Saint belief that the body is a central feature of mortality. "What importance could the body have?" might be the question put to Mormonism by the Judeo-Christian religious tradition that undergirds Western society. "The body is nothing but dross: vile, corrupt, and ephemeral. It is to overcome the body that we are here—to confine its appetites, flout its desires, and finally to escape from it into the bliss of a spiritual existence unencumbered by physicality. That is our purpose on earth." To most Western religions, the body is not only inessential but contradictory to the divine nature in man.

The influence of that idea is evident all around us. Our culture seems bent on forcing the "bad" body into a stereotype as far from nature as it can be. Our ideal of beauty is so rare that almost no one's body conforms to it naturally and certainly not for more than a few years. The physicality of the physical is futilely denied by the media myth that the natural attributes and capacities of the body—from six-week acne to childbearing to aging—are in fact unnatural things we should all hope to avoid. The bodies we see on television, in magazines, at the movies, do not seem to look or act or ache like ours do. The heroine never loses her tan, though she ostensibly lives in Siberia, and the hero springs back after seventeen brutal beatings, wincing only slightly, to whisk her away for a romantic interlude that seems to have no connection with procreation. They are not human figures. They are more like the gods of Valhalla or Olympus: eternally lovely, eternally young, eternally nothing like you or me. Our bodies, our cultural tradition tells us—our sinful, decrepit, mortal bodies—are disgusting shadows of these immortal figures.

And yet, with incalculable audacity, Joseph Smith dared to propound the notion that our bodies, the very ones we now possess, are themselves divine. Some Latter-day Saints seem to believe that in the resurrection we will become much like the movie stars whose appearance and abilities our society idolizes. Perhaps it is more likely that we will gain the wisdom to see beyond the "traditions of our fathers," which teach us that our bodies as we now know them are unacceptable and crude.

The religions that shaped many of our culture's attitudes have filled our environment with the idea that we can and should deny our physical nature. As members of the societies that formed around those religions, Latter-day Saints are constantly exposed to these erroneous ideas, often in the guise of truth itself. "Truth," says Eliza R. Snow in one of our most beloved hymns, "is reason." (Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985, no. 292.)

Truth as reason is the central tenet of the other major contributor to Western philosophy besides the Judeo-Christian religious tradition. Since the Age of Enlightenment, the gospel of rationality has occupied the premier position among the ideological doctrines of secular Western society. The response of this philosophy to the Latter-day Saint idea of mortality is opposite to the view of orthodox religion, but it is no less derogatory. "Here to gain a body?" the secular humanist might say. "How ridiculous. You cannot gain a body, for you are your body. We must celebrate the body, yes—we must use its capacities for enjoyment to the fullest—for there is nothing else." Western rationalism teaches that the spirit is an illusion, fabricated by the conjunction of molecules in our brains, and that those brains are dictated by laws of physics, which are utterly accidental and devoid of meaning. The truly honest and reasonable man, so the logic goes, must face the fact that his ideas of an immortal spirit are merely the desperate self-deceptions of a brain genetically programmed to deny the possibility of its own annihilation.

The cultural outgrowth of this philosophy might seem to be a negation of the Judeo-Christian denial of the physical. In fact, the two join hands in a sort of mad and paradoxical dance that dominates our popular culture. I am everything but my body, says the Judeo-Christian ethic. I am nothing but my body, says the tradition of rationality. And so as we are taught to loathe our bodies as nothing, we are also taught to indulge them as everything. If the body seems prone to gluttony, lust, or greed—fine! We deserve these little treats, don't we? After all, we're only here for a moment before we vanish into oblivion. "Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die." On the other hand, as you eat, make sure you don't gain any weight. As you drink, make sure you do it suavely, like the aristocrats in the commercials and not like the sad, sick figures you might see on the street or in a detoxification center. And before you make merry, get your teeth capped so that the manic grin of a mortal facing death will appear to be the brilliant smile of one impervious to mortality. Even the most mundane products of our culture, far divorced though they may be from overt philosophical thinking, can often be traced to these paradoxical ideologies, which claim that the body is everything and that the body is nothing. Woven together, these two traditions form much of the fabric of the society in which we live.

The ideas of the Judeo-Christian ethic and of rationalism are seductive not only because of the glamor they have each been accorded in our culture but also because they claim to rely on the two great principles of human understanding: faith in the revelations of God and development of the divine capacity to reason. The worldly corruptions of these two sources of knowledge are two of the most neatly packaged and effectively marketed products sold by the adversary.

Under the attractive wrappings, however, these ideas contain the same fundamental error: the assertion that the physical cannot be immortal. This single error forces mortal beings to fix their identity on either the spirit or the body: to choose between the two. This choice is more than unnecessary. It is deadly. The Lord has revealed to us, both anciently and through latter-day prophets, that "the elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy; and when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy." (D&C 93:33-34.) Satan would like nothing better than to see us cut off from "a fulness of joy." What better way to deceive the faithful and the honest in heart than to persuade them that faith or honesty must lead to the conclusion that either the spirit or the body is the soul of man?

This is not to say that Latter-day Saints have nothing to learn from those of other faiths. Like many of Satan's most effective lies, the lies of the world concerning the relationship of the mortal body and the eternal spirit are not outright inventions but twisted truths. These are the most effective forms of deception because they satisfy part of our need to continue discovering truth, which is born in each of us. After all, poison is most likely to kill when the fatal dose is mixed most imperceptibly with the tastiest and most nutritious food. We must all learn, as we must all eat, if we wish to continue our existence. The task is not to reject any "dish" of ideas served to us, for then our minds and souls would starve. The Lord has commanded us to "seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.) The object of that study and faith must be to discern the truth of an idea from the error it might contain, accepting what is good and nourishing and rejecting the errors, which can poison and destroy.

Our research convinced us that although they are flawed and incomplete, both the non-Latter-day Saint religious understanding of the body and the scientific findings that emerge out of rationalism do have a place in our understanding of our physical natures, of sin—especially addictive sin—and of the Atonement, which affords us the inestimable gift of repentance. We are told many times in the scriptures to "walk not after the flesh" (Romans 8:4), and yet latter-day doctrines teach that God Himself has a body of flesh and bone. Clearly, the Lord does not wish us to rid ourselves of the flesh. What, then, is meant by this injunction to "walk not after" it? Part of the answer might be found in the rationalist's claim that the body is "programmed" to seek its own comfort and maximize its own well-being. There is certainly some truth to this argument. In the scriptures we are told over and over that the natural man is an enemy to God. Successful and effective branches of human knowledge, especially the social sciences, are based on analysis of the ways in which human beings "naturally" behave; however, Latter-day Saints add to that understanding of man's nature the crucial belief that there is an immortal intelligence placed in the body, which, until this mortal stage of existence, has been separate from it. That intelligence is not subject to the same inclinations as the physical body. There are instances, as we have seen in our son with Down's syndrome, where the body can cloud the spirit's understanding. Like Adam, if not to the same extent, we are all affected by the nature we inherit in ways that may be complex and difficult to understand.

The idea that genetic inheritance has a profound effect on our behavior is vividly illustrated by the predictable ways in which behavior changes for individuals whose genes are abnormally constituted. But a physical or mental handicap is not the only reason such confusion of the spirit may occur. Consider the terrible ways in which the "sins of the fathers" might be "visited upon the children." One example might be an abused child who grows into a well-meaning adult. Having been abused by his parents, such an individual might abhor the thought that he himself would ever strike his children. And yet, studies show that when he finds himself under pressure and unable to cope with those children, the grown abused child is very likely to become a child abuser. Once we understand that this behavior is the only instruction in parenting that he ever received from his own parents, we might feel that it is terrible but nonetheless natural that he might resort to such behavior. Less frightening and more familiar is the example of a child whose parents offer food as consolation for every injury and reward for every success. "Naturally" such a child might grow up with a tendency to use food for emotional sustenance. A similar "natural" process seems to be at work in people with compulsive sexual behaviors: a great many of them appear to have experienced sexual molestation as children.

The behavioral sciences, which have uncovered these patterns in human action, have helped many people understand the roots of problem behaviors. The "natural man"—which is the only part of man such science acknowledges—does seem to base its actions on some kinds of conditioning. That is the learning of the carnal mind, which teaches the body to avoid pain and seek pleasure. Untempered, the carnal mind leads to the selfish and destructive fulfillment of appetites. As Alma told Corianton, "all men that are in a state of nature, or I would say, in a carnal state, are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; they are without God in the world, and they have gone contrary to the nature of God." (Alma 41:11; italics added.) Here Alma uses the word nature to refer both to the sinful state of man and to the essence of divinity. What is the difference? The man who is in a state of nature is in a carnal state, but that does not mean merely that such a man possesses a body. After all, Alma has just informed his son that at the resurrection "the soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul." (Alma 40:23.) The human body in and of itself does not constitute that carnal nature that is contrary to the nature of God. Rather, it seems that the submission of the intelligent spirit to the "natural" inclinations of the mortal body lies at the root of the problem.

In Doctrine and Covenants 93, the Lord elucidates the relationship between our physical nature, with its conditioned behaviors and selfish appetites, and the nature of the immortal spirit. This remarkable revelation explains much of the apparent contradiction between our carnal nature and our divine nature:

"For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy;

"And when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy.

"The elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God, even temples; and whatsoever temple is defiled, God shall destroy that temple.

"The glory of God is intelligence, or in other words, light and truth.

"Light and truth forsake that evil one.

"Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God." (Vv. 33-38.)

According to this great scripture, we are not born into sin by inheriting mortal bodies. On the contrary, by taking on a physical nature we become "the tabernacle of God." Nevertheless, mortality does expose us for the first time to the temptations of the natural man. But the Lord points out that His evaluation of our actions rests on our understanding of our own behavior. As infants, at the stage of mortality when we are most selfish, most dominated by the nature of our bodies, we are paradoxically "innocent before God." Why is a baby incapable of sin? Not because he is unselfish or because he denies the appetites of his body but because he is incapable of understanding the nature of selfishness or appetite. He has not yet had the opportunity to evaluate his actions through "light and truth," which constitute intelligence. Once he is able to understand his actions through godlike intelligence, once he has eaten from the tree of knowledge, he will be capable of defiling—or glorifying—the temple of his body.

One great problem of mortality is that we do not grow from our infant state of innocence into a state of knowledge without receiving pressures from the physical condition of the world, from the errant ways of those around us, or from Satan, who claims to be the god of this world. Often, like children who are mistaught in their infancy, we fall victim to sin before we are fully capable of understanding why. Our mentally retarded son Adam, because of the nature of his body, may perform behaviors that are against the laws of God simply because he does not fully comprehend the nature of his actions. His case is extreme, but it is not unique. Each of us inherits a body, which acts before we have divine understanding of its motivations. Doctrine and Covenants 93 continues:

"And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers." (V. 39.)

Satan and his servants are working on us, unfairly and treacherously, from the moment we assume mortality. Sometimes, as this scripture tells us, in committing acts of disobedience we simply follow their counsel instead of the Lord's. Sometimes, like the child abuser, the overeater, or the sexual offender mentioned above, we owe part of our transgression to the "tradition of our fathers." That these actions may be unconsciously motivated or result from the misused free agency of others does not mean that the actions are not wrong. The fact that the child abuser was himself abused might make his actions understandable, but it does not make them good. Nor does our ignorance transform even the smallest of our sins to virtues—and we all have sins. In all of history, there has only been one Person on the earth who did not succumb to any of the various pressures of mortality. "If justice be thy plea," says Shakespeare's Portia to Shylock, "consider this: that in the course of justice, none of us should see salvation." That is why, Portia continues, "we do pray for mercy." (The Merchant of Venice; italics added.)

Commenting, as Shakespeare does, on the universal sorrow that would result from the nature of men in the course of simple justice, Alma explains the way in which mercy is offered to all of us: "And thus we see that all mankind were fallen, and they were in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consigned them forever to be cut off from his presence.

"And now, the plan of mercy could not be brought about except an atonement should be made; therefore God himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also." (Alma 42:14-15; italics added.)

God did not create us with the potential for unintended sins or uncontrollable appetites and then abandon us to the consequences. He did not make us vulnerable to the pain and pressure inflicted by the free agency of the wicked and then condemn us for being hurt or twisted. In order that we might have the subjective experience of weighing and feeling both good and evil and emerge from that experience whole, Jesus Christ assumed the consequences of our sins Himself. "Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. . . . he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed." (Isaiah 53:4-5.)

Each human being is given the light of Christ by which he may know whether his actions are good or evil. That is all we need in order to overcome the sins of the natural man, for we are not expected to pay the consequences for every action that falls short of godliness. The Lord merely entreats us to repent of our incorrect behavior when we recognize that it is wrong. As we stumble through mortality like bulls in a china shop, smashing objects we are far too poor to replace, He requires only that we recognize the damage and do our best to correct it. He has paid for our destruction already, so that we might have the chance to go into the shop without bankrupting ourselves. The Lord's prophets "say nothing but repentance unto this generation" (D&C 6:9), not to condemn us for our imperfections, but to encourage us to accept the Atonement, which ransoms us from paying the price of nature by ourselves. Repentance is not a burden. It is a gift.

Part of the process of repentance is that we learn, through our errors, to understand our physical nature so that we may become one with it. Because of the Lord's unimaginable sacrifice, there is only one group of mortals for whom "there is no forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come." (D&C 76:34.) These are they who, "having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves," will "go away into everlasting punishment." (Vv. 36, 44.) The difference between this type of sin and all others is that the denial of the Holy Spirit, which by definition "enlighteneth our understanding" (Alma 38:28), is committed in full personal understanding of the sin and its implications. "For behold," says Alma, "if ye deny the Holy Ghost when it once has had place in you, and ye know that ye deny it, this is a sin which is unpardonable." (Alma 39:6.) Just as we have no need for the Atonement until we obtain some understanding of our behavior, we do not become ineligible for forgiveness until that understanding is complete. A son of perdition, having partaken of the light of Christ, understands the plan of salvation. He has been filled with the light and truth that Alma defines as godlike intelligence. He knows himself and the consequences of his actions, and he chooses with full understanding to deny Christ and refuse the gift of the Atonement. The Lord will never violate our free agency, just as He could not deny Lucifer's when that son of the morning knowingly chose damnation. Even the supernal gift of the Atonement cannot force redemption on one who understands sin with the understanding of a God and chooses it nevertheless.

Most of us never have the opportunity to make such a choice. Our sins are sins of partial comprehension, of ill-gotten conditioning, of mistaking the desires of the carnal mind for those of the spiritual intelligence. The sins of the natural man are not the choices of Lucifer but the blunderings of spirits who search for a half-remembered heaven by pursuing the weak rewards of earth. Psychologists who claim that our brains and bodies are programmed to follow such reinforcements seem to be right in many cases. What their mechanistic theories do not account for, however, is that understanding our errors can often allow us to correct them. If the child abuser, overeater, or sexual offender can learn to identify the true causes for the undesirable actions, the person will have a better chance at controlling them—an idea that constitutes one of the cornerstones of modern psychology. The sciences that claim that we are only carnal beings, and nothing more, can show that comprehension often brings control. But they do not logically explain what it is within us that can change conditioned actions through the process of understanding. They cannot. For they do not acknowledge the existence of the spirit, and it is the spirit that understands, the spirit that changes, the spirit that makes it possible for us to allow Jesus Christ to atone for the sins of the natural man. The study of the physical body and its nature is part of the spirit's gaining that understanding. The role of the spirit, as the scriptures show, is not to eschew the nature we gain when we assume a physical body but to direct that nature toward the good.

"Bridle all your passions," said Alma to his son Corianton, "that ye may be filled with love." (Alma 38:12.) This simple and profound phrase is evidence of the wisdom of a prophet who understood that the spirit and the body are both integral parts of the soul. A bridle is not an instrument with which a vicious beast is forced into submission. It is a tool of guidance, of communication, between a valuable animal and its human rider. Left without governance, an unbridled horse, like the natural man, will turn to the satiation of its appetites because it sees no reason not to. If the horse is abused or tormented or forced to abandon altogether the good and wholesome aspects of natural appetites, it will use every device at its disposal to escape, circumvent, or flout the impossible demands of an unreasonable master. But if it is loved, valued, and guided by a hand that understands its needs and nourishes it without overindulgence, the horse, like the body, can take its rider to objectives that can profit both of them—objectives that the animal would not reach without the rider's knowledge and the rider could not reach without the horse's strength.

We believe that compulsive cycles arise "naturally" in some individuals when they are exposed to certain conditions. Research suggests that at least some forms of addictive behavior have a physical component. Alcoholism is a good example. Many scientists believe that the potential to become severely addicted to alcohol is carried in some individuals' genetic makeup. If a person who is genetically predisposed to alcoholism is exposed to liquor, so the theory goes, he or she is more likely to become severely addicted to alcohol than is a person with different genes. Some researchers have claimed that other addictions, such as sexual promiscuity and homosexuality, are also "in the genes." They use this claim to argue that such behaviors should be accepted by society. Although we disagree with this claim, this book is not designed to argue against it. We are not "value-neutral"; we write to believing Latter-day Saints who wish to rid themselves of addictive behaviors, and not to others who wish to defend those behaviors as morally acceptable. Our research has convinced us that whether or not a genetic predisposition is involved, some individuals seem more likely than others to respond to a particular experience by becoming addicted to that type of behavior. Certain surrounding conditions—for example, the intense pressure and minimal structured time of a college student's schedule—seem to make the individual even more likely to develop such an addiction. Compulsive behaviors come in infinite variety, but the common pattern described by all the people we interviewed makes us believe that the course of almost all these addictions is remarkably similar. The natural man seems prone to this pattern of behavior. It develops without conscious effort and often in spite of the resistance of the addict.

That is the pattern we have called the compulsive cycle. It is one of the most devastating errors of the natural man, for those who become trapped by it often do not understand the nature of their dilemma—and understanding is an integral part of change and repentance. One of the most pronounced differences between the people we spoke with who managed to free themselves from their addiction, and those who remained addicted, seemed to be that the first group understood that the sin was part of a cycle. This understanding was a key element in these individuals' repentance. For, as we have pointed out, the intelligence, or spirit, is able to control the behavior of the natural man insofar as it understands that behavior. The testimonies of the compulsive-cycle victims we spoke to—including the accounts of the three individuals, Ellen Schor, Bill Stewart, and Warren White, whose cases we follow in describing the cycle—were often unsettling and sad. Nevertheless, in general the self-descriptions of these compulsive-cycle victims were marked by courageous honesty. Especially in the cases of those who repented of their sins, we believe that they told us the truth about their lives. In their accounts of their addictions we have seen enacted the simple and eloquent words of the Savior: "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:31-32.)
