Martha Nibley Beck, John C. Beck, Breaking the Cycle of Compulsive Behavior ( 1990)

3

The First Step: Feelings of Isolation

There is no true "first step" in a cycle: by definition, a cycle works as an unbroken continuum. The behavioral addicts we spoke with in our research did not remember a distinct beginning to their compulsive cycles, although they sometimes remembered the first time they became involved with their particular actions of self-indulgence. Looking back over their lives, people who were in the midst of an addiction often remembered themselves before the problem began as "accidents waiting to happen." These people seem to have decided retroactively that the behavior to which they were addicted had always been a part of their natures and that their entrapment in the compulsive cycle was therefore inevitable. They remembered themselves as leaves floating along on a stream that had eventually dragged them under. By contrast, people who had successfully repented of habitual sins saw this "selective memory," which they had exercised during their addictions, as part of the addiction itself. Recovering compulsive-cycle victims felt that their recollections of childhood were more balanced and accurate after they had broken the cycle than those memories had been when they were actively involved in the addiction. They thought they could remember a time when they were not involved in addictive behavior. Unlike the actively addicted subjects, they did not think they had been floating on a current of potential addiction all their lives. They did not think they had "always been this way." They could pinpoint times when they believed they had fallen or been pushed into the stream of compulsive behavior.

Despite these differences in their personalities and experiences, all the people we interviewed recounted remarkably similar feelings, which they claimed had led them to behavioral addiction. Feelings of emptiness and loneliness were the water of the stream that had surrounded them before the compulsive cycle caught them. Those feelings did not change qualitatively when they entered the cycle; the water simply became deeper and the current stronger. We have labeled these painful sensations "feelings of isolation." Because they seem to be so universal and can begin so early in life for so many reasons, feelings of isolation constitute the stage of the cycle which most nearly approaches the first step.

One of the most frightening aspects of mortal life is the capacity each of us possesses to feel utterly and irredeemably alone. Perhaps feelings of isolation were present in previous stages of our existence, but surely the loneliness of this "lone and dreary world" can be as devastating as anything we might have experienced elsewhere. Jesus Christ, who sought solitude often during His mortal ministry, nevertheless entreated His disciples to "watch with me" (Matthew 26:38) as He approached the terrible suffering of Gethsemane. Instead, they fell asleep, and as the resurrected Christ later told Joseph Smith, "I have overcome and have trodden the wine-press alone." (D&C 76:107.) It was in the garden and later on the cross, as He took our sins upon him and "descended below all things" (D&C 88:6), that Jesus experienced the ultimate spiritual isolation possible in the human estate. There is no more powerful image of this loneliness in all literature than that evoked by Jesus' exclamation on the cross: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matthew 27:46.)

Each of us, as we sojourn on the earth, experiences some shadow of the agony of Christ's isolation during His atonement. The great promise of the gospel, made possible by that ultimate sacrifice, is that we need not be alone forever. Many of the most sacred ordinances of the Church concern the sealing of human beings to each other and to God, with a power that will maintain those relationships throughout eternity. Each of us knows from personal experience that "it is not good for man to be alone." (Moses 3:18.) The search for companionship, for the unconditional love that binds souls to each other, is one of the most powerful forces that drives us from our infancy onward. The ultimate source for that love is of course the Lord Himself, who is love. Most of us, however, first come to a mortal understanding of that love through the medium of our fellow human beings. And yet the physical conditions of this world, including factors like death and time, which are unfamiliar to our spirits, create inexorable barriers that separate us. One great challenge we face on earth is the same one that Christ himself underwent—to confront temptation and suffering within the confines of our own free wills, to "work out our salvation in fear and trembling" in a condition of isolation.

The people we talked to who had been trapped in compulsive cycles did not describe their feelings of isolation in quite such ultimate terms. What they mentioned without exception, however, was the core of loneliness that lay at the heart of their behaviors. No matter what the behavior, the why seemed invariably to come down to loneliness: to a sense of being different or alien, to the feeling that the person involved in this behavior was ultimately not lovable. Interview after interview followed a common pattern. The first response to the question, "Why do you perform this habitual action that you know is destructive?" would be something unique to the respondent's personality or situation: "I learned it from a friend and just got hooked," or "I guess I kind of wanted my parents' attention," or "It just seemed fun." If that first response was followed up by a second question—"Why did you get hooked?" "Why did you want your parents' attention?" "Why did it seem fun?"—the answers that came back would begin to speak of loneliness, isolation, and the person's own conviction that he or she was unlovable. "I felt like one of the group when I was doing it." "I just wanted to know my parents cared." "While I was doing it, I would forget for a while that I was basically a bad person."

Let us repeat that these people did not appear at all unusual. In fact, most of them seemed to have better than average evidence in their lives that they were worthwhile and loved. But what we came to realize, as we conducted our interviews, is that every person who ever comes to earth has some difference, some real or imagined inadequacy, some factor that might indeed set him or her apart from others. There are as many ways to feel different and alone as there are human beings, for each of us is unique and our understanding of one another is far from perfect.

At the times when we spoke to them, many of our subjects were in the midst of a long-term addictive behavior. This fact no doubt dominated their responses during the interviews. Nevertheless, it was interesting to see that all of them were unconvinced, emotionally and spiritually, that they could be loved unconditionally by other people or, especially, by their Father in Heaven. Although they agreed to the concept intellectually, they did not believe it in their hearts. If asked directly, they would willingly admit to the feeling that some part of them, the part they often identified as "the real me," was unlovable and therefore utterly, achingly, endlessly alone. Involvement in destructive cycles fed into this isolation and eventually created the terrible degree of loneliness we saw in people with long-term problems. But we believe that at some point it was the feeling of differentness, the ubiquitous "certain something [that] whispers 'you're a stranger here' " (Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, no. 292), that enticed our subjects into an addictive action and pushed the compulsive cycle into its first deadly revolution.

Often, the experiences a person had had within the family of birth had contributed to the form the compulsive cycle took in that particular person. Occasionally it was clear how "sins of the fathers" had translated directly into similar actions by children. For example, a child who had seen his parents take drugs thought nothing of doing so himself as soon as he found an opportunity. A girl whose mother was abandoned by her father tried to replace him by engaging in promiscuous relationships with men. But the vast majority of the people we spoke with emphasized that they came from good families, that their parents loved and provided for them, and that they had been taught correct ways throughout their lives. Their involvement in compulsive cycles seemed to be less tied to anything their families had done incorrectly or had failed to do correctly, than to a combination of many influences in their lives and the ways they interpreted or misinterpreted others' actions—and always, to the sense that for some reason, they were different and alone.

The examples of Ellen Schor, Bill Stewart, and Warren White might serve to illustrate how very different situations can create similar feelings of isolation and contribute to the beginning of a compulsive cycle. The comparison of these three case histories is notable for the differences between the individuals mentioned but also for the common themes. It is important to point out that, while these three subjects are in many ways exemplary of the people we interviewed, we have no empirical basis for claiming that they are typical of all those with similar problems. We are not experts on the addictive behaviors exhibited by these individuals. Nor do we claim that the incidents we record here were necessarily the factors that "made" Ellen, Bill, and Warren turn to their addictions. The case histories that follow are simply the stories told to us, in retrospect, by three people who had worked through addictive behaviors. The following incidents are their subjective accounts of important events that might have helped direct them into problem behavior.

Ellen Schor was a surprise baby, one who had been born several years after her parents believed their family was complete. Although the entire family was thrilled by her birth, Ellen always knew that they had not planned on it. She was an accident, however happy that accident might be. She wondered if that had had some detrimental effect on her development, for as she grew up, Ellen realized she was different from other little girls. For one thing, she liked books on science and history better than dolls. For another, she was not turning out to be the beautiful princess she was supposed to be. She had a rather large nose and extremely short legs, and no one on television looked anything like her. Ellen pinned her hopes for loveliness on the Grimm brothers' tale of the ugly duckling and retreated into her schoolwork when the other girls talked about clothes or hairstyles.

Her academic diligence soon earned Ellen a reputation for being aloof and bookish, which made her teachers favor her and her peers avoid her. Out of devotion to the teachers, who clearly liked her even when the other children didn't, Ellen worked harder than ever to rise to the top of her class. By the time she was twelve she was so far ahead of her classmates that she was encouraged to skip from the seventh grade directly into her freshman year of high school. Accepting the consensus of her parents and teachers that this advancement would be a remarkable experience, Ellen started high school at thirteen.

She soon discovered that her teachers and parents had been right. It was a remarkable experience, being singled out and given so much attention—much, Ellen thought, like being chosen to sit on the trapdoor at a carnival so people can throw baseballs at you in hopes of knocking you into a vat of water and watching you drown. Ellen was even less socially adept, by comparison with her new schoolmates, than she had been in her own age group. To make matters worse, the onset of adolescence had added acne and a slight but distinct chubbiness to her private catalogue of unacceptable physical attributes. She decided that those must be the reasons everyone else in her new school seemed to have so many friends and so much fun while she ate lunch alone and filled her after-school hours with more study than ever. High school seemed to be populated exclusively by girls who looked like Miss America, and boys who looked at the girls, and, of course, smart fat ugly pockmarked accidental little Ellen, who looked for comfort in too many chocolate chip cookies.

Ellen had almost given up on the Brothers Grimm and their famous duckling when a wonderful thing happened. She caught hepatitis. She missed the last month of classes and nearly died while the disease ran its course, something she vastly preferred to attending school. Ellen spent most of that time in an exhausted daze, with neither the strength nor the desire to get out of bed. On the June morning when she finally managed to totter dizzily down the stairs to her sister's bedroom, she was met by an astonishing spectacle—her own reflection in her sister's full-length mirror. There she was, a month older, years wiser, and—glory be—nearly twenty pounds thinner than the last time she had seen herself. Ellen leaned against the doorjamb and gazed in rapture. She, Ellen Schor, was thin! She admired herself with unabashed delight. Certainly her face would never amount to much, but from the neck down, she thought, she could be on a magazine cover. Thin! Ellen made a happy little leap into the air and passed out cold.

That summer, as she regained strength, Ellen made a secret pact that she would not regain weight. She began to read up on the latest diets, trying them all with varying degrees of success. She memorized calorie charts and carefully measured her food. When her weight began to creep up, she started a jogging program and brought it back down. Staying thin took a lot of effort. Nevertheless, Ellen found that she could control her body. With this realization came a self-confidence she had never felt before. She bought herself new clothes as rewards for self-discipline, accumulating a modest but attractive wardrobe. When school started, she found herself no longer intimidated (well, not so very much) by the gorgeous specimens of femininity who flocked through the classrooms. Nor was she so afraid that the boys who lined the halls at class break would jeer at her as she walked past. She began to smile and talk to acquaintances, and soon she found some of them becoming friends. They laughed at her jokes and even seemed to admire her academic prowess. They apparently didn't realize that she was younger than they. They convinced her to try out for the pep squad. She made it.

For the first time she could ever remember, Ellen felt that she belonged. She now did everything done by everyone else her age, with one notable exception: she never ate with anyone. For deep in her heart Ellen knew the source of her newfound popularity, and she therefore knew that food was her deadliest enemy. When she returned home from school in the afternoons, she could see in every family portrait the hideous image of the old friendless Ellen. She wished she could burn the pictures. She hated their evidence that somewhere, frozen in the past and lurking behind every corner of the future, was Ellen the Fat. Obviously, she thought, it was her weight loss that had transformed her from the unappealing lump she had been into the vivacious person she now pretended to be. She shuddered to think what would happen if her new friends found out that she had once been so fat—or, worse, that she could become that heavy again. With every ounce of her impressive determination, Ellen clung to and nourished the behaviors that she knew could keep her monstrously rebellious body from achieving its former unbelievable bulk. For she believed without question that if the pounds returned—or even one pound, for that matter—the fragile sense of belonging she had built would vanish like the fairy tale it seemed to be. Ellen at fourteen was enlisted in a self-proclaimed war between her body and her happiness. The compulsive cycle had begun to turn.

Bill Stewart was the oldest of nine children, and for ten years the only boy in his family. As a child he was constantly aware of the need for him to be the "little man of the house," to imitate his kind but silent father and offer constant support to his mother and sisters. Bill's personality, however, was closer to that of his exuberant mother than his father. When he was still very small, Bill's mother would spend hours singing to him, and he would join in lustily with his baby voice until she burst into laughter and the song stopped. These were the happiest times of Bill's life. When his twin sisters were born, Bill decided quite without prompting that the singing sessions were over. It was time for him to be a man, and men sang only in church. At age three, Bill had bid a sad farewell to his childhood—a fact that would have horrified his parents if they had known.

Bill imitated not only his father's quiet demeanor but also his independence and self-sufficiency. Samuel Stewart had been a child during the depression, when his part-time job at a lumberyard had provided a sizable proportion of the income for his entire family. He had learned to place hard work and frugality among the premier virtues possible—especially for a man. When Samuel married, he thrilled with quiet pride at his ability to provide a comfortable and well-appointed home for his bride. Watching her flourish in the house he bought and maintained with the labor of his own hands, Samuel felt rewarded for every weary hour of work. Bill never knew that on the day he had come home from the hospital, while his mother had been sleeping an exhausted sleep, Samuel had picked up the fragile bundle in his callused hands, kissed the baby reverently on the forehead, and promised without words that someday Bill would know the same joy he felt at that moment. He would teach his son to build a family as he had done, without complaint and without assistance. He could think of no greater gift.

What Bill did know, although it was never spoken openly, was that his father expected him to provide for himself. Even in grade school, he sensed that asking for money for the toys and snacks his friends bought would be unacceptable—he never even tried it. When he lost a two-dollar reader from the school library, Bill went straight to the librarian to ask for work in order to pay back the money. He was sure if his father found out about his loss of this valuable object, there would be no forgiveness. He had no idea that the librarian had called his father to praise his honesty and resourcefulness and would never have believed that Samuel had nearly burst with pride and love for his son when he had received the call. Nothing was said. In Bill's eyes, his profligacy remained a dreadful secret.

The unmanly Bill, he decided, the Bill who lost money and threw away opportunities, was the same infant Bill who had joined in his mother's musical effervescence and sense of humor. Ashamed of his weaknesses, Bill would have sent that part of himself into a lifelong solitary confinement, if it had not been for one thing. To be more accurate, eight things. As the eldest, Bill was often assigned to help his mother with the care of his younger siblings. The quiet, studious teenager who did his schoolwork and assisted his father in stoic silence was transformed when Bill found himself alone with his younger brothers and sisters. They were surrounded by a magic world where the need for self-sufficiency was irrelevant, and the secret Bill, greedy for a sense of connection, could romp in heady freedom. Bill was the idol of his siblings. When he was not with them, the memory of their admiration made him struggle even harder to be a strong and independent man.

When Bill's father suggested that he not return from college for the summer after his freshman year, the public Bill had hardly even noticed. Certainly, that was the logical thing to do. It made perfect financial sense, and the public Bill accepted it without a second thought. It was the secret, weak Bill, nearly invisible now, whose unmanly heart had ached at the thought that he would not see his youngest sister's "terrible two's" or teach his four-year-old brother to throw a football. He refused to listen to the voice of the secret Bill. He refused to acknowledge that it even had a voice. He could not understand his vague but inescapable malaise and never consciously called it loneliness.

Jenny burst into that loneliness when it had grown so large that Bill felt little else. She was the opposite of everything Bill had tried to become. She was energetic and outgoing, like his mother. She wanted him to laugh with her. With Jenny he was three years old again, never caring about the need to stay wrapped inside himself. Jenny had one trait his mother did not: she spent money as though it rained on her from the sky. Jenny had never saved a dollar, and she worked to supplement an already generous allowance from her parents. Bill's extreme carefulness with money and the seemingly impossible task of saving for a mission while he supported himself at college had become a kind of necessary obsession. But he was tired of thinking about money—how to earn it, how to save it, how to spend it, and, more to the point, how not to spend it. Jenny never, ever, thought about such things. Money and fun flowed from her equally freely, without being measured, divided, or reserved. To Bill, her life seemed to consist of every forbidden and wonderful thing.

Still, he was plagued by his own stiffly trained exterior. The secret, soft, spendthrift part of Bill had been isolated for so long that it seemed reluctant to come out into the light. Bill longed to be a part of Jenny's group of friends, but he lacked the familiarity with their way of life to fit in effortlessly. He felt awkward, and sometimes lonelier than ever. The first time Jenny offered him recreational drugs, the public Bill was appalled. But the child he remembered when he was with Jenny had been ignorant of danger and easily manipulated, and in a way it was that child who trustingly agreed to join in the "fun." Bill quieted the part of him that screamed a warning against the drugs by assuring himself that it would only be this once. "This once" turned out to be the first time since leaving his family that not even the smallest part of Bill felt cold and lost and alone. It would be years before he broke free from his compulsive cycle.

When Warren White was three years old, his uncle Joseph turned to Warren's mother and said, "Whew! This one's a lady-killer, just like his dad!" Susan Paxton White blushed and laughed, agreeing. Warren's translucent skin, his opal blue eyes, and his dark thick hair reflected every nuance of his father's handsome face.

To Susan and her husband, Don, Warren was the perfect child, the unexpected reward after a long and discouraging wait. It had been nearly ten years after their marriage that Warren was conceived, long after the tests and procedures and treatments for the Whites' infertility had been given up as useless. They had thought of him as their miracle baby before he was born, and after his birth he lived up to the promise. Bright, sweet, beautiful, and affectionate, he was everything Don and Susan had ever imagined in a son. Watching him, Susan often thought—though she never would have said so—that the luster from the other side of the veil had never quite left Warren. From the time he was very little, she noticed him playing privately in a world formed and peopled in the endless reaches of his imagination. Toys and television were there to be enjoyed, but Warren seemed happiest with the playthings Susan could not see.

If she had been able to enter Warren's invisible world, Susan probably never would have left. It was a marvelous place, full of colors and sounds seldom seen on earth, with people of heroic stature and character doing thrilling, wonderful things on every hand. Warren was the king, except on the days he was the deputy sheriff. (Usually these were the days when the sheriff—his father—was out of town.) As chief ruler and protector of the populace, Warren's sworn duty was to rid the world of evil and injustice.

That was one reason it upset him so to have both his uncle and his own mother label him a lady-killer. Apparently, there was some hereditary component to this alarming identity, for Uncle Joseph had specifically mentioned Don White as sharing his son's subconsciously murderous inclinations. Warren looked at his mother and Uncle Joseph gravely. Joseph repeated his outrageous accusation. "Isn't that right, Warren? You're going to be some lady-killer when you grow up!" Susan saw Warren's face go pale, and each of his cheeks showed a bright red spot where the blood always rushed when her son's emotions ran too high for him to contain them.

"No!" Warren shouted.

Uncle Joseph looked startled.

"Mommy, I'm not a lady-killer! I don't kill ladies! I save ladies!"

The laughter that ensued echoed for years as Joseph and Susan related Warren's childish misunderstanding during different family gatherings and nostalgic visits. The imagination Warren had shown and the passion with which he responded were some of the qualities his family loved most in him—and in each other, for both the Whites and the Paxtons were known for their willingness to dream wonderful things and to bring them about through steadfast energy of purpose. Everyone on both sides of the family was proud of little Warren. And no one ever explained to him exactly what they meant by "lady-killer."

He soon forgot about the incident. Still, it raised questions that never quite stopped bothering him. What was this thing, referred to so often by adults and especially on television, magazines, and movies, that he did not quite understand? What knowledge were grown-ups privy to that he was not—knowledge that seemed so central and important to the workings of the world? For a while Warren incorporated this unknown Thing, this bad and dirty Thing, this alluring and wonderful Thing, into his imaginary world. He was not quite sure what it would turn out to be, but he knew it was important.

Secretly he hoped it would be a friend. Warren was lonely in his imaginary world, just as he was at the parties his parents held for their friends, where he would listen as the adults talked and laughed about things Warren neither cared about nor understood. For his adored parents' sake, he sat quietly in his uncomfortable bow tie through endless evenings with no one but grown-ups. But he retreated often to the wonderful world in his mind where vicious pigs and alligators fell before his sword as he, King Warren, quested through the land in search of someone with whom he could plan and plot and play.

When he was five, the quest ended. Warren knew vaguely that babies grew in their mommies' tummies, and he had also noticed that his mother was gaining some girth around the middle, but he never put the two together until one day Don and Susan asked him if he would like a little brother or sister. Susan laughed merrily at the blank look on her son's face, at the sudden look of understanding that brought the familiar pallor to his face and the two hot pink spots to his cheeks. "Yes!" Warren shouted, and ran to his room for a furious session of saving his mother from the pigs and alligators who would undoubtedly pursue her during her daring mission as his new brother's protector. He knew it was a brother. How else could the baby become the next Deputy Sheriff, once he, Warren, had inherited his father's badge?

One night, Warren awoke with the hair standing up on his arms and the back of his neck. He lay there, trembling, wondering what the sound was that had awakened him, when it came again. It was his mother's voice, but not his mother's voice: a strange, animal cry, half anguish and half despair, like nothing he had ever heard before in his life. He knew before his father came into his room that he was not to ask what was happening. He knew that when his Uncle Joseph and Aunt Della arrived in slippers and overcoats and told him everything would be all right, that he must not complain about his parents' sudden departure. He knew, during the long night they spent at the hospital, that everything was not going to be all right. And he knew, when his father arrived alone at dawn and told him Mommy would be home later, that his brother would not be coming home with her.

What Warren did not expect, what he was not prepared for in any way, was what he saw when he crept back into the living room for comfort after his father tucked him into bed that sleepless night. Uncle Joseph and Aunt Della were standing awkwardly in the living room, trying not to watch as Don sat on the couch with his hands over his face and sobbed. Della patted his father's shoulder helplessly.

"It's all right, Don. It's all right. I know how I felt when I had my miscarriage. It's terrible, but it passes."

Warren's father looked up through swollen eyelids and tried to laugh.

"I know, Della, I know. It's not the baby . . . well, yes, it is the baby—did I tell you he lived for nearly ten minutes? I had a chance to bless him . . . so tiny. . . . "

Joseph and Della nodded.

"But, no, it's not the baby, it's Susan. She wanted this baby so much. She was so happy. What will this do to her, after all these years? It'll kill her. It'll kill her. And, I . . . I . . . "

Warren watched transfixed as his father's face contorted with pain and grief.

"I feel like it's all my fault! I did this to her! It's my fault—if it weren't for me she'd have all the kids she wanted. She'd be happy! It's all my fault!"

Warren turned and fled down the hall to his room. In some corner of his brain he could hear his Aunt Della's voice, sharp with reprimand: "Now, Don, you just stop that! It's not your fault, and you do make her happy, and the two of you'll be having children for eternity, so just you stop this!" But the memory of the agony on his father's face and the desperation in his voice dominated Warren's acute imagination. So this was it. This was how he and his father were destined to kill ladies. It fit, it resonated in Warren's mind. The fear and sorrow that flooded his small consciousness were almost too much for him to bear. He went to the imaginary world where he had always found comfort and happiness, but it had been laid waste by the horrible monster that was killing his mother and had killed, irrevocably killed, his brother. It was barren and hideous and frightening. Just before he fell into an exhausted sleep, five-year-old Warren closed the door to his ravaged imaginary world, locked it, and threw away the key.

Warren did not cry that night. He did not cry during the year that his mother smiled seldom and spent much time alone. In fact, no one in the first grade ever saw him cry—or the second, third, fourth, or any other grade. Warren's lack of emotional display made him an object of admiration among his classmates, especially when they were also his teammates. He was an excellent athlete, tall, strong, and coordinated, and he earned the nickname "Ice" for the deadly calm that seemed to settle over him like a frost when a game demanded his concentration. This concentration served him as well in school as it did in sports. He studied methodically even as a young boy, always turning in his work on time, well completed and immaculate.

Warren himself was rather impressed by his unusual control of his passions. He was always calm and reasonable, with a dry sense of humor that made him popular as he grew into adolescence. He rarely argued. He considered anger beneath his dignity and saw no need to succumb to it. With self-control came confidence. Warren knew he could be trusted, and others sensed that as well. He was called to leadership positions in his Primary classes, his Scout troops, and eventually in his priesthood quorums. He knew that he would never succumb to the temptations that seemed to be the obsession of some other boys his age. When he was thirteen, one of the boys in his group of friends found a pornographic magazine in an abandoned construction site. All the other boys seemed fascinated by it, but Warren, when he caught a glimpse of one of the pictures, had felt such revulsion that he thought he would choke. He walked away from the group without a word, not caring that the other boys would jeer, and was surprised when some of them followed him and the others looked ashamed. He was a natural leader, and among all the boys he knew, Warren was the most confident and self-assured.

When he was not among boys, however, he was a basket case. Warren liked and admired many of the girls in his ward and at school, but when it came to interacting with them he was hopelessly out of his element. The other boys all seemed driven by some invisible force to think about girls, to talk about and to girls, to make girls notice them. Warren felt no such compulsion. Nothing. Fortunately he had little opportunity to expose this weakness, for there were plenty of all-male activities in which to participate. In fact, for years Warren was able to maintain a very active social life without ever once having to interact with girls for more than a few seconds.

As his sixteenth birthday approached, Warren knew he was losing his camouflage. Soon, he would have no more excuse for his lack of interest in girls, and he had no idea how to imitate the way the other boys acted—something seemed to have been amputated from his mind. He turned sixteen quietly, hoping that no one would notice, but less than a week later he picked up the telephone and heard the terrifying voice of the prettiest cheerleader in the junior class. The dance next week was girl's choice, did he know? Oh, sure, yes, Warren mumbled. Would he like to go? Um, yes, sure, um, sure, yes. Warren began to sweat as he replaced the receiver. Now he was caught. Maybe he'd get sick before the dance—but it was right after the football game, and he had to play. Maybe he would be fatally injured during the game? No, he decided, not likely.

Warren paced the floor. What did this girl Julie expect of him? Did she like him, the way everyone talked about girls "liking" boys? How would she expect him to act? Would she be able to tell that he wasn't like other guys, that toward girls he felt as blank as an empty swimming pool? Would she try to—Warren stopped pacing and stared at the floor—kiss him? Worse yet, would she expect him to kiss her?

In the midst of his panic, Warren suddenly had a brilliant idea. One of the other cheerleaders was going to the dance with his best friend, Cameron West. That was it! A double date! Cameron was everything Warren aspired to become: warm and friendly and exuberant and socially facile. If Cameron were along, the guys could talk together most of the time, and then if Julie tried anything, Warren could watch how Cameron behaved and take his cues from that. It was perfect.

It was awful. Julie seemed impressed by the way Warren looked in his tuxedo, but after chatting with him all the way to the restaurant without eliciting a word in response, she turned around and directed her comments to Cameron and his date in the back seat. It set the tone for the entire evening. Cameron and the two girls talked and laughed comfortably during dinner, while Warren sat in a miserable silence that grew deeper every time Julie threw him a puzzled glance. At the dance Julie and Warren ended up watching the other couple pirouette gracefully around while Warren pressed his back against the wall of the gym and fought a desperate urge to turn and run. Cameron showed his date to her door with chivalric courtesy, a procedure that Warren tried to duplicate with Julie once they had dropped Cameron off at his house. He came across with all the grace of a rhinoceros on stilts. He was sure he heard Julie give a sigh of relief as the door closed behind her. He was just glad there had been no attempt at kissing.

That night Warren had trouble sleeping. He was paralyzed with embarrassment, terrified by the prospect of having to repeat this ghastly effort ever again in his life, and he was angry. At least he thought it was anger—he had never felt quite this restless, burning irritation, this unsettling discontent. He stared at the ceiling. There was Cameron, talking with his girlfriend Debbie. Warren rolled over and buried his face in his pillow. Cameron was chatting nonchalantly with Julie. Warren threw back his sheets and rolled over. Cameron and Debbie and Julie danced happily around his room.

It was anger he was feeling. He was angry. More than that, he was furious. No, that wasn't quite it. . . . Abruptly, Warren sat up in bed. His face went pale, and two red spots burned on his cheeks as he realized what was wrong. He was jealous. He had never felt anything like this before. Waves of terrible emotion swept over him in suffocating floods. The feelings seemed to be endless in their scope and variety—love, anger, fear, desire, longing, excitement. Castles and forests flashed past his mind: slavering alligators and bold heroes and the chestnut horse he rode on with his stillborn little brother. A terrible thing began to happen. For the first time since he had watched in horror while his father cried, a deep wrenching sob began to rise from Warren's own chest. The sob seemed to bring his insides up with it: all the pain, all the joy, and all the love he had kept buried there since that night. And in this torrent of feeling, Warren felt more numb than ever before. For he knew now that he was and always would be alone. Utterly, unspeakably, irredeemably alone. The secret was out. The infinite yearning that filled his soul to the limits of his imagination would never be fulfilled. Yes, he was jealous. And he was in love. But it was not Cameron's attractiveness to girls that Warren wanted, nor Cameron's social adeptness, nor even Cameron's charm. It was Cameron. As the smothered sob broke from Warren's throat, filling the air with the sound of his terrible isolation, the compulsive cycle folded him quietly in its icy embrace.

The stories of Ellen, Bill, and Warren obviously have many differences. They also have many similarities. It is the similarities that provide clues to how compulsive cycles emerge from feelings of isolation. These three young people all came from loving Latter-day Saint families. All were bright, well-meaning, and happy youngsters. But each of the three felt lonely and different as children, for a number of reasons. All of them began to experience such feelings before they were old enough either to define them explicitly or to recognize that they were anything other than the natural state of the universe. Perhaps because of that, and because they misinterpreted cues they took from the behavior of people around them, Ellen, Bill, and Warren all kept their feelings of isolation private and unexpressed. At the same time, however, each of the three was searching for some means of alleviating the sense of isolation that characterized their everyday experience. A combination of traits and circumstances, which might occur in anyone's life without producing particularly devastating effects, led each of these three individuals to a very compelling experience with some kind of behavior. For Ellen the experience was losing weight, for Bill it was using drugs, and for Warren it was a relationship with a male friend. These experiences would probably have left many people relatively unaffected. For Ellen, Bill, and Warren, however, they broke through internal barriers that created feelings of isolation. They were therefore extremely powerful and alluring.

There was no sin involved in the conditions that created feelings of isolation in these three people or in many of the others we talked with in the course of our research. The feelings themselves are not destructive. On the contrary, they are essential to motivate us to regain the presence of our Heavenly Father. But the natural man, in his intelligent ignorance, often feels the presence of needs before he understands their nature. The compulsive-cycle victims we spoke with were bright, intuitive, and eager to form conclusions by which to conceptualize their experience. Sometimes this process outstripped the acquisition of wisdom. In such cases, individuals can misinterpret the objects of their own desires and the expectations of those around them. There is usually no way to place accurate blame on anyone or anything when a good person becomes addicted to a destructive behavior, except perhaps the very nature of mortality. But even when there is no obvious perpetrator involved in the creation of a compulsive cycle, there are inevitably many victims. The next chapter will discuss the way in which feelings of isolation can lead to the second step in a compulsive cycle with more and more inevitable consistency. The accounts of our interview subjects, as they discuss these actions of self-indulgence, will testify that the void that seems to haunt so many people in this mortality is never filled by behaviors that they expect will bring pleasure. If feelings of isolation bring the individual to the compulsive cycle, the compulsive cycle even more surely will bring isolation to the individual.
