Martha Nibley Beck, John C. Beck, Breaking the Cycle of Compulsive Behavior ( 1990)

4

The Second Step: Actions of Self-Indulgence

One of the best-known aphorisms in latter-day scripture is Lehi's declaration, "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.) In that one stunningly simple phrase, Lehi sums up the plan of salvation and the reason for our existence, the Good News reduced to its barest essentials and proclaimed with the resonance of a Hallelujah shout. It is the answer to the ubiquitous question, asked directly or indirectly by human beings in so much of their art, philosophy, and unexpressed thought: "What is the meaning of life?" In our popular media, pompous cartoon characters and the heroes of comedies may purport to answer this question. Or they may open an examination booklet to find it the only question on a test—the ultimate nightmare, because the question is generally considered to be unanswerable. The social consensus is that no one can tell us the meaning of life but that occasionally a brilliant scholar, philosopher, or scientist, working at full mental capacity for a very long time, can turn out something approaching part of the answer. Such an explanation must necessarily be extremely complex and erudite, far beyond the ken of the person on the street. Like the Israelites in the wilderness, many in our world perish "because of the simpleness of the way, or the easiness of it" (1 Nephi 17:41), working desperately to discover the meaning of life while the simple truth sits under their noses and waits vainly to be seen.

After all, we do not need Lehi to tell us that we seem designed to experience joy, that when we feel joy we are glad of our existence and happy to continue living. The "pursuit of happiness" is one of the "self-evident" truths that the Declaration of Independence acknowledges as the right of every human being. Every action taken by most of us is in some way an effort to become happier, to feel more of this sensation we call joy. In short, we all know perfectly well that, as Joseph Smith said, "happiness is the object and design of our existence." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938], p. 255.) This fact is so baldly obvious that Satan rarely even tries to convince us it is not true. Instead, he throws out a smoke screen of deceit to convince us that we can't really credit such a simple definition of life's meaning, that there must be more to it than we can understand. A vast pool of learned treatises, theological, philosophical, and artistic, parade as Satan's substitute for the fourteen words, "Adam fell that men might be, and men are, that they might have joy."

Substitutions such as these represent the adversary's chief line of offense against man's innate, spiritual response to things that make him happy. In baffling our recognition of how to achieve the joy we all know we want, Satan uses the ignorance of the natural man, with its natural appetites, to great effect. For every good and marvelous and joyful thing the Lord has given us, the devil is busily erecting a whole parade of shoddy counterfeits, covered with chrome and glitter to disguise the fundamental flaws in their design. Some of these appeal to the spirit: the Lord gives us revelation to enlighten and free our wills, whereas Satan (as Doctor Faustus and Macbeth discovered) gives us sorceries and priestcrafts to mislead and entrap. Some counterfeits seduce the mind, like those worldly philosophies that build towers of exquisite reasoning based upon incorrect premises, too proud of their rational coherence to question or even recognize the errors in their fundamental assumptions. But because the central task of this life is to gain and master a body and because the most powerful agents of joy we gain on earth involve the powers of the body and their proper use, Satan has put some of his most diligent efforts into designing counterfeits for joy that entrap us through our physical beings. Among them are the behaviors that occupy the second step of a compulsive cycle, behaviors that we have labeled "actions of self-indulgence."

In the context of a compulsive cycle, an action is simply a behavior, the movement of the physical body to achieve some specific end. The philosophies of our society, which discount the physical as either meaningless or temporary, belittle the significance of such physical actions. The argument is that since the intentions of the heart and thoughts of the mind are of primary significance in determining the moral context of our behavior, the physical manifestations of these feelings and beliefs are superfluous and irrelevant. As college students in a university that nourishes and glorifies the mind, we often heard arguments against the necessity of mere physical enactments to confirm metaphysical intentions. "Why should I have to be baptized if I can just believe in God and lead a good life?" was a common question, or "Why should we have to get married—we don't need a piece of paper to show that we love each other." If one believes that the physical body is just a casing to be abandoned by the spirit at death or that the mind dies with the body anyway, this attitude toward the physical acting-out of a spiritual reality is logical and justified.

But Latter-day Saints do not adhere to these views of the body and its actions. We believe so strongly in the influence of physical actions on the immortal spirit that we build temples and serve in them as physical proxies for those spirits who did not perform the ordinances of salvation while in mortality. The ordinances of salvation are not merely a show of good faith, wherein we confirm our spiritual devotion by submitting ourselves to meaningless or simply symbolic action. Action itself, the physical action of the physical body, possesses a power that we do not fully understand. It is not trivial. It is part of the power by which the worlds were created, and it is not to be trifled with. Every deliberate action we perform carries the whole soul, body and spirit, with it. For this reason the Lord has, at certain times in history, created explicit and carefully delineated rules of action by which His people were instructed to direct their lives. To the people of Moses' day, the Law was made the whole substance of the gospel for a people whose understanding of the Spirit proved insufficient to direct action. In the latter days, we have been given one such law, "for a principle with promise, adapted to the capacity of the weak and the weakest of all saints, who are or can be called saints." (D&C 89:3.) This is of course the Word of Wisdom, a simple code by which our actions are to be directed—not only because such action is the stuff of truth but also because it has the power to carry the spirit toward or away from the fulfillment of its divine potential. As the Lord told His chosen people before the coming of Christ, physical action is necessary to bring us closer to Him.

The power of adherence to laws of physical behavior is evident in many of the world's great religions. As students traveling in Asia, we once had a long discussion with some Malaysian Moslem friends. They were anxious to convert us, and we were eager to learn more about their religion. We asked them what they believed. "Oh," they said, "we pray five times a day, we study the Koran, we wash ourselves before meals, we fast during the day for a month each year, we hope to travel to Mecca . . . " They recounted a long list of ritual behaviors and observances. "Yes," we said in puzzled ignorance, "that's what you do. But what do you believe?" Our friends looked at us in confusion. "We just told you what we believe," they said. "We pray five times a day—oh, yes, we face Mecca, that's important—we wash ourselves at certain times, we wear coverings on our heads, we abstain from foods that are unclean . . . " After another few minutes of recounting behavioral codes, they beamed at us in assurance that now we would understand.

We didn't. Our Christian upbringing, in a society dominated and undergirded by the ideological impact of the New Testament and the philosophers' emphasis on reason, had done nothing to prepare us to understand a way of thinking in which the enactment of the Law constitutes the essential fabric of religious faith. It was not that our Moslem friends did not understand the concepts of motivation and intention. They simply considered them secondary to the physical acting out of ordinances commanded by God. Our Western ideological training, on the other hand, made us much more amenable to the idea that what a person does is not the point, as long as his heart is in the right place. On the one hand is the idea that the acting out of physical behaviors is central to salvation; on the other, the firm belief that "it's the thought that counts." Both are partially correct, and both are in error. Physical action and spiritual or intellectual commitment are both necessary but insufficient to the salvation or damnation of the soul, which is spirit and body combined.

A good illustration of the relationship of intention and action can be seen in temple work for the dead. The physical ordinances must be performed in the body—there is no way around it even for the greatest of souls. The body must undergo physical baptism in water and all the other actions by which the soul is made ready for the presence of God. If that body has already passed away, then another body may be substituted as proxy, but a physical body it must be. In order for every soul to have the opportunity to accept these ordinances, Latter-day Saints aspire to what may seem the preposterous goal of performing temple ordinances for every soul who has ever lived on earth—a goal that we would never have imagined for ourselves if the Lord had not set it for us. And yet, even when this tremendous task has been accomplished, only a relatively small group of spirits will be willing and ready to accept the ordinances we have performed for them. In other words, these actions are absolutely essential to salvation, and the spirit cannot perform them without the body. But even when the body has carried out the actions, the spirit of the individual has the ability either to accept them or to reject them. It is the spirit's intelligence that guides the body's power.

That is why the Lord instructed Samuel that "man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart." (1 Samuel 16:7.) All deliberate actions have great power to move the soul some given "distance" in our eternal progress. Some actions, by their natures, move us further than others. But the direction in which an action takes us—whether it moves the soul toward or away from our Father in Heaven and the joy which emanates from Him—is directed by the intentions and understanding of the spirit. Thus, a very powerful action, for example, the physical union of a man and woman, can move us much closer to godhood if it is sanctioned by the Lord. But it moves us equally far in the opposite direction when it is undertaken with impure intentions. To think that such an action can be performed without any consequences, however, is a terribly dangerous mistake. While the spirit determines the direction in which action takes the soul, the action itself cannot be divorced from the power it has to move us.

Of course, not every action performed by our bodies is significant to our eternal progress. It is doubtful that the Lord includes every sneeze, wince, and hiccup in the list of mortal actions that will save or destroy our souls. These actions are insignificant because they are unintentional. The physical behaviors that matter to our progression are deliberate actions motivated by the intelligence. They are expressions of the spirit. The actions of self-indulgence that occupy the second step on the compulsive cycle are not meaningless but pleasant behaviors like scratching an itch. Nor are they actions that yield pleasure as one component of a righteous search for joy, the way that the pleasure of physical intimacy accompanies the much broader and more encompassing joy of a celestial marriage. The term "actions of self-indulgence" refers to actions that are temporally enjoyable but that the actor mistakes for eternal joy, the joy that is the "object and design of our existence." The condition of the spirit that motivates this behavior—of which the behavior is an expression—is the sense of profound isolation discussed in the last chapter. It seemed to us, as we conducted our interviews, that for a person who becomes entangled in a compulsive cycle, some particular action has the capacity to provide a strong enough sense of pleasure to block for a moment the perpetrator's awareness of his or her loneliness.

For a person involved in an addictive behavior, then, the gratification involved in actions of self-indulgence is a counterfeit of the joy for which we exist. The people we spoke with who had been taken in by the counterfeit were not seedy or ill-intentioned; in fact, they seemed to be individuals who were particularly driven to seek for joy and were thus perhaps too eager to accept a substitute. The feelings of isolation that these people found to be intolerable are the precise opposites of the joy we are designed to experience. The happiness we are promised by the gospel is one of inclusion, of connectedness, of being in the presence of those we love most—including our Father in Heaven and His Son—and of being one with them. The ultimate hell our doctrine envisions, on the other hand, is the condition of "outer darkness." The sectarian image of hundreds of sinners roasting over communal coals is certainly frightening, but it does not strike such a terrifyingly familiar chord as the idea of a spirit separated from all love and all light. The feelings of isolation that accompany this mortal estate bring us close enough to that terrible experience to know that the pain of fire and brimstone is nothing in comparison to separation from God, who is both light and love.

This mortal world is the province of the adversary, and in it we seem to feel more of his agony than of God's joy. Death, physical injury, illness, abandonment, and all the other "thousand natural shocks that flesh is heir to" have to do with disintegration, with entropy, with things falling apart. Satan preaches the gospel of disintegration, of people and things withdrawing away from each other in a chaos of isolated fragments. The Lord's way, on the other hand, is one of integration, of bringing together, of sealing things both on earth and in heaven, of at-one-ment. That unity is the joy for which Lehi says we are designed. The Savior is the source to which we must look to fill the void that exists within each of us. The way to that eternal joy has been clearly outlined in the gospel of Jesus Christ. It is straight and well-defined.

Unfortunately, it is also difficult to follow for those wrapped in the ignorance of mortality and the unfamiliarity of a physical nature. As part of that nature, we are privileged on this earth to enact—physically enact—behaviors that are component parts of the joy of eternal life. Many of these behaviors bring with them great pleasure, which we could not have experienced without obtaining a body. The sensation of physical pleasure is one we have never known before this life. Its allure is a testament to the great intrinsic power of physical action. According to our interview subjects, the pleasure of some physical actions is so strong and partakes enough of the joy of eternal life, that for some people it can block awareness of the void within us caused by the fundamental disintegration of this lonely world. For those involved in compulsive cycles, in whom the awareness of their isolation is particularly intense, this relief from unhappiness is mistaken for joy itself.

It seems that almost any action can become an "action of self-indulgence." It is not even necessary for the behavior to be genuinely enjoyable. The only thing necessary to allow any action to qualify as an addictive behavior is that, for some people, this action is capable of blocking awareness of the feelings of isolation that characterize their everyday experience. A few actions are particularly addictive because they have great intrinsic power to capture our attention and create enjoyable sensations. The three types of action we have chosen for our case studies—eating, the use of mood-altering chemicals, and compulsive sexual activity—are the most common examples we encountered. But for some people the behavior might be gambling, shopping, stealing, falling in love from afar, jogging, working, watching television, or virtually any other activity. What differentiates a compulsive-cycle addict from anyone else who engages in these activities is that addicts find relief from feelings of isolation in performing the action and that they mistake this oblivion for joy. Since, as Lehi says, joy is the reason for our existence, compulsive-cycle victims erroneously locate the meaning of life in the pleasure obtained from the addictive action and hence in the action itself. The action consequently becomes the primary focus of the addict's life.

The surprising thing about our interview subjects' descriptions of their actions of self-indulgence was that different subjects' lives were affected in almost identical ways by a wide variety of very different behaviors. We spoke with many people who had engaged in some improper activity once or twice and then immediately stopped. We do not consider these people to have been in a compulsive cycle. People who are caught in a cycle describe a pattern of behavior and feeling typified by several characteristics that are the same, no matter what the particular action of self-indulgence may be.

To begin with, many behavioral addicts report that before they ever began to indulge in a particular behavior, and even if they thought the action was wrong, they found it fascinating, exciting, or romantic. That may seem difficult to imagine for people who are not similarly attracted to such actions. Even victims themselves, after escaping the compulsive cycle, often mention that their own addiction seems disgusting or boring from the perspective of their new understanding. Nevertheless, entrancement with a particular action seems to characterize people who later fall into compulsive cycles. It was unclear to us whether the fascination is itself part of the cycle or whether it is merely a predisposing factor. What was clear from many of our interviews, however, is that fascination with a particular activity is not necessarily "built in" to the addict's personality. The people we spoke with who had escaped such addictive behaviors all reported that the longer the time since they had been involved in the cycle, the less interest they felt in the action to which they had once been addicted.

The addict's initial fascination with the action of self-indulgence often leads to the first commission of the act. Sometimes this is a distinct departure from the addict's ordinary life-style, an incident that stands out in the addict's mind as the moment when he or she capitulated to the compulsive cycle. In other cases the action is so mundane, so much a part of daily life, that it does not strike the individual as anything more than a slight exaggeration of ordinary behavior. But even if the addictive action is something the victim has done before, there is a distinctive quality to the action that initiates a compulsive cycle. The addict generally describes it as "the time when I got hooked." The "hooking" occurs when, suddenly, an action as exotic as taking drugs or as ordinary as eating moves into a particular position within the person's mind. It becomes the focus of the person's thoughts and feelings for several hours, days, or even weeks after the actual activity has ended. The action, whatever it might be, becomes the object of the addict's inordinate attention.

Once this initial exposure to the action of self-indulgence has taken place, the person involved in a compulsive cycle begins to act somewhat like a teenager experiencing puppy love for the first time—except for the fact that puppy love is a normal step in the process of coming closer to other people and one's own potential, while the fixation of a person in a compulsive cycle is a step toward isolation and pain. Young lovers are transported by the objects of their affection. They feel that their adored one is the answer to all of life's sorrows and inconveniences, the purveyor of such bliss that to be with this person is to rise above the petty woes of existence. Compulsive-cycle victims feel the same way about their actions of self-indulgence when they first feel the pleasure of the action replacing their feelings of isolation. Like a lover, a behavioral addict feels that whatever the addictive action—shoplifting, drinking, jogging, or any other of an unlimited array of behaviors—that action is the answer to everyone's problems. One of us was invited, while still in high school, to take drugs with a group of young acquaintances. Even after the invitation was firmly declined, the group drove to a meetingplace where they customarily assembled to smoke marijuana and experiment with other chemicals. What was astonishing about these people was not their behavior so much as their attitude. They claimed, and seemed to believe sincerely, that anyone's life would be enriched by recreational drugs and that once a newcomer was broken of initial "shyness," he or she would naturally relax into the use of such substances. To them, drugs seemed to stand as the essential center of all life, one they could not live without and one that all people wanted in their hearts, no matter how much they denied it on the surface. They saw the world as divided into those who took drugs and those who were violently and maliciously opposed to drugs out of a frustrated desire to use them. Their complete refusal to believe that anyone could be simply uninterested in using recreational chemicals was nothing less than amazing. Nevertheless, it is typical of those in a compulsive cycle. The anorexic believes that thinness is everyone's top priority. The sexual addict thinks that physical intimacy is at the forefront of everyone's mind, all the time.

What makes this aspect of a compulsive cycle particularly baffling and infuriating to the friends and acquaintances of the addict is that all their actions are interpreted by the addict as though they were motivated by a similar addiction. Having found a pleasure that substitutes so nearly for joy, having determined that this action is the answer to all troubles and discontents, the compulsive-cycle victim simply does not believe that other people do not place it at the center of their lives. There is a chilling parallel to missionary zeal evident in many accounts of "actions of self-indulgence." Almost all of the behavioral addicts we interviewed had been literally taught and trained to indulge in their addiction by someone more experienced with that particular action. We spoke with a bulimic woman who admitted that during her high-school years she had taught "about fifty" of her friends and relatives to binge on food and then vomit it—an action she had decided was a wonderful way to eat her cake and not have it, too. With anguish she told us, "I honestly thought I was doing them a favor"—a belief that seemed grotesque and horrible from the perspective of a mature woman who had almost destroyed herself with that addictive action.

As terrible as the sin of transmitting an addiction might be, it is often motivated by a desire that is in itself inoffensive, the wish to have others share one's world view and activities. That desire is strengthened by the fact that, soon after the person involved in a compulsive cycle becomes addicted to the "action of self-indulgence," he or she begins to realize that the obsessive preoccupation with this action does not fit in socially with the activities of others. That realization leads quickly to another typical feature of a truly addictive action: such behaviors are usually enacted either alone or in the company of a few people who are similarly addicted. Addicts begin to shut all other people out of their lives and thoughts. The exclusionary character of the activity is one of the things that mark it as an addictive action. For example, it is normal to enjoy playing handball with a few good friends. It is not normal to limit one's acquaintances to those friends and nobody else, to talk about handball to them and them only, to drastically decrease one's contact with all those who are not handball players, and to react with aggression or defensiveness when a nonplayer asks questions about one's handball games. Compulsive-cycle addicts, no matter what "game" they may be playing, become proprietary and solitary in the commission of the action.

Another characteristic of addictive behaviors is that they are planned ahead of time in the addict's mind. Remember that compulsive-cycle victims have decided that some action of self-indulgence is the source of all happiness because while they are involved in such an action, the feelings of isolation and pain they deal with during the rest of the time are blocked out of their consciousness. The problem is that addictive actions do not really heal the wounds of isolation. In fact, the action generally leaves the addict feeling worse than ever. Eventually, most compulsive-cycle addicts begin to notice that the action of self-indulgence—no matter what it is—simply does not occupy enough time to keep them from experiencing profound discontent and unhappiness. Compulsive-cycle victims therefore begin to "stretch" their addictive actions over time in a variety of ways. These ways almost always include spending more time to complete the activity as well as engaging in it more frequently, but these measures alone do not prove sufficient to totally block addicts' awareness of their own unhappiness. Therefore, they typically begin to spend more and more time simply thinking about the activity to which they are addicted. It is a very specific kind of thinking. It occupies a great deal, if not all, of the addict's attention. It most commonly takes the form of reliving past experiences with the action of self-indulgence and of imagining and planning in great detail some future experience. One question we asked the people we interviewed was "How much time do you spend thinking about this problem?" The typical answer for someone at the height of a compulsive cycle was that the addict thought about the action of self-indulgence and related topics practically all the time. As one addict put it: "If I'm talking to someone about something else, I of course think about what I'm saying. But as soon as the conversation's over, my mind snaps back to it [the addiction]. If I'm in a movie or something, every now and then I kind of break away from the movie, and I'm thinking about it again. I'd say about 99 percent of my thoughts are about this problem, either thinking about how I can do it or thinking about how I can stop."

Besides that kind of concentration, another way that compulsive-cycle victims enlarge the scope of the action of self-indulgence is to develop a kind of ritualized routine surrounding the activity. The routine is generally something that grows longer and more elaborate over time. A man we spoke with who habitually stole items from stores described the development of this kind of routine:

"I remember the first time I actually took anything . . . all of a sudden I was just sneaking out of this store with some stupid little thing—something I would never use in my life. I just was out of the store with it all of a sudden.

"That was the first time. Well, I didn't really blame myself for taking the thing because it was so cheap, and I just felt like it wasn't really even me that did it, you know—it just sort of happened and I wasn't really even aware of it. But then I started, like, wandering in stores hoping that it would happen again! I mean, in my right mind I wouldn't do anything like that, you know, but I kept hoping it would just happen, like a fit or something, so that I could do it and not feel guilty.

"After a while, even going to the store would trigger me to steal something. I would do things like go shopping for four items and then I'd only buy one, so I'd have to go back more times. After a while just getting in the car, I'd get in it for something else and I'd end up at a store. And then I'd spend a long time browsing around, and then I'd steal something. I always told myself that I was just window shopping, and then at the last moment I'd take something. Pretty soon I was spending a lot of time doing this. I would even end up late for work, or leave early so I could go to the mall. This happened over several years. I would try to stop, and then it would get worse. I was out of control. Finally I got caught."

This man's action of self-indulgence grew from a moment of time into an activity that occupied an enormous proportion of his life. Strange as his experience may seem, this pattern is not unusual among the behavioral addicts we interviewed. What is important about the shoplifter's story is that it points out how an action of self-indulgence is enlarged into a whole routine of related activities. As soon as addicts start into their routines—for this man, simply getting into his car or entering a store—they push away their consciousness of all painful feelings. They also push away the part of themselves that is appalled by their own actions, which despises such behavior and vows repeatedly to stop. When those involved in compulsive behaviors say they can't help themselves or that they are out of control, their statements may sound very strange to someone who has never been trapped in such a cycle. After all, what could be so difficult about not going to the effort of driving to a shopping center and purloining some unnecessary item? But when addicts describe themselves as uncontrollable, the part of themselves that expresses the feeling of being out of control is speaking with complete honesty. That is the part of the self that addicts squelch and silence while they are committing the action of self-indulgence, and so it is the part that truly has no control once the routine of an action has been begun. Once compulsive-cycle victims are involved in such routines, they have entered a different world, where knowledge of right and wrong, of dangers and consequences, is muted to a mere whisper and easily ignored.

Because it is this "other world" that protects behavioral addicts from "feelings of isolation" and the pain arising from them, compulsive-cycle victims allow it to grow—in fact, no matter how strongly they may object to an addiction in principle, they nurture its growth at moments of crisis when they cannot deal easily with life. Sometimes the compulsive cycle grows slowly, filling a lifetime with a few hours here and there of addictive behaviors. But often it burgeons more rapidly, starting with a few relatively "innocent" escapades that hardly seem completed before the compulsive-cycle victim becomes enmeshed in a terrifyingly far-flung net of destructive activities. The case histories of Ellen Schor, Bill Stewart, and Warren White may help illustrate this process. Once again, these three cases are typical of stories we heard from practically all people caught in compulsive cycles, no matter how different their addictions seemed on the surface. It should be noted that many behavioral addicts seem to enjoy talking about their actions of self-indulgence to a sympathetic audience. As long as they feel confident that their listeners share their belief in the desirability of their actions, they will spend a great deal of time recounting all the lurid details of their behavior. They also enjoy reading the accounts of others who describe an addiction similar to theirs with the same kind of fascination. "Locker room talk," both spoken and written in the form of verbal pornography, is an example of this kind of discussion. In contrast to this self-indulgent and provocative style of reporting actions, the stories we heard from compulsive-cycle victims who had broken free from their addictions were terse, dry, and to the point. To avoid crossing the fine line between description and titillation when discussing these "actions of self-indulgence," we here recount the stories of Ellen, Bill, and Warren's addictions in their own brief but honest words.

I was kind of an awkward kid, and I had always thought I was a bit too plump. When I was about fifteen, I lost a lot of weight during a bout of hepatitis. I think it was then that I first decided dieting was the key to happiness. Well, not dieting exactly. At first, what I wanted was to be thin—or so I thought. Looking back on it, it seems more as though I was looking for some way that I could control my life, and I decided that way was through controlling my weight. Even when I got very thin, my whole life still revolved around eating, dieting, exercising—every aspect of energy input and output. I can't believe I spent so much of my life on something so boring, but I guess I did it so that I could avoid facing the real issues of life. You know, if I could just focus on my weight or a diet, I wouldn't have to admit that there were elements of my life I couldn't control that simply.

Anyway, if you want to know what I actually did during that time, it's a long, boring story. The center of the whole complex of behaviors I got into was eating. Even when I didn't eat for several days at a time, I was always thinking about it. I thought about what to eat, what not to eat, and how I should eat or not eat it. A lot of behaviors went along with this obsession—memorizing diet books, exercising for hours, reading fitness magazines, looking through catalogues for pictures of especially thin models to "motivate" me. The real compulsion came to center on the habit I got into of bingeing on huge amounts of food. Afterwards, I would force myself to vomit to get rid of the calories and the guilt.

It all started after my illness, when I first lost weight. I became fixated on maintaining that body size. It seemed to me that everything good in my life hinged on staying thin. That's when I started thinking about dieting constantly. During that first year, my activities centered mostly on working hard at eating as little as possible. I weighed and measured all my food and switched to eating mostly low-calorie foods like vegetables and diet soda. I occasionally "slipped" and went off whatever diet I was on, but basically I kept my calorie intake very low. I know this because I kept a daily diary (which I still have) where I recorded lists of everything I ate each day, along with the calorie count, which I looked up in diet books. I think I must have bought every calorie-counting book ever published. I used to page through them for hours, memorizing the calories in any food I was likely to encounter. After a while I hardly needed to consult the books—I had an automatic calorie counter in my head. I added up the calories in everything I ate before I'd even swallowed it. All the time I spent thinking about food and dieting kept me from having to deal with the rest of my life.

I got pretty skinny after a year or so of this, as you can imagine. I think I dipped below the best weight for my body, because my metabolism dropped, which is what the body does to protect itself in times of starvation. This meant that it took less and less food for me to maintain my body weight. It also meant that I was cold all the time, that I felt weak and tired, and that I gained weight very easily while eating the same small amounts I'd been eating all along. But I still wanted to lose weight, so I took up a severe exercise program. I read that jumping rope burned more calories per hour than just about anything else I could do, so I jumped rope for hours in my bedroom. I also saved up to buy an exercise bicycle, and I jogged every morning before school. Of course I was always exhausted, and I hardly had time for anything but dieting and exercising. My parents and friends began to show some concern about me, so I "moved underground" and began to keep my dieting a secret. I imagined that I was some kind of spy on this secret mission to lose weight. I started thinking everyone was against me, that they were the "enemy" trying to make me fat. I was pretty crazy. The magazines and books I read—usually quack fitness publications—helped me convince myself that everyone who didn't live like I did was unhealthy and weak-willed. I was still shy and awkward, but now I decided it was because I was better than other people instead of worse.

By my junior year of high school, I was a physical wreck. People would tell me I looked like a concentration camp prisoner, which thrilled me. My parents took me to the doctor, but he couldn't find anything wrong with me and told them I must just be naturally skinny. I decided that I was happy at that weight. To stay there, however, was a constant battle, because my body was not made to be that thin. I managed to stay thin with the same methods I'd been using all along: constant preoccupation with food, exercise, and my body, calorie counting and calculations about weight loss (I kept a small notebook with hundreds of tidy lists concerning food and exercise), and doing everything I could to burn calories. I wrote in my journal that I couldn't imagine anything besides weight loss that might be interesting to think about. Can you believe that?

Anyway, after about another year of this compulsive behavior—and of being underweight—I began to get hungry. Not just hungry the way you feel when you've fasted twenty-four hours or forty-eight hours. That kind of hunger seems almost unnoticeable compared to how hungry I got. Until you've been undernourished constantly, for a long period of time, you have no idea what real hunger is. I still can't believe that there are people who feel that hungry, who would give anything for a little food, and here I was doing it deliberately in the midst of plenty. Most Americans don't realize what a terrible, compelling force hunger is. I once heard a psychologist say that anyone's will could be broken by hunger, if semistarvation went on long enough. Well, my will finally broke. That's when I started to binge.

Sometimes I hear people joke about going on some kind of binge—like they ate too much birthday cake or something. People laugh about that. Well, believe me, the binges involved in eating disorders aren't funny. As a freshman in college, I still maintained my dieting and exercising—more so than ever, in fact—but in all this effort to control myself, I would occasionally break down and eat enormous amounts. I don't want to go into detail about that particular behavior. Just talking about it, even after years, makes me feel awfully sad and degraded. What I didn't realize then was that I had cut myself off from everyone to the point where I was terribly, terribly lonely, and I was trying to fill that emotional emptiness with food. Even after my physical hunger was stuffed to the gills, that hunger for love was as strong as ever. When I binged, I felt as if I would never be able to get enough food. I would go on eating, as fast as I could, until I became horribly nauseated. Then I would feel so overcome with guilt and self-hatred and the fear of being fat that I would fast for weeks, or run for hours, or force myself to vomit. Of course, I had to keep this whole thing secret from the people around me. I didn't make any friends during the first two years of college, because I kept away from people to leave time for my obsession. I also became a terrific actress to hide the problem from people in my dorm. No one had any idea what my life was like.

During the year before I finally went to the college health clinic and asked for help, my life was totally out of control. My original ideal of staying thin and attractive was still there—I had never once felt I could count on being thin enough to please myself—but it had become a minor part of this nightmare of bingeing and purging. The more I kept bingeing, the more alone I felt, and the more alone I felt, the more I depended on bingeing to try to feel better. That may sound melodramatic, but I got to the point where I literally felt like I was in the power of some demonic force. I would get up in the morning promising that I would eat practically nothing that day. Then something would happen that would trigger a binge. At first it had to be something fairly drastic, like failing an exam or having an argument with my parents. But after a while it got to be so that almost anything—passing a candy store, talking to a friend, not getting any mail—could set off a binge. I would leave my dorm and go into store after store, buying the most fattening things I could afford and stuffing them down. That would go on for hours, until I ran out of money or the "demon" was satisfied and I could stop eating. Then, of course, I would go into the "purging" phase, where I'd find some quick way to get rid of all those extra calories. You can't imagine what a horrendous way this is to live—and I know I'm not the only one who's had a problem with it.

I knew I needed help when one day I went into "binge mode" before I could go to the bank and get cash. I went into a panic. I started running to the bank, but on the way I passed an all-night convenience store. I tried to walk past it, but I couldn't. I went into the store, picked up some goodies, and left—without paying, of course, since I didn't have any money. I was going to have cash in about two minutes, but the demon couldn't wait that long. Outside the store, I started to cry. I had never stolen anything before. When I was little, I was the kid in the neighborhood who talked the other kids out of stealing treats. I didn't know what had gotten control of my life, but I knew it wasn't me. It was as though I had been walking down a hallway where the walls kept getting narrower and narrower, and the ceiling kept coming down, and the floor coming up. I had finally reached the point where I couldn't go on, and I turned around to leave—and I found out there was no way back. I was trapped in this smothering little box, and I couldn't move. I couldn't call to anyone for help. I was completely immobilized. There's no way I can describe how I felt at that moment. And yet, I wasn't aware of feeling anything. I was completely numb. It was like I'd been killing myself for years, and now I was watching myself die—not just my body, but my self—without feeling a thing.

I never really thought about drugs at all until I was almost halfway through college. When I first started taking them, it was pretty much a social thing. My girlfriend and her friends seemed like really great people to me—well, they were great people, in a lot of ways—and they took drugs like it was no big deal. I just didn't consider the consequences. It's like when you're fly fishing. You hide the hook in something that looks really good to the fish, so good he doesn't even think about the hook. Then when he goes after the fly, the hook gets lodged in his mouth, and you end up taking the fly away anyhow. The fish ends up with nothing but the hook. And it's not just like he ate something bad for him, either. The hook drags him away from the water and kills him. That's drugs.

So, anyway, for me the bait was these parties I used to go to with friends. I didn't get addicted to anything right then. I would take drugs with everybody else. I guess it helped me have a good time—yes, it did, because before that I was so shy. I just felt like a lump on a log. Never said anything, never smiled. I was self-conscious about my looks and my manners and everything. Mostly I just felt so dumb compared to the people who interested me—especially my girlfriend Jenny. When I took drugs, though, I felt completely different. I had a lot of confidence when I was using "uppers." I know now from talking to people who are on drugs that there's really no difference in how smart or how interesting people are when they're high and when they're not. In fact, when they're high, people are actually—in my opinion—less interesting, even though they can get very "hyper." Anyway, when I took drugs at parties I stopped feeling self-conscious, and that let me develop a lot of friendships, which was really a good feeling since I missed my family a lot.

Sometimes I would have a hard time unwinding after these parties. It got so I had a really hard time sleeping. I knew that I was awake because of the drugs, so I couldn't trust my body to fall asleep naturally. So I started taking "downers" to help me sleep at night, so I'd be able to function in class and at work the next day. I'd use just about anything to help me sleep—over-the-counter medications or sometimes a drug I'd gotten from a friend. Later on I found out the most effective thing was alcohol, and I really got hooked on that. That's probably the most dangerous drug I ever used, because no one thinks anything about it. Anyway, at the beginning I would take something to make me sleep when I got back late from a party. Then I would have only a couple of hours to sleep, so when I woke up I'd be so exhausted I could hardly move. Well, the answer to that was more "uppers." It got so I was completely regulating my life by chemicals—I never knew how my body actually felt, because it was sort of buried under this constant flow of drugs.

I think I just decided I couldn't trust myself to do anything without taking something to help me. I had no faith in myself. It was like insurance—like I couldn't even try to do something without drugs in case I failed. Any time I had to do anything I would pop something—whether it was sleeping, or waking up, or going to class, or going to a party, or going to play basketball. As soon as I knew I had to do something, I'd get terribly nervous that I couldn't do it on my own, or that people wouldn't like me, or something. Then I'd remember that I could take something, and I'd just relax and feel better once I'd decided to use drugs. Then after I took them, I felt really confident, which I never did otherwise. When I went to class high, I felt so smart—I felt like I was the smartest person on campus, and I could do better than anybody else because they didn't have drugs to help them. I actually started to kind of look down my nose at people who didn't take drugs, because I thought they were so stupid to be missing out on this great secret. It was like, drugs could solve all your problems, so if you don't take them you're really missing out. I know how my girlfriend felt when she gave me the drugs in the first place. After I'd been on them for a while, if I got to know someone I liked I would think, "boy, I bet they'd love to find out about drugs," because I wanted them to do well in school and everything. Now that seems so crazy, but then, that's just the way I thought.

Finally my roommate found out about my drug habit. He'd been suspicious for a long time, but one day he actually walked in on me while I was about to take some drugs. He took the stuff and flushed it down the toilet (he was a lot bigger than me or I might have tried to stop him), and he told me he was going to tell the bishop and my parents and that I'd better start to fly right or that he'd have me arrested. He talked to me for a long time. I really was furious at him then, but looking back I think he was amazing to get that involved. He was a really great guy.

I spent the rest of that night sitting in a chair staring at the wall. I thought my whole life was over. For a while all I could think about was "I've got to get some drugs or some booze or I'll never get through this." But for the first time in more than a year, I couldn't turn to anything like that to solve the problem. I really did some hard thinking that night, I can tell you. That was the beginning of my getting over the drug problem.

I don't know when my problems with homosexuality really began. I do remember the one time in high school [the prom date related in chapter 2] when I first decided that I was a homosexual. That day my life seemed to become divided into two separate "rooms." There was the good room, where I kept everything clean so that people could come in and walk around and see what a great guy I was. That good room was perfect, too. I was everybody's all-star everything. Never a problem. But then there was this bad room, connected to the good room by this little door. The bad room was filthy, had no windows, and was full of junk. I never cleaned it. It was where I went to relax, you know, in my mind. That's where I kept the "real" me. Well, the whole bad room was built just to hide the part of me that felt romantic feelings. I say "romantic," because that's what I mean. What I wanted—at least at first—was a loving relationship with one individual. If I had felt that for a girl, I never would have had to build a "bad room," to divide my life into two opposite halves. But I immediately decided that I was a homosexual, and that thought was so terrible that I locked all my feelings into this secret room. I could never tell anyone about them. I knew my parents, friends, and Church leaders would have been appalled if I had gone to them to talk about it. Besides, I wanted to keep the feelings of love that I felt, even if they weren't right. I wanted to protect them. So I put together this "bad room" and kept a secret, homosexual self there to grow without any input from anyone but myself.

At first I managed to ignore my feelings most of the time. But when I was lonely or sad, I would go into the "bad room" and imagine that I could just talk and relate to someone I felt very close to. That person was always a guy my own age. I think in a way that the person in the bad room was me—I wanted to feel loved by my own self. Does that make sense? Anyway, as a teenager I would imagine that I had this very close relationship with another male. I think our society relays the message—especially to men—that all love is sexual, because I couldn't imagine being close to someone emotionally without including a sexual element. It took me years to learn that love and sexuality are not necessarily the same thing. At any rate, my fantasies were relatively innocent for a while but eventually became more and more centered around sexual activity. It didn't seem to matter, because I had already decided I was "gay," so I felt there was nothing more to lose. I was lost already, right? I thought, as long as you've stepped over that line, you can't make things any worse. So as a teenager, I grew more and more obsessed with those fantasies.

I confessed those feelings to the bishop in preparation for my mission. He seemed very uneasy about the whole thing—didn't want to talk about it. I remember thinking, "He's just glad he wasn't born this way." The bishop was a good man, but he made me feel as though these homosexual thoughts were a sign that I was from some different species. I know that he was a wonderful counselor for some of my friends who had "normal" sexual temptations or who had even succumbed to those temptations, but he treated my problems as though they were really incurable. He just told me to try never to think about anything like that again, because if I did there would be no hope for me. It was like being told you have a vein in your brain that's about to rupture and kill you if you move—it was paralyzing, but it didn't help the problem. I just sort of vowed I would never let anyone into that "bad room" again. Anyway, I kept myself pretty free from those thoughts for a while and went on my mission. I kept myself so busy I'd never think about anything like that. I made sure I was exhausted all the time. I was the hardest-working missionary in Germany! Plus that, the special gift and companionship of the Spirit that missionaries have made it easy to avoid any kind of temptation.

When I got back from my mission I tried dating some women, but I just couldn't seem to get interested. All my friends were dating and getting married, and I felt very lonely. I missed the missionary work, the sense of purpose it gave me, and the tremendous love I felt for the people I served. I really love kids, and when my friends started having their own kids, it would just remind me what I "was," and that made me lonelier than ever. To get away from these feelings, I started to fantasize a lot again. I started noticing men who were obviously homosexual and found that there were certain places in town where they seemed to congregate. I started going to those places "just out of curiosity." The people I saw there provided a lot of fuel for my imagination. I found some homosexual pornography in the parking lot of a bar and made the mistake of looking at it. That old "bad room" was getting quite a collection of experiences in it. I didn't like the effort of keeping that part of myself so secret, so I took a job in Los Angeles to get away from my family and Latter-day Saint friends. I heard a lot about homosexuality on the news and other places—how it was natural and should be given equal status with heterosexuality, and so on. A lot of the information sounded very persuasive, and I was swayed by it. I started to accept the "fact" that this was my nature, that God had made me this way and I deserved to act out my feelings just like anyone else.

In Los Angeles I sort of moved into the "bad room." My testimony just stayed in the "good room," and I never looked at it while I was thinking about my sexual behavior. I often swore to myself that I would somehow overcome my feelings and live in the "good room" forever, without loving anyone romantically or sexually for my whole life. But then I would go into a kind of trance that would take me, without any conscious thought, to the gay bars and other areas of town where I knew homosexual activities were taking place. It hardly even seemed like a big step to begin engaging in such behaviors. I had already given up on myself. As long as you have this "bad room," which no one ever sees, you're lost anyway, right? What does it matter how awful the things are that you do in that room? So, I started actually having relationships with some of these men I met during my nightly wandering. I cut off contact with my family altogether. When they called I would get furious at them because I hated myself so much and felt so alone and miserable, and I couldn't tell them why.

What amazes me most, looking back on those days, is how something that began as a search for love could have become so empty of real human relationships. The encounters I had were all pretty anonymous. They had nothing to do with love. Love enhances the rest of your life. This behavior seemed to be dragging the rest of my life into it like a whirlpool. I spent larger and larger amounts of my time engaged in these activities—sometimes in actual encounters with other people, but more often in wandering through "that section of town" or into bookstores that sold homosexual materials. It just took so much time! I was glad it did, because the rest of my life—except for my work, which was pretty isolating—was so empty. So night after night I spent hours wandering, dwelling on this "fascinating" topic. The way I see the world now, any kind of loveless sexual encounter seems so empty and hollow. But then, this type of activity seemed exciting and forbidden. It began to absorb my whole mind and soul.

I really hit rock bottom one day when I was sitting in a gay bar and I ordered a soft drink, because of course I never broke the Word of Wisdom. Can you imagine that? There I was, all geared up to commit the sin next to murder, and I was being all careful not to break the Word of Wisdom! I was standing between the "good room" and the "bad room," and I just couldn't believe the contrast. It just seemed so absurd, so ridiculous, and so disgusting. I knew the Church was true, I loved the Lord with all my heart, and here I was sitting in this horrible place where He could never, ever, reach me. And the terrible thing was that I knew—I knew—that even if I left right then I'd be back sometime in the very near future. I was totally out of control. If I had not had a testimony, that is the first time I think I might have just ended it all. As it was, nothing made sense to me. Not anything. It was the most terrible feeling in the world, and I wanted to just vanish altogether—good room, bad room, and all.

In considering actions of self-indulgence, as well as the other steps of the addictive cycle, the common elements in the stories of Ellen, Bill, and Warren are striking and important. Despite the apparent differences in these people's lives and personalities, and despite the dissimilarity of their actual addictive behaviors, all three stories fit a common pattern. Each of these actions of self-indulgence could be interpreted as a kind of demonic counterfeit for some aspect of life that is good, wholesome, and ultimately a contributor to the joy for which we are designed: Ellen mentions her preoccupation with the process of nourishment, Bill sees drugs as a substitute for the normal physical alternation of relaxation and alertness, and Warren describes his homosexual behaviors as a misguided search for friendship and romantic love. All three of these people fell into the trap of mistaking an activity that blocks pain with an activity that brings joy and, therefore, of placing that activity at the center of their lives.

Bill, Ellen, and Warren all described a complex of behaviors surrounding their actions of self-indulgence that were quite similar. Each of them mentioned an early predisposition to be intrigued with the activity to which they later became addicted. Each described how the fascination grew once they had begun to engage in the behavior, gradually becoming an obsession that absorbed enormous amounts of time and energy and progressively cut them off from interaction with loved ones. All three case histories show the development of an "addictive routine," a series of activities leading up to the actual commission of the action, during which the victim blocked out everyday thoughts and feelings. They describe the way in which their routines became more and more time-consuming and the activities less and less congruent with what they themselves considered decent and good. Finally, Ellen, Bill, and Warren all described the terrible sensation of being "out of control" that assailed them at times when their feelings and consciences were not pushed aside by the excitement of a routinized, addictive action.

The pattern exhibited by these three compulsive-cycle victims in regard to the action of self-indulgence is typical of the addicts we interviewed. Not all of them showed every aspect of the pattern in exactly the same proportions. In some cases, one feature or another of a typical addictive action might be predominant, insignificant, or altogether missing; however, every victim we spoke with recounted experiences with most of the aspects of actions of self-indulgence we have mentioned. Perhaps the single most telling fact that identified an addict was the choice to participate in a behavior even at the expense of hurting or excluding loved ones. That was the source of much anguish for both the compulsive-cycle victims we spoke with and the people who cared about them. During the commission of the "action of self-indulgence," the addict invariably blocked the memory of this pain by becoming absorbed in the addictive routine, which seemed to have an almost hypnotic power of distraction. After the action was over, however—when the second step on the compulsive cycle had been taken and completed yet another time—the addict typically entered the guilt, shame, and self-hatred of the third step. This terrible consequence of the action of self-indulgence is the subject of the next chapter.
