Martha Nibley Beck, John C. Beck, Breaking the Cycle of Compulsive Behavior ( 1990)

5

The Third Step: Feelings of Self-Hatred

For many centuries, one of the most frightening and horrible illnesses of the many that afflict mankind was the disease of leprosy. Leprosy was not feared for bringing sudden death, as many infections can. A quick demise would be merciful compared to the slow decay of leprosy, which rots the body a little at a time, often for years, before the victim finally succumbs to it. Nor is leprosy the most painful condition to be suffered by the sick. On the contrary, this disease owes many of its deadly effects to the fact that it anesthetizes the victim to the sensation of pain, so that wounds and infections go unnoticed until they have destroyed the body piece by piece. This is not a pleasant subject, but it is an apt metaphor to use in describing addictive behavior. For what leprosy does to the body, the compulsive cycle does to the soul. The pain of being left alone on earth to work out one's salvation in fear and trembling is not easy to bear, but like any pain that comes from happenstance rather than from evil, it can be a very useful sensation. It tells us that we must search for the companionship of other people and the Lord's love and ultimately the eternal presence of all righteous beings. It will not allow us to rest completely unless we are moving closer to that happy goal. As we have pointed out in the last two chapters, however, for some people this search ends—or at least is suspended—when they stumble into some action that anesthetizes them to the spiritual pain that accompanies feelings of isolation. Mistaking the comfort of oblivion for that of the Comforter himself, such people often become involved in behavior which tears, wounds, and destroys the soul while the victim is desensitized to its effects.

Satan, however, is crueler than leprosy. He is interested in the anesthetizing effect of addictive actions only so long as they serve to entrap us and allow us to hurt ourselves. Once the injury has been inflicted, there is no need for him to allow us to ignore the pain of drawing further away from our divine potential. The action of self-indulgence may continue for some time, but eventually it ends. No appetite is unlimited. At some point even the most advanced addict reaches the point of surfeit, and the addictive action ceases. Then, inevitably, follows the third step on the compulsive cycle. We have labeled this stage "feelings of self-hatred," but that is a rather pale way to describe the emotions that flood through compulsive-cycle victims when they realize that they have once again broken all promises and resolutions not to engage in the addictive behavior.

This realization is what marks the end of the action of self-indulgence and the beginning of the next step on the cycle. To someone who has never experienced powerful temptation, the claim that behavioral addicts do not realize what they are doing until after the action of self-indulgence is ended might seem rather odd. After all, when someone plans several hours or even days in advance to perform some action and then carries it through with every indication of premeditated gusto, it seems ridiculous to say that the person does not realize what is being done. And indeed, addicts readily admit that in a certain sense they are aware of their actions while the actions are being performed. In another sense, however, they do not fully realize what the action means at the time when they commit it. The function of the routinized patterns of behavior that surround or precede the action of self-indulgence seems to be the removal of the addict from the real world. The further a compulsive-cycle victim goes into these behaviors, the more effectively the addictive routine blocks out awareness of even the most powerful reasons for avoiding the action of self-indulgence. The loved ones whom the addict truly wishes to protect and please, the fervent covenants to obey God's commandments, the expectation of horrific consequences, and every other obstacle to the addiction are simply pushed aside.

The addict does not do this out of spite but because the real world where promises and consequences exist is also the world that contains so much loneliness and unhappiness. As long as the action of self-indulgence is in the immediate future or the present, the addict is aware neither of this earthly isolation nor of the reasons for avoiding the compulsive cycle. Only when the action is over and the excitement inevitably fades does the victim realize—incorporate into the real world—what he or she has just done. When that realization occurs, it is as though an anesthetized person has unwittingly torn his flesh apart and then suddenly regained an acute sensitivity to pain. It may seem to an observer, watching an addict seek out an addictive action again and again, that the compulsive-cycle victim feels no remorse for sins or broken promises. On the contrary, however, the people we spoke with described the third step on the cycle as an overwhelming, all-consuming combination, of guilt, shame, bitterness, remorse, sorrow, and despair. Alma described this feeling to his son Helaman by telling him that it could not be described, referring to it as "inexpressible horror." (Alma 36:14.) The effect of all these emotions seems to boil down to a greatly reduced sense of self-esteem, or as we refer to it on our model of the compulsive cycle, self-hatred.

The feelings of self-hatred that follow the action of self-indulgence may seem natural and even constructive to both a compulsive-cycle victim and the victim's loved ones. Everyone involved may see a healthy dose of guilt as a good indicator that the addict is on the way to reform. That is a natural error to make, for often, especially in instances that do not involve addictive behavior, shame and remorse do result in a sinner's abandoning his sin. The youngster who taunts a classmate may be so affected by the tears in her friend's eyes that she becomes more considerate for the rest of her life. The careless and overly confident teenager might become a much more careful driver after an accident that results in damage to his parents' car. An employee who steals a few items from a huge shipment of goods, thinking it will never be noticed, might be so smitten by conscience that he finds himself unable to enjoy the stolen objects, eventually replaces them, and resolves to be more honest in his daily activities. This kind of guilt—what the scriptures call sorrowing unto repentance—is healthy, normal, and constructive. (See Mormon 2:13-14.) It is one of the chief mechanisms by which we learn to live uprightly. It is given to us by the light of Christ to recognize when an action is unrighteous, and guilt is a part of that recognition.

The self-hatred of the addict following the action of self-indulgence, however, is different from the prickings of conscience just described. It is a horror that numbs and petrifies, rather than remorse that goads to repentance. Self-hatred serves to cement the compulsive cycle in place, rather than to free the victim from it. Victims and their loved ones who view this stage on the compulsive cycle as the guilt that will ensure that the addict "never does it again" are mistaken. Their well-meaning intentions to improve the preventative efficacy of guilt by dwelling on and exacerbating the feelings of self-hatred actually contribute to the problem. These feelings are a part of the compulsive cycle. They perpetuate the addiction. It is therefore very important that both behavioral addicts and those who wish to help them learn to identify these feelings and to distinguish them from the righteous guilt that should follow a misguided or destructive action.

All the behavioral addicts we interviewed described the same type of emotion as following the commission of their various actions of self-indulgence. Usually the addict mentioned that the feelings changed in intensity and nature depending on how long the addiction had been going on. The first commission of an addictive action, especially one that is not explicitly forbidden by the scriptures or social convention, usually inspired a kind of surprise in the perpetrator. "I couldn't believe I had done it" or "It seemed as though it must have been done by someone else" were common descriptions of an addict's reaction to his or her first experience with an action of self-indulgence. When the action was a serious sin, this surprise was more extreme and accompanied by a sense of horror and loss. No matter what the action, however, the feelings of self-hatred that followed this initial realization were less intense during the first revolutions of the compulsive cycle than they became later on. The first experience was usually followed by an immediate resolution never to participate in the activity again, and because the addict had not yet experienced the failure of breaking this commitment, it was usually made with great confidence. At the same time, however, the memory of the pleasure and the oblivion to pain that accompanied the action often occupied a large place in the addict's mind even after the action. This memory, of course, contributed to the re-commission of the action and the perpetuation of the compulsive cycle.

By the time compulsive-cycle victims have been involved in their addiction for several months or years, their reaction to the action of self-indulgence is different from what they experienced at the beginning of the addiction. Many of the people who came to us for advice and volunteered their stories were at this terrible stage. Some had been there for years. Typical comments about the long-time addict's feelings after each occasion of indulging in the action of self-indulgence were, "I want to die," "I feel like killing myself," "there seems to be no hope," "I don't see how I can go on," "it's just too hard to keep trying," or "I'm just naturally this way; I might as well give up."

Not only is the addictive action followed by despair and agony but the pleasure has gone out of the action itself. After years of trying and failing to repent and forsake their addictions, compulsive-cycle victims find their lives transformed into a meaningless repetition of the same tired and hated activities, followed inevitably by self-loathing and despair. Their spirits have been wasted by this leprosy of the soul, until their only keenly felt desire is for the extinction of consciousness. Believing Latter-day Saints know death will not accomplish this end, and that makes the predicament seem completely inescapable to a compulsive-cycle victim in the advanced stages of an addiction.

Between the surprised remorse of the first reaction to sin and the despair of a long-time addict lies a history of deeply felt shame that follows each occurrence of the action of self-indulgence. From the very outset, however, there seem to be notable differences between the guilt of the compulsive-cycle addict and that of a nonaddict who commits a similar sin. Perhaps the most important of these differences is the tendency of behavioral addicts to label themselves evil, disgusting, or worthless. As we mentioned in the chapter on feelings of isolation, many people who are vulnerable to the compulsive cycle already have rather low self-esteem. Many of the very successful people we interviewed who were caught in such a cycle expressed an anxiety about their worth as human beings, which seemed astonishing in view of their impressive accomplishments. Some of these people seemed to be working extraordinarily hard to achieve success of all types, in order to disguise what they felt was their fundamental lack of worth. Other talented people we spoke with were so convinced of their inadequacy as human beings that they refused to work up to their potential in school, employment, or personal relationships. They felt doomed to failure before they began and were not willing to risk the hurt of attempting something that they felt sure would end in a confirmation of their low self-image. Where these people had picked up their original low self-esteem was something that varied with each person and is therefore impossible to sum up in generalized terms. What was obvious from the interviews, however, was that in the first place this skewed image of self increased the victims' sense of isolation, which made them more vulnerable to temptations, and second, that once they had succumbed to temptation, these people immediately decided that the sin was proof of their original estimation of themselves as low and blameworthy. As one woman put it, "When I realized what I'd done, it was like all the worst suspicions that I'd always had about myself came true."

That type of reaction is particularly devastating when the temptations encountered by compulsive-cycle victims are designated by labels that they can apply to themselves to make their self-disgust concrete. One of the most striking examples of labeling we saw in the interviews was evidenced in the difference between men who had some kind of sexual addiction and women who had similar problems. For instance, in the case of men who indulged in improper relationships with women, even repetitively and obsessively, no extremely pejorative title was readily available to affix to the sinner. Our society looks upon such men as impressive and admirable and often gives them such labels as "playboy" or "lady's man," which carry connotations of being dashing, successful, and desirable. A woman who engages in similar relationships with men, on the other hand, is subject to a variety of titles so vituperative that we will not repeat them here. One of the most bewildering things we saw, in interviewing male-female couples who had fallen into precisely the same sin at precisely the same time, was that both partners often labeled the woman and felt concerned about her ability to remain faithful and chaste, whereas the man's sin was seen as a simple and understandable mistake. Surely part of this reaction can be attributed to labeling as well as to the social backgrounds and attitudes that create different types of labels for different types of actions.

Even more devastating than the examples of the labels given to promiscuous women, however, were the absolute designations of type our society assigns to individuals who commit sexual sins in something other than male-female relationships. Of the compulsive-cycle victims we spoke with who were involved in homosexual behaviors, for example, a large number remembered being approached by a much older person and molested when they were still quite young. Because this event had a powerful effect on them, they had decided that they must "be" homosexuals, a label given and heavily reinforced in our society to anyone suspected of such inclinations. One puzzling and saddening problem we faced in our research was that so many reputable theorists state, or simply assume, that one who has committed a homosexual action "is" a homosexual, and can never gain fulfillment in any other type of relationship.

This type of labeling, by the way, is certainly not limited to sexual behavior. According to many of the psychological theorists whose works we studied, once a person is an alcoholic, he or she is always an alcoholic; once an anorexic or bulimic, always an anorexic or bulimic; once a pathological liar, gambler, or kleptomaniac, always and forever a flawed and categorized person. Nevertheless, when psychologists deal with these afflictions, their assumption is that the addict can at least be helped to escape from the behavior, even if there is always some susceptibility to the problem, and great success in overcoming their addictions has been achieved by people in all these categories. This escape is assumed not to be available to people who engage in homosexual activities but who do not wish to be homosexual. It is politically inadvisable to suggest that homosexuals either can or should establish heterosexual relationships. The few stories that are available about homosexuals who attempt a heterosexual life-style often cite their eventual return to their "true nature." This belief keeps everyone within the bounds set by those who claim that homosexuals are a genetically distinctive group, entitled by an accident of birth to live a separate life-style. By far the strongest statements we found to the contrary were published by members of the Church, especially modern prophets. We have no wish to argue with homosexuals who are intent on claiming the right to be homosexual. We are addressing those who believe in the gospel, who do not wish to lead a homosexual life-style, and who wonder if the hope offered by the prophets is as convincing as the unanimous cry of the secular world. In our research we encountered a number of people who, at this writing, appear to have escaped from both the enveloping label of homosexual and the behaviors it entails. But the power of this title, and the encouragement given to those who are tempted to admit that they "are" homosexual, to establish an identity within themselves as homosexuals first and foremost, is by far the most devastating example of the power of labeling that we saw in our interviews.

The act of labeling oneself, of identifying with the sin one has committed before one identifies with any other aspect of one's being, is not part of healthy guilt. The Lord tells us over and over again through the scriptures and His spokesmen on the earth that judgment is not ours. It belongs to Him. We are instructed to recognize sin and to abhor it, but to abhor the sinner is itself a sin. A person who sees himself or herself chiefly as a child of God, and who knows of the unlimited potential for goodness pertaining to this relationship, will see addiction as a dangerous behavior uncharacteristic and unworthy of a Divine heritage.

That is how the Lord sees us. It is how He wants us to see ourselves. The power that encourages us to judge, to label, and to hate the sinner as well as the sin comes from below and not from above. We interviewed many compulsive-cycle victims who actually seemed proud of their self-hatred, as though this loathing was a demonstration of their good intentions and their knowledge that what they had done was wrong. The more they could hate themselves, the more righteous they felt. What a paradox! It is Satan who despises us, and when we hate ourselves—even because of the basest transgression—he and all his angels rejoice that we have joined their ranks. Judgment belongs to the Lord. And yet, consider His actions when He confronted the woman taken in adultery—not "the adulteress," but "the woman, the daughter of God, taken in adultery." Knowing full well that He would suffer for her sins in Gethsemane, that He had every right under heaven to accuse her, Jesus told the woman, "Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." (John 8:11.)

That is all He asks any of us to do in assessing our own actions. In our hearts, most of us know that. But the fact is that "going and sinning no more" is the one action many of us are not willing to perform. The compulsive-cycle victim, in particular an individual who has been involved with an addiction for some time, is unwilling to forgo the addiction, no matter how guilty he or she may feel about it. Like many of the people described by Nephi, addicts seem to feel at some level that if they "sin a little," "God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God." (2 Nephi 28:8.) Inflicting those "stripes" themselves, by a sort of emotional self-flagellation following the action of self-indulgence, seems in many cases to be part of the addictive ritual, the way in which the victim pays for the sin so that there will be no need to give it up. Unlike the feeling of sorrowing unto repentance, which makes the guilty person hurry to leave the sin in the past and get on with a righteous life, the feelings of self-hatred experienced by the compulsive-cycle victims rivet addicts' attention on their mistakes and on their own sinful natures, absorbing so much attention and energy that the feelings actually interfere with other aspects of living. Obsessed with the idea that they are dreadful persons whom everyone would despise "if they knew what I really am," compulsive-cycle victims withdraw further and further from loved ones and from the Lord. A behavioral addict may seem driven to work at a frenzied pace or else refuse to work at all in jobs or school. The person may sleep too much or too little and seem unable to enjoy leisure activities. The Lord, who is our model for all behavior, clearly tells us that once we have truly repented of our sins and forsaken them, He simply forgets them. Compulsive-cycle victims in the throes of feelings of self-hatred do not forget their mistakes, not any of them, not for an instant. That is not a Christlike reaction.

One of the most instructive stories we heard about the difference between feelings of self-hatred and sorrowing unto repentance was told to us by one of several bishops we interviewed about their experiences counseling people with addictive problems. This Church leader recounted an experience he had had while serving as bishop of another ward some years earlier. A great deal of the bishop's attention in his calling was taken up in trying to help a member of his ward—we'll call him Eric—who was addicted to alcohol. This ward member went on a drinking binge every few months, whenever pressures at work and in his troubled marriage became too intense for him to handle. After each drinking bout, Eric reacted by plunging into a severe depression, during which he berated himself as a failure, a disgusting, drunken bum, and any other degrading label he could think of. His wife, who loved her husband despite their arguments and was deeply concerned about his drinking, tried to stop Eric by shielding him from consequences on one hand (making excuses for him at work, delivering messages for him while he was drunk, and so on) and on the other hand by reemphasizing his feelings of self-hatred. After a drinking binge, Eric would go through a period of being verbally abused by both himself and his wife. Then he would go to the bishop, confess his sins, and to quote the bishop, "hang his head like a whipped dog expecting to be kicked." After a few occasions the confession appeared to become part of the routine that surrounded Eric's binges. In fact, he seemed disappointed that the bishop did not "come down harder" on him, since the sting of shame seemed to allow him to feel that he had paid for, and thus repented of, his sins.

The bishop advised Eric many times to attend the local branch of an alcoholic treatment program. Finally, he told us, "I delivered him personally to a meeting and made sure he stayed there." At the meeting, Eric encountered some new perspectives about both his relationship with alcohol and his relationship with God. That night, at his home, Eric prayed for help in overcoming his addiction. He had said similar prayers many times before that, but this time Eric felt his prayer answered by a flood of warmth and love that was completely different from the vengeance he expected the Lord to pour out on him. The next day Eric made yet another appointment with the bishop. As the bishop later told us, "Eric was a different person that day. He was completely honest about his problem, but he didn't dwell on it. He didn't seem to be begging me to restore his self-confidence, and he didn't seem hopeless. In fact, he seemed to be really happy, even though he wasn't proud of his actions. That's really what it was. He was still ashamed of his actions, but he was proud of himself. Now, I grew up thinking that if you were really repentant, you'd go through all kinds of weeping and wailing when you confessed to the bishop. Well, Eric used to do that—in fact, he did it all the time. But this time he didn't shed a tear. He actually seemed excited. But this time the Spirit told me Eric had really repented for the first time."

Eric had occasional problems with alcohol even after this incident, but the different character of his reaction to his mistakes helped him use them as constructive, rather than destructive, lessons. At this writing it has been ten years since Eric took a drink. Both the professional and the personal sides of his life seem to be going well, and he is active and happy in his Church callings. What changed first for Eric was the quality of his reaction to the action of self-indulgence that tied him to the compulsive cycle. The crushing force of the feelings of self-hatred he had felt for years finally gave way to the sorrow that came from the knowledge that he was worth too much to waste, not that he was worthless until he repented.

The stories of Ellen, Bill, and Warren at the third stage on the compulsive cycle all fit the typical pattern of a behavioral addict who has not yet reached the realization of personal worth that rescued Eric. Their stories have in common a monotonous theme of self-destructive shame and guilt. The media of our society often portray addicts as tortured souls whose suffering is extraordinarily noble and romantic; however, anyone who consistently deals with people who are full of guilt—but not to repentance—soon comes to the conclusion that there are few things more common and less interesting than self-hatred. Still, the images of Ellen, Bill, and Warren suffering through these feelings may serve to illustrate the third step on the compulsive cycle, as well as to show that just as faith in our divine potential can bring us closer to the Lord, belief in our own worthlessness inevitably brings us closer to the adversary.

It was five-thirty in the afternoon, and already as dark as midnight. Ellen had a ballet class at six, and until lunchtime she'd honestly been planning to go. The dance class had been traumatic since she had gained nearly three and a half pounds (according to the digital readout on her new computerized scales), and Ellen was sure everyone in the class was scandalized by her obesity. She was constantly afraid that the teacher would comment. After all, she'd enrolled in ballet in the first place to make sure that she would stick to her diet and exercise program. Ballet people really cared about thinness, Ellen had told herself, and if she knew she had to show up in a leotard and parade around in front of several of them, that thought would certainly be enough to stop her from indulging in the eating binges that had recently been getting more and more frequent.

Somehow, the plan didn't seem to be working the way Ellen had expected it would. In fact, she had to admit that it seemed to be having the opposite effect. Whenever she thought about her ballet class and the necessity of staying thin to avoid the disapproval of her instructors and classmates, she was gripped by the terror that she would never be able to do it—that her true, fat nature would soon bulge out and reveal itself in the most public and humiliating way. The really infuriating thing was that every time this fear came over her, she had the same reaction. Well, approximately the same. Sometimes it was chocolate ripple, and sometimes it was burnt almond fudge. But it was always an unbelievable amount, and she always ended up vomiting to get rid of it.

Ellen lifted her head wearily and stared at the rim of the bathroom sink. She couldn't afford to miss ballet again, but she certainly couldn't go now. This was where she'd spent the last class period, too—slouched against the cold tile wall between the fixtures of the only private bathroom in her dorm. Finding a place to rid herself of calories after a binge had been one of the most time-consuming struggles of her years of college. Now, though, she wasn't sure the private bathroom was a good thing. Knowing it was available seemed to have made her binges begin more easily and go on longer. Ellen winced. She didn't want to think about that, about the way she behaved when that terrible demon overtook her, about the contrast between her life and the lives of normal people. She would tell her ballet instructor that she'd had—uh—food poisoning. All week. That wasn't very far from the truth, really. A whole gallon of ice cream at one sitting was probably an overdose in the truest medical sense of the word.

Ellen closed her eyes and pressed her cheek against the cold tile wall. She knew what was coming. It had to come. After each and every binge it came, like the bills after a credit-card spending spree. Buy now, pay later. She hadn't enjoyed this latest binge at all—hadn't enjoyed eating for years—but at least while she'd been in the middle of it she hadn't had to think about anything. Especially she hadn't thought about herself: what a really low, abhorrent, filthy creature she was. Ellen put her face against her knees, pressed the heels of her hands against her forehead, and began to rock slightly back and forth as the realization of what she was and what she had done began to break over her in scalding waves. Familiar, time-worn nouns began to parade themselves through her mind: pig, slob, glutton, barbarian. . . . They were followed by the adjectives: fat, obscene, disgusting, hideous, gross, filthy. . . . There were more adjectives than nouns. They took longer to go through. They always did.

Ellen hugged her bent legs and pressed her eyes against her kneecaps until stars and comets twirled behind the lids. The verbs went by: swilling, hogging, stuffing. . . . After four years of this, Ellen was a veritable thesaurus of degrading gustatory terminology.

She wanted to run, wanted to escape this thing that was ruining her life and filling her with inexpressible disgust. She rose jerkily to her feet and began to pace back and forth, back and forth, between the sink and the wall four feet away. There was no escaping the thing. The thing was Ellen. How could she get away? What was there in Ellen that could get away from the essence of what she had become? There was no place far enough, deep enough, dark enough, to hide Ellen from herself. Every day she walked and ran and danced and bicycled away from her Self, trying to make it dissolve around her, and everywhere she went the Self came with her. Every day—yes, she had to admit it had become every day—some part of her Self that was not Ellen filled her with food, food used like a weapon to hurt her and destroy her while it enlarged its Self. Every day she purged her Self, sometimes again and again, trying to spit her Self out and flush her Self away forever. The catharsis would ease the agony for a moment. But then it would return again, this Self that was destroying Ellen. And every time it came back, it was stronger.

Ellen began to pace faster, swinging in little circles between the bathroom wall and the door, panicking at being trapped in this tiny room with her most powerful and most hated enemy. She couldn't leave, couldn't go out where people could see her, her loathsome and bloated Self dragging her with it like a criminal locked in the stocks for people to jeer at. Ellen hated her Self, hated it with a passion she no longer felt for anything else. She could see it all so clearly now, everything her Self was doing to her. There must be a way, must be a way to win victory over it. Ellen was beginning to perspire from her frantic pacing in the tiny warm room. She stopped and jerked open the medicine cabinet. The panic receded slightly and her eyes brightened as she quickly made a mental catalog of the contents. One bottle of aspirin, two used cotton balls, a box of laxatives (those were Ellen's—she used them sometimes after a binge), and a disposable razor.

A razor! Ellen backed away from the medicine cabinet and did two or three more laps around the bathroom. She could win. Yes, she could win. She could destroy her Self, and then she would be free. Ellen clenched her teeth in a defiant snarl. Revenge, that was what she wanted. Revenge over this hideous Self that lured her into unspeakable actions, that had used her to gorge its Self until Ellen was driven half mad with hatred for it. Her Self had ruined her life, Ellen thought, and it was only by taking her life—taking it back—that she could ruin the Self. With trembling fingers Ellen lifted the razor from its shelf and tried the edge against her wrist. It was dull, coated with shaving cream and hard-water minerals, but it was sharp enough. She drove the corner of the blade into her skin.

A brilliant flash of pain shot up Ellen's arm and into her brain, and the razor dropped, clattering to the floor. Blood oozed from a small wound in her wrist, not even big enough to require a Band-Aid and pitifully inadequate to accomplish what Ellen had planned. She kicked the razor into the corner, shaking her arm furiously until the blood flicked over the mirror and the white tile of the bathroom wall. Her mouth opened in a silent scream—not because of the pain in her wrist but because of the pain in her soul. There was no escape; there would be no victory. The Self had won again. She could hate it, but she could not stop it. It would preserve its Self, it would go on taking her with it into binges and purges and ice cream shops and lavatories, always becoming worse, always more shameful, until . . .

Until what? There was no "until." Dawn would never break on this night. Even if she died, Ellen knew in her heart—had known since the answer to a simple prayer had come one Sunday morning when she was only nine—that what awaited her after death was simply more of life. She could not believe that this knowledge had made her happy at one time. She had heard of religious men in India who burned themselves alive. Ellen thought she knew why they must do it. They were trying to get rid of them Selves, to disappear into the air, to scatter them Selves over such a vast territory that they could never possibly reassemble. But the Church was true, Ellen assented bitterly. The Resurrection was real, and extinction was impossible even for the damned. And oh, if ever a soul deserved to be damned, she thought, it was her Self. She would have no escape from it, no victory, no relief from surrender. The Self never slept while Ellen was awake. It never stayed in a room when Ellen left. It never let itself go unsatiated when Ellen was hungry.

With a sudden surge of horror, Ellen realized that she was hungry now. She had rid her Self not an hour ago of everything she'd eaten during her last binge, and her stomach was growling again already. Ellen stared at her Self in the mirror with eyes that widened in terror. Until now after a binge she'd been free from the urge to eat again until at least the next day. Now, it had been only an hour, and the demon was emerging already. What was this thing, Ellen thought, this Self in the mirror? The image was hard for Ellen to see clearly, so great were the hatred and the fear she felt toward it. It was a hideous, slavering, voracious, insatiable monster. She was too weak to fight it anymore. Ellen watched, exhausted, as her Self opened the door and pulled her out of the bathroom with it. She thought dimly that she must stop her Self from going in search of food for another binge. But the very thought of food seemed to feed the Self, and it grew stronger as Ellen headed for the exit. At least the unbearable horror was slowly giving way to blessed numbness. Anything was better than what she had been feeling in the bathroom. As she walked more and more quickly toward the shop where she always bought her ice cream, Ellen felt her Self begin to smile.

Far away, across the wide green field, walked a small company of people just Bill's age. They were chatting and laughing, and Bill thought he could see them getting ready for a picnic. He smiled, watching the expressions on their faces and the comfort they seemed to feel in each other's presence. Their courtesy toward each other was obvious but not stilted, and the whole group seemed to shimmer with a marvelous combination of tranquillity and excitement. Bill wanted more than anything in the world to be invited to the picnic. But it was so far away, such a long way to travel . . . if he didn't hurry, he thought with a sudden pang of anxiety, they would finish and go away before he reached them. Bill began to run forward, forgetting where he had been standing. Suddenly the green field was gone, and he felt the earth vanish beneath him. He was falling—falling, falling, endlessly falling into the blank gray abyss that separated him from the picnickers.

Bill woke up with a gasp and stared at the ceiling, eyes wide, body tense, for almost a full minute before he realized he had been dreaming. It was always the same dream, every couple of months. The same field, the same distance, the same plunge into nothingness that shocked him awake and left him trembling for hours. This time, though, the people at the picnic had been different. He knew them. He'd been out on his first blind double-date with them not—he glanced at the clock—six hours before. Bill didn't know how he'd been talked into something like that in the first place, especially by people in his ward. He hadn't really talked to anyone at church for more than a year, let alone gone out for an evening with ward members. Since he and Jenny broke up, though, life had been pretty lonely, and he'd mentioned the fact to Jeff Bridgeman at church one day, in response to Jeff's simple "How are ya?" Stupid, Bill told himself, to go telling your life story to someone who probably couldn't care less. But he liked Jeff, thought he could probably trust him, and the stuff about Jenny had just sort of spilled out before he'd had a chance to think. He hadn't been asking for charity. But the next day Jeff had called with a series of statements, not questions—"We're going to a movie Friday night. Dinner first. Your date's name is Tammy. She's terrific; you'll like her a lot. See you at six." Jeff had hung up before Bill could say a word.

He had hardly been able to believe it when Friday at six P.M. he had found himself showered, shaved, dressed, and even a little excited. What was easier to believe was that he was as high as a kite—it would have been unthinkable to meet all these new people, to be with them for a whole evening, without something to help him. He hadn't even felt a twinge of guilt, taking drugs for something like this. No one could be expected to face a blind date without a little extra courage from somewhere. With his ears ringing and his pulse racing from the effects of the uppers, Bill felt confident that he would be able to entertain the others and enjoy himself. Still, he had to admit that he needed a lot more of whatever he was taking to help him perform well these days. It was a struggle simply to feel normal anymore, even when he was high or drunk. It used to be that drugs had made everything seem so extraordinarily vivid. Now Bill needed them just to keep the world from fading out altogether. When he wasn't on something, every stubbed toe and hangnail was excruciating, but at the same time he seemed to feel nothing. The amount of drugs Bill had had to take to get ready for the blind date would have sent him into space a year ago. Now it seemed barely enough to bring him up to the level of everyday life.

Well, Bill thought ruefully, staring at the ceiling, Jeff had been right. Tammy was terrific. So was Jeff's girlfriend Linda, and in fact Jeff himself. Bill was astonished at how cheerful and comfortable the three of them seemed. They didn't talk like Jenny and the friends he'd met through her. They never seemed to say anything bad about anything or anyone. That's all Jenny's friends—and Bill along with them—had ever done. All their conversations had been characterized by a sort of continuous sneer at everyone who wasn't like them, jokes about people who didn't act like they did and were too gauche to know how gauche they were. Bill was used to that kind of humor. He had actually become quite good at it, provided he was stoned. But here were three people, Tammy, Jeff, and Linda, who seemed to accept everyone no matter how they acted. And they kept laughing, like little kids in the middle of a game. Bill was sure for a while that they must be using something. He even asked a few key questions, giving them every opportunity to tell him about their experiences with drugs. "Well, you seem happy tonight," he told Tammy, watching her face, "What's your secret?" and later, to Jeff, "Nice party. Do you party a lot?"

Bill shook his head in wonderment. They hadn't shown a flicker of understanding. Tammy had answered that she was happy because it was the weekend, and Jeff had given him a quizzical look and said that he liked parties just fine, but he'd call this just a date—parties had cookies and punch. Either they were both amazingly competent liars, or Tammy and Jeff really hadn't realized that Bill was talking about drugs. Bill couldn't believe anyone was that good a liar. That left only one possibility. Somehow, incredibly, the other three people on his blind date had been having all that fun under their own power.

After this shocking realization, Bill had spent the rest of the evening watching in awe as Linda, Tammy, and Jeff talked and laughed and changed their minds about the movie. As they walked up to the marquee, Tammy had said, "Look, you can go to a movie all alone. As long as we're together, let's do something together." Five minutes later they had all been renting shoes at a bowling alley—and Bill was the only one in the group who'd ever bowled. A kind of aching warmth began to bother Bill, like heartburn, as he remembered teaching the other three the basics: showing them how to pull back straight and follow through smoothly, the same way he'd taught his brothers and sisters to pitch a baseball or clear the high hurdles. For about five minutes, struggling to make the technique clear to them, Bill had forgotten all about himself—what he was and what he did. He didn't remember thinking anything consciously, there in the bowling alley, but for those few minutes he'd allowed himself to feel that he was one of them.

That, Bill thought, had been a mistake. It had brought on the stupid picnic dream again. What Jeff and Linda and Tammy were, Bill may once have been, but that was a long time ago. They were like children, they really were. Carefree, unspoiled, and above all, innocent. For Bill that part of life was over. Those people were in good with God, he reminded himself sternly. Happiness was automatic for them. They'd get married in the temple and have lots of little kids, and they would never even dream what it was like for people like Bill who hadn't made it. What would it be like, Bill wondered, if he could go back again to when he was a little boy, to when he'd never done anything really wrong and he had the chance to make the choice again? Knowing it was a dangerous and foolish thing to do, Bill let himself imagine. No drugs, nothing wrong, everything all fresh . . . Bill put his hands over his face and began to cry.

It was so stupid to think about it. He needed the drugs now. He couldn't bear life without them. He just wasn't a good enough person to handle things alone, or strong enough to cope with the world as it really was, or something. He didn't know. But he'd tried to stop, he really had, and it was just no good. The tears that had pooled up by the bridge of Bill's nose overflowed down his cheeks. They ran into his ears, dripped onto his pillow, and soaked the hair at the nape of his neck: more tears than he had believed his body could contain. It was over, it was all over. All happiness, all goodness, all innocence. Innocence was like a crystal vase: it couldn't be glued together once it had shattered. Bill rolled over onto his side, and the tears found new tracks down the sides of his face. Was it any good at all to try to patch up the vase, since the cracks would always be there no matter what? No. There was no reason even to try.

Still, he had to do something. He was running out of money. His savings for his car, his mission, everything was gone. Bill could hardly believe what his life had become. When he was eight and his horse had thrown him and broken his leg, he hadn't cried. When he was twelve and stepped on a rake, almost impaling his foot, he hadn't cried. While the doctor had cleaned the wound and given him a tetanus shot, telling Bill's father that even grown men could hardly stand that kind of pain, Bill had never once really cried. Those wounds had healed. Bones knit, flesh mends, but damaged innocence is damaged forever. Sobbing quietly, amazed that the tears kept coming, Bill thought of ways that he could make himself stop using drugs. He would punish himself, for one thing. He wouldn't watch TV, or eat anything but cereal, or something—anything—until he had been clean for . . . a week. No, a month—well, a week. But even as he made the resolution he knew it wouldn't work. TV and food were insignificant compared to how much Bill needed drugs. He didn't care about anything anymore as long as he had something to get high on. Except, of course . . . that was it. His calls home to his family were the high point of his week. He would abstain from them until he was clean. That would give him enough motivation, he was sure of it. He didn't deserve to call them anyway, really. That was something good people did—talk to their parents and their brothers and sisters. Good people could give their families something worthwhile, and they deserved what their families gave them back. Bill began to cry harder than ever. He was a bad, bad person, he told himself, and he had no right to associate with the Stewarts. He had shamed them. He had brought dishonor to the whole family, and if they knew what he was, they would never speak to him anyway.

Behind his swollen eyelids Bill let himself watch the image of the green field and the happy picnicking group, so far away, beyond the gray chasm. He had been there once. He had been with them; he had been like them. If he could just forget what it had been like to be innocent, he wouldn't feel this way all the time. But only drugs were strong enough to make him forget, and they didn't last long. When their effects faded, as they had done now, the memory of innocence came back to haunt him like the ghost of a dearly loved friend. The sweetness of what he had lost and the yearning for what could never be beckoned beseechingly across the bottomless abyss. Bill pulled the pillow over his face and cried as though the tears would never stop.

Warren was exhausted. He rubbed his fingers over the stubble on his chin and peeled off his coat and tie on the way to his kitchen. He poured himself a glass of orange juice and took a long drink. Hungry, too. He hadn't eaten since lunch, and he'd walked a long way. Warren wondered how much territory he'd covered in five hours of wandering. At four miles an hour (Warren's long legs and athletic stride carried him at least that fast), that would be—good grief, twenty miles! No wonder he was worn out and ravenous. He peered into the refrigerator. Two boxes of Chinese take-out left over from the night before, a very old apple, and the orange juice. Not a very promising assortment. Warren picked up the apple, took a bite, found it mealy, and chucked the rest into the disposal. So he'd go hungry. So who cared. Feeding him was like putting gas in a car that had been hit by a bomb.

He found the remote control to his stereo television and switched it on. Most of the channels had already gone off the air. The all-night news anchorman was recounting the story of a particularly grisly murder in the L.A. area, and on the late movie Humphrey Bogart was kissing Ingrid Bergman. Warren watched for a minute. There was a man's man, he told himself as Humphrey walked into the night. Torn from the woman he loved, facing possible heroic death amid the sands of Casablanca . . . Warren wished that he could trade lives with Humphrey's character. A quick death with honor sounded wonderful. But it was much too late for that. He switched off the TV and ran his hand through his disheveled hair.

Well, he'd done it again. That was all there was to it. Not that it seemed one more time should matter. One more broken promise to himself, one more step away from the life he always thought he would live. It had become so routine he hardly thought he should feel anything about it anymore. But he did. He kept wondering why. Why, after all the plans he'd made to keep himself away from it, all the schemes he'd thought through, all the structures he'd put into his schedule so that he wouldn't have time to go wandering, why had he done it anyway? That's how it always started, he could see that now. Just wandering, just an innocent little evening walk around town. Just seeing the sights, getting some exercise. And then, of course, he'd been curious. Not tempted, just curious. It was interesting, to see what was happening in "that" part of town. Naturally, when he got to "that" part of town, there were a lot of magazines around. He'd needed to get some cough drops, anyway, and all the convenience stores in "that" part of town carried "that" kind of magazine. He hadn't really been able to help looking at them once he'd gone into a store, and besides, that pornographic stuff didn't really affect him. It was no big deal.

From the convenience store on, Warren noted concisely, he hadn't been wandering anymore. He had been prowling. And, of course, he knew where and how to prowl. After all these years of "innocent little walks," Warren had picked up all the cues and broken down all the barriers within himself. It was getting easier all the time. The streets seemed to be swarming with people like him, all prowling around, looking for each other. There had been a time when Warren had found this idea tremendously exciting—it meant that he was not alone, that he belonged to a brotherhood of people who felt as he did. That's why he had started talking to these people in the first place, Warren told himself. He had really just wanted to meet someone who was like him. But it seemed that he was different from the people he met in bars and bookstores and on the street, just as he was different from the people he'd met so long ago—it seemed like another lifetime—in church and school and his parents' parties. Yes, Warren had met plenty of people on his "little walks" who shared his inclinations. But most of the men he had met seemed to embrace this identity with defiant pride. He found he couldn't really talk to them. Many of them seemed brittle and shallow and cold and predatory, centered on their bodies, the bodies of others, and the elevation of their sexuality to a total definition of life. Once he had finished a "little walk" and his energy was spent, Warren was always frightened by the memory of the men he had sought out.

The ironic thing, he thought as he rose wearily and went into the bedroom, was that they probably thought the same about him. He remembered what Alice, his office partner at work, had said to him just as he finished canceling his afternoon meetings, telling himself he had to get some exercise. "Are you all right?" Alice had asked, her voice concerned. "You look awful. What's wrong? Did somebody die or something?" Warren had realized, right then at that moment, that the expression on his face was the same one he watched for on other men's faces in "that" part of town. It was a kind of intense searching look, driven by desperation and masked in pride, with eyes like the eyes of a captured bird of prey. He felt it on his own face as Alice had spoken, but the recognition had meant nothing to him then. He was becoming just like the men who frightened him, and he would have done anything at that moment to get out of the office and become more like them than ever.

Warren's eyes as he looked back on the evening still had something of the falcon in them. He felt that he could see himself with extraordinary clarity. As his realization of what he had done—what he was—grew sharper and more vivid, Warren hated himself with a cold and unsparing hatred. Perhaps, really, he should just give up. After all, there was no way back. If his parents, his friends, his mission president—anyone he had ever truly respected in his life—got the faintest inkling of half of what Warren had done, he would drop lower in their esteem than the most revolting vermin. He knew that. It was an absolute. So why bother to avoid their disgust, when he knew perfectly well he deserved it? Ah, it was just so hard. So hard. Everyone was so proud of him, thought he was so perfect. It would hurt them if they knew. It would reflect on his parents. They would blame themselves and so would other people. Tongues would wag all over the country as one friend passed along to another the little tidbit of news about the Whites' son, Warren, and isn't it a pity, he seemed like such a promising young man . . .

No, he couldn't just accept himself and "come out of the closet." It would hurt too many people. But he was starting to feel that he couldn't really accept those people either, knowing as he did that his real identity was something they rejected and despised. Warren sat down on the edge of his bed and let himself fall backward onto it like a rag doll. He was so tired. He remembered feeling something like this after long days of tracting in Germany. Mile after freezing mile he had trudged through the streets, in his missionary shoes, looking for people who would stop and talk with him. His eyes had scanned faces then just as they did earlier today, looking for someone with the right combination of features, someone who would meet his eyes, someone who was also searching for something. Sometimes those days had been so discouraging that he had almost wept with frustration and fatigue when evening came and he could relax. At those times, Warren remembered, he would open his scriptures and play a little game. It was very simple. All he had to do was find scriptures that described the way the Lord felt about His missionaries and then read them to himself. But instead of reading them just as they were written, Warren would put his own name in the place of all the proper nouns that referred to people. That was it, the whole game. But it had gotten him through some awful evenings.

Warren closed his eyes and smiled, remembering some of the scriptures he'd loved best and the warmth of hearing them, in his mind, addressed specifically to him: "My son [Warren], peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment. And then, if thou endure it well, [Warren], God will exalt thee on high." (D&C 121:7-8.)

"O thou afflicted [Warren], tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, [Warren], I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires." (Isaiah 54:11.)

"For God so loved the world [Warren], that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever [Warren] believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16.)

A peaceful glow began to spread over Warren's body as the familiar passages flowed through his mind. He was almost asleep, but there was something, some little thing. . . .

Abruptly Warren's bloodshot blue eyes snapped open, and he was back in the real world. He was sickening. How dared he, how dared he apply those scriptures to himself after what he had done? There were other scriptures for him and his kind. Head spinning with fatigue, Warren got up and walked to the bookshelf. There were his scriptures, a gift from his parents at the time he left for his mission, gathering dust between his old college textbooks and some cheap paperback novels. Coldly, methodically, Warren pulled the scriptures out of the bookcase and began to leaf through them.

"Woe unto them [Warren] who commit whoredoms, for they [Warren] shall be thrust down to hell." (2 Nephi 9:36.)

"A wicked man [Warren] is loathsome, and cometh to shame." (Proverbs 13:5.)

"Thou [Warren] shalt not commit adultery; and he [Warren] that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out." (D&C 42:24.)

Warren slammed the scriptures shut and threw them against the wall. Repent. Repent. He had sinned, and he was loathsome, and he was about to be totally cast out, unless he repented. What did that mean? That he should never do anything sinful again? What a laugh. The last time he remembered believing that could happen was more than a year ago. He'd averaged a sin a week since then, he estimated, and it was getting worse and more frequent all the time. He was a pervert. That was all there was to it. He was an abomination, a freak, a distortion of nature. He could see how a person could repent of something he'd done, but how was he supposed to repent of what he was? Yes, he believed that the Lord would forgive him, if he sincerely repented, no matter how many times he sinned. But was that to be his life—one constant round of trying, failing, tormenting himself in sackcloth and ashes, and trying and failing again? Other people didn't have to live that way. Other people had "joy and rejoicing in their posterity," and happy homes, and someone to talk to when they were too afraid to sleep. Yes, he believed that God could forgive him, but he wasn't sure he could forgive God. To make a person this way, to give him a flaw over which he had no control, and then condemn him for it—what kind of a God was this? Warren had prayed so hard, so long, so often before he'd finally given up on the whole thing. He'd thought at the time that forgetting this religion, with its whimsical, condemnatory, torturing God, would buy him some relief.

No relief had come. Not then, not since. Warren worked through most of the days now with the thought of night growing more and more intoxicating in his mind. He spent the evenings wandering in a fixed trance, like a hunter among other hunters. He spent the nights alone or with people he feared, watching himself become one of them. And he spent the early mornings coldly, carefully controlling the despair and emptiness that overwhelmed him. Well, Warren thought, God had certainly kept his word about "thrusting the adulterer down to hell." Here was hell, large as life, right here in southern California. Warren considered his options. He could certainly kill himself, but there didn't really seem to be much point in that. It wouldn't change things for him, and it would ruin his parents. He could go on pretending to be normal, live through his entire life in this tumult of hidden deeds and fears of being found out. He thought about it. No. Unendurable. The control he was careful to maintain was wearing thin. He could feel it. Something was going to snap if he went on the way he was. Well, then, he could move away, change his name, never let his parents hear about him, and dive into the world of his own kind. Warren pondered this for a while. Yes, it seemed to be the only possible way to continue his life. He had no choice. It was time to surrender.

Twenty miles. Whew. Warren unbuttoned his shirt and took it off. It was his favorite shirt, a white one. Virgin white, he thought. Warren White. Warren Virgin White. Warren placed the edge of the shirt's collar between his even teeth. With a sudden tug and a twist of his head, he tore the collar off the shirt. Then he carefully placed one hand on each side of the neck and tore the shirt in two down the middle. His strong fingers worked busily, as he ripped the pocket from the breast, yanked the sleeves off the torso, and began to shred the fabric into long ragged strips. When there was nothing left to tear, Warren bunched the cotton he was holding into a compact ball between his fingers and twisted it. He tightened his grip with all the strength he had, until his body shook with the strain. The veins in his neck and forehead stood out like bluish cords. When he opened his hands, the shirt was still there. Warren began to chuckle as he looked at its torn and bedraggled remains. No, there was no getting rid of himself, no matter how hard he tried. Whatever he did, he would always have to be. It was really very funny. One puny pervert in the broad span of history, struggling to disguise himself from his destiny. The chuckle grew louder, then became an outright laugh. Warren threw the dismembered shirt on the floor and kicked it against the wall. He threw himself on the bed, exhausted, wheezing and coughing with laughter, and his eyes were the eyes of a captured bird of prey.

It is ironic that we often feel that the suffering that comes to sinners as a result of their sin is "fair," that it is less deserving of pity than the suffering of innocents. "Well," we say, watching the news in appalled fascination as an exposed addict's face contorts with shame and anguish, "he brought it on himself." We almost celebrate the addict's humiliation, comforting ourselves with the notion that he is nothing like us nor anyone we care for. Sometimes we think with pity about the wicked one's poor parents, or spouse, or children—but the sinner himself? He deserves whatever he gets, we comment to each other. And those who secretly know that they have committed the same actions and deserve the same punishment nod in agreement, hating themselves more than ever.

How strange it is that the Lord views sinners, including compulsive-cycle addicts, so differently from the way we view them. At times, He almost seems to downplay the suffering of righteous people by comparison. While it seems that He might concentrate harder on preserving the innocent from all the trials and inconveniences of life, the Lord incongruously spends almost all His time worrying about the guilty. Instead of concentrating all His approval on those who resist temptation, the Good Shepherd takes time to "leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it." (Luke 15:4.) During His ministry on earth, Jesus spent a good deal of His time with the wicked, forgiving their sins and incurring the wrath of the law-abiding Pharisees. Preposterously, after all the pains we take to be upright, He tells us that "joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, who need no repentance." (Luke 15:7.) How unfair! How infuriating! How could a just God favor the wicked over the righteous?

The answer is, of course, that He does not. He loves us all with an equal and infinite love. The Lord's joy in the sinner that repents, His constant urging that we must all repent and encourage others to repent, comes from His knowledge of what it feels like to suffer the understanding of one's own guilt. That is partly what Gethsemane was for, to let the Savior understand through His own experience what we suffer when we sin. And even He, who walked calmly through persecution and to death, pleaded with His Father that that particular cup might be taken from Him. Christ has felt every depth of horror, every shock of realization, every hopeless yearning that a deed could be undone that all of us combined will ever feel. And so He knows that the pains of the righteous, however unbearable they may seem, are trivial compared to the pains of the guilty. He and His prophets, like Alma, are filled "with great anxiety even unto pain" that we avoid such anguish if at all possible. (Alma 13:27.) The Lord and His servants urge all people to repentance, not because they do not understand how hard it is to repent, but because they do understand. They know the feelings that accompany sin; however, the Lord and His servants also know something that many compulsive-cycle addicts do not: the feelings that accompany righteousness. The feelings of self-hatred we have discussed in this chapter are not among such righteous emotions. They do not lead the guilty addict to reach out to help others or to make restitution for the wrong, as feelings of remorse usually do.

On the contrary, as we have seen in the stories of Ellen, Bill, and Warren, behavioral addicts' hatred, depression, disgust, and despair at their own actions make them withdraw from the company of others. Victims of compulsive cycles are sure that if anyone, particularly the people they love most, knew about the addictive behavior, they would be cast off forever. And so the compulsive-cycle victim who has committed some action of self-indulgence and proceeded on to feelings of self-hatred marches inexorably to the next step on the cycle, actions of self-concealment.
