Martha Nibley Beck, John C. Beck, Breaking the Cycle of Compulsive Behavior ( 1990)

7

Breaking the Compulsive Cycle

It is very cold. The fog that has been settling around you is becoming thicker and thicker; your breath steams and blends with the tendrils of mist as you trudge across the broken rocky landscape. You have no way of knowing how long it has been since you lost track of the other members of your expedition. Nor do you know—within a hundred miles—where you are, since your party set out in the first place to explore uncharted territory. All that you are sure of is that you are very far from the food, and warmth, and company of civilization. You may also be far from the cove where the expedition's ship is anchored—you are so disoriented from cold, fatigue, hunger, and the fog that everything and nothing around you looks familiar.

You are trying to follow the coastline, hoping it will take you back to the ship. It is a rocky, precipitous shore, with sheer cliffs dropping to the ocean hundreds of feet below you. The rocks are dank and slippery under your feet, and every so often you lose your balance and have to scramble for a foothold, sending pebbles and bits of mud tumbling into the black water. You are afraid of falling, especially in the fog, but more afraid of turning inland to become irrevocably lost without the sea to guide you.

Both those fears are trivial, however, compared to the knowledge that if you do not find the others soon, they will be forced to give you up for lost and continue their journey. You know, but do not acknowledge to yourself, that night is falling. The cold is growing more bitter, and the fog even more dense. You force yourself to speed up, not knowing whether your last reserves of energy are taking you closer to safety or farther from it.

Suddenly, you feel the earth crumble under one foot. Your stomach seems to leap into your throat as you feel yourself falling and skidding, in a shower of rock, down the face of a steep cliff. Just as you understand, in a flash, that you are about to die, you come to a thumping halt on a narrow shelf of stone far down the cliff face. It is now almost completely dark and you can see very little, but once you have managed to calm down a bit, you discover that the ledge is just big enough for you to sit on. Feeling the rock above and below you with bruised and freezing hands, you determine that there is no way to climb up or down from this precarious perch. You can hear the waves below you in the darkness, but you do not know how far you are from the water.

The thought passes through your mind that you may as well drop into the blackness and end it all, because there seems to be no hope that you will ever come out of this situation alive. A quick end to your suffering sounds better, on the whole, than slow death by starvation and exposure on this miserable piece of rock; however, the thought that you may actually survive the fall to the ocean (as well as the strange persistence that leads people to cling to life in the face of certain death) makes you stay where you are. You feel a jolt as a piece of the ledge breaks away and skitters down the cliff out of sight, and you press yourself up against the damp stone as you realize that the ledge is beginning to disintegrate under your weight.

You sit on the crumbling precipice for what seems like, and may well be, hours. For a while you try to cast your thoughts back to happier times, to Christmases and summers and peaceful afternoons spent in comfort and warmth, with family and friends around you. You soon realize, however, that the memories are making your situation seem even more unbearable than it is, and you do your best to stop thinking about them. The night is now utterly black, and fear and despair begin to get the better of you. Although some irrational part of you is still yearning for rescue, you intellectually acknowledge that there is no hope, that you must reconcile yourself to death.

You are trying not to anticipate what death will be like when, suddenly, you notice a tiny speck of light piercing the fog below you. It disappears, then reappears again. You can barely see it. You think you must be imagining things and try to forget about the light, but there it is again, bobbing through the fog for an instant and then vanishing. It seems to be almost directly below you now, but you can't tell how far away. Your heart begins to pound in your chest, and all your suppressed hopes rise up into consciousness, as you begin to let yourself believe that somehow, someone has come to your rescue. Faintly, over the crash of water and the grinding of stone, you hear a thin, wavering voice calling your name. You shriek back, desperate to be found and saved. You shout until your lungs ache and your throat is hoarse, "I'm here! Help!"

The answer comes back almost inaudibly through the mist, "I've got you! I'll save you! Hang on!" You are overcome with relief, as you sit huddled on the disintegrating ledge. You break into sobs of joy, knowing that very soon strong hands will be pulling you to safety. You even begin to relax.

And then the voice says something that sends fear stabbing through you again, as strong as it ever was. You are alone, in total darkness, not knowing how far it may be to the water or what is around you in any direction. You are not even sure that the voice is not a desperate hallucination. All you are sure of is the wretched ledge that is keeping you from tumbling into the freezing sea. And the voice is saying one thing, over and over: "Jump! Jump! Jump!"

You are determined to procure a lifeboat, to set out on a rescue mission, which the captain says is a waste of time, too much trouble, and a terrible risk. You know the odds all too well, but you refuse to give up just because success is improbable. Out there, somewhere, in the freezing darkness, is your friend. You know how difficult and frightening the overland trek was this morning, even with a team of seasoned explorers and all your navigational instruments to guide you. You had been so worried about finding your own way that you didn't notice your friend had broken away from the group. By the time you thought to look for him, as the team stopped for a brief rest, he was already out of earshot. You don't know what happened to him or where he is, except that he couldn't be more than several hours' march from any point along your exploratory route. But you can imagine very vividly what he must be going through, now that the weather has worsened, night is coming on, and—above all—he is by himself. Even more vivid is your image of how you would feel if you sailed blithely away and left your friend to stumble in the darkness until he died. You would almost rather die yourself.

The rest of the crew berates you for delaying the journey on account of one foolish person. After all, they point out, your friend was quite able to keep up with the group. He was always the kind of person who went a little too far, explored a little too much, refused by too large a margin to conform to the team's directives. Good riddance to him, they say. Let him take the consequences of his actions. You know your shipmates are speaking from their own fear, fear of delaying their arrival at some more hospitable place, and fear of going back into the fog along the treacherous shoreline. Their fears are justified. If a rescue party does set out in a small boat, it is more likely that they will all die than that they will rescue your friend. At heart, though, most of them are uncomfortable with the notion of leaving anyone alone and hopeless in this awful spot. Finally, you make them a deal. You will go out in a small boat, alone, for an hour. If you do not find your friend before the hour is up, you will return, and the ship can continue its voyage. If you do not return before the hour has passed, the others should go on without you. After all, you explain to the explorers, there is more chance that two can survive in the wilderness than one by himself. They nod, expressions of disbelief on their faces. You all know that no matter how many people set off together into this particular wilderness, every one of them is likely to be overcome.

As your little boat pushes away from the ship, you wave good-bye to the other sailors. They do not wave back. You realize that although you can see them vaguely by the light of your torch, they cannot see anything but the torch itself. You hear them talking about you, mournfully, as you row toward the shore. They seem to think of you as already dead. You try not to let this bother you, shrugging it off by reminding yourself that you have made this trek before, you know the coastline fairly well, you are the strongest oarsman in the bunch, and you have all the motivation anyone could hope for.

A few long pulls on the oars take you close to the sandy stretch of beach where the search party went ashore. Instead of getting out of the boat, you turn and head along the coastline. This is terribly dangerous, since the waves are likely to smash the tiny craft into a rock at any time. But you know your friend. The two of you have learned the same strategies, and you think alike. You know that he is likely to be looking along the coastline for the inlet and the ship. You stay far enough out to avoid the breakers. The fog is dense a few yards above the water, and you feel as if you are rowing under a soft, undulating ceiling as you strain your eyes and ears for any trace of your friend.

Suddenly, incredibly, you spot a flash of white, flapping in the cold breeze. It looks and moves like a piece of cloth. As you move closer into the shore, you see that it is hanging from a small ledge of rock just above the water. Closer still, and you discern what is holding the cloth in place. The dim figure of your friend sits huddled on the ledge. The piece of cloth you noticed is dangling from his torn clothes. His head is down, pressed against his knees. A patch of fog rolls between you and you lose sight of your friend, but you continue to guide your boat toward him. There is not time for any elaborate rescue. You are both in danger if you cannot get back to the ship in time. Acutely aware of the risk and nearly bursting your muscles to pull the boat near your friend without letting it shatter against the rocks, you begin to yell his name.

After a few shouts, you hear your friend's voice, hoarse and strained but full of hope, calling back to you. "I'm here! Help!" You scream back, "I've got you! I'll save you! Hang on!" You hope that you sound confident, since you are by no means sure that you have the strength left to save yourself now, let alone your friend. With all your might, you bring the boat into position directly under your friend's body. You wait for a swell to bring the boat up to its highest level, just ten or twelve feet below the rock ledge. You can see your friend's dangling shirt below the level of the fog, but you know that he probably cannot see you. There is only one way that he might possibly be saved. "Jump!" you shout as the boat rises toward him. There is no response. "Jump!" you shout again, knowing that you cannot hold this position much longer. Nothing.

The whole situation is driving you almost mad with anxiety and anger. You have risked everything to save him, this friend who wandered away out of stupidity or willfulness or both, and now you are both about to die because he refuses to take the last little step toward his rescuer. If only he would look more carefully, see how close rescue really is! If only he would take stock of his situation and realize that the ledge is not security but death! If only he would be brave, just for the moment it would take to leave the ledge and risk a dousing in the water, to get to the safety of your boat! You cannot see clearly what he is doing or understand why he is pausing so long. There seems to be no reason for it. "Jump!" you scream furiously, losing hope and energy. "Jump! Jump! Jump!"

This metaphor is meant to illustrate some of the emotions and conflicts experienced by both the addict and the addict's loved ones who are trying to help the addict break a compulsive cycle. It is also meant to show how the process can be both extremely straightforward and extremely difficult. Our discussions with people who have conquered addictive behaviors, and our observations of those who have been less successful, have convinced us that breaking a compulsive cycle can be very simple; however, it is almost never easy.

One of the central themes of this book is our belief that a person who is caught in a compulsive cycle has accepted the action of self-indulgence as a counterfeit for joy, and that this counterfeit ironically cuts the person off from the experience of true joy, which comes from healthy interaction with loved ones and, above all, from the presence of the Lord's spirit. Anyone who has become thoroughly addicted to some behavior—who has accepted the counterfeit for joy as joy itself—is bound to have an exceedingly difficult time giving up that action. The compulsive-cycle victim may never have experienced, or may not remember, what true joy feels like or how to obtain it. The closest such a person may come to joy is the pleasure of the addictive action, and addicts are not sure any other source of fulfillment exists to ease the ache of the void within them. To voluntarily eschew the action of self-indulgence without the assurance of finding anything else to fill this void is extraordinarily frightening. The addictive behavior is the ledge to which addicts cling, knowing it is not improving their lives but preferring it to the unknown fate they would meet if they jumped.

To the family member, church adviser, or friend, the addict's tenacious grip on the behavior that is destroying him or her seems absurd and incredibly frustrating. The loved one faces not only the problem of the victim's compulsive behavior but the problem of personal energy. We are all struggling, in this difficult world, to make our way as best we can toward shelter and safety. It requires a great deal of energy to stop and carry someone else, especially when that someone seems unwilling to help by coming even one step toward rescue. It is an agonizing feeling to stand in a relatively secure place and watch a loved one cling to his or her own destruction. It tears would-be rescuers in conflicting directions. Should they go on, forgetting about the stubborn addict, and save themselves? Should they try to enter the world of the compulsive cycle to drag the victim back, and perhaps be lost themselves in the process? It often seems that there is no energy left to simply wait for the addict to come around, because the storms, waves, and darkness of this world can soon destroy even the strongest who stop rather than working every minute to move toward safety.

Parents are perhaps the group of mortals who are most familiar with the terrible decisions involved in trying to help a compulsive-cycle victim who seems to resist help. But ultimately it is our heavenly parents who feel the anguish most acutely. Their love and understanding of the problem goes deeper than any earthly version of it, and their knowledge of the consequences of sin and waste is more acute. The Lord could, if He were willing to violate our free agency, pluck us out of the most desperate circumstances, and He knows how close salvation is to each of us. He longs for us to take advantage of His atonement. He urges us in every possible way to take that one blind step toward him in faith that He will support us. But unlike Satan, Christ has covenanted that He will "never force the human mind." (Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985, no. 240.) He will not push us off our various precipices. We must be willing to jump. Too often, our fear pins us to the cliffs, until they finally crumble beneath us and we fall to the very death we hoped to avoid by refusing the offer of help. The Lord's sorrow at this terrible result of our own trepidation echoes the feeling of every person who has ever watched a loved one succumb to a compulsive cycle. "O ye people . . . which have fallen," Christ mourned at the destruction of the wicked on the American continent before His appearance there, "how oft have I gathered you as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and have nourished you. . . . yea, how oft would I have gathered you as a hen gathereth her chickens, and ye would not." (3 Nephi 10:4-5.)

Both the individuals who fall into compulsive cycles and the people who love them must believe that the Lord understands each of them perfectly. He knows how difficult it is to face up to the consequences of erroneous actions, and He knows the stress and anguish of trying to rescue those who will not be saved. Since these are different phenomena, although they may overlap, we will divide this chapter into three parts. First, we will discuss some misconceptions that we believe can be particularly damaging to the process of breaking the compulsive cycle. These are beliefs commonly held by both behavioral addicts and their loved ones. Second, we will speak directly to those individuals who struggle with addictive behavior in their own life. Finally, we will address the significant other who hopes to assist the victim in overcoming addictive behavior.

Misconceptions About Breaking the Compulsive Cycle

Two of the most pernicious and pervasive myths about compulsive cycles are actually different sides of the same coin. They come from a common tendency to see people and their behavior as static in time, when in fact every aspect of human mortality is in constant flux. For example, when we speak of what someone looks like, we generally assume that we are speaking of one distinct visual image. Actually, however, what establishes the person's identity is the continuity between an infinite variety of images—does a person "really" look like a baby, a child, a teenager, a middle-aged person, or an elderly person? Identity comprises the unique way in which an individual undergoes the process of aging, not any step along the way. The same logic applies to both sin and repentance. Each is a continuous process that we often mistake for an isolated event.

This error in perception leads to a kind of once-and-for-all mentality in dealing with compulsive cycles. A confession to the bishop may be seen by both a behavioral addict and the addict's anxious loved ones as The Repentance that will change everything. The victim of the compulsive cycle may go along for some time after such a repentant act, thinking that he or she is "over it." After the repentance, conversely, if temptation arises again and the addictive action is repeated, both the addict and the loved ones may conclude that this particular surrender to temptation is the watershed event that seals up the addict as a hopeless case. One of the most common themes in our interviews was the discouragement of someone who had "given it up for good" only to find that "it" was still a temptation too powerful to resist. Once they had succumbed to the temptation, many addicts concluded that they would never escape, that they were condemned to wrestle with their addictions for the rest of their lives. For many people we spoke with, the agonizing roller coaster of determined repentance and devastating defeat had continued for years.

The title of this chapter, breaking the compulsive cycle, may imply that there is some dramatic action that can shatter the entrapment of addiction in one fell swoop, freeing the victim quickly and permanently from the cycle. That seems to be an impossible goal. There are, we believe, actions that can and do break the compulsive cycle. But they must be used in a continual process, not as a grand one-time effort. One point we would most like to impress on both compulsive-cycle victims and their loved ones is that neither success nor failure in breaking the cycle is ever final. Every repentant act works into the process of growth that can finally free the addict from the addiction, and every return to error can teach new lessons about the factors that have bound the addict to it. The Lord will forgive an infinite number of sins and accept an infinite number of repentances. Whether or not we are involved in serious compulsive behaviors, continual repentance is the only mechanism by which any of us may hope to achieve perfection.

The shame, hurt, and fatigue of forsaking an addictive action again and again, only to return to it with a vengeance each time, may lead the behavioral addict to the conclusion that it would be best to give up trying. Loved ones may also decide that the sinner is a hopeless case and abandon any effort to assist in breaking the compulsive cycle.

But it is the belief that escape is impossible, not the addictive action itself, that makes the case hopeless. Satan may have power to tempt us in ways that we do not fully understand, and in the case of the compulsive cycle, he does. But the basic attributes of godliness in each of us—faith, hope, and charity—are beyond his grasp. Addicts who abandon hope of escape from the cycle of compulsive behavior, even though hope itself may be painful in the face of repeated failure, have made a choice that cements them to the addiction. Satan can mar our happiness, but he cannot reach our hope. He can take it from us only if we give it to him.

In our interviews and research, we heard and read many firmly stated claims that an addict can never really be free from the addiction—that in the final analysis, the desire for the addictive action will always gnaw at its victim's spirits, no matter how long the addict might abstain from it. And yet, we heard well-meaning Church members say over and over again that a single, "true" repentance would blot out sin forever, that if the addict would simply repent honestly enough, the addict would instantly and permanently be freed from temptation.

As far as we can judge from the experiences of people who actually have broken compulsive cycles, neither of these opinions is true, and both work to convince the addict that he or she is condemned. On the one hand, if the addiction is permanent, there is obviously no escape from it, and the addict might as well give up. On the other hand, most addicts have repented deeply and sincerely, only to find that they still suffer overwhelming temptations—which seems to mean that their repentance was ineffective and that, again, they should simply stop trying. The danger of these fallacies becomes clear if we consider that although sin may slow our progress toward happiness, giving up the effort to become perfected will stop us dead in our tracks.

The people we talked with who had broken compulsive cycles spoke of both sin and repentance as processes, not events, and thereby escaped the twin myths of the irrevocable sin and the irrevocable repentance. They assured us of their confidence that if they continued in the lifelong process of spiritual growth, they could be completely free from their addictions. As one woman put it, "it's like being totally healed after a long sickness; it's like flying, . . . this marvelous freedom."

Breaking the compulsive cycle had not, in any case we encountered, been a one-time event. It had happened over and over and over until it became virtually continuous, and none of the recovering addicts we spoke with felt that their repentance was completed or indeed ever could be in this probationary period on earth. The lifelong process of repentance these people described—what we call the "joy cycle"—is discussed more fully in the next chapter. In this chapter, however, where we are considering the initial, difficult efforts to stop the process of sin and embark on the process of repentance, suffice it to say that breaking the cycle of compulsive behavior is almost never a one-time ordeal. The road to freedom is liberally dotted with instances of apparent failure. Neither the victim nor the loved one should ever allow despair to stop the journey.

A second common misconception we saw in people who could not overcome addictions was the belief that the compulsive cycle could be broken by force. Many addicts and their loved ones tried physical, structural means to eliminate the addictive behavior. We spoke to two bulimic women who had had their jaws wired shut with the willing help of their concerned parents and spouses. A missionary tried to overcome compulsive masturbation by sleeping only four hours every night, spending the rest of the night pacing in an effort to "burn off the excess energy" that he believed led him into temptation. An addictive shopper chopped up her credit cards and threw them away in an elaborate ceremony designed to end her addiction at last. A sexually promiscuous man took a job in a Middle Eastern country where, as he understood it, extramarital liaisons were illegal. He believed that fear of legal reprisal would keep him from his addiction. These were all valiant efforts at repentance. They clearly demonstrated the sincere commitment of the addicts to give up their various actions of self-indulgence. But as far as we were able to discern, such measures simply do not work.

For one thing, there always comes a time when structural barriers to the action of self-indulgence are removed. A compulsive-cycle victim who does not wish to spend life chained to the wall in a padded cell cannot rely forever on structural constraints. (That statement is not necessarily meant to be humorous. Some, though not many, addictions are so menacing to society that the addict is justifiably kept imprisoned, away from the opportunity to commit the sin.) When the chance to sin arises, a behavioral addict whose repentance depends on lack of such chances will succumb to the action of self-indulgence with hardly a struggle. What is even more alarming is the tendency of almost all addicts to escape from structural barriers deliberately once the pressures created by the compulsive cycle become unbearable. When the compulsive-cycle victim reaches that point, the only function of the barriers is to intensify the addict's self-concealment, isolation, and self-hatred.

It is truly frightening, in such cases, to see how far some behavioral addicts may go to obtain the addictive action. In fact, the effort to overcome barriers to the addiction might lead the compulsive-cycle victim into more extreme behavior than he or she has ever engaged in before. A teenager who was addicted to marijuana agreed with his parents to have them watch his every move until the addiction was broken "once and for all." When the need for the action of self-indulgence became too strong for him to bear, this normally kind and loving young man threatened his parents with physical violence and eventually beat his mother to escape from the house. The woman who cut up her credit cards went for a while without shopping, and then she began stealing items from stores—which became a new stage of her addiction. The missionary whose pacing was designed to keep him from masturbating eventually took to wandering the streets at night, alone, and finally fell into a much more serious sexual sin, which led to his excommunication. Building structural barriers between the compulsive-cycle victim and the action of self-indulgence is like nailing a lid on a geyser. Because the pressure leading to the action comes from within the person, not from the environment, either the lid will eventually be blasted off or the pressure will be released through other channels.

Another, less obvious reason that the structural-barriers approach to breaking a compulsive cycle does not constitute effective repentance is that the Lord cares less about our actions than about our motivations. He does not want us to simply find a way to grit our teeth and clench our knuckles against our desires for the rest of existence. He does not want us to strain against self-imposed bonds, longing for delights we have deliberately set out of our reach like Ulysses sailing past the song of the sirens. Many honest Latter-day Saints are discouraged by the Lord's doctrine that "whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart." (Matthew 5:28.) They take this scripture to mean that they must forcefully control not only every action but every thought. Compulsive-cycle victims see that as practically impossible, because a large portion of their inner life is spent thinking about the action of self-indulgence and because the compulsion to think about the action is even more pervasive than the compulsion to perform it. As one young man put it, "I could conceivably manage to force myself to abstain from [this addictive behavior] for the rest of my life. But I haven't been able to control my thoughts. And if thinking about it is the same thing as doing it, I might as well do it. I can't stop thinking about it. I don't have that kind of self-control." This man's perspective assumes a coercive approach to breaking the compulsive cycle. Temptation is overcome by "control," which pits the individual's spirit against his carnal mind in a constant battle. The stronger impulse wins and maintains the victory, by force, against the weaker.

This image of coercive control over one's own impulses is more reminiscent of Satan's plan for salvation by decree than it is of Christ's plan for the repentance of free will. Are we given individual agency only so that we can exercise against ourselves the contention and force that the adversary would have used to control us? Compare the perspective of the young man who said he didn't have the "self-control" to master his thoughts to the imagery Christ uses when speaking to Joseph Smith on a similar topic:

"Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven. . . . thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever." (D&C 121:45-46.)

Where is the coercive righteousness here? Where is the self-control, the police action against wicked and misguided thoughts? Every image in this passage is one of submission, rather than struggle. We are told to let, not force, our bowels to be full of charity and virtue to garnish our thoughts. The doctrine of the priesthood is not something won by conquest in battle. Rather, it is something that settles on the soul like "the dews from heaven." The reward of the righteous is not a prize we grasp after slashing our way through our evil impulses. It "flows" to those who receive it, "without compulsory means." A glance at Christ's mortal ministry shows that the Lord practiced on earth what He preached to Joseph Smith from heaven. His actions in mortality and His advice to Joseph show the same infinite meekness, the same willingness to yield, the same unlimited power arising from the absence, not the presence, of force.

Those who berate themselves or others for not forcing themselves out of an addiction thus come closer to Satan's method of directing behavior than they do to Christ's. Those who nobly consign themselves to a lifetime of struggle against their own desires are condemned to both heartache and ultimate failure, for even if they can control their thoughts and actions by strength of will, the thoughts and actions will forever fight back, and few are strong enough to subdue the rebellion indefinitely. Repentance is not a military victory. It is a process of continual surrender to our Heavenly Father. One man who had broken a particularly vicious compulsive cycle some years before we interviewed him told us, "I have learned that the only time my addiction seems tempting to me is when I let pride move me away from listening to Heavenly Father. If I start to think I can control myself, I lose control." The idea that the compulsive cycle can be broken by force is often honestly come by, but it is wrong. The very common phenomenon of berating an addict for not having enough willpower is therefore both incorrect and very destructive, for willpower is a coercive agent. As such, it intensifies the conflict within the victim of the compulsive cycle without freeing him or her from the addiction.

One last crucial misconception we would like to dispel is the idea that the addictive behavior is a simple cause-and-effect event, rather than a self-reinforcing cycle. This mistake is a very easy one to make, because the process of the addictive cycle is often buried very deeply beneath apparently uncomplicated temptations. In our thinking and language, we tend not to differentiate among various types of error according to the motivations that underlie them. That makes it very difficult for both compulsive-cycle victims and their loved ones to understand the addict's actions. To explain why it is so misleading to classify all identical behaviors as similar, despite the motivations behind them, we will briefly consider an example of the same illicit behavior in light of various underlying motivations. The sin we will consider, in this illustration, is as follows:

One fine day, June Albrecht is wheeling a shopping cart through her favorite supermarket. As she passes a bin full of candy, June grabs a handful, pops several pieces into her mouth, puts the rest in her pocket, and continues to munch somewhat furtively as she shops. June does not pay for the candy when she leaves the store.

Those are the facts of June's case, and they do not alter according to her motivations. From the point of view of the law, which considers only our actions, June has committed a crime for which she should duly make restitution. But as we have said, the Lord, who "looketh on the heart" (1 Samuel 16:7), sees the incident as involving not only June's actions but also her motivations.

Consider how you might evaluate her actions if you knew that June had simply been walking happily through the store, noticed that she had means and opportunity to take some of her favorite candy, and decided that it wouldn't hurt anyone if she nabbed a few pieces. That is what we might call a "simple" sin, motivated by circumstances outside the sinner. The availability of a tasty treat would then be a "simple" temptation. It follows that this would be the kind of sin that is easily corrected by "simple" guilt—June might remember the theft, feel remorseful about it, pay for the candy on a later shopping trip, and forget the whole affair. Many of us committed this kind of sin as children. Usually we overcome the urge to indulge ourselves after we realize the necessity of honesty for our own integrity and the good of those around us. By the time we reach adulthood, most of us have little trouble resisting simple temptations to sin. We no longer take things that look attractive to us merely because the opportunity presents itself.

Now take another case. Suppose that June's husband has recently abandoned her, leaving her to raise several small children. She has no job, no money, and no family to help her. She has gone without food for some time to let the children have what she can afford to buy. She knows that she should stick to basic foods and not waste her few remaining dollars on candy, but when she sees the bin of sweets she can't help but think of how happy the children would be to have a little treat. Against her better judgment, she finds herself purloining the candy. Once she has it, she succumbs to her own hunger by sneaking a few bites as she walks. June feels terrible about the theft but doesn't have the money to pay for both the candy and the milk for the baby.

This maudlin example would be enough to soften most hearts in regard to the wickedness of June's sin. (Generations of readers have placed themselves squarely in the camp of Victor Hugo's fictional hero Jean Valjean, who committed a similar crime.) The reason for our inclination to accept June's theft in these circumstances is that we realize that hers was not a simple sin arising from the mere presence of temptation. The motivation for her crime in this context is a very real need that comes from within June, not from her external situation. We sympathize with June because we understand such internal needs—indeed, in circumstances like the ones we have just described, it is the hunger of June and her children, not the theft of a handful of candy, that strikes us as the greater injustice. We almost all feel that there is a difference between a sin motivated by simple temptation and one motivated by need.

Now consider the case of June Albrecht as it actually happened to a woman we interviewed (the name, of course, is invented). The crime we have described was, for June, part of a repetitive pattern of small thefts that almost always involved food. June did not consider her shoplifting a great problem, because she had often seen her mother take tidbits of food from the grocery store when June was a child. What did bother her was her increasing tendency to overeat candy, which had led to an unwelcome weight gain. June swore off sweets several times, but whenever she passed candies in a store she found herself not only eating them but stealing them. When she tried to stop, she found herself becoming nervous, irritable, and tense, and she always finally went back to take some candy.

June did not connect this behavior with the habit she had developed as a child of sharing bags of candy with her twin sister and best friend, Beth. As children, Beth and June had often taken candy or cookies from the pantry shelves and sneaked into the backyard to share a forbidden treat. This behavior had disappeared as the girls grew up, and June rarely ate sweets as an adult. She and Beth remained very close until Beth had begun to date a young man who belonged to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. June had never heard of the Church. All she knew was that Beth was becoming "a religious fanatic," and that the two were drifting apart. When Beth joined the Church and married the young man, June's overeating and shoplifting began. As she put it, "It was as though since I had lost Beth, I was trying to replace her with something I remembered sharing with her." The addiction disappeared spontaneously when June began to investigate the Church, then joined it, and became even closer to her sister than before. It wasn't until then that she realized that her actions had been motivated by her desire to replace her relationship with Beth.

This oversimplification of the complex problem of one person's addiction brings out some important distinguishing characteristics of the compulsive cycle. In the first place, June clearly was not experiencing the trauma of physical need. She had plenty of cash to buy candy if she wanted it, and she was not only well fed but overfed. It is therefore quite likely that if we were observing June's situation, we would assume that she was committing what we have called a "simple" sin. Such sins, as we have seen, have at least two characteristics with which we are all familiar: they are motivated chiefly by irresponsibility and lack of resistance to temptation, and they are easily prevented or overcome by an active conscience.

But June's was not a simple sin. In fact, she was responding to a deeply felt need—the need to replace the closeness she had once felt with her twin sister. In the case of a hungry person stealing food, the need is apparent both to the sinner and to the observer. It is clear to everyone that if the hunger is satisfied by some other source of nourishment, the need for the sin, and therefore the temptation arising from need, will be eliminated. In the case of the compulsive cycle, the connection between the addictive behavior and the need is usually unclear to everyone, including the sinner. The sin is therefore assumed to be a simple sin, and everyone involved condemns the addict for not overcoming temptation in the relatively easy way that a child learns basic honesty. The victim, meanwhile, has no idea why the behavior is continuing, and experiences the terrifying feeling of being unable to control his or her own actions.

Confusing an addictive behavior with a simple temptation leads to one of the most destructive reactions to the compulsive cycle for both sinners and those who would help them repent. We call this problem "misdirected focus." By this phrase we mean that virtually every person involved in the problem of an addiction tends to concentrate on some part of the compulsive cycle, rather than seeing the cycle as an integrated whole. To begin with, everyone usually agrees that if the addictive action ceased, there would be no problem. That is the reason addicts and their loved ones erect the kind of structural barriers we have described, in an attempt to block the action from occurring. This approach is often worse than useless because it stymies the addict's misguided attempts to fulfill a need, but it leaves the need still present and unsatisfied.

The problem of misdirected focus tends to take a somewhat different form in compulsive-cycle victims themselves and in loved ones who wish to help but who do not share the addiction. As the previous chapters have pointed out, we see the compulsive cycle as being divided along two different axes. On one axis are the subjective emotions felt by the addict: the feelings of isolation and the feelings of self-hatred. On the other axis are actions through which the victim attempts to cope with these feelings: the actions of self-indulgence and the actions of self-concealment. Of these two different types of phenomena, it is the feelings that create the need within the addict that lead to undesirable actions. They are painful feelings, and like all suffering beings, addicts find it hard to remove their attention from the pain and from the effort to escape that pain. If you have ever stepped solidly on the sharp end of a needle, you know how effective pain is in making you forget everything but your suffering and the need for immediate relief. Therefore, although the pain of the compulsive cycle is emotional rather than physical, behavioral addicts are likely to spend virtually all their attention on their need to feel better. There may be times, especially just after the commission of the sin, when they solemnly swear that they will control their actions, but in general behavioral addicts tend to focus on their feelings of longing and discontent.

The counselor, observer, or loved one, on the other hand, does not feel and often cannot understand the subjective needs of behavioral addicts, mostly because the need does not relate logically to the addictive action. Most of us, for example, could understand June's sorrow at her loss of her sister's companionship. The connection between that loss and the stealing of candy, however, is very obscure, buried in June's past. Not even she recognized it for many months. It is hard for anyone, watching a behavioral addiction in full bloom, to understand why the addict should feel so compelled to perform this behavior, and the extent of the victim's pain in the absence of the action of self-indulgence is almost impossible for the nonaddict to comprehend. All the observer sees is the actions on the compulsive cycle: the action of self-indulgence, whatever that may be, and the lies and deceit that stem from it. It is these actions that cause the pain for the addicts' loved ones, and so it is toward them that the loved ones direct all their attention. What the addict is doing seems to be the paramount question from the observer's point of view. The addict, conversely, is preoccupied with what he or she is feeling.

The most common situation when addicts and their loved ones are trying to break the compulsive cycle, then, is one in which the addicts focus most of their attention on the feelings involved and the people around the addict focus most of theirs on the actions. The victim is like a person who has stepped on a needle and feels the pain but does not recognize where the pain is coming from. He pursues the addictive behavior like the wounded man turning to morphine for relief, while the sharp point of his unfulfilled need festers, unaddressed, within him. The loved ones desperately strive to keep him from the sin, thinking that they can break the compulsive cycle by refusing the addict his morphine, not seeing the needle or understanding the pain that drives the addiction.

In cases we saw where the compulsive cycle had been broken, the focus of the victims and their associates had been switched—in other words, in these cases, the addicts had begun to focus on their actions rather than on their feelings, and the loved ones had focused on the addicts' feelings rather than on their actions. We never saw a case where the compulsive cycle was broken by focusing only on one, two, or even three of the steps we have described. The reason we have formulated the cycle as we have is that the four steps we have described were all recognized and described to us, in one way or another, by the people we spoke with who managed to free themselves from addictions. The realization that they were caught in a cycle that involved an interplay of feelings and actions, and was not simply a cause-and-effect relationship between temptation and lack of willpower, seemed to be an essential step in breaking the compulsive cycle.

Many other misconceptions might interfere with the process of overcoming addictive behavior. Some of them are most prevalent among compulsive-cycle addicts themselves; others are more common to loved ones who are not involved in addictions but who want to help addicts free themselves. Both these groups of people need to "unlearn" certain ideas that prevent them from helping to break the compulsive cycle. The converse of eliminating these erroneous ideas is the adoption of new perspectives, which in turn can lead to constructive actions by both behavioral addicts and their loved ones. Neither the new perspectives nor the constructive actions will surprise anyone who is familiar with Latter-day Saint doctrine or the standard works of the Church. The Lord has never kept them a secret. Nevertheless, we believe that the experience of people we spoke with who have broken the compulsive cycle helps clarify ways in which well-known doctrines apply to the special problems of behavioral addiction.

The advice that follows, which is directed first to victims of the compulsive cycle and then to loved ones who desire to help them, is based on interviews with such recovering addicts. As we followed the stories of all our interview subjects over a period of five years, we noticed dramatic changes for the better in the lives of some, whereas others proceeded predictably along the compulsive cycle without any show of improvement. We interviewed those who seemed to have broken out of behavioral addictions, as well as their loved ones, to determine how that process occurred and what these people would say to others who were struggling to break addictive patterns. Although the recommendations we drew from their accounts are divided into two sections, one of which is addressed primarily to compulsive-cycle victims and one to those who wish to help them, we believe that the advice will be far more helpful if both parties read both sections.

Breaking the Compulsive Cycle: Advice to the Addict

If you are an addict who has not yet acknowledged your addiction or who still clings to the action of self-indulgence as the source of all good things, this book will make you angry. Every page may infuriate you because of the open and intended opposition we have against things you hold dear. You may see yourself here but feel that we have got it all wrong, that we are presenting a narrow-minded and distorted picture that makes your life seem evil when in fact you are working hard to be a moral person. To you, we apologize: we have no desire to force our beliefs on anyone and no wish to impose them on you.

On the other hand, you may be a victim of the compulsive cycle who feels that your addiction is hurting both you and those around you: that it is skewing the course of your daily life and that the days are adding up to months and years of unproductive or truly destructive fantasies and actions. If you have seen your addiction as clearly wrong, you may want to change but feel powerless to do so. You may have repented a thousand times, and gone back to your addiction a thousand and one. This advice is written to you, to reassure you that there is hope and to tell you how people very much like you have realized that hope.

Understanding the compulsive cycle might be seen as the first step in breaking it. That is the reason we have devoted most of this book to a description of addictive patterns. Seeing more clearly the interaction of feelings and actions that makes the cycle so difficult to break might help you realize that you cannot escape an addiction by focusing all your attention on trying to abstain from the activity to which you are addicted. Those who have broken the cycle report that it must be attacked at all four steps simultaneously. The compulsive cycle can only be broken when every step on it is replaced by something that leads to the joy for which we were created. We believe that you have been indulging in the action of self-indulgence as part of your need for joy. The resulting loss of self-esteem and the self-concealment that follows are driving you further away from that joy. Until the emotional needs expressed in this cycle are fulfilled (your need for a sense of belonging and your need for self-respect), the search will continue to manifest itself in your behavior. But until your behavior changes (indulgence in the addiction, and lying to conceal both your actions and your thoughts), these needs cannot be fulfilled.

The first step in unraveling this dilemma is to search your mind and heart for the connection between the addictive behavior and your need for happiness. Take as a hypothesis the possibility that when you think you need to perform this addictive action, you may really need something else. What is the real need? The answer may be too painful for you to think about. Thinking about it may send you scurrying back to the action of self-indulgence with more desperate enthusiasm than ever. Our guess, judging from the testimony of all our interview subjects, is that you need to feel loved and worthwhile. That guess is certainly not wildly original. The need to feel loved is the most basic emotional need of the human spirit. What may come as a surprise to you is how deeply you feel that you are unlovable or unworthy of love and how much pain that feeling carries with it. If you have become very much involved in a compulsive cycle, we urge you to examine your soul for the feelings of isolation we encountered in every addict we interviewed. If you find such feelings there, think of how they may have become linked, in your life, with the activity to which you are addicted. The links are different in every case, and they are often hard to see, but when you think of them, you will know them. No one, not even the most highly trained psychiatrist, can tell you which links are significant as well as you can yourself.

To realize the link between a real need for love and the action that provides a false fulfillment of that need is to weaken the link dramatically. As you discover more and more ways in which links have been formed in your life, you can find authentic ways to fulfill needs that have been blunted but left unsatisfied by your addiction.

The comment about psychiatrists, by the way, may feed into a favorite misconception held by virtually all addicts: that is, that you can escape from your addiction without the help of other people. Some of the individuals we spoke with who had broken the compulsive cycle had done so with the assistance of psychiatrists or psychologists and assured us that their therapy had been crucial to their recovery. Others had joined groups, such as Alcoholics Anonymous, which had proved pivotal in breaking their addictions. A few had managed the escape with intensive help from friends, roommates, or family members. No one had broken the compulsive cycle without help. Our point in saying that you are the one who ultimately recognizes the links between your needs and your addiction is not that you can think your way out of a compulsive cycle on your own but that the final burden of learning and realization rests upon the addict, not with the counselors.

This advice—that you should address the problem of feelings by looking within yourself—might be very welcome to you. Many addicts spend a great deal of time thinking about their addiction, the reasons for it, the crises in their lives that "justify" it. In our interviews, we heard many intricate self-analyses that excused the addicts' actions in their own mind. But you must realize that pondering the workings of your own life is not enough to free you from the compulsive cycle, for your analysis, if it comes only from yourself, is subject to the same misconceptions and biases that led you to the addiction in the first place.

For that reason, we recommend that the first priority for the addict who wishes to break the cycle of compulsive behavior is to focus on replacing the two actions on the cycle: the actions of self-indulgence and the actions of self-concealment. Understanding the process of the compulsive cycle is not enough to break it. In order for the victim to be free of the sin, every step on the cycle must be replaced with the element of righteousness of which the addictive cycle is a counterfeit. The feelings of isolation in the cycle lead the addict to the action of self-indulgence, the actions produce feelings of self-hatred, which lead to actions of self-concealment, and these actions in turn produce feelings of isolation. The reasons behind your original isolation, and the links between those feelings and the action of self-indulgence in your life, are particular to you. Discovering those links is a vital internal step to breaking the compulsive cycle.

But you cannot change your feelings simply by willing them to change. You may know intellectually that your addiction is not equivalent to happiness, but you cannot simply eliminate your desire for it any more than you can fall out of love deliberately. However you got started on the compulsive cycle, you are perpetuating your addiction by enacting behaviors that create feelings that lead you back to the behaviors. You cannot change your feelings without changing your actions.

But aren't we contradicting ourselves here? Haven't we spent pages describing how impossible it is to simply stop an addictive behavior? Not exactly. What we have tried to point out is the futility of trying to change only the isolated action that is considered sinful and destructive, while leaving the rest of the compulsive cycle in place. As we have already said, the way to break a compulsive pattern is to replace the actions and feelings on the cycle with actions and feelings that produce righteous joy. But if you will examine the cycle, you will notice that the feelings it includes are a product of the addict's interaction with, and view of himself in relation to, other people. The feelings are essentially social phenomena. The sinner cannot change them alone because they involve the actions and opinions of the people around him. By contrast, the actions on the cycle are things addicts act out on their own volition. It is here, therefore, that we believe addicts should focus their attention and efforts. Understanding the compulsive cycle gives new meaning to the beautifully simple and profound summary of repentance revealed to Joseph Smith in the Doctrine and Covenants:

"By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them." (D&C 58:43.)

These two criteria address the two action steps on the compulsive cycle and show that neither confessing (replacing the actions of self-concealment with actions of self-disclosure) nor forsaking (substituting fulfilling, righteous actions for the addictive action of self-indulgence) can stand alone as true repentance. Both must be done simultaneously if the compulsive cycle is to be broken.

Most behavioral addicts who honestly wish to escape their addictions have tried hard to forsake the action of self-indulgence, whatever that may be. We believe that one flaw that is common in these attempts is the addicts' belief that they need to eliminate only the very worst part of the addictive action. In the chapter on actions of self-indulgence, we described the extensive routines that addicts go through before they perform the actual addictive behavior. An example is a compulsive shopper who spends hours window shopping before making any purchases or a sexual addict who wanders through the red-light district of a city for a long time before hiring a prostitute. Repentant addicts often think that they can "blow off some steam" by indulging in part of this routine without "going all the way." "I'll just go window shopping from now on," the addict resolves, or "I'll just walk around 'that' part of town for a while to see what's going on." As we have pointed out, the addict loses control after making the choice to enter the addictive routine. Truly forsaking the action means forsaking the whole routine, even things that may seem quite innocent. Taking a stroll through town might seem to be an admirably healthy undertaking, but for a person who always ends such constitutionals in a liquor store indulging alcohol addiction, it may be a serious mistake. Even people who claim to be desperate to give up their addictions often balk when they think of giving up the whole addictive routine, including deliberately constructed fantasies, which may feed into the problem.

If you are strong enough to eliminate every trace of your addictive action from your life, you will probably find yourself with a tremendous amount of spare time, time that you are used to spending on your addiction. As we have pointed out elsewhere, the action of self-indulgence can often grow to occupy a huge proportion of the addict's schedule. Simply removing the action of self-indulgence without substituting any other activity is not only difficult but unproductive.

Breaking the compulsive cycle is a process of substitution, not of abstinence. Some addicts attempt to replace one addictive behavior with another which they consider more acceptable. For example, a smoker might turn to overeating as an alternative addiction, or a drug addict might use prescribed medications as substitutes for illegal ones. According to our observations, the opinions of people we interviewed who had broken addictive patterns, and the advice to be found in the gospel, replacing one worldly addiction with another is not an effective repentance. It does not resolve the addict's needs in any productive way; it simply attempts to contain damage, which has come to be accepted as inevitable.

The actions we believe can work as effective substitutes for the actions of self-indulgence that make up part of the compulsive cycle are actions that accord with the divine nature of human beings. We call these "actions of progression." The word progression has a particular place in Latter-day Saint doctrine in that we believe progression is an attribute of godhood, one that continues throughout eternity. Progression is the essence of salvation. It is what our Heavenly Father does, and it is what we must do if we are to become like Him. The Latter-day Saints' image of heaven is not a place where angels sit on fluffy clouds, playing harps and enjoying an eternal stasis. It is a dynamic place, where work, learning, and relationships continue with perpetual and fascinating newness. It is an exciting place, and so far as we can discern from the scriptures, there are at least two characteristics of the activities we can perform there that make it exciting: all of them increase our capacity to love and our capacity to understand. People who have gone through after-death experiences typically have two central objectives when they find themselves with a second chance at life. They want to learn more, and they want to love more. Any activity that moves you closer to these two objectives qualifies as an action of progression.

If you are deeply engrossed in an addiction, you may truly be unable to remember anything that is interesting enough to you to replace the action of self-indulgence. One thing we heard repeatedly in accounts of people who had broken the compulsive cycle was that they had, for one reason or another, begun to replace their addictive actions with actions they had enjoyed when they were children. Think back to when you were very small, and try to remember something that you enjoyed doing and would do for some time whether or not anyone else was with you. These activities typically signal the existence of interests that are not likely to have disappeared with maturity, even if the activities themselves have ceased. The recovering addicts we spoke with often mentioned having rediscovered interests and talents that had been dormant or ill-attended during the years of addiction. One man who, as a boy, had always loved to disassemble and reassemble electrical gadgets in his parents' home (something they did not always appreciate), later found that working with computers and other high-tech gadgets was so interesting to him that he could often successfully replace his addictive action by "playing" with his electronic "toys." A woman who had always loved drawing decided to learn sculpture as part of overcoming a problem with compulsive overeating. When she felt the urge to eat, she would first spend five minutes working on a clay sculpture. If, at the end of five minutes, she still felt hungry, she would have a snack, but eventually, she told us, "It got so I was more interested in the sculpture than in eating, even when I was really quite hungry, and I lost weight."

The exercise of our talents in a way that enhances understanding—in other words, learning—appears to have a very powerful effect on many people, in some cases as strong as an addictive action. We believe that is because this exercise of talents is an action of progression, intrinsic to the divine nature in each of us, and so it has the power to bring us closer to our Heavenly Father and to others. Doctrine and Covenants 130:18 makes it clear that what we learn in this life will "rise with us in the resurrection," and thus, many learning activities can be classified as actions of progression. Nevertheless, the mere increase of understanding is not enough to make an action qualify for that distinction. We are told many times in the scriptures that great knowledge and talent can be developed merely to obtain the honors of men. In that sense, exercising our talents can in itself become a compulsive activity. We have all known very talented people who place the exercise of their talents above their loving relationships in the same way that an addict values the action of self-indulgence above friends and relatives. We have all known people who left husbands and wives, children, parents, or friends, because their work and the fame or status they gained from it were more important to them.

For an activity to qualify as an action of progression, then, it must fulfill another criterion besides increasing our capacity to learn. It must also increase our capacity to love—to love God, ourselves, and others. The scriptures portray our Heavenly Father as engaging in two types of activities: He creates, through the manipulation of material substance and the origination of ideas, and He works to bring human beings back into His presence. Both of these activities are essential aspects of godhood, but the second is apparently the most important. "For behold, this is my work and my glory," the Lord tells Moses in the Pearl of Great Price, "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) Since "eternal life" is defined by the Lord as knowing Him and being with Him, we may broadly put it that to our Heavenly Father, obtaining and enjoying our company is His "work and glory," His "action of progression." That assertion might come as a stunning proposition to anyone; to a person engrossed in the self-hatred of a compulsive cycle, it is almost incomprehensible. But there is no way around it: the Lord loves us, wants us with Him, and spends His efforts working to bring us into the embrace of His love. Every action He performs partakes of that objective.

The actions of progression with which you might attempt to replace an addictive action of self-indulgence are infinite. Nonetheless, "by their fruits ye shall know them," as Christ told His disciples, and "the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." (Matthew 7:20; Galatians 5:22-23.) If an activity increases your closeness to your Heavenly Father and to other people, makes you more likely to serve others rather than yourself, and decreases your desire to perform actions contrary to what you feel is right, you may be sure it is an action of progression.

Along with the activities for which you showed an affinity as a child, direct acts of open communication are also actions of progression. Conversation, working or playing with others, and willing service of all kinds are effective replacements for addictive actions. The idea in forsaking the addiction is to substitute such actions of progression for the whole action of self-indulgence, including every routinized behavior contributing to the undesirable activity.

For the person who is in the power of a compulsive cycle, the most effective action of progression that can help break the cycle is sincere, open confession to a respected confidant. This statement should make it obvious why we believe that both the types of action on the compulsive cycle—the actions of self-indulgence and the actions of self-concealment—have to be replaced simultaneously if the cycle is to be broken. You cannot perform many true actions of progression, which bring you closer to mutual understanding with God and other people, if you are keeping a large part of yourself a deadly secret. Forsaking the sin, or replacing the actions of self-indulgence with actions of love, cannot be effective or successful without confessing it—replacing the actions of self-concealment with actions of self-disclosure. The most crucial error made by individuals who could not break the compulsive cycle was that they clung to their secrecy, thinking that they could get over the problem without anyone finding out. Over and over we heard, "I've figured out my problem and prayed about it, and I will work it out between myself and God. I don't think anyone else ever needs to know." The actions of self-concealment went on unabated in these cases. It followed that the addicts were never able to feel that the people around them knew them, accepted them, and loved them as they were. The feelings of isolation were never fully relieved, and as a result, the actions of self-indulgence continued to be powerfully tempting.

No one we spoke to who wanted to break the compulsive cycle questioned the idea that they should forsake the addictive action. On the other hand, most of them fought strenuously against the idea that they should tell anyone about all of their addictive activities. The underlying reason for that, although they all gave many reasons, appeared to be their fear that the hatred they felt for themselves because of their actions would be reflected back to them by others who discovered how imperfect they really were. Confession was most repugnant to those addicts whose behavior was serious enough to require confession to their bishops or other Church authorities. We would like to consider some of the misconceptions and problems that recovering addicts told us had temporarily blocked their ability to take this step in replacing self-concealment with self-disclosure.

Many compulsive-cycle victims we spoke to saw the Church policy of requiring official confession of some sins to be punitive and humiliating. They thought of it as a means by which God instills pain in sinners as a retribution for wicked actions. Some seemed to feel that the process of confession was like a prison term or a flogging, that it was meant to create such intense misery that the sinner would not dare return to the sin. Some saw it as more similar to the stocks, where wrongdoers are publicly paraded around to receive the mockery and abuse of the self-righteous. These addicts felt angry and fearful toward a God who they believed would "write all their sins on a scroll for everyone to read at the final judgment," or who would "shout their sins from the housetops" in an effort to hurt and shame them. We even spoke to some people who had gone to priesthood leaders to confess and had received treatment that seemed to indicate that the leaders themselves thought of confession as this sort of punitive retribution. Most of the people we spoke to about this issue, however, admitted that they had never fully confessed the extent of their addictive behaviors to an official of the Church.

If they had done so, they might have discovered what we found in our interviews with people who had confessed to Church leaders, including some addicts who were excommunicated, and with Church authorities ranging from General Authorities to bishops: if you have sinned, no matter in what fashion, the process of confession to Church leaders is not meant to use shame as a weapon against you. On the contrary, it is to teach you "by your own experience," and not just in theory, that you are valuable and acceptable to the Lord and to His servants, in spite of your imperfections. It is to let you know that there are many people who possess both the desire and the authority to assist you in escaping the bonds that keep you from progressing toward happiness. One stake president told us, "I have felt as much love in the room during the excommunication of someone who was truly repentant as I ever felt performing a baptism—more, I think."

Many people we spoke with were unable to face the humiliation of confessing serious sins to Church authorities. Even the gentlest and most skillful treatment from a priesthood leader could not obfuscate this humiliation, for the sin was indeed a sin, and the sinner had indeed committed it. One of the most powerful insights that was reaffirmed by the testimony of those who had broken compulsive cycles was that the only thing that can free anyone from humiliation is humility. Humiliation is the sting pride sends up when it has been injured. In the absence of pride, there is no source for humiliation.

One man—we'll call him Jim—told us how he had struggled for years with an addictive pattern of sexual behavior, feeling that he should confess his sin to his bishop but unable to overcome the humiliation he felt at the thought of revealing his "true" nature to a man who happened to be his subordinate at work and his next-door neighbor, as well as his priesthood leader. When Jim was involved in an automobile accident that nearly took his life and left him physically helpless for months, he began to develop a humility he had never felt before. As he learned to accept the cheerful help of nurses who bathed him, dressed him, and soothed him when he wept with pain, Jim came to realize his innate dependence on others and the absurdity of demanding perfection in them before he let them see his imperfections. During his recovery, Jim invited the bishop over and confessed his sins. As he did so, he felt sorrow but not humiliation, because, as he told us, "my humiliation went away when I gave up my pride." As it happened, Jim's bishop reacted to his confession with an understanding born of spiritual sensitivity—"more than I thought he had in him," as Jim told us with a grin—and the two of them set to work on a recovery program, including a Church disciplinary council, which helped Jim break his addiction. Jim had not expected the overwhelming warmth he felt from his bishop and later in the council, but he told us that even if he had received much harsher treatment, he did not think he would have felt humiliated. "Humility is my magic weapon against humiliation," he told us.

Perhaps the greatest illustration of this principle is the humility exhibited by Christ at the trial that preceded his crucifixion. The Savior no doubt felt great pain, emotionally and spiritually as well as physically, when his beloved people spat at him and demanded his execution. But no matter how the mob attempted to humiliate Jesus—by dressing him in foolish clothes, writing mocking epitaphs above his head, and battering him with words and weapons—his dignity seemed to grow stronger as his circumstances grew worse, until Pilate "marvelled greatly" at his composure. (Matthew 27:14.) Remember that Jesus had no sins of His own when He endured this trial, but He was bearing all of our sins, and all of yours, and all those of the most despicable evildoers who ever walked on earth. If his own soul had contained so much as a whisper of pride, surely the humiliation would have destroyed him. But in Jesus there was no vanity to be hurt.

As always, the Savior's example presents us all with a standard to emulate in the pursuit of our own happiness. If the fear of humiliation is locking you into actions of self-concealment by keeping you from confessing your sins to others, understand that you are listening to the defensive bargaining of your own pride—a pride that belongs to Satan's world, not God's, and that will not make you happy. Consider that refusing to confess or waiting for a wiser Church leader to show up might help you avoid some humiliation temporarily but that relinquishing your pride can protect you from humiliation permanently and entirely. Few people have obtained the kind of humility it takes to confess serious sins without humiliation, but those who have confessed benefit in every aspect of their lives.

In summary, then, here are the procedures that we believe will allow you, the victim of the compulsive cycle, to break the cycle effectively. First, make every effort to understand the pattern and causal links in your addiction. Second, learn to recognize the entire routine surrounding the action so that you can forsake actions that might lead you to the loss of control that results, finally, in sin. Resolve to replace the addictive routine with actions that lead to progression, especially interaction with other people. This resolution overlaps with the third step, which is to stop concealing your actions and your thoughts, and begin to disclose the real facts of your life to people who can help you overcome your problem.

The "people who can help you" fall into three groups, and we believe that to break the compulsive cycle, you must disclose the whole truth about yourself to all three. The first person is yourself. If you are like most addicts, you have covered your problems with such a network of rationalizations and outright lies that you no longer consciously think about the real facts of your case. That may be keeping you, among other things, from being able to recognize the links between your actions and the real needs that motivate them, thus preventing you from breaking those links. If you can ask yourself what you did and why, and answer honestly, you will begin to unravel the complex chain of circumstances that might have predisposed you to your addiction. The first step to replacing actions of self-concealment with actions of self-disclosure, then, is to admit to yourself, calmly and without hysterical self-recrimination, exactly what your life is like. It is an amazing thing to realize that it is possible to lie to oneself and believe the lies, but almost all behavioral addicts do it. Tell yourself the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, without either trying to justify your actions or indulging in self-hatred.

The second person to whom you must confess your addiction is our Heavenly Father. If it is surprising to think that we can successfully deceive ourselves, it is absurd to believe that we can also deceive God. But the fact that He knows your actions and your motivations better than you do yourself does not mean that going to Him in honest repentance is superfluous. Because of the Lord's respect for our free agency, He can only help us with our problems when we invite Him to. After you have reached a clear realization of your doings, of the fact that you are caught in a cycle of feelings and actions that are limiting your happiness, discuss the problem openly with the Lord in prayer and ask Him for help. Believe that He can help you, and that He will, no matter what kind of a person you may be, no matter how deeply you are involved in error. The prophet Moroni tells us: "Behold, I say unto you that whoso believeth in Christ, doubting nothing, whatsoever he shall ask the Father in the name of Christ it shall be granted him; and this promise is unto all, even unto the ends of the earth." (Mormon 9:20.)

This astonishing passage of scripture contains no conditions, no qualifications, no caveats for people whose problems are too heavy or sins too deep. Moroni continues: "O then despise not, and wonder not, but hearken unto the words of the Lord, and ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need. Doubt not, but be believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord with all your heart, and work out your own salvation with fear and trembling before him." (V. 27.)

The power of prayer was attested to by every person we interviewed who had managed to break the compulsive cycle. If you have tried and failed again and again to free yourself from a temptation, you may have concluded that no power on earth is strong enough to conquer your addiction. You are right. In our research on secular treatments for addictive behaviors, we never found any treatment to be as successful as those which advise the addict to turn to God for help. Alcoholics Anonymous is a good example, as are a number of similar "Anonymous" organizations for people whose addictions range from gambling to sexual deviance. These are not Latter-day Saint organizations, nor need they be to take advantage of Moroni's promise. The important feature they share is that their members voluntarily ask the Lord to take control of lives that are out of control. One striking similarity between all the stories we heard of people who had escaped behavioral addictions—not only the Latter-day Saints we spoke with but also nonmembers whose stories we heard or read—was the spiritual rebirth that accompanied their surrender to their Heavenly Father, a surrender that occurred through prayerful confession.

The third party to whom you must confess, in order to break the compulsive cycle, consists of those people around you who love you and on whose love you depend for your emotional nourishment. In the case of sins that should be confessed to Church authorities, these authorities must be included among this group of people. This step in confession is typically the most difficult barrier for a behavioral addict to overcome. The fear of being cast out from the people you know best is so intense that it alone may serve to lock the addict in the compulsive cycle for years and years. Often, the fear may be justified. Those who love you the most are also those who can hurt you the most by their rejection, and they are the very people most likely to be hurt by your addiction. The alcoholic who fears that his friends will think less of him once his addiction is made public may find that some of them do. The teenager with a drug problem is probably correct in assuming that his parents will be shocked and horrified to hear about his addiction. The promiscuous husband who is terrified that his wife will leave him if she finds out about the problem may be right. The risk of rejection does exist, because your loved ones are not perfect, but we believe it is much, much smaller than most compulsive-cycle victims fear. We also believe it is a risk that must be taken, because you can never overcome feelings of isolation until you are convinced that the people who are closest to you know you completely and love you as you are.

The flaws in others' ability to cope with your addiction make confessing it to them extraordinarily frightening. But in our research we found far fewer cases of loved ones rejecting addicts because of a repentant confession than we would have expected. We were also surprised to find how carefully each confession to a Church leader or disciplinary council is handled, how much real revelation is experienced by the people who judge these confessions, and how different the outcomes of confessions may be, depending on the Lord's directives for individual cases. We found that the dissolution of loving relationships, including fellowship in the Church, is almost always a product of continuing sin, not of a struggle to repent. One reason loved ones might be tempted to give up in despair when they discover your addiction is that they may misunderstand the problem, by assuming that there is no hope for change. Explaining the workings of the compulsive cycle and reaffirming that it can be overcome often enable significant others to deal with the discovery that someone they love is involved in a behavioral addiction.

A good illustration of this point is the change in attitudes of the general public toward specific addictions when information on the problem is made available. Not many years ago, alcoholism was considered so shameful and inescapable that many sufferers and their loved ones hid a drinking problem long after they should have gone for help. Even more recently, drug abuse was subject to the same stigma; however, the growing public understanding of these problems that has been accomplished through government action and educational media coverage has recently begun to change these perceptions. Now it is possible for sports figures, political personalities, and performing artists to come forward, practically in droves, and publicly acknowledge that they are working to overcome some substance addiction. As the public has become more educated to what addiction is and that it is neither a product of innate evil nor an inescapable trap, the general reaction to celebrities who confess to an addiction has been an increase of love and support, rather than horror and rejection.

Part of the reason substance abuse is now less scandalous than it once was is that the addiction is usually blamed on the power of the chemicals involved. We believe chemical addiction is powerful, but often only ancillary to the cycle of needs and actions we have described. There are still some forms of addiction—most notably sexual behaviors—that are not recognized as being addictive, partly because there is no addictive chemical involved and partly because repetitive sexual activity is seen by our culture as a sign of virility and freedom. The very fact that sexual addictions are not recognized for what they are is part of the reason we found, in our research and in our interviews, that sexual addictions seemed harder to break than chemical dependencies. The sexual addict's problem is more likely to be mistaken for a simple sin than is the substance abuser's, and therefore the people around the addict are more likely either to respond to his or her confession with horror or to celebrate the obsessive activity as a sign of prowess. When we began our research in 1984, there was practically no popular literature available that suggested that sexual behavior could be addictive. Since then, the terrible blight of AIDS has become an everyday feature of life. Researchers who study the disease have begun to wake up to the fact that there are people who are unable to control their sexual behavior even at the risk of their lives and that these people are as lost in their addiction as any alcoholic or drug addict.

The way in which you confess your addiction to your loved ones is crucial to their reaction. If you simply stride into your parents, proclaim, "I am a homosexual; what are you going to do about it?" and walk out, you are very likely to meet with the devastating reaction you might be dreading. Arrange a time when you can talk to your loved ones without interruption or disturbance for a considerable length of time—at least a couple of hours. One husband we interviewed made his first break with the compulsive cycle by arranging a week's vacation alone with his wife, during which he told her about his drug abuse and answered all of her questions. As of this writing, the drug problem is not present, and the marriage is thriving.

Describe what you understand about addictive cycles, and tell your loved ones that you need their help to overcome an addiction from which you have been suffering. Ask humbly for this help. Describe the addiction and answer any questions honestly. You do not need to recount every little instance of addictive behavior. A guide to knowing whether you have fully confessed is this: after your confession, you will be impervious to blackmail. In other words, there will be no action in your past that you are afraid will be discovered by the persons to whom you have confessed. There might be certain events they do not know about, but there will be nothing hidden away because it is "even worse than the other stuff." If it is easier for you to write down your confession in a letter, it should always be followed up by face-to-face conversation.

As you might expect, your loved one may be overwhelmed by your confession. There may indeed be tears, recriminations, and anger. These will not surprise you. What will surprise you, if you ask for help in complete humility, is the power of the love for you that exists in the other person. You may not believe it until you actually go through the confession (that is what confession is for), but many of these people around you can and will love you, even when they know all your imperfections. If your confession elicits sorrow and anger, remember that no one feels sorrow or anger over a sin because of indifference to the sinner. It may take some time for your loved ones to comprehend the extent of your problem, or to learn that you really do need their help to break the compulsive cycle. Be as understanding of your loved ones as you hope they will be of you. Accept their imperfections as you hope they will accept yours.

You might also be surprised to find that your loved ones are intensely relieved by your confession. Usually, loved ones are sensitive enough to realize that they have not been in touch with what a secretive addict is really thinking and experiencing. Your loved ones may have been living in a state of continual confusion and alarm because of the feelings of unreality and uncertainty produced by your actions of self-concealment. You may think that you have been protecting them by hiding your addiction, but in the end, the deceptions hurt much more than the truth. In our research, we heard and read of many relationships that had been brutally severed by deception. We saw love die in the absence of truth much more quickly than in the presence of weakness. We have also heard of people whose relationships did not survive the shock of an addict's confession, but we personally spoke to many recovering addicts and their loved ones who had achieved an unusual degree of emotional and spiritual intimacy through working together toward repentance.

The actions of self-disclosure involved in your confession and in talking continually with loved ones and counselors about feelings, thoughts, and experiences are the activities for which your actions of self-concealment were Satan's counterfeit. If you perform these actions, along with actions of progression, you will see how the other quadrants on the compulsive cycle—the feelings of isolation and the feelings of self-hatred—begin to disintegrate by themselves. They are pushed out of their positions by the feelings of self-respect that follow a constructive or creative action, such as honest work or loving interaction with others, and the feelings of belonging that result when someone you care for knows the whole truth about you and loves you anyway. At this point, you will have begun to live in accordance with what we call the joy cycle, rather than the compulsive cycle. The new feelings that result from righteous actions help perpetuate those actions, and make them easier the next time around. For there will probably be a next time.

Remember that a compulsive cycle is never broken once and for all and that your old habits are likely to die hard. But if you stick to the principles of confessing and forsaking your sins, every slip will be less devastating and every temptation weaker, until one day you realize that while you will never be immune to your addiction, you are free of it.

Breaking the Compulsive Cycle: Advice to the Loved One

If you suspect or know that someone you love is caught in a version of the compulsive cycle, you have been spared the formidable test of an easy road in your effort to achieve joy and personal perfection. If you have been to college, you may have spent thousands of dollars to have others educate you, often by making you do things that were so tedious or difficult that you never would have done them on your own. The experience of dealing with a loved one who is trapped in an addiction will offer you experiences that are more difficult than any college assignment and potentially more educational—and they won't cost you a cent. A few tears, yes. Some lonely, difficult hours, perhaps. A great deal of thinking, praying, and new understanding, yes—if you let the experience motivate you to learn, instead of suffering it without effort like a mule standing miserably under the lash rather than moving forward to get away.

You may be overwhelmed by the injustice of your situation. You may feel that you do not deserve to be forced to suffer because of someone else's mistakes. We agree. You do not deserve the pain of dealing with someone else's addiction. On the other hand, you do not deserve the joy that can come from being pushed to new understandings by the same difficulty. Both of these experiences go beyond the limits of what anyone "deserves." Christ suffered more because of your loved one's sins than you are able to, and He certainly did not deserve it. On the other hand, His work and His glory consists of helping sinners learn to overcome their errors and achieve their potential. In confronting the sin and error of someone you love, you will be emulating a role Christ assumed when the plan of salvation was first put into action. You may never have a better opportunity to become like Him.

The first section of this chapter pointed out some misconceptions about the compulsive cycle that are common to almost everyone. The second section considered other erroneous ideas that we believe are most common in victims of the cycle themselves. We would like to begin this section by discussing some beliefs that are often expressed by those who would counsel victims of compulsive cycles and that we feel are inaccurate and destructive.

The first of these misconceptions is the idea that you can change another person. That is simply not true. You can lock behavioral addicts up, you can reason with them for hours, you can pray for them until you are blue in the face, and still, you cannot change them if they choose not to be changed. The law of God protects the right and power of every individual to determine his or her own choices, to work out a personal salvation. As we have already pointed out, physically restraining an addict from indulging in the action of self-indulgence only makes the problem worse. The most eloquent persuasion means nothing to people who have made up their minds not to listen. Alma the Elder, in a great act of faith, procured the services of an angel to help convince his wayward son to repent—but Nephi obtained the same blessing for his brothers Laman and Lemuel, and they persisted in their unrighteous actions nevertheless. The ultimate power to change always rests with the individuals themselves, and there is no way you can commandeer that right.

That does not mean, however, that you should resign yourself to simply watching a loved one succumb to a compulsive cycle. It does not mean that you can abnegate your responsibility to help the addict change. What it does mean is that in your response to your situation, you should not waste your energy trying to improve the compulsive-cycle victim like a sculptor hammering away at a malformed statue. It is worse than useless to spend time brooding about the addict's problem and devising strategies for making the addict change. That is Satan's technique. It is wrong, and it doesn't work. The fact that there is no way you can alter an intolerable situation by changing the source of the problem may lead you to the conclusion that you are powerless to do anything but endure the unendurable, but that is not the case. You have great power to change your circumstances because you, like the addict, have the power to change yourself. The first and last thing you must do if you wish to help a loved one break the compulsive cycle is to strive in every way to repent of your own shortcomings and become more Christlike in your own actions. Take advantage of the fact that pain is a great motivator to faith. Let every hurt feeling, every confused moment, every worry lead you to loving actions that might eventually rescue the compulsive-cycle victim from his pain, rather than to a self-righteous or self-pitying attack on the addict.

Since Christ has spent most of history trying to help His loved ones overcome their temptations, the record of His action in the scriptures is practically a how-to guide for dealing with this difficult situation. The best thing you can do for both yourself and your addicted loved one is to follow the Savior's well-documented example. Consider a few of the ways in which Christ has dealt with the kinds of emotions and situations that now confront you. Jesus' behaviors and attitudes in relation to the sinners He encountered in His mortal life were nothing less than shocking to His contemporaries. For one thing, He associated freely with people He knew were imperfect and even wicked. He treated them with unconditional kindness, took pains to comfort and heal them, and held no grudges even when they condemned, scourged, and crucified Him. At the final day, Jesus will be responsible for judging us according to our actions in life, but during His mortal ministry the love He expressed for all sinners was utterly unconditional.

When you discover that someone you love is struggling with an addiction, that perhaps you have been lied to and your trust betrayed, the temptation to lash out at the sinner can be very strong. You have been unjustly injured, and you may feel that justice should be served by returning hurt for hurt. There are at least two reasons you should resist the temptation to accuse and punish a loved one who has hurt you by falling into a compulsive cycle. In the first place, the thought that an innocent bystander should offer love and support rather than retribution to a wrongdoer, which is almost unthinkable to many people, was clearly not unthinkable to Christ. Because the Lord's actions mark the way to happiness, we can assume that revenge, which he eschewed, does not lie along that road. In the second place, you are not an innocent bystander. To the Jews who would have stoned the woman taken in adultery, Jesus said, "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone." (John 8:7.) He did not say, "Let him whose sins are pretty tame in comparison to hers cast the first stone." In the Sermon on the Mount, the Savior queried, "Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?" (Matthew 7:3.) He was speaking to you as much as to your addicted loved one when he used that analogy.

How could Jesus have been sure of the sweeping implications of this statement—that is, in every case, one who condemns a sinner is more in error than the sinner himself? The Lord provided the answer when he said that "with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again." (Matthew 7:2.) This sentence not only implies but unambiguously states that we ourselves set the standards by which our mortal actions will be judged. The standard by which you will be judged is specific to you, because it is taken from the record of your own judgments toward the actions of others. Your opinions of other people's sins are based both on what you know they have done and on what you suspect motivated their actions, as we illustrated with the story of June, the candy thief. But you cannot fully understand the situations and feelings that motivate the actions of others, and that is what makes the act of judgment so terribly dangerous.

When you condemn someone else's actions, you are in effect setting up a rule—by which you will yourself be judged—that states that given the particular set of circumstances this person is facing, anyone should be condemned for perpetrating similar actions. Because you do not comprehend the extent or power of the motivating forces in anyone else's life, however, you have no idea how you would respond in the same circumstances. It may well be that you are weaker than the sinner but have never borne such heavy burdens—in which case you are damned by your own judgment even if you have not committed the sin. The act of judging others is therefore more likely to rob us of salvation than many more obvious sins. Christ alone understands not only our sins but the pressures that lead us to commit them. Thus, when He tells us, "I the Lord will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men" (D&C 64:10), He is not protecting some kind of egoistic divine privilege. He is preserving us from transforming our ignorance into rules of judgment by which we will condemn ourselves. When He commands us not to judge each other, He is not stripping us of power but giving us an instruction that will save us from our own sins. If you refrain from judging others harshly, you will not be judged harshly yourself.

Those who have discovered their own weakness are wary of making judgments, for they know that some kinds of duress can make human resolve shake like a reed in the wind. Paula Johnson, a woman we interviewed whose husband Ted was involved in a compulsive cycle, told us how she learned this lesson during the prolonged and difficult birth of their first child. The Johnsons had decided on a "natural" childbirth, and according to plan, Ted gently rebuked Paula when she asked for an anesthetic after many hours of labor. He reminded her of what they had read during her pregnancy—that the sensation of labor was "not really pain, just pressure." After a succinct but colorful response to Ted's well-researched explanation of what she was going through, Paula demanded and got an anesthetic from her obstetrician. Looking back on the experience, she realized, "I had been doing the same thing to Ted about his problem that he did to me during labor—I just didn't know what he was going through to make him turn to [his addiction], so I kept telling him it should be easy to give it up." Paula's response to this new understanding was to stop assuming that Ted had "no good excuse" for becoming involved in an addiction. As she gradually turned her attention to learning more about the experiences that led him into a compulsive cycle, she found her anger and vindictiveness toward him dissolving in empathy—an empathy that did much to help Ted overcome his addiction.

The temptation to judge can lead a behavioral addict's loved one to accentuate the problem by rejecting the sinner and increasing the feelings of isolation. It can also lead to the dissolution of priceless relationships. But in our research we encountered this phenomenon much less often than a problem at the opposite side of the scale. We mentioned this problem in the chapter on actions of self-concealment, when we discussed the ways in which loved ones can come to accept and even share in the addict's pattern of hidden activities. Some researchers call this phenomenon "coaddiction." It occurs when, because loved ones do care so deeply for the addict and because they are ashamed of the victim's actions, they enter the cycle of deception, leading to isolation, leading to desperate attempts at happiness, leading to a profound loss of self-esteem, leading back to deception. An example would be the family members of an alcoholic who join in the addictive pattern by lying to friends, neighbors, or employers about the problem, by protecting the alcoholic from the consequences of drunken behavior, and by increasingly cutting themselves off from people who might find out. Coaddiction is almost always a product of loving "not wisely, but too well." The loved one's affection for the addict and the desire not to be judgmental, precisely the qualities we have just encouraged, often lie at the root of this multiple tragedy.

Again, following the example of Christ can help you avoid the pitfalls of being too accepting of an addiction. Jesus' unconditional love, meekness, and refusal to offer violence even when it was being used against him are qualities we hear discussed over and over again by faithful Christians. There is often an implied message that all unpleasant emotions must be swallowed or suppressed if we are to become Christlike. But an unbiased reading of the standard works shows a Jehovah who told Enoch, Moses, and most of His other prophets that His anger often "waxed hot" against the disobedient children of Israel. We see the mortal Jesus uncompromisingly cleansing the temple of defilers. We hear Him express the deep pain of shattered intimacy with the words, "Judas, betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss?" (Luke 22:47.) We hear Him instruct the Latter-day Saints, through Joseph Smith, that we should speak out against evil—"not with railing accusation, that ye be not overcome" (D&C 50:33) but "with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost" (D&C 121:43). In short, we see a God who possesses a full range of human emotional reactions to being hurt, as you may have been hurt, by the sin of a loved one. These emotions are part of our divine heritage. It does not seem to be either possible or wise to eliminate or stifle feelings such as anger, hurt, and sorrow. Like all our passions, they are to be bridled and directed, not squelched. A loved one's refusal to acknowledge the feelings that arise in response to an addict's behavior is often the beginning of self-deception, which leads to coaddiction.

Christ gave simple and effective instructions for dealing with these painful feelings in Doctrine and Covenants 121. He tells us that we should maintain a constant spirit of kindness that will enable us to know when we have been "moved upon by the Holy Ghost" to express anger, frustration, or hurt. But that should be followed, the Lord tells us, by "then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; that he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death." (Vv. 43-44.)

This type of interaction is not the judgment that rejects and isolates the victim of a compulsive cycle. It is an account of your own hurt feelings, which stem from your love for the addict, followed by an honest expression of that love. If you never express the deep conflicts you feel over the addict's actions, you are liable to find yourself becoming tremendously resentful. In the end, your resentment may all but bury the love that caused the hurt—and cause you to hide that love along with the resentment. Furthermore, swallowing your anger and grief is one form of shielding an addict from the natural consequences of inadvisable actions, which is a key element in coaddiction.

Many of us do not learn from our secular culture how to differentiate and deal with different types of angry emotions. In our research, we found an interesting tendency toward gender differences in the ways loved ones reacted to an addict's problem. Men seemed more prone to believe that judgment and revenge are justifiable elements of righteous anger. This belief made them more prone to reject persons caught in a compulsive cycle outright. Many women we spoke to, on the other hand, seemed so averse to passing judgments that they swallowed their hurt and anger and became coaddicts. It is quite a trick to sort out the types of anger, which our culture tends, one way or another, to lump together.

Fortunately, Christ's example is again available for us to study and emulate. Perhaps the surest guideline in this divine example, one that can serve you well through all the unprecedented and very difficult situations you may confront in helping a loved one break the compulsive cycle, is the simple fact that Christ never performed any action that would interfere with His own progression. He freely forgave sin, but He never participated in it, excused it, ignored it, or facilitated it. In short, He did nothing that might have jeopardized His salvation. A woman we interviewed quoted the story of a pioneer sister who went to the Prophet Brigham Young to complain about her marriage. "Brother Brigham," she fretted, "my husband just told me to go to Hell!" President Young promptly replied, "Well, Sister, don't go." Christ invites us all to come where He is by repenting of our sins and our errors. He will accept repentance as many times as it is offered. But if we fail to repent, He will not compromise Himself by coming down to the place where we have chosen to remain. Although He loves us infinitely, He will not go with us to hell.

The reason Jesus was able to go through mortality without ever becoming confused about the proper response to conflicts between forgiveness and uprightness is that He remained in constant contact with His Father in Heaven. The accounts of people we spoke with who had seen the compulsive cycle operating in the lives of loved ones were remarkably similar in their emphasis on the need for counselors, Church leaders, and family members to remain sensitive to spiritual promptings. Paula Johnson, the woman who realized during childbirth that she was judging her husband too harshly, began to give up this tendency to be judgmental because of one particular experience—labor and delivery. But she reported that after she had done that, she began to experience spiritual guidance in dealing with Ted's addiction to an extent she had never felt before. She began to avoid harshness, half-truths, and many other errors typical of addicts' loved ones simply because "when I was doing my best to repent instead of wishing Ted would shape up, I always had that wonderful feeling and I was prompted about how I could help him change."

Bishops, stake presidents, and other Church officials as well as the family members we interviewed reported receiving the same high level of spiritual help in their dealings with compulsive-cycle victims. The uplifting experience of feeling the Lord work through them to redeem His "lost sheep" was a wonderful and unexpected recompense for the pain they suffered as a result of the addict's behavior. That was true as long as the loved one was trying to live righteously, whether or not the compulsive-cycle addict was willing to change. The pain caused by the addict's actions was still present, but the joy brought by the Spirit made life not only bearable but happy for the loved ones. Joy and sorrow are not mutually exclusive, as we are often inclined to believe. God told Enoch, "Among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren . . . wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer?" (Moses 7:36-37.) Yet we also know that the Lord is the source of all joy and feels infinite joy. The two feelings are paradoxical only in an earthly sense. The Spirit can offer great, intense joy when the world contains only misery.

This brings us back to where we started—the proposition that your own righteousness, and not that of your loved ones, ultimately determines your happiness. If you are in perfect tune with the Lord's Spirit, you will hardly need this book to tell you how to help your loved one break a compulsive cycle. The Holy Ghost will communicate advice tailor-made for the specific instances you encounter, whereas we can only offer some generalized suggestions; however, some of the ideas we ran across in our research might help you orient your behavior as you strive to perfect your lines of communication with the Spirit.

We have said that victims of addictive cycles tend to focus their efforts on eliminating bad feelings, whereas loved ones tend to focus theirs on eliminating bad actions. To break the compulsive cycle most effectively, this situation must be reversed. Before the birth of her baby, Paula Johnson had focused almost all her attention on her husband's actions, assuming that she knew all she needed to know about his subjective experiences and feelings. After she switched her approach to trying to understand Ted's perspective, her concern began to diminish his feelings of isolation—and with them, the addictive actions he was trying to forsake. It may seem repugnant to try to comprehend and even empathize with the feelings of a long-term behavioral addict. The urge to accuse is much stronger and much simpler than the effort to understand. Resist that urge, however, and you will find yourself learning much not only about the sinner but about yourself.

We have recommended that victims of the compulsive cycle who wish to break their addiction should go to their loved ones and Church authorities to confess. If you find yourself in the role of confessor, put yourself in the addict's shoes. Understand that whatever weaknesses led the addict to the compulsive cycle, that person is showing tremendous strength in coming forward to confess. Even if you abhor the sin, allow yourself to continue loving the sinner. Realize that an addictive pattern is the result of someone taking a wrong turn in the effort to arrive at happiness. The need for that happiness is something we can all understand. Always remember that God is stronger than Satan. Acknowledge, along with the victim, that there is abundant hope for the repentant.

So far, we have been discussing your role in helping your loved one conquer addiction almost exclusively in terms of your attitudes and perspectives. But, many would-be rescuers asked us in our interviews, what can one actually do to help another person break the compulsive cycle? Some of the ways that you can help are implied in the diagram of the cycle itself. Just as the addict must replace the actions of self-indulgence with actions of progression and the actions of self-concealment with the actions of self-disclosure, you must do everything in your power to replace the feelings of isolation with feelings of belonging and the feelings of self-hatred with feelings of self-acceptance. Although all of these replacements must be made simultaneously if the compulsive cycle is to be broken, we believe that it is perhaps most crucial for you to focus on helping the addict to eliminate feelings of isolation.

Remember that much of the isolation addicts feel is caused by their own self-concealment. Your loved one believes you could not possibly love him or her if you knew what kind of a person he or she really is. To dispel that misconception, you must find out what kind of a person your loved one really is, make sure the addict "knows you know," and continue to show love and support. It will do you little good to storm, philosophize, argue, bribe, threaten, or speak words of wisdom. To break down the terrible walls that trap a compulsive-cycle victim in feelings of isolation, there is one thing that you should do more than anything else: listen. If and when a loved one comes to you to confess any misdeed, listen. If a compulsive-cycle addict refuses to confess and wants only to defend the virtues of a thoroughly destructive habit, listen. If the addict doesn't talk to you at all about the action—even if you don't know but only suspect there is a problem—listen, listen, listen. Listen to your loved one's silences as well as any outbursts of talking. Listen quietly to the statements that make you want to fight back with your own opinions or stop the painful words with words of your own. Listen without pouring out expressions of affection that the unbelieving addict might view with suspicion and recalcitrance. Listen with the sincere intention of learning to understand.

Some honest Latter-day Saints feel frustrated that the Lord does not speak to them more often, that they do not hear voices speaking out of silent air or burning bushes. They feel that a God who does not speak—a silent God—must not care. But the Lord's silences are never the silence of indifference. They are the silence of listening. The Lord has extended an open invitation to every one of us to go to Him any time and tell Him about our problems, our fears, our temptations, and our mistakes. He is that rarest of things, a friend who really wants to listen to us talk about ourselves. He has told us through virtually every prophet that He is waiting eagerly to listen to us if we simply speak to Him in faith. It is when we have made the first move to communicate that He can and does respond. All of the people we interviewed who had broken the compulsive cycle felt that their sincere repentance had been rewarded by the ability to truly feel that they were receiving answers to their prayers—not always immediately but eventually.

To help a loved one who is trapped in a compulsive cycle, then, you must sometimes follow the Lord's example of attentive silence even when you are tempted to vent your mortal spleen. Extend invitations to the sinner, as the Lord does, by really listening to whatever the addict says, without sending back a rebuttal, changing the subject, or ignoring what you have heard. Listen to your daughter talk about the new makeup styles you detest. Listen to your husband fussing over a problem in his work that bores you. Listen to a friend mourning a breakup with a sweetheart you never liked in the first place. The fact that you are listening will make the compulsive-cycle victim increasingly likely to disclose more and more of the thoughts that have been hidden under actions of self-concealment. As these thoughts begin to emerge, timidly, piece by piece, just continue to listen. Even if what you hear stings, you should try not to react too strongly to information that has been hidden precisely because the addict is so afraid it might shock you.

Simple attentive silence is unbelievably effective in tearing down the walls that keep the compulsive-cycle addict from feeling your love. But of course, total silence hardly constitutes a normal human response to another person's conversation. Besides, you may become confused and need some kind of clarification to follow what your loved one is saying. If you feel the need to ask questions or make comments, remember that when you are dealing with the problem of your loved one's addiction, you should be focusing your attention on the addict's feelings and not on the addict's actions. Any questions you ask will be most effective in breaking through the victim's isolation if they have to do with those feelings. "Why did you do that?" is usually not a helpful question in such a conversation. Behavioral addicts usually do not know why they did it, or they simply put their actions down to the belief that they are just naturally terrible people. But the question, "What were you feeling that led you to do that?" may lead addicts to look into their own motivations for their action, which will help them realize just a bit more about the connections between their feelings and their actions in the compulsive cycle.

As you question your loved one, then, ask about the feelings associated with the behavior rather than about the behavior itself. And as you listen, listen to the feelings being expressed more than to the descriptions of action. Listen to the tone of voice, the halt in speech, the struggle to bring out words that your loved one wishes desperately did not have to be spoken. Especially if a long-term addict comes to you with a confession, you may hear an account of actions that you hate. But if you listen, you will hear sorrow, and loss, and confusion, and grief, and loneliness—and these you can love. You do not need to think of "the right thing to say" in the midst of a discussion about the loved one's addiction. Victims of a compulsive cycle have locked themselves into their isolation and made it impervious to intruders from without. There is no right thing to say. You must wait for the addict's true feelings to leave their isolation slowly, timidly, like a frightened wild animal emerging from its burrow to take food from your hand. If you keep your hand extended by listening without any strong reactions, the addict will probably master the fear of self-disclosure and eventually make contact.

One reason we can make these bold assertions with some degree of confidence is that we saw the power of listening and calm questioning in the course of our research. On several occasions, we interviewed compulsive-cycle victims who had just been introduced to us by friends who knew about our project. We did not know these people before the interviews. We spoke very little to them about their problems. Since all we wanted to do was gather information, we simply let them talk, and when we became confused, we asked simple questions motivated by a desire to understand the person's subjective feelings, not by any personal investment in the problem. This very uncomplicated procedure often produced three reactions in the addicts we interviewed, which at first came as a complete surprise to us but later became so familiar we came to expect them. First, the compulsive-cycle victims would almost invariably say to us, not too long into the interview, "I've never told anyone about this before." Second, the interview subjects seemed eager to get in touch with us again and talk more about their struggles with their addictions. Third, we would often receive the completely undeserved compliment, "You really understand me." Of course, we often felt we didn't understand these people at all—but they felt we did, and that was a chink in the wall that separated them from other people. And all that we had done was listen quietly and ask simple questions about the feelings that accompanied addictive behaviors!

Of course, you should not think that you have to develop a sort of therapist-patient relationship with the compulsive-cycle victim who needs your help. You have feelings, too, and if you never express them, you will begin to feel as isolated from the addict as the addict once felt from you. You are equals, partners in the enterprise of trying to break the compulsive cycle, and equals share things in relatively equal measures. There are two feeling steps on the compulsive cycle. The feelings of isolation can be demolished by quietly listening to the victim's feelings, but to replace feelings of self-hatred with feelings of self-esteem, the addict needs to learn that the two of you can communicate on the same level. There should be times, especially at the point of a confession, when all your attention must be on the behavioral addict's feelings. It is a terrible waste to cut off a confession in midstream by breaking into a tirade about your own feelings on the matter. But there will be other times, times when the addict has talked himself out and really wants to hear what you think, times when you will be the one to ask for a chance to talk over your feelings.

Breaking the compulsive cycle requires communication between the addict and the loved ones, and communication must be a two-way street if the addict is to feel the self-respect of dealing honorably and fairly with others. The addict who has been listened to needs to hear what you feel about the problem. Any prevarication or dishonesty on your part will probably be sensed, and the addict will know that you are still somehow "different" from him because you seem to find it necessary to lie about your feelings toward him.

When you feel it is appropriate to bring up some of your own feelings, then, you should do so. But you must be extremely careful not to adopt an accusatory, self-pitying, or selfish tone in your discussion of your feelings. One helpful technique, mentioned frequently in Church magazine articles on family relations, is to make sure every sentence is phrased in terms of your own experience and feelings, rather than your assessment of the addict, by using the phrase "I feel . . . " whenever you are discussing your reactions to the compulsive cycle. Rather than saying, "You must not care at all about what this is doing to me," you might say, "This all makes me feel as though you must not care . . . " Instead of shouting, "How could you do this to me?" you might say, "I feel really hurt by what you've done." Be careful that you truly are expressing feelings, not judgments, in these sentences. Statements like, "I feel that you are a miserable clod," or "I feel that you just did this because you have no self-control" are not descriptions of your own emotional state; they are descriptions of judgments you are making because of your feelings. An interesting bit of trivia relating to this type of communication is that in the Japanese culture, where strong personal relationships are the norm and almost any kind of isolation is anathema, it is linguistically improper to describe someone else's feelings without qualifying the statement to show that you are in fact only surmising what the other person feels. For example, simply saying "He's tired" is incorrect in Japanese. The correct phrase would be translated, "I think he is tired." The Japanese thus have a linguistic reminder of something you must remember on your own: when you discuss your feelings about an addiction with the addict, don't claim to know all about the problem. Just describe the feelings in you as they arise. Christ expressed pain, anger, and grief during His mortal ministry, but He never attacked others for causing these painful feelings.

In summary, then, as a person who wishes to help a loved one break the compulsive cycle, you should be concentrating on the addict's feelings, not on his or her actions. You should try to help the addict change those feelings by, first, establishing a tradition of listening attentively to the sinner. If your loved one confesses unacceptable actions to you, do not react with harshness. Continue to listen as calmly as you can, asking questions about the addict's feelings in relation to the actions rather than about the actions themselves. Focus on gathering information, not on devising and advising strategies to change the compulsive-cycle victim. Then, after your loved one has had a full opportunity to tell you everything that is weighing on him or her, respond by honestly describing your own feelings, always including your feelings of love toward the addict. Continue to express your love to the victim by listening, sharing your feelings, and performing normal daily actions of friendship and service that will show the addict that you still value the relationship, that things are not unalterably changed, and that this is a problem the two of you will work on together. Avoid falling into judgmental attitudes or becoming a coaddict by lying to others about the problem. Above all, strive in every way to increase the level of your own righteousness, so that you will be able to find joy in living despite the difficulties and pains of helping a loved one overcome an addiction.

As you can see, breaking the compulsive cycle requires the cooperation of the addict and at least one other person. Neither party can accomplish it alone. Whereas the compulsive cycle necessarily drives people apart, breaking the cycle necessarily brings them together. Nor can the process be accomplished without turning to the Lord for help, and the same thing is true for mortal-and-God that is true for mortal-and-mortal: the compulsive cycle separates, and breaking the cycle reunites. You may be amazed to hear that the people we spoke with who had broken addictive cycles were profoundly grateful for the opportunity of wrestling with the terrible problem of addiction. Their loved ones and counselors shared this gratitude. The three case studies we have followed throughout this book may serve to illustrate some of the means by which real people broke the compulsive cycle. Here, as in the accounts of the actions of self-indulgence, we will record the subjects' experiences in their own words.

It's hard for me to pin down any one specific time when I "turned around" my obsession with eating and dieting. It was a lot of times, all strung out together, that brought about the real lasting change. I guess the thing that started me thinking in different ways about the problem was a conversation I had with my ballet teacher in college—or rather, a conversation she had with me. Apparently she had attended some kind of workshop on teaching dance, and they had had a panel on eating disorders, which are a problem for a lot of dancers. I guess she had started to suspect that I was having the same kind of trouble. One day she asked me to stay after class, and she just simply asked me if I thought a lot about my weight and if I dieted a lot. I was really hostile to her, but inside I remember being very relieved to have someone talking to me about this thing that took up so much of my time and energy. I felt as though she understood me. That teacher probably doesn't remember me at all—I'm sure she has no idea how grateful I still am to her. She suggested that I get in touch with a group on campus where people with eating disorders could go for help. I was very sullen about the whole thing, but I took the phone number she gave me.

I kept the number of the counseling group for several weeks. I don't know what kept me from calling right away—pride, maybe. I kept trying to convince myself that I didn't really have a problem. The thought of asking for help was really humiliating for me. Also, part of me was afraid that if I went for help, I would get it—you know, that I would stop bingeing and purging. I depended so much on the whole process emotionally, even though it was making me suicidally depressed, that I was afraid to give it up. Does that make sense? No, but it's the way I felt. Anyway, things finally got so bad that one night I picked up the phone and called the center. The woman on the other end was really sweet to me. She kept asking me questions and seemed really interested in my thoughts and experiences. I was amazed at how good it felt to talk to someone. I started to cry almost as soon as I got on the phone, which was really embarrassing for me because I had never let anybody see me cry, but she didn't seem to mind at all. She invited me to join in a sort of therapy group that met on campus one night a week.

I was kind of afraid to show up at this group, but I did it anyway. It was a real watershed experience for me. All of a sudden I had this whole group of people to talk to who would listen to me and who had similar feelings and problems. I remember one night, after I'd been going to the group for a few months, when I looked around at all those people and thought, "Why are you all sitting around talking about eating? Don't you ever do anything else? Nobody here is boring, but this obsession with food is! It's such a waste of interesting people!" That was a real shock to my system, because all of a sudden I could see that this thing I had thought was so important was really very trivial. When I could hear other people talking and see how their obsession was holding them back as people, I could apply those insights to myself. It was really good for me.

I was surprised to find that one of the student volunteer workers at the eating disorders group was a girl named Andrea who lived just down the hall from me in my dorm. At first I was horrified when I saw her at the center. I thought, Now she knows about me—she'll tell everybody! I expected her to treat me like a really sick person. But she didn't. She came up to me when she saw me, and gave me a big smile and said, "Oh, Ellen, I'm so glad you're here." I didn't even know she knew my name, let alone that she'd been worried about me! It seemed incredible. Andrea and I became good friends, because I knew that I didn't have to hide anything from her. She had a lot of other friends, and she started inviting me along when they went places together.

It made me feel strange, a little nervous, but warm, when I would spend an evening talking to other girls in the dorm instead of doing my homework. I always felt like saying no and staying away from people, because I'm really a very shy person, but the eating disorders group kept encouraging me to do things with other people, so I did. It got easier as time went on. When one of my dormmates heard that her father was having a cancer operation, I remember for the first time in a long, long time that I started spending more time thinking about someone else than I thought about myself. The rest of us in the dorm got together and had a bake sale to raise money so this girl could go home to help her mother with the younger kids while her father recovered. I realized after the sale was over that I had spent the whole day thinking about the people around me, instead of the food. For me, that was incredible.

Another event that stands out in my mind as a real turning point was the time I went to visit my grandparents after I had been involved with the therapy group for about six months. I'd gotten to the point before that I kind of went to see my grandparents as a duty. I couldn't figure out why they would want me there, because it never even crossed my mind that someone might actually like me. I thought they were just taking advantage of their authority or something. I couldn't imagine any reason that anyone would want to associate with me if they weren't getting something out of it. But the experiences with the group and the friendships I was making apparently had made some kind of a dent in my thinking, because this time when I went to see my grandma and grandpa I approached them as friends, instead of as a diligent granddaughter. I remember them sitting there and asking me questions about myself, and I started to think, My gosh, they're actually interested! I was so startled by this idea that before I knew it I had mentioned the group where I was still going to talk about eating disorders. They started asking me questions about that. At first I was terribly embarrassed, but I couldn't just lie to them, so I told them I'd been having some problems with food and dieting and stuff. I expected them to just come unglued, but I'll never forget the expression on their faces. They looked relieved! Grandma said, "Oh, so that's what's been wrong, and you're getting help. We've been so worried."

Something about that moment somehow convinced me once and for all that these people actually cared about me. I can't really describe the feeling. It was like I had been locked inside a steel safe, and all of a sudden the steel just disintegrated into dust around me and I was outside on a sunny day for the first time in my life. It was the most amazing feeling. I started to bawl like a baby, which upset my grandparents a lot. They kept asking, "What's wrong? What did we say?" and I kept trying to answer, but I really couldn't tell them why I was crying. My grandpa came over and put his arms around me, and that really did it! I was crying so hard I could hardly breathe. I kept trying to tell them that there was nothing wrong, but all I could get out was, "No, it's all right, I'm happy, I'm happy!" Actually, I was just flooded with all kinds of emotions. I was sad for all the times I had been lonely and afraid. It wasn't like self-pity, because I was looking at the Ellen in the gray steel safe, who wasn't me anymore. It was sympathy for that person that was making me cry, because all of a sudden I understood that she never had to go through all that. I realized that there is so much happiness in letting yourself feel things for others that it makes up for the sadness you can also feel. I hadn't been sad for all those years. I had been trying not to feel anything rather than risk feeling anything bad. That's what the obsession with food really was. It was a way to keep myself from feeling. That day with my grandparents I realized how ironic that was, because not feeling is the worst feeling of all.

Even after that day, I still definitely had my problems. Getting over all my habits was a long, slow process. I remember the first time I felt really lonely and went to the convenience store, as I always did, to buy some ice cream to make myself feel better. I picked up the carton, and then suddenly I thought, "This is ridiculous. You're lonely, not hungry. Ice cream's not going to help, so think of something that will!" I put the carton back and walked home and helped a friend with her homework, and after that I never had as much of a compulsion to binge when I was under stress. I remember the first time I realized that I couldn't remember what I'd eaten that day and that I didn't care. I remember the day my sister said, "When did you stop measuring all your food?" and I couldn't remember that, either. This all happened over a period of several years. Gradually, my friends, school, church, and other activities just started to push my obsession out of the way.

The gospel was very important in this process. It showed me what was important in life and kept me working toward those things. I started studying the scriptures and realizing, for the first time, that God wasn't a terrible person who stands up in heaven demanding that you control your life. The feeling I got when I read the scriptures was the same as the "sunny day" feeling I first felt in my grandparents' living room. My favorite quotation from Joseph Smith is, "Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938], p. 255.)

I really believe that. I've experienced it. I am experiencing it. If you can follow the first two commandments—loving God and loving human beings—I believe that you can get over almost any problem. Now, whenever I feel the things that used to make me binge or obsess about my weight, I think about those two commandments, and then I find some way that I can live by them. I suppose if I stopped doing that I could go back into my old ways, but honestly, it seems so unlikely I hardly ever even think about it. I've tried dealing with life by controlling everything through control of my own body, and it doesn't work, I promise. The first two commandments work. They have for me, and I believe they would for anybody.

I guess the way I got into drugs was so gradual I didn't really even know how deep in I was. I kept thinking I had it all under control. When my roommate found out about it and threatened to go to my parents, that was the first time I started to see it as a problem and realized I'd better stop. From that time on I was at least always trying to quit, you know; at least I didn't believe that taking drugs was cool or anything. So maybe that was the real turning point. But really, I didn't make much progress in my actual behavior. I felt guilty about the drugs, but when I felt like I needed them, it just didn't matter. So the problem went on for about two years after I'd already realized it was a bad thing. In fact, it got worse. It seemed like the harder I tried to quit, the worse I felt; and the worse I felt, the harder it was to quit. But at least I was trying.

It was about a year after the incident with my roommate that I got a letter from my sister saying she was worried about my little brother Justin. He was only about nine at the time. She said he'd started hanging around with some tough older kids at his school and that one of the kids used to steal beer from his father and they'd drink it after school. Marcy—my sister—had seen my brother doing that. She said she didn't know whether or not to tell our parents because she knew how mad our dad would get. She'd tried to talk to Justin herself, but he wouldn't let her. I guess he'd become kind of different, really hostile and sarcastic compared to how he used to be. He wasn't doing great in school, the whole bit. And he was only nine! So this letter said that she wished I was home, because I would know what to do and Justin always copied me in everything, so she was sure I could talk some sense into him.

Boy, you can imagine how I felt! My first reaction was, I was just totally stunned by this. I mean, to me Justin was only a tiny little kid. I used to give him piggy-back rides. I couldn't believe that he could get into anything wrong like this. My next reaction was, I was angry. I wanted to go out and smash anything that might hurt my little brother. Because, you see, I knew what he was getting into. Maybe if I'd just been somebody who never did anything wrong myself, I would have thought it was just some kind of phase or something. I don't know—maybe that's all it was. But I knew what it could lead into. I was furious at those kids who gave Justin this beer and stuff. If I could have reached them right then, I probably would have pounded them flat. I was really mad. And then I started to feel responsible. Marcy was right—Justin always had copied me a lot. I started wondering if I had ever let him see me drinking or doing drugs or maybe let him smell something on my breath or been obviously high in front of him. I couldn't get that off my mind. I started feeling really sick about it. In the middle of this whole thing, I went to take whatever it was I was hooked on at the time. Then I realized something. I was setting an example for Justin even if he couldn't see me. It didn't matter that I'd kept everything a secret. It comes through no matter how well you hide it. Somehow, it comes through.

A couple of days later I decided I just had to quit. I'd been trying on my own for so long I knew I couldn't manage it by myself. For a while after I got Marcy's letter I thought, you know, that would give me enough motivation so that for sure I'd be able to quit. But right away I could see I was just kidding myself. In fact, I got really honest with myself for the first time in a long, long time. I used to sort of kick myself after I'd use the drugs, sort of to pay up for it or something. But this time was different. I felt like I didn't have time for playing around. I had to stop because of Justin as well as myself. So I just thought out logically, "How do I do this thing and make it work?" I knew the local hospital had a rehabilitation program, because my friends and I used to crack rude jokes about it all the time. So one day I just drove myself over to the hospital and went looking for this program. It was weird. I was kind of like a passenger in the car. A big part of me didn't want to go in for help, but the part that did took over and sort of carried the rest of me along with it.

I guess I expected a medal or something for turning myself in, but no one at the hospital treated me that way. They were nice, but they were real no-nonsense people, I can tell you! One of the first things they had us do was write down our whole history of drug and alcohol abuse. They wanted everything, including times we might have broken the law to get drugs or sell them or anything. I guess I should have been scared that they'd have me arrested, but for some reason that never even occurred to me. I'm a lousy writer, but I really got into this confession thing. I wrote down every last detail—stayed up all night and didn't even notice it. I guess I'd really been wanting to tell someone about it for a long time.

We had to read our confessions in a group session. I thought that was going to be really humiliating, but it turned out other people had problems just as bad as mine, and I could see the counselors weren't acting like it was the end of the world, so pretty soon I relaxed. The whole thing was so different from talking about drugs with my friends. My friends and I used to always pretend like what we were doing was so cool, but down deep we knew we weren't doing the right thing. Here, everyone was being totally honest. It really felt good. I can't describe it. It was like fresh air or something. Just honesty. When I read my story everyone listened very quietly and asked a few questions at the end. I was still a little afraid somebody would get mad, but no one did. It was great! I felt mostly relieved. I remember I looked over at one of the counselors who I thought was the smartest one, and I said, "So, do you think I'm a hopeless case?" You know, kind of joking, but really serious. He just looked back at me and said, "Nope." It was the first happy thing I'd heard for a long time. That program got me through a lot.

One of the things we had to do was to try to make restitution for anything we'd done wrong because of our drug abuse. There are only so many things you can make restitution for, you know, but what we could, we were supposed to make up for. My big thing was, I had been stealing money from the store where I worked. Every day I would take the money for a few purchases without ringing up the sale into the cash register. Sometimes, if I needed money fast, I would actually take a little from the cash register and try to make it look like an adding mistake—you know, take exactly a hundred dollars so I could say I'd just hit the wrong key on the register or something. My boss was a nice man, and he suspected something, but he always gave me the benefit of the doubt. I really hated the thought of going in there and telling him I'd been taking his money. I mean, I hated it! That was the hardest thing I had to do. Before I went in, I worked out a plan where I would work full-time for part-time pay so I could pay him back the money I'd stolen. I didn't even know how much it was.

Mr. Treadwell was really mad at me, I can tell you. I thought he was going to hit me. He turned bright red when I told him about the money. Then he said, "I didn't think you were that kind of a young man, Bill." It just about killed me. I wanted to get mad back, but we'd talked about this whole thing in my group, and I knew I didn't have much right to feel angry at him just for feeling angry at me. I told Mr. Treadwell about my plan to pay him back. He looked at me for a long time and then he said, "Why should I trust you?" I thought about that for a little while, and then I said, "I guess you shouldn't." Boy, that was a real killer. I realized I had to rebuild my reputation from scratch. I started seeing how drugs could wreck your whole life. But Mr. Treadwell is really a good man, and he let me have one more chance. I slipped and took drugs a couple of times after that, but I never stole from him again. We're good friends now.

The other thing I did was to write to my parents and tell them what was going on. I had almost lost contact with them. I thought my father was going to kill me, but I figured he couldn't do it long distance. I told them I was worried about my little brother and said we needed to all work together so he wouldn't do what I'd done. My mother called me the day after she got the letter. I guess she and my dad had been up all night talking. She said, "You know we love you" and a bunch of other stuff. It was pretty sentimental. I started calling back regularly. I used to worry a lot about the expense of calling long distance, but my mom specifically said that I should call any time, so I took her up on it. I still felt a little guilty costing them so much, but they didn't seem to mind. My dad got on the phone and sort of talked about the weather for a minute, and then he started kind of choking up. It was awful, but at the same time I could see he really wasn't this big tower of strength like I'd always thought he was. He had a heart. That was a pretty great surprise to me, even though it hurt.

One of the things I realized was that when I was with my old group of friends they put a lot of pressure on me to take drugs. I know you're supposed to "Just Say No," but I'd already said yes so many times it was too hard for me to just stop. Once I got in those circumstances, the temptation was too much. So I stopped hanging out with them so much. I would stay home alone instead of going out with them on a Friday night. But then I started getting really lonely, and that made me want drugs again. I talked about that in my program, and everyone told me what I should do was make more friends who didn't take drugs. At first I said I didn't know anyone who didn't, but then I remembered that I'd been out on a blind double-date with some people from my ward, Jeff and Linda and Tammy. Tammy had been my date. They were really nice. I felt unbelievably stupid and awkward, like I was begging for somebody to be my friend, but I called Jeff and asked if we could double again. He said, "Sure." Then I asked him if he'd call Tammy for me again, and he said, "Call her yourself! I bet she felt bad you never got back in touch with her!" That was incredible to me, of course, but Jeff had me on the spot, so I promised I'd do it. I was so nervous! Here I was, this drug addict, calling up this nice Mormon girl to ask her out! I was so amazed when she said she'd like to go, I just about passed out.

We went out a couple of times, the four of us together, and then we started hanging around each other on campus and at church. Yes, I started going to church again. Mostly it was because Jeff and Linda, and of course Tammy, were there every Sunday. But it wasn't just a Sunday thing for them. They talked a lot about the Church even on dates, which I could hardly believe. They were very casual about it, but it came into the conversation quite a bit. I remember one night we were having some ice cream after a movie, and Jeff and Linda were talking about an exam they had taken in a chemistry class they had together. All of a sudden it hit me that they were talking about the Church in the same way my old friends and I used to talk about drugs! We used to talk about how much easier things were to understand when you had this "expanded consciousness" from drugs, and we'd talk about how we'd do better in school because of them, how we studied better, how we understood things faster. That was exactly what Jeff and Linda were saying about prayer getting them through their exams! They were kind of joking, but I could tell that underneath they really believed it.

After that I started kind of praying that I would get the help I needed to get by without drugs. I think it really helped. Tammy and I started dating pretty regularly, and after a while I started to feel like she was the one for me. I knew she was a strict Mormon, but that didn't worry me because I was pretty much off the drugs and I was going to church and praying. I was actually more religious than I'd ever been before. Finally I started hinting around about how the two of us might get married. One day, Tammy came out and said to me, "Look, Bill, you're twenty-one years old." I said, "Yeah, so what?" And she said, "If you're going to go on a mission, you'd better do it soon. The older you get, the harder it is to make the decision." I almost dropped dead. Tammy knew about my drug problem, and she knew I'd never even thought about a mission since I was nineteen. But every time I would try to talk to her about our future together, she would say, "Well, let's wait to see whether or not you decide to go on a mission."

One day I decided that since I really believed the Church was true, because it was helping me get over my drug problem, I owed it to God to go. I realized that one of the reasons I didn't want to do a mission was that I knew once I went I wouldn't be able to get drugs or alcohol easily. Even though I was trying my best not to take anything—and doing better at it all the time—the thought of not being able to get drugs if I "needed" them was pretty scary. Also, I knew I would have to confess to the bishop, and I didn't want to do that. I still felt like no one had the right to judge me. I was pretty proud. But one morning, when I realized that I should go on a mission, I finally said this little prayer, sort of like, "Oh, all right, get off my back. I'll go, I'll go!" It was a really moving prayer, you can tell.

The funny thing was, from that time on there was a real difference in my life. All of a sudden I seemed to need a lot less Dutch courage to get through things. I felt like I was kind of being carried along. It was strange. I went to the bishop, and he put me on probation and asked me how long it would take me to earn the money for my mission. I said about six months. The bishop said, "Well, then, let's work together during that time and get you all ready to go!" It felt good. He was really nice, not at all like I expected.

Anyway, I worked for six months and kept going to my hospital group and dating Tammy and calling home and checking in with the bishop, and the drug problem just sort of lost its hold on me somehow. Best of all, that summer I went home and spent a week fishing with my dad and brothers in Idaho. We had the best time! I had kind of forgotten what a great time I used to have with my family, being outdoors and playing games and stuff. One day Justin and I went out on the lake in the boat and had a long talk about his problems at school and everything. I think he needed to talk. He's a good kid—he just needed someone to talk to him who could understand what he was going through. I love my family so much. I can't believe I ever let drugs get between me and them. After we got back from the fishing trip, Tammy drove up to meet my family. My mom liked her a lot. What shocked me was that one day I came into the kitchen and found my mom and Tammy talking about me and drugs! I still thought it had to be some big secret, even though everybody knew about it, but there they were, just talking about it like they were discussing canned peaches or something. Tammy is a real no-nonsense person, just like my mom. We all ended up talking, and I felt like I finally didn't have to hide anything from anyone anymore.

The six months went by, and I got my mission call to the Southern California Spanish-Speaking mission. If you'd told me two years ago that I could learn another language, I wouldn't have believed you. If you'd put me in a class and told me I had to learn Spanish in two months, I would have stoked myself up on so many drugs you would have had to prop me up with two-by-fours just to keep me from slithering off my chair. But my mission has been a great experience. I've learned even more about the power of prayer and service to others and what they can do in your life. I feel like my family and Tammy are proud of me, and I want to make them even prouder. I don't know whether or not I was right about not being able to get drugs on my mission, because I've never tried. I'm just too busy to think about it! Now I can see that the drugs were a substitute for the Spirit and for service to other people. And those things are free. You can't beat that.

There were a couple of people who really helped me change my life. One was a former mission companion who moved into my ward, and one was a woman who worked at my company. I had been inactive in the Church and very active in my "alternative life-style" for quite a while before Brian joined my ward and became elders quorum president. He saw my name on the ward records one day soon after he moved in, and he came out to see why I hadn't been at church. I was as rude to him as I could be, not because I didn't like him but because I did. I wanted him to be so offended that he would go away forever and not find out about me. It was like that with everyone I knew in the Church. The more I respected them, the harder I tried to drive them away. Most of the time it worked, but not with Brian. He asked to be assigned as my home teacher, and he used to come over regularly just to chat. He never pressured me about the Church. I used to feel terribly depressed after these visits. Brian's life seemed to be everything I kept telling myself I didn't need or want—he loved his Church callings, he had just married a beautiful woman, and they were planning a family. Some of the worst things I ever did, I did to block the feeling of loss and loneliness that would come over me when I thought about what it would be like to be Brian. I just thought there was no hope of that for me. I can't describe the anger and the hopelessness that made me feel.

After a couple of years, Brian was called to be the bishop of our ward. Another man was assigned to be my home teacher. The first time he showed up, one Saturday morning, he really gave me the hard sell about coming back to Church. He used these little cardboard puppets to act out a story about reactivation, and then he said, "Shall we go to sacrament meeting together tomorrow? I know you can do it. " The whole thing just made me furious—I felt he was being incredibly patronizing. So I said to this poor guy, calmly, "Did you know that I'm gay? And I have no intention of changing. Why don't you go home and make up a little story about that?" His reaction was just what I'd expected. He looked totally disgusted and sort of edged away from me as though he thought I might attack him or maybe it was contagious. He left immediately, and I never saw him again. In a way, I felt like I'd won some sort of victory, but at the same time it was an incredibly depressing experience. It was like I had finally proven for myself that the way I expected Church members to react to me was exactly the way they would react. I was like some sort of leper.

At six o'clock the next morning my doorbell buzzed, and there was Brian in his shirt and tie. I was angry at him for having woken me up, but he just breezed in and sat down on the couch. Apparently he'd called my home teacher to see how I was doing, and the home teacher told him what I'd said. He said, "Warren, is it true?" I felt so sick, because I really liked Brian, and I knew what a good man he was, and now he knew about me, and he would hate me, too. So I just got very cold toward him and said, "Yes. Now you can leave."

His reaction took me completely aback. His face kind of fell, and he said, "Oh, Warren, how awful for you!" Well, he might as well have pulled out a knife and stabbed me in the heart. I was all ready for whatever angry or disgusted thing he might say, but I just wasn't ready for sympathy. As if it wasn't bad enough that this guy now knew my worst secrets, I started to cry right in front of him! I thought I would die from embarrassment. I sat there and thought, Great, now he's going to think I cry all the time because I'm effeminate or something. But I couldn't stop. Brian just sat there with this sympathetic look on his face. Finally I kind of got hold of myself and said, "Look, there's nothing you can do about it. That's just the way I am, and that's that. So you see, that's why I can't come back to Church."

Once again, I expected that that would be the end of it, that he would just leave or get mad or something. Instead, he sat there for a long time, and then he said, "Warren, remember that lady we baptized in Frankfurt?" I knew right away what he was talking about. When we were companions, one day we had practically been pulled off a bus and over to a little house by some power we couldn't understand. It wasn't really physical, but it might as well have been. We both felt it. There was a lady living in the house whose son had just been killed in a train accident. She let us right in and told us that her dead son had appeared to her in a dream the night before and told her that he would send some people with the keys to seal the family together so that their separation would only be for a little while. She said her son told her what we looked like and promised that he would make sure we got there. It was the most incredible experience to baptize this woman and then her husband and daughters. Obviously, it really strengthened my testimony.

Anyway, there was Brian sitting in my apartment ten years later talking about this incident I'd almost forgotten. We started discussing other experiences we'd had on our missions where we'd really felt how true and good the gospel was. Without even realizing it, I started enjoying all this reminiscing. Brian is a fun person to talk to, and we'd always gotten along really well. We ended up talking for over an hour. I'm sure he missed some kind of bishopric meeting, but he never mentioned it. After we'd gone through all our experiences as companions, we talked about what happened the rest of our missions. Then we talked about the people we'd baptized. Brian had kept track of them, though I of course hadn't. It was good to hear news. I really cared about those people. So then, after we'd about talked ourselves out, Brian looked at me and said, "The Church is true, Elder White." I looked back at him and said, "I know." And I did. I always had. Then Brian said to me, "Well, how can you believe there's no place in it for you?" I started to cry again, of course. While we had been talking, I had felt all warm and relaxed again, the way I had on my mission, but as soon as he brought me back to the present, everything seemed to go wrong all over again. I knew he'd gotten to me, though, because I got really mad. I usually have very good control over my temper, but I almost yelled at him. I told him he didn't understand me, he had no idea what he was talking about, he was a bigot, and he should get out of my sight. So he left. Since then I've often felt bad about my reaction that day, but Brian never said anything about it. I guess he understood the kind of strain I was feeling.

That night, I prayed for the first time in years. I really poured out my guts. I told God how lonely I was, how angry I was at Him for making me this way, and how confused everything seemed to be. I prayed for a long time, lying in bed. When I finally fell asleep, I had a very powerful dream. It wasn't like the lady in Frankfurt—no people from beyond the veil or anything. In the dream I was walking along a road with Brian, and there was this terrible earthquake going on. He was laughing and talking, and suddenly I said to him, "Brian, don't you see everything's falling down around us? It's awful! Everything's going to be destroyed!" He answered calmly, "Oh, yes, I know, but there's nothing to worry about. Look, there's your brother." And he pointed behind me. In the dream, I got very excited because I had always wanted a brother, and I had never had one. So I turned around to look where Brian was pointing. Then I woke up.

I don't remember what I saw in the dream when I turned around, but I seemed to remember seeing something, or somebody. All I know is that I woke up with the most overwhelming feeling of peace and love and happiness. I just lay there sort of floating around in this wonderful feeling. I was so happy I really thought I would die, and if I had died I don't think I would have minded. I also realized who the brother was. It wasn't just my brother, it was my Brother, with a capital B. All of a sudden I knew what I had to do, and I wasn't even worried about it. The only thing I wanted was to keep that feeling with me forever and ever. I called Brian and woke him up, and "Listen, I want to come in and confess." He said, "Warren, are you all right?" He told me later that I sounded so thrilled about this whole thing he thought I must be drunk. The happiness I felt in that dream stayed with me through almost everything that followed for about a year.

Well, we set up an appointment, and I went in to talk to him. He had me go to the stake president after I spoke with him. They considered having a Church disciplinary council but decided just to put me on probation. That really blew me away. I expected that I'd be right out on my ear if anyone ever heard about me. Instead of excommunicating me or even disfellowshipping me, they put me on a pretty strict probation—and then they called me to be a greeter at church, which meant I had to show up on Sundays. I couldn't believe it. Brian said frankly he couldn't believe it either, but that's what the Spirit told them to do. The response I got from the stake president and Brian gave me a lot of hope. They seemed to really sincerely want to work with me, they thought I could live the gospel and be happy, and they told me to call them anytime.

At first, I called them a lot more often than I wanted to. Old habits die hard, especially the kind of habits I'd gotten into. I can't believe they never gave up on me, considering how often I slipped. I hated having to disappoint them, but they always approached it as a learning experience. They'd say, "Well, try to figure out why you did it. Don't just beat yourself up for having done it." They were wonderful. The only time things really got bad was one time when I decided that I just couldn't bear to disappoint them again, so I started lying to them and saying I wasn't having any trouble with temptation. As soon as I started lying, that feeling I had received in the dream was suddenly gone. It was horrible. I felt as bad as I had ever felt. The more I lied, the more it was like I might as well go ahead and do whatever came to mind, since I'd have to confess eventually anyway. When I finally went back to the stake president, it was even harder than the first time I confessed. But that warm feeling came back to me after I'd done it, and I learned a lot from the experience. I learned that lying about my problem was the biggest thing that would stop me from changing.

One thing I realized was that I used to do things that had nothing to do with sexual temptation but that when I'd do them I'd always end up in the wrong places. I used to take long walks, and I'd always drift toward the wrong part of town. So I bought a bicycle and started riding it for exercise instead of taking walks. Another trouble spot was driving home from work at night—I almost always ended up driving to "dangerous" places I used to go to, "just to see what was happening." Once I got there, it was all over. I didn't have the willpower to resist at that point. I prayed hard for a way to solve this problem, and a short time later a woman at my office asked if I would like to carpool with her, because we lived in the same neighborhood. Alice wasn't a Latter-day Saint, but she was very religious, and we used to talk about our different beliefs on our daily commutes. She was—is—an amazing person. She seems so interested in other people, and she really listened to the things I said. We became very close friends.

One day, for no real reason, I told her about my struggle with homosexuality, my confusion about God's laws and homosexuality, and my efforts to repent. She seemed absorbed, listening to me go on and on about myself. She asked really thoughtful, intelligent questions and seemed to be thinking very hard about my answers. I remember when I told her about my past, she said, "Gee, that surprises me," but she didn't sound shocked at all. She hardly said anything that whole trip; she just listened to me talk. I felt as though a huge knot inside my chest was beginning to loosen up as I talked to her. I remember thinking something very childish as we went into the office building that day. I didn't say it, but I thought it. I thought, Alice is my best friend. I felt like a six-year-old, thinking that, but I was so happy I didn't care.

Seeing how well Alice reacted to my problems and negative feelings got me started thinking about a lot of things. In my family, my father always used to try to protect my mother from any bad feelings or news. If there was something about a disaster in the paper, he would tuck it away somewhere that she wouldn't find it. He taught me to protect her from bad things. The problem with that was, I started thinking that women just couldn't handle knowing about everything that was going on inside me. It's hard to really feel love for someone if you're always trying to protect them from the bad things in yourself. But here was Alice, dealing with all my "bad things" without even batting an eye! One day I called my mother—she about dropped dead from surprise, because I had never called her in almost four years—and I actually started talking about the way Dad used to shield her from bad things. She started laughing and saying how silly he was, that he was so sweet always trying to make her world perfect, and that she avoided letting him know that she was aware of bad things because he got so worried about her. The whole thing really shook me up. This wasn't my mom! This was some kind of real person! It was a long time before I felt ready to tell my parents what I had been through in my life, but that day was the beginning of a real change in me and my whole family.

One day when we were driving to work, Alice told me her boyfriend had proposed to her and she had accepted. It came as a total shock to me. I had known she had a boyfriend, which was fine because I didn't "like" women anyway, right? I thought, This shouldn't bother me, but it did bother me. A lot. I thought, She can't marry him! She's my best friend! The emphasis was on the word my, and that came as another surprise to me. Suddenly I saw Alice and her fiancÃ©—a husband and wife—as best friends. I had always thought that marital relationships were like the relationships I had had with men: in other words, very physical. There might be other elements of the relationship, but the primary element was sexuality. Now all of a sudden I was seeing Alice and her fiancÃ© adding sexuality as an element of their friendship, instead of the other way around. It was an incredible revelation to me, because suddenly I realized that I wanted that kind of relationship with Alice! All at once, everything I knew about life and love seemed to be fitting together in new ways. It was very bewildering to me, but very exciting.

Because she was my best friend, and I had always been completely honest with her, I told Alice all of it. She made it clear to me that she was sorry, that she was in love with her fiancÃ©. But—it was a very strange conversation—as we both sat there and talked on and on about what it felt like to be in love and I realized more and more that I had been in love with her since the day I had decided she was my best friend, we both kept congratulating me on how I was seeing love and intimacy in this new way. It took me quite a while to deal with having realized I had fallen in love with someone after she had gotten engaged to someone else, but from that conversation I got my first real glimpse of hope that I could be happy in this life. The progress toward breaking my old habits took a giant leap forward that day. Since then, I've found out that my hope was justified. I have been happy, very happy, and I have changed. I know not everyone thinks I should have changed, and a lot of my gay friends see me as a traitor and a fool for "knuckling under to the establishment," but my happiness means more to me than their approval. I owe a lot of that happiness to Brian and Alice, and I'll never be able to repay them.

Ellen, Bill, and Warren all "broke" their compulsive cycles by substituting useful and productive actions and feelings for destructive ones at each step. Actions of progression replaced actions of self-indulgence. Feelings of self-esteem arose from those actions and were reinforced by people around them, replacing feelings of self-hatred that had become habitual. Actions of self-disclosure were substituted for actions of self-concealment, and feelings of belonging emerged from a combination of this self-disclosure and the supportive response of friends, family, and Church leaders. In each case, the subjects claim that the cycle of compulsive behavior was broken. But let us reiterate that this was not an event, but a process. The compulsive cycle is not simply obliterated by repentance: it is transformed. Just as the error was a way of living, so is its opposite. We call this way of living the joy cycle. The next chapter will discuss the results that seem to follow when the joy cycle replaces the compulsive cycle as the central coordinating process of an individual's life.
