Martha Nibley Beck, John C. Beck, Breaking the Cycle of Compulsive Behavior ( 1990)

8

The Joy Cycle

The central message of this book is that compulsive behavior can be overcome. And yet, we agree with the idea first taught by alcoholic recovery programs that behavioral addicts can never say they are cured. "Once an alcoholic, always an alcoholic" is an accurate phrase in the sense that if you are vulnerable to an addiction in the first place, you are likely to remain vulnerable, even if you never again indulge in the activity. But aren't these two claims—that one can both overcome an addiction and remain vulnerable to it—contradictory?

They might be, but only if you define breaking a compulsive pattern as leaving the cycle of addiction. We have come to think that this destructive cycle is simply the counterfeit of an opposite cycle that operates in the life of virtually every happy person. It is one small part of the many patterns and influences by which our behavior is oriented. In the case of compulsive actions, the cycle becomes central to the individual's attention for the same reason that fresh air becomes central to our attention when we are smothering in smoke. A healthy, natural, and normal aspect of life has been replaced by a substitute that is unhealthy, unnatural, and abnormal. The counterfeit, in all its many forms, is what we have been referring to as the compulsive cycle. The "real thing" we call the joy cycle.

In the four chapters that described our concept of compulsive behavior, we went through the compulsive cycle once. The image evoked by our account and the diagram in Chapter 1 suggest a two-dimensional circle, like a wheel spinning around and around in the same location. But that is not an accurate portrayal of an addictive pattern. To complete the picture we need a third dimension: to north, south, east, and west, we must add up and down. The shape that describes the cycle best is a coil, like a spiral staircase. Imagine such a staircase spiraling eternally up, into light and happiness, and eternally down, into darkness and misery. Now imagine that the staircase is within you, is in fact part of you, and your soul moves on it as time passes. There is no apparent way off the staircase, and no way to move far in any direction without going either up or down—but it is up to you to determine which of these directions you will go. The spiral staircase is both the compulsive cycle and the joy cycle. It is a powerful thing, and like all powerful things it can move human beings to either great good or great evil, depending on how we decide to use it.

To the people we spoke with who were in the midst of a compulsive cycle, this spiral staircase was a shortcut to pain, fear, and sadness. The more times they went around the cycle, the deeper they sank. When they felt they must soon hit bottom, they found that the staircase went on down, down beyond depths they had never dreamed could exist, and then down further, and on down again. The deeper they descended, the faster they went and the harder it seemed to be to move back upward, even for a short while. Whatever lies at the bottom of this twisting staircase, it must be impressively large, for it seems to exert a profound gravitational force. But we believe the bottom is not reachable in this life. As long as a mortal being is able to make choices, the staircase within that person goes on and on. And no matter how long the journey or how far down the steps, as long as mortality continues there is always the opportunity to turn around.

Almost every compulsive-cycle addict we watched over a five-year period turned around at some point, usually at many. There were moments, or days, or weeks in all of their lives when some act of service or duty replaced an addictive action and when the person felt a rise in self-esteem because of it. There were times when a whole or partial disclosure of self chipped away at feelings of isolation. Most of these changes of direction, which came by substituting proper actions and feelings for destructive substitutes, addressed only some of the steps of the joy cycle. Before a whole turn upward was completed, the victim had become discouraged or tempted or simply tired of fighting gravity, and the descent down the staircase was resumed with more hopelessness than ever.

But some individuals attacked the compulsive cycle at every step, and continued to do so. It was always a struggle at first, and there were usually occasions when these people slid backwards, sometimes for quite a while. But as soon as they firmly understood the ways in which they could use their patterns of feelings and actions to ascend, rather than descend, they were no longer hopeless. In fact, for these people the staircase became a blessing rather than a curse, as much a shortcut to happiness as it had been to sorrow. In these cases, as time passed and the person climbed higher and higher, there seemed to be a point at which each of them began to realize that heaven, as well as hell, has its gravitational force. Climbing out of the densest darkness, they struggled along by sheer strength, which failed frequently. As the blackness gave way to grayness, the force pulling them down began to weaken, and they climbed a little faster, turned back a bit less often. Terrible compulsions became irritating, leftover habits. As the recovering addicts ascended into brightness, they felt the gravity downward being balanced and overcome by an even more powerful force from above. The intermittent descents all but stopped, and the addiction was officially broken—as long as there was no turning back. At this point most recovering behavioral addicts told us they were content: they could handle their addictions, and they wanted nothing more out of life. But, as they continued to move up the spiral staircase simply to keep from falling down it, they discovered that the cycle, which they knew could take them down beyond their worst imaginings, could also take them up beyond their wildest hopes. After a while, even though the possibility of backsliding was still there as long as there was a chance to turn back, the upward pull of the joy they experienced made these individuals' terrible temptations seem puny and ridiculous. The higher these individuals went, the stronger they got.

A disproportionate amount of space has been allotted to the counterfeit of the joy cycle, as opposed to the joy cycle itself, for the same reason that a disproportionate amount of literature has been devoted to describing conflict as opposed to concord. Because happiness is our natural state, happiness speaks for itself. We understand it. Unhappiness, being foreign to our natures, takes some explanation—and we all feel the need to puzzle it out, because it hurts and worries at all of us every day of our lives. Certainly the victims of compulsive cycles ponder and dissect and dwell on their discontent, whether they think of their addiction as poison or ambrosia. The amazing thing about the several dozen active behavioral addicts we spoke with was the similarity we noticed between their personalities, despite the apparent diversity of their life-styles. After some of these people had been climbing the joy cycle for some time, the comparison was reversed: their life-styles became quite similar, and their personalities became marvelously divergent and unique. But they no longer felt any need to explain or justify either their behavior or their experiences. They were too busy enjoying themselves. A miserable life is more interesting to analyze, but a happy life is more interesting to live. For that reason, we will spend only a chapter describing the joy cycle and the events we saw in the lives of individuals who learned to live the joy cycle. We will discuss the steps of the joy cycle one by one, compare them with the corresponding steps on the compulsive cycle, and attempt to show how each step leads into the next.

Feelings of Belonging

One of the most deadly things about the feelings of isolation that seem to lie at the root of compulsive cycles is that they are rarely recognized for what they are. The core of isolation within an addict is usually hidden under layers upon layers of other stresses as discontents. In their hearts, although not intellectually, victims of compulsive cycles seem to believe that they are essentially unlovable or perhaps that there is no such thing as love. Their lack of trust in their ability to find a sense of complete belonging often makes the acknowledgment that love is what they want and need too painful to face. Feelings of isolation go right to the core of the individual. They are felt not as a conscious awareness of the desire to be loved but as an indescribable void within the addict's soul. Actions of self-indulgence and other distractions serve to block the void temporarily, but it always returns when the distraction is removed.

This void is not simply emptiness. It is emptiness that yearns to be filled. It is characterized by longing, wistfulness, half-formed hopes, and bittersweet echoes of something the individual typically cannot identify. It craves some kind of satiation, but being wordless, it does not name the thing it craves. The void of isolation will not allow addicts to rest. It goads them to constant action the way hunger drives an animal to forage. It lies at the heart of a relentless search for satisfaction. Such satisfaction is never realized, however, by any of the frantic measures an addict uses to feed the internal void. Repeated attempts to block the void by worldly means leave him "even as when an hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty." (Isaiah 29:8.)

When victims of compulsive cycles (or anyone else, for that matter) are finally willing to acknowledge and reveal their dependency, their vulnerability, and their need for others—in other words, their essential loneliness—they have taken the first step toward replacing feelings of isolation with feelings of belonging. If such individuals present themselves without reservation before both God and their loved ones on earth, revealing their imperfections, sorrows, and weaknesses as well as their strengths and successes, they become both more lovable and more able to feel loved. This love grows as it is expressed in word and deed to fellow human beings and to the Lord. As addicts allow themselves to reach out fully to others, rather than locking parts of their experience within themselves, the aching void paradoxically becomes an overflowing abundance of joy.

"Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled," said Jesus in His Sermon on the Mount. (Matthew 5:6.) A corollary we add from our research is that they who hunger and thirst after anything but righteousness, which is a closeness and similarity to God, never achieve a satiety of the soul nor any lasting fulness at all. In the scriptures, the word joy very often appears in the same sentence with the words full, filled, or fulness. In many of these instances, the "fulness of joy" is mentioned after an individual has experienced terrible isolation and then put forth a tremendous effort to reach out to God and to the people around him. Alma the Younger and the sons of Mosiah, after experiencing "the darkest abyss," decided that they "could not bear that any human soul should perish" in a similar condition. (Mosiah 27:29; 28:3.) They therefore embarked on a very difficult mission to the Lamanites. When the five met again, after "suffering all manner of afflictions," Ammon, one of Mosiah's sons, discussed his feelings in connection with his experiences: "Behold, my joy is full, yea, my heart is brim with joy, and I will rejoice in my God. . . . Yea, I say unto you, there never were men that had so great a reason to rejoice as we, since the world began." (Alma 26:11, 35.) The joy felt by Ammon and his friends sent them back into the mission field, where they performed some of the most impressive works and preached some of the greatest sermons ever recorded. They had reached out of the isolation of sin to serve others, and they seemed to gain more capacity to be filled with joy as they poured themselves out to God and his children in a seemingly endless flood of love.

One reason Alma and the sons of Mosiah were so able to experience great joy was precisely that they had "suffered much anguish of soul because of their iniquities, suffering much and fearing that they should be cast off forever." (Mosiah 28:4.) The fact that "there is an opposition in all things" (2 Nephi 2:11) creates a special form of justice in that it ensures that those who have felt deep anguish also possess the capacity to feel great rejoicing. The horror of the abyss carves out more space for joy, as long as the response to the yearning is not to pull things into one's self but to give things of the self away to others. No one ever encountered more isolation and darkness than Christ did at His atonement, and His response to that moment of the greatest possible need was to give the greatest possible gift. Like Ammon, who met again with his friend and brothers after a painful and difficult attempt to save souls, Christ spent the period immediately after His mortal mission meeting and talking with people who loved Him. The account of Christ's visit to the righteous part of the Nephites after the great destruction that accompanied His crucifixion hints that Jesus was affected by His experiences much as Alma and the sons of Mosiah were affected by theirs. After Christ told the Nephites about Himself and His doctrine, "it came to pass that Jesus spake unto them, and bade them arise.

"And they arose from the earth, and he said unto them: Blessed are ye because of your faith. And now behold, my joy is full.

"And when he had said these words, he wept, and the multitude bare record of it, and he took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them.

"And when he had done this he wept again." (3 Nephi 17:19-22.)

The joy that emanated through and from the Lord, almost immediately after His having been so utterly forsaken during the time He had borne our sins, was "full" to the point that it overflowed in prayer, in expressions of tenderness and service to His people, and in tears. What a marvelously human reaction! The magnitude of this experience may be beyond our understanding, but the pattern is something familiar to everyone we interviewed who had finally felt belonging after being lost in isolation.

Feelings of belonging, like feelings of isolation, are not an end in themselves. Where isolation is a vacuum that must be filled, creating a constant hungering restlessness in those who experience it, the sensation of knowing one is loved and lovable is a spring of living water that seems to overflow in a spontaneous desire to do good. It creates an impulse, but the impulse is to give rather than to take, to supply rather than to consume. People who feel deeply alone know that they must somehow search out and obtain something—anything—to ease a limitless emptiness. People who feel deeply loved know that they must somehow—anyhow—find ways to share a limitless abundance. Thus both feelings of belonging and their opposite, feelings of isolation, are irresistible motivations to action. To someone who is locked in a compulsive cycle, the response will be an action of self-indulgence. But the only productive way to respond to either of these feelings is by performing some action of progression. That is how both Ammon and Jesus reacted to the isolation inherent in being mortal and individual, and that is how they came to feel the belonging inherent in godhood and at-one-ment. That joy is indescribable. "Behold," exulted Ammon, "I cannot say the smallest part which I feel." (Alma 26:16.) The people we interviewed who had replaced compulsive cycles with the joy cycle expressed the same inability to describe the joy that came from feelings of belonging. Instead of trying to talk about them, they allowed these feelings to be expressed in actions of progression.

Actions of Progression

In general we may say that actions of progression are any actions that increase both our capacity to love and our capacity to understand. You can imagine as many of them as you like, for the possibilities are as infinite as eternity and will continue to multiply throughout it. Unlike actions of self-indulgence, which are limited to a few predictable behaviors, actions of progression are as plentiful, beautiful, varied, and fresh as snowflakes in winter. In some cases they involve activities that can become mere empty pleasures when undertaken with the wrong motivation or in the wrong circumstances—sexual behavior is a good example. But actions of progression have some sure characteristics by which they can always be distinguished from actions of self-indulgence.

One of these characteristics is that someone engaged in mere actions of self-indulgence may be excited for a time but eventually becomes jaded and bored with the activity. The addict needs more and more of an addictive behavior to feel the same amount of interest, excitement, or pleasure, and the rest of life also becomes steadily less interesting as the person goes through the compulsive cycle again and again. Actions of progression, by contrast, enrich the remainder of life rather than dull it—and they are never boring. They may be difficult, tiring, even daunting, but they are never boring. Such actions are expressions of love and understanding, and through them love and understanding become concrete. That is not a boring process. It is gloriously interesting and exciting. To use the technical term, it is fun.

To some, fun is a word that has been corrupted to indicate mere pleasure. To others the concept is denigrated as childish—a sophisticated ennui is much more acceptable in worldly circles than a constant ebullition of fun. It is easy for Satan to convince vulnerable people that actions of progression are childish, because they are in fact thoroughly childlike. Children and young animals spend hours and hours in activities we call play, which we generally distinguish from serious, adult activities. Psychologists have long understood that this kind of play is not merely idle time-killing. It is an absolutely essential experience by which children learn how to interpret and manage information about themselves, each other, and the physical world. Through it, they gain in capacity to both love and understand. Play is the essence of an action of progression.

This capacity does not disappear with maturity. We all know people whose actions seem to spring spontaneously from within, instead of being imposed from without. These are the people who love their jobs, who are still curious about the world around them, who are delighted by both new and familiar experiences and people. We remember being called outside, as children, by parents who were entranced by a sunset and wanted us to see it. We remember being instructed by fathers and mothers in skills our parents seemed to love for their own sakes—skills that often touched on the work each of our fathers did to support our families. Both of us remember listening in on discussions during which our parents brought up and debated new concepts about a wide variety of people, things, and events. Since both of us were later children in large families, our parents were not particularly young at the time. Apparently, however, they were not mature enough to have learned that grown-ups should not have fun.

Although actions of progression are fun, they are not silly or giddy. Watch a two-year-old playing contentedly, and you will see an expression on his face of great intensity, of complete absorption, not of glee. Watch an artist who is painting from the heart, or a parent playing with a new baby, or a mathematician working on a really intriguing theory, or two friends deeply engrossed in conversation, and you will see this same expression. The person involved in a true action of progression will continue for hours in complete absorption and identification with the process. Time seems to disappear, as does any conscious awareness that the actor is separate from the action. The dancer, to paraphrase Shelley, becomes the dance. Compared to the engrossing experience of love and understanding that accompanies actions of progression, the forced oblivion to one's own needs that arises from an action of self-indulgence is positively repugnant. The difference between these two types of action becomes even more glaring when we move to the next step on the joy cycle, the feelings that arise as a consequence of actions of progression.

Feelings of Self-Esteem

The feelings of self-hatred that follow the commission of a compulsive behavior are based on two comparisons: the comparison between what behavioral addicts aspire to do and what they have actually done, and the comparison between what they think other people are like and what they think they themselves are like. Both these comparisons involve, on the one hand, an intensive evaluation of the self. They draw the compulsive-cycle victim inward, to personal behaviors and personal emotions. On the other hand, these feelings also involve the addict in a scrutiny of others that is both inaccurate and incomplete. At this step on the compulsive cycle, victims dwell both on their own shortcomings and on their own images of other people's superiority. They exaggerate both the hatred they feel for themselves and the reaction others would have to them if the truth about the addiction were made public. Both these behaviors are equally self-centered, because in one case compulsive-cycle victims dwell on themselves, and in the other case they dwell on what other people think of them. The last thing a behavioral addict suffering feelings of self-hatred thinks about is what other people are actually doing and feeling. Furthermore, the pain created by self-hatred forces more attention to be focused on the self, which is experiencing the suffering.

Actions of progression, because they teach us how to deal with situations and beings other than ourselves, and because they allow us to lose ourselves in what we are doing, lead to feelings that are the opposite of self-hatred. We have called these feelings "self-esteem" because there is no more convenient brief term. What we mean by this term, however, is not self-congratulation but complete forgetfulness of self, utter lack of self-consciousness. The greatest works of mankind are accomplished when human beings, feeling the love of their Father in Heaven, express the joy of that love through actions of progression. The quality of objects and relationships produced by that process approach divine creations as nearly as human creations can, because they are made by the same methods employed by our Heavenly Father and in partnership with Him. The creation of a child or a family are examples of such projects, as are the creation of beautiful or useful objects and ideas.

Once the work has been done, the worker is understandably filled with pride at the quality of the product. But self-esteem is not the pride in which we decide that we are superior beings for having created good works. It is joy at being part of the awesome power of creation, which runs from God through mortal beings to the world around us. When Alma and the sons of Mosiah discussed their feelings about their missions, Ammon's brother Aaron expressed some concern that Ammon was falling into the error of focusing pride on his own actions and virtues. "Ammon," he said, "I fear that thy joy doth carry thee away into boasting." To this Ammon replied with one of the best descriptions of true self-esteem in the scriptures. "I do not boast in my own strength," he said, "nor in my own wisdom. . . . Yea, I know that I am nothing; as to my strength I am weak; therefore I will not boast of myself, but I will boast of my God, for in his strength I can do all things." (Alma 26:11-12.)

The submission to God that allows His light to shine in and through us, the love of others that makes us care for them as for ourselves, and the actions that spill over from the joy of belonging constitute the foundation of great and impressive works. But that foundation is by its very nature opposed to self-consciousness. It is a complete relinquishment of self that constitutes true self-love.

Christ taught that "whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it." (Luke 9:24.) "Losing" one's life and "saving " one's life can of course mean accepting death or seeking the continuation of mortality, but that is not necessarily what Jesus meant. For most of us, it seems more probable that He was using the terms losing and saving as we usually use them about objects. When we save something, we concentrate on it. We make sure we know what it is and where it is at all times. When we lose something, on the other hand, we lose track of it—simply forget where it is or even that it exists. The feeling of losing one's self in this way follows a true action of progression just as naturally as self-hatred follows a compulsive action of self-indulgence. It is the feeling we get from watching a child discover the perfect gift for which we searched and spent but which the child believes is from Santa. It is something that has nothing to do with how impressive we are, how we compare to others, or what those others must think of us. In true self-esteem, the self is forgotten. We can acknowledge our accomplishments and our worth without arrogance, because our whole attention is on the change for good that our actions of progression have wrought on the world and the people around us. Jesus proclaimed Himself "the way, the truth, and the life" because this was a matter-of-fact description of His role in the plan of salvation, not because it emphasized His own importance. (John 14:6.) In terms of his essential worth, Christ not only compares Himself but identifies Himself with the lowliest human beings. "Verily, I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25:40.) The feelings that follow actions of progression, which spring from feelings of belonging, tend to bring us closer to this divine attitude toward ourselves.

One consequence of this loss of self-consciousness that we call self-esteem is that the person who experiences it becomes much less concerned with protecting the reputation of the self by hiding its nature. For those who have no reason to feel guilty, open, unguarded communication of personal doings and feelings is not a threatening prospect. For the compulsive-cycle victim who has learned to follow the joy cycle, it means that telling the truth about past experiences or present struggles is much less frightening. There is no need to dwell on one's sins, but if discussing them will help accomplish good for someone else—if such a discussion can be seen as an action of progression stemming from feelings of love—the former addict who has learned to follow the joy cycle will gladly volunteer information about past experiences and feelings. For everyone, self-esteem combined with the need to trust and communicate with others tends to lead directly to the fourth step on the joy cycle, actions of self-disclosure.

Actions of Self-Disclosure

The deceptions meant to hide a behavioral addict's compulsion tended to have two devastating side effects. One was the tendency for "little" lies to spread out like the proverbial tangled web, so that finally the addicts found themselves lying about virtually every aspect of both inner life and behavior. The other was the truly terrifying capacity for this web of deception to interfere with the addicts' ability to recognize the truth and to lead the individuals toward eventual rejection of the discerning power of the light of Christ, which distinguishes truth from falsehood. Whereas actions of self-indulgence put compulsive-cycle addicts within the reach of misery, lies were the chains that bound them to it.

The two effects we saw resulting from self-concealment are reversed by full and honest self-disclosure. Just as addicts grow less capable of telling the truth about themselves with every turn down the compulsive cycle, so they becomes less capable of hiding themselves with every trip around the joy cycle. The first confession is usually very difficult. The more socially proscribed the addiction, the more difficult the confession. The second confession is somewhat easier. A common experience we saw in the lives of every person we met who broke an addiction was a phase following the initial confession when the recovering addict "told all" to a variety of close friends, relatives, Church leaders, and professional counselors, and spent a good deal of time with them revealing secrets.

Several factors seemed to be working in this broad dissemination of information. First of all, anyone who has been through a very traumatic experience is likely to discuss it and recount it a great deal during the initial aftermath. This process of communication allows the person to share the burden of grief and shock and to "touch base" with others as a person who has been changed by suffering. The experience of addiction, and the terrible effects compulsive behavior may have on the inner and outer life of the sufferer, constitute this kind of severe trauma. Second, recovering behavioral addicts we spoke with were astonished and thrilled by the discovery that others could accept them as they really were, and they wanted to make sure that they had this full acceptance from many of the people they cared about. Third, the recovering addicts knew that they simply could not overcome their compulsive behavior alone, and they wanted to enlist the largest support group possible to assist them. Finally, the act of telling the truth, which to habitually honest people seems as natural as blinking, was a source of great spiritual and emotional refreshment to the people we knew who had just broken compulsive cycles.

All of these factors working together had the interesting effect of making it eventually quite difficult for the former addict to lie well, if at all. One woman, a former bulimic, told us how for a year after her marriage she had lived in a typical network of deceptions, so that not even her husband knew how she spent her time. Finally, she broke away from her addictive bingeing by confessing her problems to her husband and enlisting his help in understanding herself and controlling her activity. After three years of climbing up the joy cycle, she told us, she was unable to lie convincingly to him even when she wanted to. "Now he always knows what I'm getting him for Christmas," she told us ruefully.

As the habit of lying is replaced by the habit of honesty, the addict's ability to trust others and interact with them freely increases. This, of course, accentuates feelings of belonging and love and sends the individual up another turn of the joy cycle, motivating more useful actions, which further reduce self-consciousness and lead to even greater self-disclosure. Lying, which is a step down the compulsive cycle, begins to interfere with the feelings of belonging that bring so much joy. Eventually, the recovering addict learns to avoid any deceptive action whatsoever—perhaps more carefully than people who have not experienced the agony of living a lie.

When honest behavior returns to a recovering behavioral addict's life, so does the spirit of discernment. To tell the truth, one must know the truth, so in an effort to be as truthful as possible, the people who are climbing the joy cycle begin to think very carefully about what they inwardly know to be true. What exactly were the actions they performed? What actually were their motivations? The search for truth, for truth is recognized by the light of Christ, leads former addicts down paths of self-understanding they may never have known. "What did I actually do last night?" a recovering addict asks, quietly, without railing or rationalizing. The answer will be simple, factual, not decorated with exaggerations or excuses. "I got drunk," the answer might be, or "I committed a moral transgression." "Why did I do it?" is the next question the addict may ask, especially if others who know the truth are asking this question, too. "What were the feelings that led me to commit this error?" "Where did those feelings come from?" "What were the experiences that shaped my response to the feelings?" The answers may not be obvious. It may take a great deal of thought to come up with the truth, but when the truth is reached, the seeker recognizes it immediately. The whole process of psychotherapy is nothing more than a search for the truth about the links between our motivations and the events that create and arise from them. We met people who had changed their lives both with and without the help of people trained to ferret out these truths. But we never met anyone who overcame a compulsive cycle without complete honesty.

Even if a person is thoroughly honest about experiences and misconceptions that might have led to undesirable behaviors, however, it is impossible to draw correct motivations and behaviors simply from an accurate account of error. Once victims of compulsive cycles begin to understand the reasons that they have linked a search for joy with self-defeating actions, there is still a need for the great truths of the gospel. These provide us with a real understanding of our natures, our destination, our purpose, and the meaning of our lives. For instance, understanding that one or both of your parents set a bad example for you can help you stop from following in their footsteps, but it is not nearly so powerful as having a good example to emulate. Knowing that the steering wheel turns your car is essential to reaching your destination, but a map or a guide is also necessary to determining your direction if you have never been taught the way to reach your goal. Likewise, realizing the truth about the workings and reasons for your own behavior is an important step in gaining control over your actions, but the truth to be found in the scriptures is a map, and people who live the gospel are guides who can accompany you and show you the way to happiness.

That good people make good guides is especially true of people who have had experiences similar to our own. In the case of the behavioral addict, that truth is particularly relevant. A person who has never been involved in such habitual sins might tell the addict who is asking for directions, "Mister, you can't get there from where you are." That is certainly one message our interview subjects got from many people around them. But if there is someone who has traveled the road from the addict's situation to a condition of happiness, that person is able to point the way, describe the hazards, and encourage the traveler with real hope. Besides the common emphasis on submission to God that we found in organizations such as Alcoholics Anonymous, we were also impressed by the use of "buddy" systems, wherein a person just trying to break out of an addiction is paired with a person who has been climbing the joy cycle for some time. Often, as the members of these groups became stronger and stronger in their resistance to temptation, their role in the organization was more as a counselor than as a patient. The way they counseled was simply a constant self-disclosure of truths about their experiences (including mistakes), their feelings, and the things they had learned about themselves, other people, and their Father in Heaven (whatever name they used for Him).

Ironically, then, the behavioral addicts who had once lived in constant dread of being found out, now took every suitable opportunity to tell the truth about their addictions. Protecting themselves from social censure by actions of self-concealment had meant that these people were constantly on guard, that they rarely revealed their true feelings, and that they were pushed deeper into isolation. Self-disclosure, on the other hand, also created a form of protection—it is impossible to blackmail someone with information that is already public. At the same time, this sharing of personal thoughts and feelings, especially when done as a service to others, extended the former compulsive-cycle victims out beyond the abyss of loneliness and shame they had lived in while they kept themselves secret from others. Actions of self-disclosure create the opportunity for a free exchange of love and support from the addict to others and vice versa. The feelings that result from this interchange are the feelings of belonging, which continue the joy cycle. Every time a former addict honestly confides in others, whether in a full-blown confession or in simple sharing of thoughts and feelings unrelated to the addictive behavior, the force that would drag the person down the compulsive cycle grows weaker, the climb up the joy cycle becomes easier, and the light of happiness and understanding shines brighter.

The people we interviewed who had learned to live the joy cycle testified that just as deception had wrapped them in chains, so they had also come to understand the meaning of the Lord's words, "and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.) As part of their newly adopted pattern of substituting honesty and altruism for deception and selfishness, they allowed us to probe into their experiences and feelings, both past and present, in the belief that someone who might be suffering as they had suffered could find helpful insight in their experiences. While we must repeat the caution that a victim of the compulsive cycle will always face opportunities to choose which way to move—up or down the cycle, and hence is never irrevocably cured—a brief look at how Ellen, Bill, and Warren deal with these choices daily shows that they now have a clearer understanding of the dynamics at work in their behavior, and therefore are far more likely to make good choices than bad ones. All of these people now agree that if they had been able to see themselves as they are today at a time when they despaired of ever obtaining happiness, the image would have given them hope. Now, their greatest hope is that their stories may give hope to others.

It is six o'clock on Saturday morning. Ellen forces her eyes open, then closes them again in an attempt to recapture a dream she can't remember but which feels unfinished. Her husband's side of the bed is empty. Ellen rolls over onto his pillow and feels the warmth still lingering where his head rested. The pillowcase smells faintly of aftershave and shampoo and the bakery where Matt is working nights to put himself through school. Ellen smiles and pulls the blankets up around her chin.

Matt's voice comes faintly through the wall from the other room of their tiny apartment. "Honey, where are the baby wipes?" Ellen sighs. So much for sleeping in. She yawns, climbs out of bed, and wraps herself in Matt's bathrobe. "I think they're on the changing table," she calls back.

"But I looked there, and they're not!"

Ellen opens the door of the bedroom and laughs. Sally, all eight pounds, three ounces of her, appears to have cornered her father somewhere near her bassinet. Matt stands helplessly holding Sally's tiny pink body above the grim contents of a very dirty diaper, looking for some way to clean up the mess without putting his daughter down. Sally wiggles her infinitesimally small fingers, struggles to free her legs from hands that seem as big as she is, and lets out a frustrated wail. Matt looks up at Ellen, eyes wide with desperation.

"Help!" he croaks. "What do I do now?"

"An interesting question," says Ellen, leaning against the doorway. "Let's look at it strategically. How could foresight, planning, and decision making have prevented this problem? Now that the worst has happened, what measures might you take to solve the problem? Let's consider—"

"Ellen!" Matt explodes. "Come on!"

She laughs again, locates the baby wipes under the bassinet, spreads out a fresh diaper, and takes Sally from her distraught husband.

"And where were you when I had the same problem last Thursday?" she queries as she rediapers the baby. "I ended up putting her down on a towel. Had to do an extra load of laundry right then, just because I changed a diaper." She snaps up Sally's pink sleepsuit. Sally fusses, making noises like an asthmatic puppy. Ellen brushes the baby's cheek with her finger, and Sally opens her tiny mouth and turns her head toward her mother's hand.

"I thought women had some kind of diapering instinct," says Matt, going to the kitchen and opening the refrigerator. "I'm hungry," he adds thoughtfully, deliberating between English muffins and whole wheat toast.

"So's she," Ellen comments. She settles into their second-hand easy chair, and Sally nestles up to her, eager to be fed. A wave of absolute contentment sweeps through Ellen, tired though she is, as she watches Sally's wrinkled red face and feels the incredible, almost fuzzy softness of the baby's skin.

"I'm afraid none of it's instinctive," she says to Matt. "None of it. I mean, how would you feel if your body suddenly grew a new person and popped it out into the air? That's exactly how I feel. I mean, I know it happens to other people, but it seems totally bizarre that it should have happened to me." Sally's little body begins to relax in her arms. "But I'm glad it did," she adds.

Matt comes back from the kitchen with a glass of orange juice for Ellen. He stops in front of the easy chair and looks down at his wife and daughter. A smile spreads slowly across his face and stays there. Ellen looks up at him.

"What?" she queries. "What are you grinning at?"

"Oh, just you," he says.

"What about me?"

"You're beautiful."

Ellen blushes. "Are you kidding?" she says. "I haven't slept for two weeks, I have postpartum acne, my hair is falling out, and I've still got fifteen pounds to lose. I look like a walrus with beach rot."

Matt keeps smiling. "You're beautiful," he repeats.

"I'm not just going to snap back to normal, if that's what you're thinking," Ellen warns him. "I don't know what the old bod's going to do now, but I don't diet anymore, and I've already ruined my arches from too much jogging. So you'd better get used to me as is." She glances up at Matt to see how he will respond to this challenge. He puts the orange juice down next to the easy chair and sits down on the couch.

"Have some juice," he says. A copy of yesterday's paper sits folded up on the armrest, waiting for one or the other of them to find time to read it. More and more newspapers have gone unread since Sally was born. Matt unfolds the paper and glances at the headlines. The back page faces Ellen with a montage of slender models parading their pencil-thin legs and torsos through a forest of fur coats. Ellen transfers Sally's sleepy little form to her other arm and sighs.

"Wouldn't you rather have a wife who looked like that?" she asks Matt, wistfully.

"What? Who?" says Matt, poking his head out from behind the paper.

"Like those women on the back," she says.

He looks at the ads. "Hmm," he says. "They look wimpy."

"If you really believe that," says Ellen, "You're a very rare man. Most guys would drop someone like me in a flash for someone like that."

Matt stares at her. "I do believe you're really worried about this," he says.

"Well, I am," Ellen replies. "I spent a long time thinking thin was the answer to everything, and fat was the way to get dumped in the nearest home for the terminally unacceptable. I know we've talked about this stuff a million times, but it's different now. It's not easy for me to get used to the way my body's changed, so why should I expect you to get used to it?"

Matt puts down the paper and stares thoughtfully at the ceiling. "How shall I put this?" he ponders. "Let's see . . . if you ever weigh a great deal more than I do, one of us will definitely need to do something about it." He smiles brightly at Ellen. "How's that?" he asks cheerfully, and then, rather crestfallen, "Not good enough?"

Ellen shakes her head. "It could happen," she says grimly.

Matt laughs. "I don't think so," he says. "I really don't."

"Okay," says Ellen, "But suppose it did? I know it's dumb, but I still worry sometimes."

Matt stands up and walks over to the easy chair. He crouches down next to it, his elbows resting on his thighs so that his head comes just level with Ellen's. "Now, look," he says softly. Sally has fallen soundly asleep. Her small fists have drooped slowly open against the folds of her mother's robe, and the fine, fair curls of her eyelashes flutter occasionally, moved by some unfathomable newborn dream.

"Look," says Matt again. "Look what you made."

"We did," Ellen corrects him.

"All right, we. But at this point, you've got to admit you've done most of the work. My body didn't give her a place to grow. I didn't go through all those changes. You know how I felt when she was born?"

"Glad it wasn't you lying there squealing like a stuck pig?" Ellen guesses.

Matt shakes his head. "Just the opposite. I was so jealous. I was more jealous than I've ever been in my life."

"You're crazy," says Ellen.

"Am I?" he asks, looking at her.

Slowly, Ellen shakes her head. "No."

"Now, do you think I would walk away from the part I have in this thing just because you don't have hip bones that show, like those women in their wonderful fur coats?"

"No," she says again, and smiles.

Matt breathes a sigh of relief and stands up. "Well, then it's settled—again," he says. "How long is it going to take me to convince you once and for all?"

"Well, let's see," says Ellen. "At a rate of one conversation a week, maybe three years? Four? Of course, if you're willing to go to two a week, we could arrange the express treatment plan. You'd have Christmases off."

"The heck I would," says Matt cheerfully. He picks up the paper and pores over the headlines, running a hand across the stubble on his chin.

Ellen puts Sally up against her shoulder in case the baby needs to burp. The aura of warmth around Sally's diminutive body and the feeling of her downy hair against Ellen's cheek seem to breathe sleep into the atmosphere like the poppies in The Wizard of Oz. Ellen closes her eyes and wonders if, when she falls asleep again, she will finish last night's interrupted dream.

It seems mildly insane to Bill that he and his companion should be visiting a lower-income housing development at seven o'clock on a Saturday morning. Not a soul seems to be awake yet, not even the bums sprawled out next to heat gratings under scraps of cloth and newspaper. Elder Thorsen told Bill that he scheduled their meeting with Mrs. Ramirez early on Saturday because she said that was the only time she was sure her husband would be home, but Bill is more impressed by the thought that his companion has arranged their visit to this area for a time when two squeaky-clean young Idahoans are least likely to get heckled, robbed, or pounded to a pulp. He envies the English-speaking elders in his mission, who not only escape having to struggle with Spanish but also get to avoid the scarier parts of town.

At least Elder Thorsen seems to know his way around. He picks his way through the garbage that festoons the inner courtyard between two tall apartment buildings and enters one of the buildings through a cracked glass door. He presses the call button by the Ramirezes' name. The answer comes back immediately, and Bill understands, "Who is it?"

Elder Thorsen replies, and Bill's attention drifts away from the incomprehensible conversation that follows. Looking back through the door, he can see three small children in bare feet chasing a flock of pudgy and reluctant pigeons away from their morning snack of breadcrumbs. The children's faces are like sunlight glancing off dark water. There is a loud buzz, and Elder Thorsen pulls open the inner entry door.

The Ramirez family live on the third floor. In the elevator, Elder Thorsen explains what is going on. "She didn't want to let us in," he says. "She was nice, but she said she'd changed her mind about meeting with us. I asked her if we couldn't just come in for a minute, and she said okay, but I want you to know we shouldn't push it, all right?"

"All right," says Bill. As if he can "push" anything! He was one of the worst Spanish students in the whole MTC, and they hadn't even told him that the Spanish they spoke in there had nothing to do with the Spanish people speak out here. If I get the urge to "push" the Ramirezes, Bill thinks to himself, I'm going to have to do it with my hands.

Mrs. Ramirez is a short woman with dusty-looking black hair that is greying at the roots and eyes the color of chestnuts. As she opens the door to her apartment, Bill and his companion smell beans and tortillas cooking inside. She invites them in with a weariness Bill understands much more clearly than her words. Elder Thorsen says something polite, and the missionaries sit down on the family's shabby sofa. Bill can feel the sharp point of a loose spring against the back of his thigh, and he shifts uncomfortably in his seat. Mrs. Ramirez excuses herself and goes into the tiny kitchen. Bill looks around the apartment. It is tidy but very poor, much of the furniture patched together from old pieces collected, Bill suspects, from trash dumps or alleys. A gaudy picture of Christ wearing his crown of thorns decorates one wall, and a crucifix hangs on another.

A small boy bursts around the corner by Bill's elbow and dashes across the room. He stops, turns around, and aims an imaginary gun at the missionaries. Bill throws his hands into the air in mock terror, and the boy advances menacingly. Bill tries to remember the word for Help! but all he can conjure up is the word for mercy from the discussions, and he's not sure that is a word Spanish-speaking children use in play. He settles for an exaggerated show of fear, which elicits a hearty laugh from the boy. Bill smiles back.

Mrs. Ramirez emerges from the kitchen and apologizes for keeping them waiting. She goes on: Bill gathers that she is very busy and that things are not going well for her family. Mr. Ramirez is nowhere to be seen. Elder Thorsen responds with a question. What is wrong? Is there anything the missionaries can do to help? Mrs. Ramirez seems flustered by the inquiry. No, it is nothing, it is nothing, she says, only . . . and here Bill loses the thread again. It is frustrating, because there is obviously something very wrong. Mrs. Ramirez's voice is breaking, and tears are appearing at the corners of her tired eyes. Elder Thorsen is nodding sympathetically and responding with a few simple questions, which Bill can understand.

"How old is Romulo?" Elder Thorsen asks.

"Fifteen," says Mrs. Ramirez. "He is a good boy." And then she begins to cry in earnest. She puts her head down and hurries back to the kitchen, mumbling an apology under her breath. The little boy crouches under a ramshackle table, quiet and very small.

"What is going on here?" Bill whispers to his companion. "Did somebody die or something?"

"No," Elder Thorsen whispers back. "Their son Romulo got arrested. Her husband is downtown right now trying to bail him out. I guess he's into drugs, and he's been stealing to get them. His parents just found out. I was going to try to set up an appointment, but I think we should probably come back some other time, huh?"

Bill's answer is cut short by Mrs. Ramirez's return from the kitchen. Her eyes are bloodshot but determinedly dry. Elder Thorsen begins a polite departure, apologizing for the interruption and hinting about coming back when it is more convenient. Bill has heard this all before, so he understands it fairly well, but he has no time to think about it. His brain is searching furiously for the words he needs to say, and his heart races with adrenaline as he prepares to say it.

"Mrs. Ramirez!" he blurts out suddenly. Elder Thorsen stops in midsentence and turns toward him, a shocked expression on his face. The woman and the little boy stare at Bill, as if they had been convinced up to now that he was deaf and dumb. Bill feels his face go cold and then flaming hot.

"Mrs. Ramirez," he says again, his voice softer this time but still a bit too loud. "I know the message we bring can save your son." Bill blushes even more violently at the overdramatic effect of the word save, but he can't for the life of him remember how to say help in Spanish. All he can do is repeat himself: "I know that the message we bring can save your son. I know this. I know this." A peculiar sensation begins to spread from the center of Bill's chest out to his arms and legs and then to the very tips of his fingers and toes. He feels as though every hair on his head is charged with some kind of strange electricity that burns but does not hurt.

Mrs. Ramirez looks at him for a long moment, her sad chestnut eyes gazing into his young blue ones. Elder Thorsen glances from her face to Bill's and back again in complete bewilderment. Bill gazes back, remembering every easy excuse for a fix he ever made, every evasion of his morals to get some drug or other, every terrible moment when he finally refused to give in to temptation, and every surge of his strength when he began to overcome the temptation, one day at a time. He tries to tell her all of it, every bit, with the simple, inarticulate openness of his eyes.

"I believe you," she says quietly.

The little boy under the table smiles. Elder Thorsen breaks in with fluent, excited Spanish, setting up an appointment for next week, when Mr. Ramirez might be home, and even possibly Romulo himself. Mrs. Ramirez is no longer crying. There is a trace of hope in her expression that was not there when she had opened the door—only a slight trace, but definite. Bill looks around the room again, at the broken furnishings and dilapidated decor, and wonders what this peculiar electricity is and why it does not go away. The room, for all its shabbiness, suddenly seems as clear and valuable as daylight. He is somehow aware of the carefulness of the work that went into the patched lamps and chairs, and the picture of Christ in its cheap, gaudy frame seems to symbolize every noble spirit trapped in impoverished surroundings. Bill realizes with a jolt that this feeling is exactly the sensation which he almost, but never quite, achieved with drugs. The clarity, the vividness, the ideas that go beyond what he would have thought on his own, are all the elusive experiences drugs had let him think he glimpsed but which they had never truly shown him.

Bill looks at the little boy, who peeks back at him from under the table and smiles shyly. The guilelessness of that smile brings an unexpected catch to Bill's throat, and he looks away quickly, embarrassed. He feels as though he will burst with the strange, thrilling feeling that vibrates more and more powerfully through his body. He wonders if Elder Thorsen would be willing to spend more time in this area, with these people who need so much. One thing Bill knows for sure: however he does it, he will come back.

The door buzzer sounds at exactly seven-thirty. Warren hops over to it, pulling on one running shoe with his left hand and trying not to spill the glass of orange juice he holds in his right. The buzzer goes off again as he finally gets the shoe in place and presses the intercom control.

"Yo!" he says into the microphone. "That you, Brian?"

"What's keeping you?" Brian's voice crackles through the intercom.

"I'm coming, I'm coming," Warren drains his orange juice in one long gulp, grimaces at his unshaved reflection in the mirror by the door, makes sure he has his keys before he leaves the apartment. He runs down the stairs, four at a time, knowing that Brian will already be warmed up and ready for a good fast pace.

Brian is waiting in the lobby, jogging in place to keep from cooling off. "My, don't we look chipper this morning," he says with a grin as Warren bursts through the stairwell door.

"I've decided to give up showering and shaving for Lent," says Warren.

"And combing your hair, and tying your shoes?" Brian inquires.

"All right, so I slept in. I was working late at the crisis center last night. A twelve-year-old runaway called looking for help. I was there until three." The two of them trot out of Warren's apartment building into the glow of the California morning. The dew on the grass sparkles like liquid crystal, and the air is soft with humidity.

"Nice day," says Brian as they fall into a steady, even pace.

"Yeah," Warren agrees. "Let's go around the park."

Brian nods. "So," he says, "How are things going?"

"Great," Warren answers, "How about you?"

"Pretty good. Better since Karen isn't so sick anymore."

"Oh, yeah?" Warren responds. "How's she doing?"

"Well, she seems fine. A little emotional, maybe. Sleeps a lot, accuses me of being a worm because it's my baby too but I don't have to deal with it, that sort of stuff. But at least she's not nauseated. Seems like all I've done for the last three months is bring her Popsicles and help her stop crying after she's seen sentimental telephone commercials on TV. Her obstetrician told her she gets sicker than most women. But the first three months are supposed to be the worst."

Warren shakes his head incredulously. "The whole thing is so wild. Karen's usually such a mellow person. I just can't imagine what it would be like to have all those things going on in your body."

"Yeah," Brian agrees. "Sometimes it's frustrating, you know. I try to understand, but I just have no real idea what she's going through."

"As Dr. Freud said," Warren switches to German, "Women—what do they want?"

"You figure that one out, and I'll pay for your lecture tour myself," says Brian.

They run on, easing into a comfortable rhythm, their feet making soft thuds in unison on the moist earth.

"Speaking of women," says Brian, "how are things going with Kim?"

Warren wipes the sweat off his forehead. "Okay, I guess," he responds.

"Just okay? Things cooling off a bit between you two?"

Warren shakes his head. "Oh, no, nothing like that. She still really wants to get married."

"So, what's the trouble? Don't you want to marry her?"

Warren laughs ruefully. "Are you kidding? You'd better believe I want to marry her. Do you know what I would give to be where you are? Do you know what I would give to go home and see her every night, and have to bring her Popsicles because she's having our baby? Seriously, Brian, you don't know how lucky you are."

"Oh, I do too. I just complain because that's what my dad always did—it's a family tradition," Brian answers. "But I still don't understand. If Kim wants to marry you and you want to marry her, what's the problem?" He glances sharply at Warren. "Is it the same old stuff?" he asks. "Are you having problems again?"

Warren shakes his head. He looks at Brian and smiles, his uncombed hair bouncing into his eyes with each step. "You know," he says, "I'm doing better with that stuff than I ever thought I would. It's amazing. It's like I just don't have time for it anymore. I spend all my time at work or at the crisis center or trying to talk things out with Kim. No, I really haven't had a problem since that time I talked to you about it a year ago. It's been getting easier all the time."

"That's terrific!" said Brian. "So that's not the problem with Kim, then?"

"Well," Warren's voice is uneasy. "I guess it is, sort of. Yes, it definitely is."

"So, what do you mean? Is Kim worried about it?" Brian asks.

"Well, I guess so. I mean, yes, of course she worries about it. But mostly it's me that gets worried. I mean, I'm doing all right at the moment, but what if something happens in the future? What if I can't trust myself? I can't let Kim take a risk like that."

"It's her risk, Warren," says Brian softly.

"Maybe. I guess so," says Warren. "But it's my responsibility. How can I do something like that to her, anyway, saddling her with a husband who has problems like mine?"

"What does she think about it?" Brian asks.

"She says we'll just keep working on it. Right when we first started getting serious, she said she wouldn't marry me if I was the only one who told her I could get over it, but she would marry me if the Lord told her I could."

"And did He?" says Brian casually.

"She says so," answers Warren. "I don't know. We're going to fast and pray about it over the weekend and go to the temple, and then we're going to ask President Stott what he thinks."

"So, as I understand this thing," says Brian, plucking a leaf from a shrub as they pass by and snapping it in two with his fingers, "Kim loves you, you love her, you haven't been having problems being a good boy, and she feels good about marrying you, but you don't trust yourself. Are those the facts?"

Warren sighs. "Yeah, I guess so." He shakes his head. "You know, Bri, women really are unbelievable. They never do what you expect. Half the time Kim acts like you could knock her over with a feather. You know, she absolutely dissolves watching Bambi or something."

"Yeah, I know," says Brian with a smile.

"And yet, you get to an issue that you think would just about crumble anybody, and she's so strong and so brave. She knows about me, Brian. I mean, I've told her everything. And she cries, and gets hurt, and I feel like I've lost her, and then she says, 'Let's get married. We can work on this together.' I keep reading her stories about women who married gay men and then the guy runs off with some man and leaves the woman with twenty-seven children. It scares me to death, I'll tell you. But she just looks at me and says that if Heavenly Father wants us married, He'll help us make it work. I don't know, Brian. I think she's crazy."

Brian knits his brows thoughtfully and grabs another leaf from a eucalyptus tree, bringing a shower of dew down on Warren's head.

They move up behind an elderly couple in matching sky-blue sweatsuits, who move politely out of the jogging path to let the young men go by.

"So you don't think you're a good risk?" Brian asks when they are out of the couple's earshot.

Warren glares at him. "No," he says succinctly. "Do you?"

"Well, Warren, I don't know," Brian muses. "In a lot of ways I wouldn't have thought so. Anyway, Heavenly Father apparently does."

"Does what?" says Warren.

"Thinks you're a good risk."

"What's that supposed to mean?" Warren scowls at the toes of his shoes, which thud on the ground beneath him in steady alternation.

"Elder White, I feel impressed to call you as the second counselor in the bishopric of our ward," says Brian. He runs on, several strides, before he notices that Warren is no longer running with him. He stops and looks behind him. Warren is standing in the grass of the park as though he has been planted there. His mouth is open, and his expression is perfectly blank.

"Come off it, Brian," he says as his friend turns around and walks back to where he is standing.

"It's 'Bishop' to you," answers Brian, wiping the sweat from his forehead.

"Come off it, Bishop," says Warren. "Quit rubbing it in. You know God doesn't want someone like me in that kind of position. What if I ever, you know, did something? What if someone found out?"

"Do you intend to, you know, do something?" asks Brian, looking into Warren's eyes.

"No," Warren answers. "I don't. But how can I be sure? You know what I am."

"No," says Brian, "I know what you've done. I don't know what you are. Your problem is, you won't let what you really are get away from what you've done."

"What do you think I really am?" asks Warren. He is still standing in the same spot, arms at his sides.

Brian looks over at a group of teenage boys shooting baskets in the court at the center of the park. "I think you're a great player who got drafted by the wrong team for a while," he says. "But you're back on the Lord's side now, and I think he wants you off the bench."

Warren doesn't answer for a while. The morning sun shines through the new green of the eucalyptus leaves, and the dew settles through the mesh of his running shoes. He studies the shoes with his eyes. Finally he murmurs, almost to himself, "I just don't see how, I just don't see how . . . after everything I've done. . . . "

"Warren, look at me," says Brian. Warren looks, reluctantly, eyes up but head still bent.

"What makes you think you're so special, Warren?" says Brian. "What makes you think that your sin is so all-fired special that you can never get away from it? What about me? You think I don't have sins? You think I don't struggle? You think I didn't cry myself to sleep every night for a week after they called me to be bishop? It's a tough life, Warren, but it's tough for all of us. Of course you're not going to be perfect all your life. Of course it's not absolutely safe. That's what it's all about, buddy, that's what we're here for. You mess up, you repent. I mess up, I repent. And you better believe we're both going to keep messing up. I, for one, intend to keep repenting, too. Now, what about you?"

Warren's eyes are fixed on his friend's face. "I intend to keep repenting, too," he whispers.

"Then, Warren, don't you understand? Once you've repented of something, it's gone. Kaput. Zilch. A big goose egg. God doesn't even remember it anymore, so what gives you the right to?"

Warren swallows. He looks intently at Brian from behind the thick black hair that has fallen over his eyes. "Do you really think so?" he asks. "Even for me?"

Brian folds his arms across his chest and looks up at the open sky. "Warren," he says. "I would never have thought of you to fill this calling. I had the same problem you do—I thought you were somehow different or incapable of it or something. I didn't even realize I felt that way, but I did. I admit it. But when I was praying about who I should call to replace Brother Harker, I knew you were the one. I never really understood you until then, Warren. I didn't understand that really, when it all comes down to it, you're just like me. Better, in some ways."

Warren gives a snort of disbelief.

"No, Warren," says Brian earnestly. "I mean it. What I felt when that impression came about you was that I don't have the faintest idea what it's like to repent like you've repented. I mean I sort of go along in life, trying to be a good guy and hoping I'm doing all right, but you've gone right down into your guts and hauled them all up and given them away. You may make mistakes again, buddy, but right now you're as clean as a newborn baby."

Warren says nothing. His head drops and he looks at his shoes, digging one foot into the damp clay of the park lawn.

"Okay?" Brian queries.

He stoops a little to look at Warren's face under the shock of hair. "Okay?" He sounds concerned. Warren's face under the stubble of his beard is very pale, and a bright red spot burns in the center of each cheek.

Warren nods, begins to lift his head, then turns downward abruptly and wipes a hand across his face. Brian coughs and looks away.

"Well, listen, Warren," he says, "I'm going to let you have some time alone to think about this calling, okay? I'm going to go on ahead—I'll get back to you tomorrow. I know it's a lot of responsibility, but I think you'll find it's the right thing. All right?"

Warren nods wordlessly, head down. Brian looks at him for a moment, then says, "Okay. I'll see you." He gives Warren a pat on the shoulder and jogs away.

Warren tries to call to Brian, to raise a hand and beckon him back, but he seems unable to lift either his voice or his arm. He wants to tell Brian that he knows it's the right thing, that he will accept the calling. He wants to tell him that he knows now it could all happen, all the things he had long ago given up wanting, all the things his patriarch had promised him before his hope had died. He wants to tell Brian about the wife and family in that blessing, the ones he'd decided belonged to someone else. He wants to tell him about the place in the celestial kingdom. But he can't. He stands in the park, not moving, his eyes leaking foolishly, as helpless as a chick with its feathers still wet from the egg.

The old couple in their matching jogging clothes shuffle past, looking curiously at Warren out of the corners of their eyes, but he is too limp to move. All strength and solidity seem to have utterly left him: he feels as though he might be blown away by the breeze in the wake of their sky-blue sweatsuits. But although all his own strength seems to have disappeared, Warren is aware of nothing but strength. Up and down, around and through, over and under him, he feels the swelling of a strength so powerful he knows that it could flick him across the park and into the street. It could scatter him into shreds without a ripple of effort; it could crush him like a blade of grass. The strength seeps into every fiber of Warren's body, every muscle, every molecule, leaving him as weak as a soggy paper doll and as strong as sunlight. He wonders why he is not afraid, but at the moment he cannot even remember what fear is like. The strength that runs through him seems to remove all fear, all sadness, all recrimination, loneliness, and pain from his existence. It bathes him in gentleness. Warren feels himself relaxing, feels the sweat and tears mingling on his cheeks and running down his neck. He lifts his head and looks at the sky, and the morning beams down on him as brightly as though there had never been a night.

Tomorrow, Ellen Schor Marshall, Bill Stewart, and Warren White will each put on Sunday clothes and go to a sacrament meeting in a Latter-day Saint meetinghouse. One of them may be in your chapel, sitting next to you, sharing your hymnbook and passing you the sacrament tray. They will not look different from thousands of other Church members all over the world, and in many ways they will not be different. Like Ellen, Bill, and Warren, every one of us, no matter how well meaning, well brought up, or well disciplined, is born into this difficult mortal estate with the objectives of gaining a body and being tested. Every one of us started life as confused by our new identities as if we had been shoved into a moving vehicle with no idea how the thing should be driven. Each of us has made mistakes in learning to control the natural man and bring this nature into harmony with spiritual development. During the trial-and-error process of learning to match our human natures to our divine potential, each of us has repented and been forgiven, by God, ourselves, and others, of countless blunders large and small. All of us must continue to learn and repent, virtually without ceasing, if we are to achieve lasting happiness. In these respects, any one of us might be Ellen Schor Marshall, Bill Stewart, or Warren White.

In some ways, however, those who have been the victims of compulsive cycles are different from those who have not. Perhaps the distinction lies in their having been born or raised in such a way that they are susceptible to behavioral addictions, or perhaps it is simply that they, more than many others, realize the universal vulnerability of the human condition. Certainly, the Ellens, Bills, and Warrens we see around us differ from many others in having been the battlefields upon which all-out, unseen wars have been fought between good and evil, between heaven and hell, between the divine and demonic aspects of their own personalities. Because of this, there may be some other differences between these recovering addicts and the other Latter-day Saints who sit around them tomorrow in church. Ellen, Bill, or Warren may be more quick than the rest of the congregation to see the profundity in simple words or the shallowness of glib ones. They may be more alert to the struggles behind their neighbors' smiles or the questions behind their confidence. They may be less likely than some to pass over the sacrament as a habitual ritual while they wait for an interesting speaker. To them, the words, "that they do always remember him," "that they may always have his spirit to be with them," will never be matter-of-fact or casual, for they remember, more clearly than most of their fellow Latter-day Saints, a time when they had all but forgotten Him and assumed that His spirit could never be with them again. They have a little more than the usual understanding of the pain He suffered for them at His atonement. As we interviewed such people, we heard echoes of that pain in their voices and saw it in their eyes. There are no words to describe it. But language is even more inadequate to convey the fulness of joy that followed when a victim of compulsive behavior turned back and learned to live according to a process of happiness. To all those who still struggle with addictive behaviors, who live through a continual descent with nothing but a hopeless hope that their longings will ever be known or satisfied, we join the recovering addicts we interviewed in pointing out the invitation of Jesus Christ:

"Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

"Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

"For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:28-30.)

We fervently believe that the atonement of the Redeemer is the way, the only way, by which the vicious cycle of compulsive behavior can be broken. Through Christ, the lives of behavioral addicts can be salvaged and made better than they were before. We know that this is true: we have seen it happen. During the research and writing of this book, we have seen many hearts broken and many spirits bruised by addiction. The ravages of the compulsive cycle reach into the lives not only of its victims but of all those who care for them. But there is no reason to abandon hope. In providing those affected by addictions with broken hearts and contrite spirits, Satan has put his own plan at great risk, for these things are all our Heavenly Father asks of us in exchange for eternal life. If we offer our hearts, souls, and lives to Him in complete humility, the Lord will help us turn back from the forces which pull us downward. He will forgive us, help us, and teach us to climb upward with our own strength until we are able to return and live with Him in the place we came from, the place we yearn for, the place where finally, after all our wanderings, we can know that we are home.
