Alexander B. Morrison, Feed My Sheep: Leadership Ideas for Latter-day Shepherds ( 1992)

Introduction

Many years of labor in the fields of the Lord have impressed upon me the importance of the shepherd's task. Leaders have always played an indispensable role in the work of the kingdom. They are the Lord's undershepherds, entrusted with the care of His flock, accountable for the salvation of those in their charge.

The scriptures solemnly certify that God will hold accountable shepherds who abandon the sheep in their charge; who fail to magnify their calling, whatever it is; who act like hirelings rather than stewards of a sacred trust. These sober words of the Nephite prophet Jacob drive home the point: "And we [Jacob and his brother Joseph] did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood might not come upon our garments; otherwise their blood would come upon our garments, and we would not be found spotless at the last day." (Jacob 1:19.)

Jacob's somber reminder of the responsibility shepherds bear reiterates a recurring scriptural theme: God's righteous anger is directed against shepherds who do not feed the flock. Throughout the ages, His prophets have spoken often of God's indignation toward such miscreant servants. Said the Lord to Ezekiel:

My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high hill: yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek after them. Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord; as I live, saith the Lord God, surely because my flock became a prey, and my flock became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no shepherd, neither did my shepherds search for my flock, but the shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my flock; therefore, O ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord; Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against the shepherds; and I will require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock; neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them. (Ezekiel 34:6-10.)

Jeremiah lamented, "My people hath been lost sheep: their shepherds have caused them to go astray, they have turned them away on the mountains: they have gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their restingplace." (Jeremiah 50:6.) Jesus dismissed delinquent shepherds as "blind leaders of the blind." (Matthew 15:14.) The message is clear: shepherds are expected to do all that they can to move the work of the Lord forward, "every man stand[ing] in his own office, and labor[ing] in his own calling." (D&C 84:109.)

Many, perhaps most, who are called to the shepherd's task feel unprepared, inadequate, ill-trained—lacking the wisdom, understanding, and skill required of the Lord's servants. Theirs is the humility of the Prophet Amos who declared, "I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son; but I was an herdman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit: And the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go." (Amos 7:14-15.)

Notwithstanding their weaknesses and inadequacies, however, the Lord calls his shepherds to their task, seeing in them divine possibilities for growth and service. This book is written in an attempt to help shepherds better understand their responsibilities. It is not a "how-to-do- it" book on leadership techniques; such can be found in nearly every book shop in the land. Others are better qualified than I to judge the merits of such publications. For myself, I have little confidence in "quick fixes" that promise instant success with little effort.

Nor is this publication intended as a definitive treatise on secular leadership as practiced in the world. The management literature is full of articles dealing with various aspects of this immensely complex field, and numerous scholars have written extensively about it. My intention is more humble: I desire to provide the Lord's undershepherds with some principles to guide them in their task, that they might be good and faithful servants.
