Alexander B. Morrison, Feed My Sheep: Leadership Ideas for Latter-day Shepherds ( 1992)

CHAPTER ONE

The Essence of Leadership

The public has always been fascinated by strong, successful leaders, both in war and in peace. Numerous attempts have been made over the centuries to describe the personality traits of great leaders or the patterns of behavior that distinguish leader from follower. Why are some people leaders and others followers? What is it that distinguishes a George Washington, a Winston Churchill, or a Joseph Smith from others? What is the source of the power of great leaders? Can leadership be learned, or is it an innate trait brought from elsewhere? Is there some way to predict who the leaders of tomorrow will be? These and related questions about leaders have tantalized for centuries. The answers to them are important if we are to learn how to lead "in the Lord's way," as faithful undershepherds.

Some may say blithely that it's not all that hard to describe a great leader. Misguided male chauvinists may proclaim that a great leader must be a man. While many great leaders have indeed been men, what about Florence Nightingale, Joan of Arc, or Elizabeth I? Another might believe that great leaders are majestic of stature, standing out from the crowd on the basis of size and physical attainments alone. They forget that Napoleon, Admiral Nelson, and Spencer W. Kimball were small of stature, as have been many other superb leaders. A third misguided soul might proclaim that great leaders must be extraordinary orators, capable of inspiring hearts and spirits by the power of their voice. But Moses, one of the greatest leaders of all time, by his own admission was slow and hesitant of speech. (See Exodus 4:10.) For every example that can be given of a leader possessing one characteristic or another, a second example can be found of an equally great leader who didn't exhibit the attribute in question in any remarkable way at all! Leadership is much more than a collection of attributes. We must look elsewhere for its definition.

Situational Leadership

Most experts now agree, at least in general terms, that leadership does not depend primarily on personality; rather, it is situational. In other words, leadership effectiveness depends upon the relationship in a particular situation between the personality of the leader, the task to be accomplished, and the attitudes and perceptions of both leader and followers. What is effective leadership in one situation just won't work in another. "Stonewall" Jackson was a superb wartime leader, but I doubt he would have excelled as president of the local PTA!

Some situations—emergencies, for example—call for a task-oriented approach to leadership, with clearly defined lines of authority and instruction. Orders are given by whoever is in charge, and those who receive them are expected to follow those orders without question. This leadership style works best when there just isn't time for extensive explanation, discussion, and shared goal-setting; when following instructions exactly is essential for success; and when the effects of failure to take the correct action are substantial. If the chapel is on fire, it's not appropriate to hold a ward council to decide whether to evacuate the building!

Some leaders (and some followers, too) function best under these command-and-obey circumstances. Others, however, are uncomfortable and don't function well in such highly structured, rigid situations. Furthermore, most problems simply do not require a military-command style of leadership for their effective solution. Whenever possible, wise leaders involve those affected by the decisions they make by explaining, asking for advice, and enlisting support and commitment rather than requiring mere acquiescence. They seek informed commitment rather than blind obedience.

Wise leaders thus are flexible in adapting to differences between subordinates. The style and substance of their leadership varies, depending on the nature of the problem to be solved and the people available to solve it. They keep their eyes and thoughts firmly on the goal they seek to accomplish but are flexible on the choice of methods used. They learn to match people and situations. They learn to "read" people, some of whom do best if given only general guidelines and allowed to "run with the ball," while others require more detailed instruction and coaching. Some prefer routine; others thrive on challenge. Leaders must, then, become applied psychologists in matching individuals and circumstances to obtain desired results.

This axiom is well illustrated by an episode in the life of Captain James Cook, the intrepid Scot who was one of the great seafarers of all time. Possessed of restless energy, unusual organizing ability, and dogged persistence in the face of what to others were insurmountable difficulties, Cook discovered the Great Barrier Reef off the northeast coast of Australia, charted the coasts of New Zealand and Tonga, and circumnavigated the globe at the southernmost latitude (proving that a long-postulated great Southern Continent did not, in fact, exist).

Although Cook is honored in our day because of his great voyages of discovery, in his own time he was recognized because of what he did to improve the health and save the lives of sailors. On long sea voyages scurvy was a curse that decimated the majority of crews, whose diet was composed almost entirely of rancid salt pork and weewilly sea biscuit. When Vasco da Gama, the great Portuguese navigator, made the first voyage by a European around the southern tip of Africa and across the Indian Ocean to India in 1498, he is said to have lost 100 of his 170 men from the dread disease with its symptoms of bleeding, swollen joints, loosened teeth, anemia, and lassitude. James Lind, a Scottish naval surgeon, demonstrated in 1753 that citrus fruit would prevent and even cure the disease. (The practice of giving lime juice to sailors of the Royal Navy gave rise in later years to use of the term limey to describe the English in general.)

Cook, who evidently was not aware of Lind's work, nevertheless had heard of the value of fruit in preventing scurvy. He experimented with various fruits, grasses, and vegetables as scurvy preventatives. So successful was he that in two long sea voyages, each lasting two to three years, Cook seems not to have lost a single sailor from scurvy.

In his experimenting, Cook found that sauerkraut would prevent scurvy. But there was a problem. His sailors, traditionally suspicious of new-fangled ideas and intensely conservative in their habits, refused to eat the stuff. Cook solved the problem by being flexible in what he did but persistent in what he aimed to accomplish. In his journal he recorded this great lesson in leadership:

The Sour Krout the Men at first would not eate untill I put in practice a Method I never once knew to fail with seamen, and this was to have some of it dress'd every Day for the Cabbin Table, and permitted all the Officers without exception to make use of it and left it to the option of the Men either to take as much as they pleased or none at all; but this practice was not continued above a week before I found it necessary to put every one on board to an Allowance, for such are the Tempers and disposissions of Seamen in general that whatever you give them out of the Common way, altho it be ever so much for their good yet it will not go down with them and you will hear nothing but murmurings gainest the man that first invented it; but the Moment they see their Superiors set a Value upon it, it becomes the finest stuff in the World and the inventer [an]. . . honest fellow. (Daniel J. Boorstin, The Discoverers [New York: Vintage Books, 1983], p. 289.)

How does one reconcile the notion that leaders are the product of situations with the scriptural evidence that God chose His rulers "before the world was"? Recall these words from Abraham 3:22-23: "The Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; and God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers. . . and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born."

In considering the applicability of these words to leadership in general, it is wise to keep in mind that God is talking about His leaders, not those of the world, whose motives, aspirations, and methods may or may not be worthy of divine approbation. Also, even those chosen for the Lord's work "before the world was" must prove themselves worthy to receive anticipated blessings. They are foreordained, not predestined, for greatness. If they do not prove faithful, they will be removed and another will take their place. After the loss of 116 pages of manuscript translated from the "Book of Lehi," Joseph Smith was chastised by his loving Lord:

Remember, remember that it is not the work of God that is frustrated, but the work of men; For although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him.

Behold, you have been entrusted with these things, but how strict were your commandments; and remember also the promises which were made to you, if you did not transgress them.

And behold, how oft you have transgressed the commandments and the laws of God, and have gone on in the persuasions of men.

For, behold, you should not have feared man more than God. Although men set at naught the counsels of God, and despise his words—

Yet you should have been faithful; and he would have extended his arm and supported you against all the fiery darts of the adversary; and he would have been with you in every time of trouble.

Behold, thou art Joseph, and thou wast chosen to do the work of the Lord, but because of transgression, if thou art not aware thou wilt fall.

But remember, God is merciful; therefore, repent of that which thou hast done which is contrary to the commandment which I gave you, and thou art still chosen, and art again called to the work;

Except thou do this, thou shalt be delivered up and become as other men, and have no more gift. (D&C 3:3-11.)

In other words, God chooses His leaders, but they may disqualify themselves if they select the wrong paths. They are, of course, free to do so; but they must pay whatever price is involved, up to and including forfeiture of their status as one of the Lord's undershepherds.

I believe there is nothing inherently antagonistic between the views that leadership is situational and that God chooses His leaders. Perhaps His role is to ensure that those whom He has chosen have the opportunity to act. He puts people and situations together. How people act in a situation is up to them, though God often prompts His children to know what to do. God will not force or coerce. Persuasion, long-suffering, and love unfeigned mark His leadership style and provide the beacon for us to follow.

Charismatic Leadership

On rare occasions a truly unusual leader arises who is more than a master of situations. Such rara aves

not only anticipate and control situations but actually create totally new opportunities. They see the world in new and refreshing ways and create novel approaches to the definition and solution of problems. They create order out of disorder. They draw others to them. Such unusual people possess one of the most powerful forms of leadership— charisma.

Charisma is a word of Greek origin that translates as "gift of divine grace." It may be defined as "a certain quality of an individual personality by virtue of which he [or she] is considered extraordinary and treated as endowed with supernatural, superhuman, or at least specifically exceptional, powerful qualities." (Max Weber, On Law in Economy and Society, as quoted by Perry W. Buffington, "Star Quality," SKY, September 1990, p. 101.)

The followers of charismatic leaders are lifted up, given new visions of what they can do or become, raised to new heights of conduct and aspiration. Both the leader and the followers are elevated or exalted. In the process, followers increase their own capacities and activities. They become leaders themselves.

Charismatic leaders possess three driving attributes: power, passion, and purpose. (See Laura Hall Rose, Charisma: Power, Passion and Purpose [Buffalo, N.Y.: Bearly Limited Press, 1991].) Their power may arise from rank or position but ultimately is a personal mantle that is almost tangibly present. People feel good to be around them, believing they will gain some of the leaders' personal power by being in their presence. The passion of charismatic leaders—their intense belief in what they are trying to do—is transmitted to others who pick it up and share in it to the extent that they may even feel the leaders' dream or vision is their own. Charismatic leaders also possess a deep and abiding sense of purpose, a vision of an ideal future state that is presented as inevitable. This sense of inevitability, of following an immutable, divinely ordained timetable, is well illustrated in Joseph Smith's famous statement: "No unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done." (History of the Church [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970], 4:540.)

President Spencer W. Kimball is the best example I know of a charismatic leader, though Winston Churchill's World War II leadership in Britain also comes readily to mind. President Kimball was a "star of the first magnitude," as President Ezra Taft Benson called him (Ensign, December 1985, p. 33), a man of great spiritual depth and insight, one who sought the will of the Master in all matters affecting the Church and had the courage and faith to accept the manifestation of that will. The Church and the Latter-day Saint people were transformed by his leadership, lifted to new heights of performance, and given a glimpse of what can be done if we will but "lengthen [our] stride," "quicken [our] pace," and "extend [our] vision."

President Kimball's historic impact on the Church and the world is perhaps all the more noteworthy because it was at least partially unexpected. He succeeded a man of unusually dynamic personality and obvious spiritual stature, Harold B. Lee. President Kimball was older than President Lee and had experienced a number of difficulties with his health. Some there were, both in the Church and out, who felt perhaps that President Kimball's administration would be a period of consolidation, of marking time, an interregnum of sorts. Of course, the Church would survive, but some unknowing observers wondered how

effectively Spencer Kimball could lead it onward and upward.

It didn't take long for opinions to change. On the morning of April 4, 1974, President Kimball addressed the General Authorities and regional representatives from around the world. After a few preliminary remarks, he got down to the meat of his message, and a new awareness fell on his listeners. Elder W. Grant Bangerter spoke of what happened next:

We became alert to an astonishing spiritual presence, and we realized that we were listening to something unusual, powerful, different from any of our previous meetings. It was as if, spiritually speaking, our hair began to stand on end. Our minds were suddenly vibrant and marveling at the transcendent message that was coming to our ears. With a new perceptiveness we realized that President Kimball was opening spiritual windows and beckoning to us to come and gaze with him on the plans of eternity. It was as if he were drawing back the curtains which covered the purpose of the Almighty and inviting us to view with him the destiny of the gospel and the vision of its ministry.

I doubt that any person present that day will ever forget the occasion. I, myself, have scarcely reread President Kimball's address since, but the substance of what he said was so vividly impressed upon my mind that I could repeat most of it at this moment from memory . . . .

President Kimball spoke under this special influence for an hour and ten minutes. It was a message totally unlike any other in my experience. I realized that it was similar to the occasion on the 8th of August, 1844, when Brigham Young spoke to the Saints in Nauvoo following the death of the Prophet Joseph. Sidney Rigdon had returned from Pittsburgh, where he had apostatized, to try to capture the Church. Many people testified, however, that as Brigham Young arose, the power of the Lord rested upon him to the extent that he was transfigured before them, with the appearance and the voice of Joseph Smith. That moment was decisive in the history of the Church, and the occasion of April 4, 1974, is parallel.

When President Kimball concluded, President Ezra Taft Benson arose and with a voice filled with emotion, echoing the feeling of all present, said, in substance: "President Kimball, through all the years that these meetings have been held, we have never heard such an address as you have just given. Truly, there is a prophet in Israel." (Conference Report, October 1977, pp. 38-39.)

Only one example of many that could be cited will be given to illustrate President Kimball's unusual qualities of charismatic leadership. I refer to the revelation on priesthood, received in June of 1978, which indicated in an unmistakable manner that the time had come to extend the priesthood to all worthy men, regardless of race or color. I have written elsewhere (The Dawning of a Brighter Day [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], chapter 4) of some of the events surrounding that revelation, which President Benson termed "one of the most significant in this dispensation." (Ensign, December 1985, p. 34.) Clearly, a matter of divine timing was involved, and the Lord Himself was the author of the revelation. But we must not forget the significant role played by President Kimball in importuning and supplicating the Lord, in seeking His will with unwearying diligence (see Helaman 10) and demonstrating the humble obedience to follow the Lord's voice.

News of the revelation on the priesthood flashed through the Church like a bolt of high-voltage electricity, opening new visions of the brotherhood of man and new understanding of the worldwide mandate of the Church to bring all to Christ. The vast majority of the Saints quickly accepted the exalting vision of a universal priesthood of all worthy men and rejoiced in President Kimball's inspired leadership.

Readers may say, "That's all very interesting, but President Kimball was the Lord's prophet and entitled to special help. I'm not fashioned out of the same heroic mold he was! I don't have his talents." No doubt about it, President Kimball was an unusual spiritual giant. Be assured, however, that all leaders in the Lord's kingdom are entitled to that same spirit of revelation that inspired, motivated, and transformed President Kimball into a true shepherd-leader. The Savior made that clear in numerous startlingly powerful references to His desire to help us become more effective leaders in His cause. To illustrate, consider the power contained in these promises:

That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. (D&C 50:24.)

Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. (Revelation 3:20.)

I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up. (D&C 84:88.)

Within the context of this discussion, I understand these scriptures to indicate not only the Savior's willingness to help us but also His burning desire to do so. Note also that the promise extends to all. It is not limited to those who hold high positions in the Church. The deacon's quorum advisor is as entitled to receive divine assistance, within the bounds of his responsibilities, as is the president of the Church in his assigned areas of responsibility.

"But my talents are mediocre at best," someone may complain. "I just don't have the capacity to do the work." Nonsense! God knows what you can do far better than you know it yourself. After all, you are one of His children! He knows you have the capability. You may have much to learn; you may need to be taught and trained; but your capacity to do the work, if you choose to do so, cannot be doubted. God knows both your heart and your mind. Don't forget, President Kimball didn't become a prophet overnight. His talents were developed over time, during many years of humble service, here a little and there a little. So it must be with all of us. There is no royal road to righteousness. Each must pay the price for spiritual growth. It is never easy, but then, if it were, it wouldn't be worth having!

Leadership "in the Lord's Way"

Because God's leaders must necessarily differ from those of the world, too much attention to worldly leadership styles is unlikely to prove very fruitful for the Lord's shepherds. They must look elsewhere for a description of the tasks before them and what is expected if they are to act in "the Lord's way."

At the end of the day, where do they turn to find the most appropriate description of the essential elements of great leadership? At first glance, Joseph Smith's famous dictum "I teach them correct principles and they govern themselves" may seem deceptively simple—too simple, perhaps, to capture the elusive essence of leadership. However, this succinct statement goes to the very heart of a powerful definition of great leadership.

Students of human behavior tell us that, in Western societies at least, we simultaneously seek gratification of two deep-seated psychological needs: the need for a sense of group unity (which brings security) and the need for independence. Paradoxically, these two needs are in opposition to each other. Each of us wants to excel—to stick out from the rest—and at the same time to possess a transcending set of values that unites us with others. We want to be the same as others, but, at the same time, we struggle to be different.

Great leaders help those they lead meet both these fundamental needs. They provide the opportunity to those they lead to stick out, to excel, to determine their own destinies, to govern themselves. At the same time, they combine that freedom with a system of values and beliefs that provides transcending and exalting meaning to life and unites the person concerned with other believers. Teaching correct principles, as found in the scriptures and the words of the living prophets, provides individuals with the common set of values and beliefs necessary to bind them together with others as a people. Letting them govern themselves provides individuals with the opportunity to control their own destiny. Both basic psychological needs are met simultaneously. Teaching correct principles and then letting the people govern themselves thus is a powerful prescription for leadership "in the Lord's way." Indeed, that leadership style truly is the Lord's way.

The Savior taught and retaught the great principles that must govern our thoughts and actions if we are to inherit eternal life. However, He does not command in all things but lets us govern ourselves. Jesus' words to the Prophet Joseph come to mind: "It is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant.. . . Men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will. . . for the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves." (D&C 58:26- 8.)

While these verses clearly speak to the need for people to show initiative and energy in fulfilling their callings, they should also remind leaders of the fact that people are agents unto themselves and capable of governing themselves if they are taught correct principles.

There is another reason why letting people govern themselves is a powerful leadership tool. People who feel they control their own destiny, at least in part, persist at assigned tasks. They become more committed to them and do better at them. Leaders who allow little or no initiative on the part of counselors or teachers, who tell them exactly what must be done, every step of the way, do little to foster the commitment essential for significant accomplishment. Those who are assigned goals under such circumstances are liable to feel no real sense of obligation to achieve them. Their attitudes are likely going to be those of a counselor in a presidency I once knew. "Those aren't my goals," he'd say when handed a detailed list by his president. "You haven't even discussed them with me. If you feel so great about them, why don't you accomplish them?" Commitment comes with ownership, and ownership comes from participating in the setting of goals, from leader and follower "reasoning together" (see Isaiah 1:18) in deciding what needs to be done and how to do it. Wise shepherd- leaders know and practice that principle.

Accountability

There is, of course, a great difference between letting people govern themselves and standing by while either nothing is done or dangerously wrong things are done. No shepherd can permit someone for whom he or she has responsibility to fail to take the needed action, or, what is even worse, act in ways that hurt others or hinder the furtherance of the Lord's work through ill-advised initiatives. Thus, a wise leader insists on accountability, not in a threatening or coercive way but in recognition of the fact that unless people feel accountable, they are not liable to feel committed. Once a goal is decided upon, progress toward its achievement must be periodically evaluated. Otherwise, the one to whom the goal's achievement has been assigned may feel that the goal isn't important. After all, if it were, the leader would care enough to ask for an accounting.

Wise shepherd-leaders recognize that accountability is a fundamental law of celestial management: "It is required of the Lord, at the hand of every steward, to render an account of his stewardship, both in time and in eternity. For he who is faithful and wise in time is accounted worthy to inherit the mansions prepared for him of my Father." (D&C 72:3-4.)

Paul the apostle knew of the importance of accountability. In his letter to the Galatian Saints he wrote of the law of ultimate accountability, the law of the harvest: "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Galatians 6:7.) That law applies in the moral sphere, of course, but it is also a powerful reminder of the direct cause-and-effect relationship between other aspects of behavior as well.

President Kimball was a great practitioner of the principle of accountability. One of my colleague General Authorities recounts how President Kimball taught him that lesson in a sweet, gentle, but never-to-be-forgotten way. As my friend remembers:

Soon after I was called, President Kimball asked to see me. Amongst other questions and directions he asked if I kept a personal journal. Somewhat shamefacedly I had to admit I hadn't up to that point. I pled the pressures of a busy professional life. President Kimball didn't chastise or berate me. Gently and lovingly, he reached over and patted my hand. "Please, good brother," he said, "start to keep a journal, starting today."

Several months went by. One day I had a telephone call from President Kimball. "Would it be convenient for you to drop by my office for a few minutes?" he asked. "Oh, and bring your journal with you."

When leader and follower participate jointly in determining goals, both share responsibility for their achievement. The follower, of course, has the major responsibility to ensure that the goal is met; but the leader must stand ready to assist as required to ensure that the follower does not fail. Elder Victor L. Brown tells of a young deacons quorum president who understood well that principle. The young man "startled his adult leaders by asking a boy who hadn't been coming to church to offer the prayer in quorum meeting. When asked afterwards if it was really wise to ask a boy to pray who had only been in church the second time, he responded, 'But I just spent three days this week teaching him how to pray.' " (Ensign, November 1989, p. 77.) Youth can be wise beyond its years!

It is worth reiterating that goals are necessary; but if people are to govern themselves, they must have a hand in setting goals for which they are responsible and in determining ways to achieve them. The extent of that involvement will necessarily vary with the situation and the person concerned. Those with a proven "track record" may appropriately receive only broad policy guidelines and be left to fill in the "how-to-do-it" on their own initiative; someone with only limited experience may require an extra measure of guidance. Situations of great importance or sensitivity may require a higher level of involvement by senior leaders. Preparing for a visit by a member of the First Presidency is of a different order than organizing a deacon's social!

Through it all, however, shepherd-leaders should so discipline themselves that they avoid giving unnecessary, detailed instructions that serve only to annoy and frustrate. I think of a stake Relief Society president who learned that lesson the hard way. She and her counselors planned an opening social, which was all very straightforward except that the president didn't know when to leave well enough alone. She assigned one of her counselors to be responsible for the program and the other for the refreshments. Then, instead of letting the counselors do their jobs within agreed-upon guidelines, she proceeded to undermine the work of the counselor assigned to look after refreshments. She did so in two ways. She began to make her own assignments for specific parts of the refreshment "package," without any reference to the assigned counselor and without her knowledge. Furthermore, she gave the counselor no room for personal initiative at all. The president even decided—arbitrarily—that apple juice and not orange juice, or any other liquid refreshment for that matter, would be served. Her motives, of course, were good. She wanted to ensure a successful event. But her actions guaranteed there would be problems. And so there were. Frustration, ruffled feelings, threats of resignation—all followed. It was an unhappy affair that would never have occurred had the president understood her role properly.

Balancing Supervision and Freedom to Act

Shepherd-leaders need both courage and wisdom to properly balance the amount of supervision needed to ensure that necessary performance levels are achieved without intruding on the moral agency of others. In no aspect of leadership is that more difficult to achieve than in dealing with youth, where the difference between "shadow" and "wet-blanket" leadership can be hard to define and even more difficult to control. Wise shepherds may be prepared to accept less-than-perfect performance in the short run in order to teach lessons that will have long-term payoffs.

A young women's leader was repeatedly assured by the class president that a social event for the Laurels was well in hand. "Don't worry," the Laurel class president said several times. "I'm looking after everything." But she wasn't. Only two days before the event, to which parents had been invited, nothing at all had been done by way of preparation. The adult leader had several choices: She could step in, brush the Laurel class president aside, do the work herself, and salvage the whole operation. Or she could do nothing and just let the program crash. A third option would have her provide advice and help to stave off disaster but still honor and maintain the overall responsibility of the Laurel class president and her associates. "If I step in and take over responsibility," the leader reasoned, "we'll probably have a high-class event; but the class president will have learned that I'll bail her out whenever she has trouble. That just teaches irresponsible behavior. On the other hand, if the event flops completely, the Laurels will all be embarrassed—and in front of their parents, too." Wisely, the leader recognized that the best option was to prevent total failure but help the class president learn that if you don't prepare, you won't succeed. She provided some help and advice but made certain responsibility for the event remained where it had been assigned, with the Laurel class president. The young woman learned her lesson—the next event was planned and executed properly.

Teaching Correct Principles

Teaching correct principles to others requires not only a knowledge of what is taught but also a dedication to the principles concerned. Speaking of President Brigham Young, James B. Allen has written: "A man becomes a leader not only because of his ability to organize, persuade, and direct activities of others with diverse attitudes and abilities, but also because of his devotion to the unifying ideals of the particular group involved." (James B. Allen, The Man—Brigham Young [Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1968], p. 23.)

Throughout Brigham Young's life, there were two unifying ideals that guided, directed, and sustained him. The first was the great latter-day work of the Restoration— the principles and practices of Mormonism, so-called, centering on the redeeming sacrifice of Jesus Christ and the restoration of His gospel to the earth for the last time. Second, President Young possessed a deep and touching fidelity, an unwavering devotion, to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The two ideals were inseparably connected in his mind. He was utterly convinced that Joseph Smith was God's prophet and instrument in the restoration of saving truths to the earth. He said:

Joseph Smith has laid the foundation of the kingdom of God in the last days; others will rear the superstructure.. . . I know that he was called of God, and this I know by the revelation of Jesus Christ to me, and by the testimony of the Holy Ghost. Had I not so learned this truth, I should never have been what is called a "Mormon," neither should I have been here to-day. (Journal of Discourses 9:364-65.)

Brigham Young knew full well "the business of the Latter-day Saints" and the Prophet's part in it all:

I feel like shouting hallelujah, all the time, when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith, the Prophet whom the Lord raised up and ordained, and to whom He gave keys and power to build up the kingdom of God on earth and sustain it. These keys are committed to this people, and we have power to continue the work that Joseph commenced, until everything is prepared for the coming of the Son of Man. This is the business of the Latter-day Saints, and it is all the business that we have on hand. (Ibid., 3:51.)

Those who wish to prepare themselves for the shepherd's task in the Lord's church must burn with the same conviction of the principles involved as did President Brigham Young. That is the prerequisite for true leadership. You cannot teach others principles you do not believe yourself. Acquiring a profound knowledge and conviction of those principles, and conveying them with power and passion to others, is the work of a lifetime.

The Leader as Steward

Stewardship, a feeling of deep responsibility to act as the Lord's agent, is perhaps the highest attribute of leadership, the distinguishing mark of the greatest leaders. It is more an attitude than anything else. Its roots lie in the concept of service, and of leaders as servants. In his book Servant Leadership: A Journey into the Nature of Legitimate Power and Greatness, Robert K. Greenleaf explained stewardship as follows: "The servant leader is servant first . . . . It begins with the natural feeling that one wants to serve, to serve first. This conscious choice brings one to aspire to lead. That person is sharply different from one who is leader first." ([New York: Paulist Press, 1977], p. 13.)

In a real sense, therefore, the greatest leaders do not see themselves as such. They seek only to serve, with no desire for self-aggrandizement or acclaim. They see themselves as the Lord's servants, on His errand, acting as His agents, imbued with a deep sense of responsibility to further His interests rather than their own. The scriptures speak repeatedly of the sacred responsibility God places upon His servants to act as faithful agents or stewards. (See, for example, Genesis 26:5; Matthew 20:8; 25:14-29; Luke 16:2; and Titus 1:7.) The word of the Lord given through the Prophet Brigham Young seems particularly appropriate for our time: "Thou shalt be diligent in preserving what thou hast, that thou mayest be a wise steward; for it is the free gift of the Lord thy God, and thou art his steward." (D&C 136:27; italics added.)

Over what, then, are the Lord's servant-leaders to be stewards? The answer is simple: over all that He has given them—every material blessing, every talent, every responsibility.

The Lord expects His servants to be diligent in furthering His cause. He expects them to carry out their duties in all faithfulness, with an eye single to His glory. His anger is kindled against those who are slothful, who fail to act as faithful servants. This sober reminder of responsibilities is well illustrated by the following story recounted many years ago by Elder Reed Smoot:

I remember, when I was a small boy, President Brigham Young was making one of his tours and arrived at a town in one of the southern counties. He had intended to stop there and speak to the people, but, as he drove along the streets, entering town, he noticed the unclean condition of the surroundings. He drove direct to the Bishop's home, stopped his team and said to the Bishop, who stood in front of his residence waiting the arrival of the president: "Why Bishop, I see the same old rocks upon the streets; I see the same old dirty surroundings; I see the same old gates off their hinges; I see the same old broken down fences; I see the same old puddles of mud before the tithing office and your public buildings, just as they were when I was last here; and, inasmuch as I called attention to these defects when I was here before, and it has had no effect upon the people whatever, I do not think it necessary for me to stop this time. Good-

bye, Bishop. Tell the people when they attend to these things and rectify them, I will stop next time. (Conference Report, April 1903, p. 53.)

Of even greater importance than responsibility over possessions is the charge God gives to His servants to care for the lambs of His flock. In a stirring address at general conference in April 1966, Elder Marion D. Hanks, himself a great shepherd, spoke movingly of the grave responsibilities shepherds have to be stewards in the Lord's kingdom. He recounted a tender story about a young woman whom he called Donna (though that was not her real name) who left her home in a small town to seek employment in a large city. She failed to find work, became discouraged and lonesome, and fell under the influence of an unscrupulous and designing man. He led her into an immoral experience. Donna, heartsick at what had happened, returned home to tell her mother and her bishop of the tragedy. She began to learn the sorrow of a remorseful conscience, followed by the blessings of gratitude for God's grace and mercy. Then Donna found she was pregnant. She decided to remain at home to await the birth of her baby. In Elder Hanks's words:

Donna stood up in the next fast and testimony meeting and explained her condition. She acknowledged her fault and asked the forgiveness of her people. She said to them, "I would like to walk the streets of this town knowing that you know and that you have compassion on me and forgive me. But if you cannot forgive me," she said, "please don't blame my mother—the Lord knows she taught me anything but this—and please don't hold it against the baby. It isn't the baby's fault." She bore testimony of appreciation for her bitterly won but dearly treasured personal knowledge of the importance of the saving mission of Jesus Christ. Then she sat down.

The man who told me the story reported the reaction of the congregation to this experience. There were many tearful eyes and many humble hearts. "There were no stone throwers there," he said. "We were full of compassion and love, and I found myself wishing that the bishop would close the meeting and let us leave with this sense of appreciation and concern and gratitude to God."

The bishop did rise, but he didn't close the meeting. Instead he said, "Brothers and sisters, Donna's story has saddened and touched us all. She has courageously and humbly accepted full responsibility for her sorrowful situation. She has, in effect, put a list of sinners on the wall of the chapel with only her name on the list. I cannot in honesty leave it there alone. At least one other name must be written—the name of one who is in part responsible for this misfortune, though he was far away when the incident occurred. The name is a familiar one to you. It is the name of your bishop. You see," he said, "had I fully performed the duties of my calling and accepted the opportunities of my leadership, perhaps I could have prevented this tragedy.". . .

"My brothers and sisters," he said, "I don't know how long I am going to be bishop of this ward. But as long as I am, if there is anything I can do about it, this won't happen again to one of mine."

The bishop sat down in tears. His counselor stood up and said, "I love the bishop. He is one of the best and most conscientious human beings I have ever known. I cannot leave his name there on the list without adding my own. You see, the bishop did talk with his associates. He talked with me about this matter. I think that he thought that because I travel occasionally in my business through the big city, I might find a way to check on Donna. I might have done, but I was hurrying to this meeting or that assignment and I didn't take the time. I too talked with others. I mentioned my concern to my wife. I am almost ashamed to tell you I talked to the Lord and asked him to help Donna. And then I did nothing. I don't know what might have happened had I done what I thought to do, but I have the feeling that I might have prevented this misfortune . . . ."

The president of the YWMIA stood up and told a similar story. The bishop's counselor in charge of this auxiliary organization had talked with her. She had had some moments of thought and concern but had done nothing. She added her name to the list.

The last witness was an older man who stood and added two names to the list—his own and that of his companion ward teacher. He noted that they were assigned to the home in which Donna and her mother lived and that they had failed in some visits and made no effective effort to be the kind of teachers that the revelations of God had contemplated.

"I don't know how long I will be a ward teacher," he said, "but as long as I am, I will not miss another home another month, and I will try to be the kind of teacher that the Lord seemed to have in mind." (Conference Report, April 1966, pp. 151-52.)

In addition to all else for which they are responsible, faithful stewards also have a deep sense of personal commitment to the mission of the Church. They see that mission in personal terms, as one that applies directly to them and for which they bear a personal responsibility. They

know that someday the Master will demand of them an accounting of what they did in helping to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. They mobilize the most noble force of their souls and give their full commitment to a cause greater than any earthly, mortal responsibility—that of proclaiming the gospel, redeeming the dead, and perfecting the Saints—that all may come unto Christ.

In fulfilling his or her sacred stewardship, a wise shepherd believes strongly that the example of a single life can make a difference, touching hearts and influencing many lives for good. A story from the early days of the Restoration illustrates the point. In April 1836, Elder Parley P. Pratt arrived in Hamilton, Ontario, on a missionary journey from Kirtland, Ohio, to upper Canada. He was penniless and could not pay the two-dollar fare for a lake steamer to take him the thirty miles to his destination of Toronto. As was his custom, Elder Pratt importuned the Lord. Shortly thereafter a stranger gave him ten dollars.

Upon arriving in Toronto, Elder Pratt went to the home of John Taylor, whose name and address had been given to him by a business acquaintance of Taylor's. Taylor, an English immigrant to Canada and lay preacher in the Methodist Church, had heard many derogatory remarks about the Mormons. At first he would have nothing to do with Elder Pratt. Within a few weeks, however, Taylor became convinced, after thorough study, that Elder Pratt spoke the truth. John Taylor and his wife Leonora were baptized on May 9, 1836. John Taylor later became the third president of the Church.

Soon after he was baptized, Brother Taylor went with Elder Pratt to call on a Mr. Joseph Fielding, who lived a few miles away. Fielding had two sisters, young women who, seeing the two visitors coming, ran from their home to a neighbor's, lest they should give welcome or even acknowledgment to "Mormonism." Joseph Fielding joined the Church and within the year accompanied Elder Heber C. Kimball to England to open up missionary work there. Mary, one of Joseph's sisters, would later become the wife of Hyrum Smith and the mother of Joseph F. Smith, sixth president of the Church, and grandmother of Joseph Fielding Smith, tenth president of the Church.

John Taylor's wife, Leonora Cannon, came from the Isle of Man. Her nephew, George Q. Cannon, was baptized as a boy of twelve years by Elder Taylor in 1840, during his second missionary journey to England. George Q. Cannon later emigrated to America. He became an apostle and a counselor in the First Presidency under presidents Young, Taylor, Woodruff, and Snow. All this from a single missionary journey! (See Francis M. Gibbons, John Taylor: Mormon Philosopher, Prophet of God [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985].)
