Alexander B. Morrison, Feed My Sheep: Leadership Ideas for Latter-day Shepherds ( 1992)

CHAPTER TWO

Watching Over the Flock

Perhaps the term that best describes the personality of Jesus is one He applied to Himself. "I am the good shepherd," he said, "and know my sheep, and am known of mine." (John 10:14.) To the pastoral peoples of ancient times, those of the flock and field, Jesus' remarks struck a responsive chord. The shepherd was a familiar sight to them. He stayed with his flock both day and night (Luke 2:8), led the flock to fresh pastures each morning (John 10:3-4), carefully and tenderly watched over each member during the day, and ensured that all were safely within the sheepfold when evening came. Equipped with a curved staff for guiding the sheep, a rod used as a weapon, and a sling (Psalm 23:4;1 Samuel 17:40), he was prepared to defend the flock against predators such as bears or lions ( 1 Samuel 17:34-35;John 10:11-13), to give his life, if need be, to protect those in his charge. Yet he willingly left the ninety and nine to go out into the wilderness, seeking the one that was lost. ( Luke 15:4-6.) The shepherd was an honored figure.

The symbolism of Christ as Shepherd is referred to repeatedly in the scriptures. The psalmist sang, "He is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand." (Psalm 95:7.) Using the same powerful symbolism, Isaiah wrote, "He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young." (Isaiah 40:11.) Said faithful Nephi, "He gathereth his children from the four quarters of the earth; and he numbereth his sheep, and they know him; and there shall be one fold and one shepherd; and he shall feed his sheep, and in him they shall find pasture." (1 Nephi 22:25.) Successful leaders in the Lord's Church look upon themselves as His undershepherds, blessed to help Him care for the flock of Christ, sharing the responsibility to watch over every member.

One of the great tragedies of life occurs when a sheep or lamb who has come to Christ drifts away from the sheepfold of God. Some become inactive, others critical or prone to find fault. A few precious souls fall prey to ravenous revilers who call evil good and good evil. (Isaiah 5:20.) Serious transgressions may even result in some forfeiting their Church membership. In each who leaves, the flame of faith falters and grows faint under the ashes of indifference or sin. To all who for whatever reason have drifted away, the First Presidency addressed a loving message in late 1985: "Come back," they said, "Come back and feast at the table of the Lord, and taste again the sweet and satisfying fruits of fellowship with the Saints.. . . We plead with you. We pray for you. We invite and welcome you with love and appreciation." (Ensign, March 1986, p. 88.)

No part of the leader-shepherd's role is more important than that which takes him or her out into the highways and thickets of the world to find and bring back members of the flock of Christ who have wandered away, in whom the fire of faith and testimony has dimmed and grown cold. As leaders do so, theirs is the joy expressed so beautifully by the Savior in that powerful parable found in Luke 15: "What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it? And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing. And when he cometh home, he calleth together his friends and neighbours, saying unto them, Rejoice with me; for I have found my sheep which was lost." (Luke 15:4-6.)

Sad to say, it is, and probably ever will be, the tendency of some to stray from the fold of the Good Shepherd. As Elder James E. Talmage wisely said, "History fails to present any example of great undertakings upon which multitudes enter with enthusiasm, and from which many do not desert." (The Great Apostasy [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1968], p. 23.)

Finding lost sheep and loving them back into full fellowship with the Saints must, therefore, be seen as an intrinsic, eternal part of the shepherd's role. Faithful shepherds for all seasons understand that winter or summer, year in and year out, finding, bringing back, and tenderly caring for the sheep are among the tasks the Lord expects His undershepherds to carry out.

The scriptural reminder that "the worth of souls is great in the sight of God" (D&C 18:10) takes on new meaning to those involved in finding lost sheep and helping to rekindle their faith. The joy felt in heaven when a lost child is found and brought back is echoed in the hearts of faithful, caring undershepherds. These shepherds say that many who have left the fold come to realize that life without Christ is a perpetual twilight. The shepherds also speak of loving parents who pray that someone will find a prodigal son or daughter, of tears of joy and gladness at rediscovery, and of the prodigal's reawakened desire to sup again at the table of the Lord. It is a great miracle.

Yet the greatest miracle of all is not the finding of those who are lost. Rather, it is the ability of the Savior's love

to heal and make whole, to apply a balm of Gilead to sin- sick souls, to restore to full understanding precious truths long since hidden by the cares of the world and the wiles of the wicked.

Why does Christ welcome back those who have been lost? Why does He call upon His undershepherds to go out into the wilderness of the lone and dreary world to find and bring back those in whom the fire of faith has grown cold? The answer is both simple and profound. The Savior exhorts us to do so because He loves all mankind, seeing in each of us an eternal worth that flows from our divine inheritance as the sons and daughters of God: "He inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female;. . . and all are alike unto God." (2 Nephi 26:33.)

Wise shepherd-leaders understand that the distinction between "shepherd" and "sheep" is neither constant nor

distinct. For example, a priesthood leader, whom one would normally think of as serving in a shepherd's role, may under some circumstances move from giver to receiver of blessings. During a lifetime we oscillate repeatedly between being nurturing shepherds and nurtured sheep. That fact underlines our mutual interdependence—for we are all "the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand." (Psalm 95:7.) We are responsible for each other— not as our brother's keeper, but as brothers and sisters freely "willing to bear one another's burdens. . . and comfort those that stand in need of comfort." (Mosiah 18:8- 9.) We cannot escape that responsibility nor expect someone else to accept it for us. At the end of the day a willingness to love and serve one another is the hallmark of our Christian discipleship and of our devotion to God.

Among those in whom the fire of faith has grown cold, faithful undershepherds find souls with special burdens— the lonely; single parents; those who are aged, ill, or troubled; those from broken homes. For them, the shepherds must provide special, tender care. Unfortunately, history records that the shepherds have sometimes not reached out in love and tenderness to those whose needs are greatest. Of such the Prophet Jeremiah intoned: "My people hath been lost sheep: their shepherds have caused them to go astray; they have turned them away on the mountains: they have gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their restingplace.. . . Israel is a scattered sheep." (Jeremiah 50:6, 17.)

Through the prophet Ezekiel the Lord reproved those shepherds who do not feed the flock:

Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God unto the shepherds; Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the flocks?. . . Ye feed not the flock. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them. And they were scattered, because there is no shepherd. (Ezekiel 34:2-5.)

The results that will almost certainly occur if shepherds fail to care for the sheep are presented in the following apocryphal "Parable of the Lost Sheep":

When the shepherd findeth it he layeth it not on his shoulders. Neither bringeth he it back to the sheepfold. He feedeth it not; yea, he provideth neither grain nor hay. Cool clear water he bringeth not. And the sheep starveth. Yea, it wasteth away. He bindeth not up its wounds; he applieth no balm to its blemishes. In its weakness and hunger the sheep crieth for help. But he stoppeth up his ears. Its entreaties he heareth not. Then cometh the wolves, and carrieth the sheep away. Then sayeth the shepherd to his friends: "Did I not tell you the sheep was good for nothing?"

Circumstances change during life, and someone who has previously been indifferent or even cold toward the Church may experience a change of heart over time. The Savior's words come to mind: "Ye know not but what they will return and repent, and come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I shall heal them; and ye shall be the means of bringing salvation unto them." (3 Nephi 18:32.) I think of a woman, baptized in 1930, long inactive, who when contacted in 1968 said that she and her husband and son had attended another church for many years and were happy with that arrangement. She was found again by the Lord's shepherds twenty years later. In the interim her husband had died, and her attitudes had changed. She now was very friendly, wanted contact with the Church, and desired home teachers. She still had her copy of the Book of Mormon! Significantly, the missionaries were led to her through her nonmember brother.

That leads me to reiterate one of the cardinal characteristics of newly found sheep: the flame of faith in them dies hard. Often it can be fanned back to life, even though covered with the ashes of apparent disinterest. The wise words of President J. Reuben Clark come to mind:

It is my hope and my belief that the Lord never permits the light of faith wholly to be extinguished in any human heart, however faint the light may glow. The Lord has provided that there shall still be there a spark which, with teaching, with the spirit of righteousness, with love, tenderness, with example, with living the gospel, shall brighten and glow again, however darkened the mind may have been. And if we shall fail so to reach those among us of our own whose faith has dwindled low, we shall fail in one of the main things which the Lord expects at our hands. (Conference Report, October 1936, p. 114.)

A story told by wonderful, loving missionaries illustrates the enduring truth of President Clark's words. Wrote one of them:

We located a man who was quite gruff and unfriendly as he came to the door. He demanded to know how we had found him and what we were doing there. He wanted nothing to do with the Church. Despite our attempts to reason with him, the good brother remained adamant and bitter in his desire not to have membership in the Church. In his anger he wrote a letter to the Bishop, then and there, demanding that his name be removed from the records of the Church.

As we were walking towards our car, I continued to speak to the man about the importance of the gospel in our lives. I bore my testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel and what it has done to benefit the many who have made the effort to live its principles and keep the commandments of God. I could see tears welling up in his eyes. I admonished him to pray, study the scriptures and think seriously of what he had just done. I pointed out that he could still rescind the letter if he wished. Following a few moments of silence he said softly, "You'd better hold the letter for a while to give me time to think."

How great is the power of pure testimony!

Many who have strayed from the fold of Christ had no real intention of doing so. Some drift away in the first few critical weeks or months after baptism, when they are still so tender and vulnerable. The flame of their faith grows faint more by neglect than anything else. Two examples illustrate the point:

A former missionary, on a return visit to his field of labor, tried to locate people he had baptized nearly a quarter-century ago. He found a man, baptized by him twenty-three years earlier but lost a short time after his baptism. "When you left soon after my baptism," the newly found sheep recounted, "I hadn't been in the Church long enough to withstand the temptations of the world. Nobody else helped me, and I soon drifted away. But I still know the gospel is true."

Another man, baptized years ago and long since lost, told a similar story when he was found again. "Before I got a chance to learn," he said, "the missionaries left, and I thought the members didn't care. I quit going to Church after a few weeks, even though I had a testimony. I still know that the feelings I had at baptism were the whisperings of the Spirit. The gospel is true." Now, more than a quarter-century later, the man contemplates what might have been. His nonmember wife, who had not objected to his baptism, has left him, and none of his three children are members either. Sheep who become lost may take others with them, including lambs not yet born.

Some members drift away because they lack the courage to proclaim their faith to an apostate world. Fearing "man more than God" (see D&C 3:7), they become "ashamed of the gospel of Christ" (Romans 1:16). In their fear they stray away, and they may take others with them. They are in special need of a loving hand to lift them up and rekindle their faith. Another missionary example will illustrate:

One sister we met had been only partially active for over thirty years. There was never any doubt in her mind about the truthfulness of the Church, but her husband forbade her from "getting too involved" and certainly she was not to allow any Mormons to visit their home. One day her husband informed her she could again return to limited activity, but only on Sunday. There was to be no weekday participation and certainly no special projects or programs to claim her time! She felt this mood change would surely be of short duration, but she went cautiously about her return to activity. She said little, but her feelings of happiness and inner peace were very difficult to hide. Not knowing the sensitivity of her home situation, we unwisely visited her without an appointment. She was obviously very concerned when she saw us, and her husband made no attempt to hide his displeasure. We noted a picture of three beautiful children on the mantelpiece and quickly determined one cannot go wrong talking about a person's grandchildren. Forty-five minutes later as we prepared to leave, everyone was relaxed and speaking freely about many subjects. Equally as important, we had an invitation to return—extended by the husband.

A week or so later as we visited with this dear sister, she could hardly contain her feelings of happiness. She related that a few days following our visit to their home, her husband asked if he could speak with her on a very important matter. He began by saying: "I think it is about time I had a talk with the Bishop to learn if my baptism of thirty- five years ago is still valid. If so, maybe I'd better begin to honor it."

This good brother and his family had moved into the area many years earlier, and he had never acknowledged being a member of the Church. He had warned his family to maintain silence regarding his membership. His withdrawal from activity, according to him, was caused by the two-pronged problem so often expressed by less-active members: failure to be adequately taught the gospel, and failure in fellowshiping. We visited several times with this brother and listened attentively and tearfully as he related the anguish of more than thirty years of fear and false pride that had prevented him from returning to Church even though he knew the gospel was true.

One wonders if he sensed something impending, because his change of attitude and desire to return to full fellowship were cut short by his death in less than two month's time. His loving, patient, long-suffering wife has expressed the comfort she feels knowing he really did believe but needed help to return.

Another important lesson for shepherd-leaders to keep in mind about newly found souls is that many—perhaps most—of them know little about the gospel. Lack of knowledge clearly is a factor in their inactivity. The fire of faith and testimony soon falters if not fed. Repetition is required for learning. Few who have drifted far away have experienced that frequent referral to the principles of the gospel needed to drive essential truths into the soul to the point where behavior begins to change. Few are familiar with the scriptures, those powerful witnesses of Christ. (See John 5:39.) Their knowledge of the saving and redeeming truths found in the Book of Mormon is especially deficient. In a word, most require conversion. Without conversion, activation is fleeting and superficial. These perceptive words from Alma 23:6 say it best: "As many as believed, or. . . were brought to the knowledge of the truth . . . and were converted unto the Lord, never did fall away."

The responsibility that falls upon shepherds to ensure that those who hear are brought to a knowledge of the truth through spirit-directed teaching is obvious. Those who attend priesthood quorums and auxiliaries and gospel essentials classes must feel the Spirit and experience the joy and edification it brings. (See D&C 50:17-23.)

To be effective, efforts to find and bring back those who are lost must be both organized and personalized. True shepherds know that each sheep is different from all others, with unique strengths, weaknesses, hopes, fears, and talents. Personalized love must be an overarching principle that unifies all that is done.

In a recent testimony meeting, a lovely sister expressed the joy she and her husband felt when they joined the Church more than fifteen years earlier. A few months after their baptism, the missionaries who had taught them and to whom they felt especially close completed their missions and returned home. Soon doubts, fears, and uncertainties began to gnaw at the new converts, as old habits and old friends began to lure them away from the fold of Christ. She explained that they were saved from a slow slide into inactivity only because a couple in their ward loved and cared for them. Many evenings were spent discussing gospel principles and Church procedures. Aid was given in replacing old friends with new ones. The new converts were encouraged to accept Church callings and helped to be successful in carrying them out. Prevention carried out early in their Church life obviated the need for redemption later on. The sister concluded her testimony: "We sometimes went to Church when we didn't particularly want to, but we knew our friends loved us and we grew to love them. That love has become deeper as we realize more each day what they did for us."

In summary, then, finding, bringing back, and caring for lost sheep and lambs are tasks of supernal significance assigned by the Good Shepherd to faithful undershepherds. In their accomplishment is found some of the richest joys of work in the Master's cause. How thrilling it is to brush away the ashes of apathy, indifference, even antagonism, to reveal and revive the faintly glowing ember into a flickering flame of faith. Those so involved can exult with Ammon, "My heart is brim with joy, and I will rejoice in my God." (Alma 26:11.)

An example from secular history illustrates the importance of shepherd-leaders taking their job seriously. It is a tragic story, one that ended in unmitigated disaster. It is told here, not out of love for blood and gore, but to illustrate a great truth: the sheep look to the shepherds for example and counsel. When the shepherds fail, the sheep suffer.

On the 6th of January, 1842, under unremitting pressure from Afghan mobs, the British army that had occupied the city of Kabul, Afghanistan, for several months began its retreat to the safety of the garrison at Jalalabad. It was the beginning of the most terrible rout in the history of British arms, a tragedy so monstrous and final as to be unparalleled in all of Britain's long martial experience.

The army and those who followed it had to travel only ninety miles; but it was in the midst of the bitter Afghan winter, through wild mountain terrain choked with snow and infested with thousands of intensely hostile tribesmen. Disorderly, already confused, some 16,500 souls struggled out of Kabul, leaving behind a plundering, screaming mob that burned the British cantonment before those who left it were out of sight. The marchers—if they could be called that, since they soon became a muddled, terrified, undisciplined mass—were comprised of some 700 British soldiers, 3,800 Indian sepoys, and more than 10,000 camp followers and their children and servants, both British and Indian. Almost within the hour, stragglers began to drop out of the line of march, and soon the trail was littered with a grisly collection of dead and dying people, abandoned baskets, boxes and cooking pots, dead bullocks and horses.

The retreat lasted just a week. The struggling mass, which had long since ceased to resemble a disciplined group of soldiery, shrank steadily in number. Each gully hid an ambush; each ridge was topped by a line of marksmen who poured a fury of musket fire on the passersby. Frostbitten, snowblind, without food or ammunition, the survivors struggled on, their ordeal made the more horrible by the piercing cold of the Afghan winter.

By the 13th of January the destruction was complete. Thirteen British soldiers (twelve of them officers) had been taken prisoner, as had thirteen British women and sixteen children. Apart from a few wandering Indian sepoys, there remained but a single uncaptured survivor—Surgeon Brydon of the Army Medical Corps. Tormented by Afghan horsemen, who chopped at him with their sabers and pelted him with rocks, he spurred his exhausted horse over the last few miles to Jalalabad.

Suddenly, Brydon found himself alone. His tormentors faded away into the gloom of the early afternoon, content no doubt that there should be one survivor who could provide details of the butchery that had occurred. Far in the distance Brydon saw the high mud walls of Jalalabad, with the Union Jack fluttering in the breeze above them. Slumped over the neck of his horse, he weakly waved his cap. The gates of the fortress opened, and men ran to lift him from his trembling animal. And so the retreat from Kabul came to its terrible end. (Adapted from Heaven's Command, the first volume of James Morris's trilogy on the British Empire [New York: Penguin Books, 1979], pp. 86- 112.)

There are many in the Church who, like those who retreated from Kabul, fall victim and are lost. Why is this so? Some are seduced and led away by the temptations of the world, betrayed and weakened by its false promises. Bereft of the protection of "the whole armour of God," they soon fall beneath the onslaught of evil that surrounds us on all sides.

A few, perhaps, are frozen by the indifference and lack of love shown by Church members. Their enthusiasm cools, their ardor for the gospel becomes sluggish, and soon they too drift away and are lost. Like the army that fled Kabul, some lack the discipline needed to stick together, to draw strength and courage from each other, to hang on and persevere to the end. Their courage falters in the face of criticism from old friends and the seductive allure of old habits. Losing their grip on the iron rod, they fall away into the mists of darkness, not to be seen again.

Finally, there are others, cut and bleeding from a thousand blades of misfortune, who simply give up and cease to struggle. Life with its inevitable disappointments and unfulfilled dreams overwhelms them, and, like dry leaves caught in a mountain torrent, they are swept away.

The task of the Lord's shepherd-leaders is to prevent the spiritual reenactment of the retreat from Kabul. Those who are entrusted with the shepherding role must work with all diligence to provide the love and care needed to protect the Saints from spiritual marauders who dart in to pick off stragglers. They must ensure that all share in the warmth of the gospel of Christ. Theirs is the task to shelter the weak and weary, give courage to the faint-hearted, instill the discipline needed to withstand the world, and strengthen the feeble knees.

Paradoxically, perhaps, shepherds will find the strength to turn aside the fiery shafts of the adversary only as they become as little children. The scriptures tell us to become "submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon [us], even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.) The arm of flesh will not suffice. The ferocity of the natural man will not win the necessary battles, for "the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord." (Mosiah 3:19.)

It must be emphasized that, unlike those who bled and died in the retreat from Kabul, we "wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places." (Ephesians 6:12.) Now is the day of Satan's power on earth. In every land he attempts, with fiendish skill and considerable success, to subvert and thwart the work of God. Malignant, treacherous, and cunning, his power grows daily.

To withstand Satan and his legions of dupes and devils, shepherd-leaders must put on "the whole armour of God." They must have "[their] loins girt about with truth, and [have] on the breastplate of righteousness; and [their] feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith [they] shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And [taking] the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God." (Ephesians 6:13-17.)

The retreat from Kabul must be seen as a tragic failure of shepherding. Taken as a group, the British officers, who should have set the example as shepherds of the flock, failed miserably at their task, preferring to save their own skins rather than putting the safety of their men first. The senior British commander, General William Elphinstone, was described by one of his major subordinates as "the most incompetent soldier that was to be found among the officers of the requisite rank."

It is noteworthy that other than Surgeon Brydon, who was not captured, twelve of the thirteen surviving British troops were officers. In fairness, four of the officers were taken as hostages under protest, at the order of the senior officer present, General Elphinstone. Nonetheless, overall, the actions of the officers involved represent a terrible indictment of shepherds who abandoned their flock.

Contrast the behavior of the army that retreated from Kabul with that of the beleaguered Martin and Willie handcart companies in the American West. Of course, we must be cautious and careful in making the comparison, since the two groups faced very different problems. Nevertheless, the actions of the handcart pioneers and of the shepherds who led them, and those who found and saved them, were markedly different from the actions of those who fled Kabul.

The story of the Martin and Willie companies is one of the most pathetic yet inspiring in the history of the Church. Its main outlines are well known to members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, though little recognized by others. It is a story of heroic dimensions, an epic of courage, endurance, and faith in God, that will live forever in the annals of the kingdom.

They were an improbable lot of heroes, those handcart pioneers; and, of course, they never considered themselves as such. As Wallace Stegner said of them, "They looked more like the population of the poor farm on a picnic than like pioneers about to cross the plains." ("Ordeal by Handcart," Colliers, July 6, 1956, p. 79.)

Like the army that fled from Kabul, they, too, had their ordeal in the snow. Unlike those who struggled across the Afghan wilderness, however, there was among the handcart pioneers no panic, no hysterical terror, no loss of group cohesion. Through all of their hardships they stayed together, helping each other, sharing grief and burdens, burying their dead as best they could, and moving on, ever westward. Their shepherds did not fail them but shared equally in their sorrows and travail, helping as best they could.

Of course, the handcart pioneers were not hounded and harassed by hostile tribesmen as was the Kabul army. Perhaps that explains why they held together and did not break. Yet somehow I doubt it. After they had lost their discipline and became a rabble instead of an army, those fleeing Kabul had only their fear to bind them together. The handcart pioneers, on the other hand, were bound together by the deep bonds of a common religious faith that gave them a sense of mutual obligation, of shared brotherhood and sisterhood. Thus sustained by their deep and abiding faith in God, they were prepared to pay whatever price was required of them to gather to Zion. Even years later, none of them was bitter over the terrible experiences. All deemed it a privilege to have had that opportunity to become "acquainted with God." (Relief Society Magazine, January 1948, p. 8.)

Wallace Stegner summed up well the accomplishments of the handcart companies when he wrote, "If courage and endurance make a story, if human kindness and helpfulness and brotherly love in the midst of raw horror are worth recording, this half-forgotten episode of the Mormon migration is one of the great tales of the West and of America." ("Ordeal by Handcart," Colliers, July 6, 1956, p. 85.)

Effective leadership necessarily involves proper preparation. All true shepherds understand that. Failure to prepare in war is an almost certain guarantee of disaster. The British army at Kabul paid a terrible price because of its lack of preparation. Long before the first of the mobs assembled, there were plenty of signs that major trouble was brewing in the city. Senior British officials were murdered. Rumors abounded for months of threatened rebellions, of secret meetings where dark deeds were planned, of tribesmen assembling out of sight and sound of the foreigners. But the British seemed lost in a dream world of their own making. They did nothing. The officers refused to see what was staring them in the face. They seemed unwilling or unable to detect the almost palpable evidence of an impending crisis, and even less willing to do anything about it. Thus, they were not ready for the hammer blows that struck them.

Let us then resolve there will be no retreats from Kabul in the Church. Let us develop our shepherding skills so we can serve as effective guardians over those for whom the Lord has given us stewardship responsibilities. Let us ever be alert to their needs and wise and perceptive in helping keep them safe from the spiritual marauders who menace the tender souls in our care.

The scriptures tell us that "if ye are prepared ye shall not fear." (D&C 38:30.) Preparation is as important for religious leaders as for those who lead an army or govern a nation. Shepherds who do not prepare almost guarantee they will not achieve desired results. Opportunities for spiritual progress will be lost. Precious lambs will wander away from the flock, perhaps never to return.

Some there are who may quote scripture in an attempt to prove that preparation is not necessary. "Take [no] thought beforehand what ye shall say. . . and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man," they intone. (D&C 84:85.) Such faulty logic, far from proving that preparation is not necessary, indicates merely the pitfalls that await those who quote scripture preferentially and incompletely. Inclusion of the words left out in the above-noted quotation clarifies the matter. Verse 85 of section 84 reads in its entirety: "Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say; but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man" (italics added). The phrase "treasure up in your minds continually the words of life" obviously implies preparation, without which we will have precious little to treasure up! "Be Prepared" is the Scout motto. How aptly it applies to shepherd-leaders!

Preparation permits two factors to influence our decisions: judgment and the Spirit. Combining the two permits us to exercise effective leadership. Wise shepherds will strive constantly to be prepared in two general ways: spiritually and technically. Both are hard work, requiring long hours and unremitting effort. Both call for concentration, commitment, and courage. Both demand discipline and determination.

The fruit of spiritual preparation is an endowment of power from on high—the power necessary to supplement our natural abilities, to strengthen the arm of flesh. "Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power . . . yea, purify your hearts, and cleanse your hands and your feet before me," the scriptures say. (D&C 43:16; 88:74.) Personal purification is the price we must pay for spiritual preparation. We must be washed clean of the soil and dross of the world. "Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord." (Isaiah 52:11.) We must yield our hearts unto God if we desire sanctification. (See Helaman 3:35.) To know God requires that we give away all our sins. (See Alma 22:18.)

Prayer, fasting, pleading, importuning—all are involved. Striving each day that we live to mirror the Master in our thoughts and actions is necessary. To follow Him we must learn of Him. "Search the scriptures," He said, "for they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39.) As we learn of Him, as we draw closer to Him, as we strive to become like Him (see John 14:21), we grow in spiritual power. We become more effective shepherds, more valuable servants.

Fundamental to spiritual preparation is the setting of proper priorities. "Seek ye first the kingdom of God," the Savior taught. (Matthew 6:33.) Leaders who do not place Him first simply cannot succeed in His work. They become mere herders of sheep rather than true shepherds, hirelings rather than trusted stewards. Speaking of the prophet who would be favored at some future date to bring to light the buried Nephite record, Moroni pointed out that "none can have power to bring it to light save it be given him of God; for God wills that it shall be done with an eye single to his glory." (Mormon 8:15.) Shepherds, if they are to be spiritually prepared, must therefore learn to set priorities that accord to the Lord His proper place in their lives.

Spiritual preparation is not something once done and forever finished. It must be seen as a process rather than an event—a lifelong commitment demanded by our discipleship. The long process of trial and training must itself be recognized as a test of our faith. Perseverance, patience, and enduring to the end are required. Painful, distressing times of anguish and adversity come to all. God has promised none of us an easy ride. But He has promised us a greater gift, the capacity to overcome, and the strength to endure. Only as we pass through the refiner's fire can we progress toward perfection.

Successful shepherds know that failure to prepare themselves technically will limit their effectiveness. Success does not come to those who fail to do their homework. Good intentions are not enough. Sincerity will not suffice. Even God has difficulty inspiring an empty mind. Said Brigham Young, "We are trying to teach this people to use their brains.. . . Whatever duty you are called to perform, take your minds with you, and apply them to what is to be done." (Journal of Discourses, 11:328; 8:137.) Oliver Cowdery, who mistakenly thought that revelation came without effort, without thought "save it was to ask," was taught that "you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right." (D&C 9:7-8.)

Studying it out in the mind can be hard work. Many of the problems faced by the shepherds of the Church are complex and difficult. Often shepherds are required to choose between shades of gray. Nor should they delude themselves into thinking that there is only one God-ordained solution to each of life's problems. The truth is that sometimes He is indifferent as to how we choose. "It mattereth not unto me," He pointed out to undiscerning disciples who wished to know the details of how they should travel to their homes. (D&C 60:5.) Under such circumstances He expects us to do "as seemeth [us] good" and to get on with it!

Service to others is the hallmark of the life of the Lord's shepherd-leaders. It is the highest expression of Christian stewardship. Service to others drives out selfishness, the great enemy of spirituality. Subduing the ego permits soul growth and signifies the extent of our devotion to Christ and His cause. It is the mark of true greatness of character. Jesus knew that and exemplified it in His life. Said He, "Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant." (Matthew 20:26-27.)

History reflects numerous examples of men and women who wore out their lives in service to others. One such person was Florence Nightingale, the founder of the modern nursing profession. Born in 1820 in Florence, Italy, where her well-to-do British parents were temporarily resident, she grew to womanhood in England. A child of privilege, she could easily have spent her life in the mindless pursuit of pleasure. But she was made of sterner stuff. She felt deeply that God had a mission for her to accomplish. She trained in Germany as a practical nurse and became the superintendent of nurses at a hospital in London. It was not an easy task. Nursing at that time was a profession with little prestige to which women of good character and breeding were not attracted. In 1854, when war broke out in the Crimea between Britain and France on the one side and Russia on the other, Florence took a party of nurses to work in the military hospitals to which the wounded were brought.

When she arrived at the hospital in Scutari, Turkey, Florence found that wounded men were being kept under appalling conditions of filth, degradation, and gross overcrowding. The walls were thick with dirt; the floors rotten. Vermin scurried everywhere. There were no basins, no towels or soap, insufficient bedding and bandages. Characteristically, Florence's first requisition was for 200 scrub brushes.

Blessed with an iron will and unflinching courage, Florence fought the hostility of the medical establishment and the army bureaucracy to obtain supplies needed for proper nursing of desperately wounded soldiers. She reorganized the kitchens and laundries. Prodigious efforts were made to clean the wards and bring to their inhabitants some of the amenities of civilized life. The wounded began to receive nourishing, well-cooked food and the comfort of clean linen. Wounds were dressed regularly, and the men were bathed and given clean clothing.

Florence drove herself hard. She worked eighteen-hour days, making her rounds through the wards late at night, a lamp in her hand, giving comfort and solace to thousands. She became idolized by the soldiers, who called her "The Lady with the Lamp." They kissed her shadow as it passed and scrupulously watched their language in her presence. Her unstinting service paid off. In a few months the mortality rate among the wounded fell from more than 42 percent to 22 per 1,000.

Florence became a national hero in her native Britain. But she cared little for personal glory, refusing public transport home and every kind of public honor. She was more interested in obtaining improved living conditions for the soldiers. Important and wide-ranging reforms resulted from her efforts.

In 1860 she organized the Nightingale Training School for Nurses at St. Thomas' Hospital in London, the first of its kind in the world. The justly honored position held by the nursing profession today throughout the world has resulted in no small measure from the example of Florence Nightingale's extraordinary life of unstinting service. I believe she would have agreed with King Benjamin, who knew that "when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) (For further information regarding this extraordinary woman, see Lytton Strachey's perceptive essay "Florence Nightingale" in his book Eminent Victorians [London: Penguin Books, 1948].)

Faithful shepherd-leaders place great emphasis on service to others. The fruits of that service are found in souls who come to Christ, in lives that are changed for the eternities. Consider the following letter, written on February 3, 1857, by Charles F. Jones, president of the Birmingham England Conference, to Elder Parley P. Pratt. In the letter, President Jones gives an accounting of his stewardship over a portion of the Lord's sheepfold. It is an outstanding example of what can be done, under the most humble of circumstances, by diligent, faithful shepherd-leaders who seek only to serve, succor, lift, and love.

When I took charge of this Conference, I found it in a good condition, with the exception of a debt, which was caused through the heavy expenses upon it the previous year. But I am pleased to say that at the end of the year 1856, it was entirely out of debt. And although in the previous year more was paid than in any former one, I am proud to say that 300 more has been paid, for various purposes, this year than last, which proves that the faith of this people is on the increase. To be brief I will say that they have paid for various purposes the sum of 1877.

This amount has been used in paying back debts; General Conference expenses; assisting Elders in going to Zion; contributions to the Temple and Emigration Funds; support of Priesthood; relief of poor, etc.

In addition to this the Saints have paid on behalf of their own Emigration the sum of 429 3s. 7d.

We have also disposed of books and Stars to the value of 262 1s. 6d.; making a total of 2631 5s. 1d.

We have 146 Elders and 133 Priests; the majority of these men have been employed during the past year in distributing tracts, and preaching in and out of doors.. . . During the year we have baptized 298 persons. . . [and] 178 persons left for Utah. The Conference is now in a healthy condition, numbering 1516. . . [with] ten Sabbath schools . . . where [children] are taught to read, write, etc., with good effect. (Millennial Star, 19:141-42.)

Service may require apparent sacrifice. In our congregations we often sing a great hymn about the prophet Joseph Smith that contains the memorable line "Sacrifice brings forth the blessings of heaven." ("Praise to the Man," Hymns, no. 27.) That sacrifice may take many forms, from the physical hardships suffered by the early pioneers to social ostracism and the loss of employment, friends, or even family associations. For many the greatest apparent sacrifice is giving up the things of the world—unbridled ambition, a love of power or possessions, sensuality in all its diverse forms; all of the sins that keep us from communion with God. Those who yield "their hearts unto God" (Helaman 3:35), who are willing to give away all their sins to know him (see Alma 22:18), soon find that what they have given up was no sacrifice at all. They feel no sense of loss but rather a deep rejoicing in the knowledge that their feet are planted firmly on the path that leads to broad sunny uplands of celestial joy.

President Marion G. Romney understood well the importance of sacrifice in the attainment of celestial joy. Said he:

When earth life is over and things appear in their true perspective, we shall more clearly see and realize what the Lord and his prophets have repeatedly told us, that the fruits of the gospel are the only objectives worthy of life's full efforts. Their possessor obtains true wealth—wealth in the Lord's view of values.. . . I conceive the blessings of the gospel to be of such inestimable worth that the price for them must be very exacting, and if I correctly understand what the Lord has said on the subject, it is. The price, however, is within the reach of us all, because it is not to be paid in money nor in any of this world's goods but in righteous living. What is required is wholehearted devotion to the gospel and unreserved allegiance to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.. . . There can be no. . . reservation. We must be willing to sacrifice everything. Through self-discipline and devotion we must demonstrate to the Lord that we are willing to serve him under all circumstances. When we have done this, we shall receive an assurance that we shall have eternal life in the world to come. Then we shall have peace in this world. (Conference Report, October 1949, pp. 39, 43-44.)

Yes, sacrifice, though it tugs at our heartstrings and stretches us almost beyond what we think we can bear, does indeed bring forth the blessings of heaven.

Applying the Principles: Guidelines for Shepherds

Faithful undershepherds strive diligently to serve those for whom they have divinely directed responsibility. It is a difficult task, one that could not successfully be carried out without the Lord's help. Demands placed on the time, energy, and abilities of even well-trained and highly motivated shepherds simply exceed mortal abilities. That may seem a presumptuous statement; after all, many men and women in the secular world are superbly successful in operating large-scale business and public organizations. But to do the Lord's work requires more power than that provided by the arm of flesh. Advanced degrees or extensive experience in business or public administration, though perhaps useful, will not suffice and are not really all that important. An extra endowment of spiritual power is required. (See D&C 43:16.) The following guidelines are presented to help shepherds obtain that power "in the Lord's way."

Knowing every sheep personally requires shepherds to develop the divine gift of discernment. Though this gift is conferred upon all people generally through the light of Christ (Moroni 7:16-18), the Lord's shepherds receive additional power through revelation from the Holy Ghost (D&C 46:16) to discern what is in the hearts of the members of their flock.

The spirit of revelation rested upon the prophet Samuel as he set about to select one of the sons of Jesse as a successor to Saul, who had forfeited his right to the office of king through willful disobedience. Samuel thought to himself as he looked on Eliab, the eldest son, "Surely the Lord's anointed is before [me]." But the Lord said unto Samuel, "Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart." When David the shepherd boy and the youngest of Jesse's sons was brought before Samuel, the Lord said, "Arise, anoint him: for this is he." (1 Samuel 16:6-7, 12.)

Faithful shepherds plead with all their hearts to know the Lord's will for His children. They long for that endowment of power that will permit them to discern what is in the heart of each member of the flock, and they cry to God for the power to provide necessary help and counsel. Prayer, pleading, importuning of the Lord may be required ere His will is known. The Prophet Joseph, who knew well the process involved, indicated the determination and persistence required when he advised, "Come to God, weary him until he blesses you." (Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith [Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Religious Studies Center, 1980], p. 15.)

In seeking to know and care for each member of the flock, faithful shepherds are motivated by charity, the pure love of Christ (Moroni 7:47)—a love that is centered on righteousness such that he or she who possesses it is concerned only with the soul of the recipient. Charity is a spiritual gift, an endowment from the Almighty, bestowed on those who are true followers of Christ (Moroni 7:48), which enables us to love others as the Father and Son love us.

None were received unto baptism save they took upon them the name of Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end. And after they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith. And the church did meet together oft, to fast and to pray, and to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls. And they did meet together oft to partake of bread and wine, in remembrance of the Lord Jesus. And they were strict to observe that there should be no iniquity among them; and whoso was found to commit iniquity, and three witnesses of the church did condemn them before the elders, and if they repented not, and confessed not, their names were blotted out, and they were not numbered among the people of Christ. But as oft as they repented and sought forgiveness, with real intent, they were forgiven. And their meetings were conducted by the church after the manner of the workings of the Spirit, and by the power of the Holy Ghost; for as the power of the Holy Ghost led them whether to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or to sing, even so it was done. (Moroni 6:3-9.)

The practice of "taking the names" of the people and of "numbering" them implies that the shepherds know all the members of the flock individually. Furthermore, following such a practice requires shepherds to consider the unique strengths and weaknesses, challenges and talents of each individual, one by one. Modern-day bishop-shepherds follow that principle when they prayerfully seek guidance for each young man and young woman in the ward, individually rather than collectively. Collective evaluations of people are of little lasting worth. "When we deal in generalities, we shall never succeed," President Thomas S. Monson has wisely stated; but "when we deal in specifics," he adds, "we shall rarely have a failure." Wise leaders use statistics, reports, and lists of the names of members categorized in various ways to consider how best to bless the lives of specific individuals and concentrate resources where they are most needed.

True shepherds know they are accountable for all of the flock, not just for those who are members of the Church. They take special actions to provide the additional help needed by those who pasture on the edges of the flock. What shepherds need most, perhaps, is an attitude of mind that helps them to look to the needs of all, to feel responsible for everyone. The specific actions needed to help a particular individual will soon become apparent once that attitude is firmly implanted in shepherds' hearts. Of course, prayer and pleading will be required, but God does not leave His servants alone and without promise of divine assistance. One of the sweetest assertions of God's love and support for His servants is found in the Savior's words to the Prophet Joseph Smith as recorded in D&C 84:88: "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up." Shepherds who have that assurance can sing with the Psalmist: "I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh my help. My help cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and earth. He will not suffer [my] foot to be moved: he that keepeth [me] will not slumber." (Psalm 121:1-3.)

Great shepherds, who lead by example, burn with excitement for the Lord's work. They are consumed by enthusiasm, as was Paul. Wrote he to the Corinthian Saints: "God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ." (2 Corinthians 4:6.) Alma, who knew the sickness of sin and the cleansing power of repentance, desired to speak with "a voice to shake the earth.. . . I know that which the Lord hath commanded me," he said, "and I glory in it. I do not glory of myself, but I glory in that which the Lord hath commanded me." (Alma 29:1, 9.)

The holy fire that consumes and transfigures the Lord's leaders is contagious. It spreads to others, changing them in turn as they, too, catch the vision of the greatest of all works. They slough off the scales of selfishness and "put on the whole armour of God" (Ephesians 6:11) as valiant soldiers in the army of God.

If I were fierce, and bald, and short of breath, I'd live with scarlet Majors at the Base, And speed glum heroes up the line to death. You'd see me with my puffy petulant face, Guzzling and gulping in the best hotel, Reading the Roll of Honour, "Poor young chap," I'd say—"I used to know his father well; Yes, we've lost heavily in this last scrap." And when the war is done and youth stone dead, I'd toddle safely home and die—in bed. (The Penguin Book of First World War Poetry, 2nd edition, Jon Silkin, ed. [Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England: Penguin Books, 1981].)

This is not to say, of course, that shepherds must attend every meeting, take no vacations, or be on call twenty-four hours a day. Those who do so will "surely wear away"; what they attempt is "too heavy for [them]," and they are "not able to perform it. . . alone." (Exodus 18:14-18.) But wise shepherds never leave the sheepfold untended or the flock uncared for. When unavoidably absent themselves, they ensure that other able undershepherds are available to care for all of the members of the flock. Wise Jethro understood that Moses was "burning himself out" by trying to do too much and needed help if he were to succeed. Jethro's advice to a struggling prophet applies equally to modern-day shepherds:

Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee: Be thou for the people to God-ward, that thou mayest bring the causes unto God: and thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do. Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens: and let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee. If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace. So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did all that he had said. (Exodus 18:19-24.)

Shepherds who understand Jethro's message ensure that counselors, teachers, and others are used wisely to care for the flock when they themselves are absent. The shepherd may be required to leave the ninety and nine and go search for the one who is lost. But he or she will not leave those "at home" unprotected or unfolded as prey to spiritual wolves.

If there is one challenge all shepherds share, it is the continual tug-of-war between tasks and time. We all seem so busy trying to juggle the competing demands of church, family, self, and profession. The work seems never to be done, and the time is so short. For the good of themselves, their families, their friends, and the flock entrusted to them, shepherds must learn to periodically reassess priorities, which should include time for family and personal renewal, to determine anew goals and objectives, and to ask honestly and candidly whether the tasks that keep them so busy are the most important in moving the kingdom forward. It is not easy to ask those questions and act on the answers. There is a certain comfort in being busy!

I well recall an overburdened bishop who said to me, "I just can't take the time to plan; I'm too busy!" I sympathize with him; after all, there are programs to administer, organizations to staff, and procedures to follow. All, of course, are important, but they are not the keystone of effective leadership in the kingdom. Our divine purpose as Church leaders is to serve as the Lord's agents, as undershepherds on His errand, entrusted with the care of His children.

It is so easy for shepherds to fall into the trap of believing their most important resonsibility is to be an effective administrator. A recent witty cartoon in the New Yorker magazine illustrates the point that the shepherd's role transcends administration. It depicts a nattily dressed man, with briefcase in hand, addressing a flock of sheep. "Your shepherd, Louie, has retired," he says. "I am Mr. Smathers. I will be your grazing-resource coordinator and flock welfare-and-security manager." The point is, of course, obvious. The prime role of a shepherd-leader is to provide spiritual help and guidance, not to be a grazing-resource manager! Make no mistake. Administration is important, but it is even more important to minister to the needs of those for whom we have responsibility.

To me one of the most beautiful and powerful aids to everyday Christian living is that found in John 14:21: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them," said the Savior, "he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him." We signify our devotion to and love for Jesus by the extent to which we keep His commandments. Those who say they love Christ, but who don't strive with all their strength to keep the commandments, signal to others, and most importantly to Him, where their true allegiance lies.

The power of the scriptures to make hearts "burn" is exemplified by the experience of the two disciples who unaware walked with the resurrected Christ on the road to Emmaus. Beginning at Moses and all the prophets, Jesus expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning Himself. After Christ's departure, when their eyes had been opened to the divine glory of their companion, the disciples said one to another, "Did not our heart[s] burn within us while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?" (Luke 24:27, 32.)

The commandments then, are the words of eternal life, by whose precepts people everywhere are required to live. (See D&C 84:43-44.) As we obey, we are blessed. Wise shepherds, who know this, do all in their power to teach the flock in their care to follow the commandments.

The prophets proclaim, and the scriptures sweetly certify, that all men and women, if they are to achieve true happiness, must come unto Christ and be perfected in Him. To achieve such supernal joy requires a life of dedication and devotion to duty and Deity, a life of service and sacrifice, a life of keeping the commandments. Such a life is characterized by partaking of holy ordinances and by making and keeping sacred covenants, those solemn, celestial agreements between man and God. Making covenants with His people and with individuals has always been one of the major ways in which the Lord deals with His children. God's people have always been a covenant- making people. Said Jehovah to Moses, speaking of ancient Israel: "If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people." (Exodus 19:5.) The Nephite scriptures also are replete with references to covenants. Nephi recorded, "My soul delighteth in the covenants of the Lord." (2 Nephi 11:5.) Indeed, the ancient and modern scriptures testify together that the greatest and most glorious blessings our Heavenly Father has for His children are received by covenant. We serve under covenant and not under compulsion, as Elder Boyd K. Packer has reminded us. (See Ensign, May 1987, p. 24.)

A covenant, in technical terms, is a solemn agreement between two parties. With respect to the covenants of the gospel, the parties involved are the Father on the one side and faithful, humble suppliants on the other. The agreements entered into are intended to be binding on both participants. We make specific promises and in return are given specific blessings. God, of course, always keeps His side of the bargain. He cannot do otherwise; His very nature forbids it. Sad to say, however, all too often some of God's covenant people, casual in their commitment, take their obligations and covenantal responsibilities less seriously than they should. In so doing, they trample sacred things under their feet.

If we fail to keep our covenants, we are not worthy of Him whose sons and daughters we are (D&C 98:15), and we are "good for nothing only to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men" (D&C 101:39-40). It is a matter of the utmost seriousness. Our position and place in the eternities will be determined by the extent to which we keep sacred the covenants we make here in mortality. Those who accept sacred covenants have a grave responsibility to honor them. The Lord has said, speaking of those who receive the priesthood and then break the covenant pertaining thereto, "Whoso breaketh this covenant after he hath received it, and altogether turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the world to come." (D&C 84:41.)

There fall upon us two principal responsibilities if we are to keep in full force the covenants we make. The first is faithfulness—a willingness to obey the laws of God, to keep the commandments, to observe the standards of the gospel, to endure in fortitude unto the end. Such a one was Nephi, son of Helaman, who sought with unwearying diligence to know the will of God and to keep His commandments. To him the Lord declared, "Because thou hast done this with such unwearyingness, behold, I will bless thee forever; and I will make thee mighty in word and in deed, in faith and in works; yea, even that all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will." (Helaman 10:4- 5.)

To be faithful is to strive each day to keep the commandments, to hunger and thirst after righteousness, to plead for divine guidance, and to seek for and listen to the still, small voice. To be faithful is to listen to and act upon the admonitions of the prophets, to humbly, obediently, and gladly follow their instructions, remembering that the voice of His servants is the same as the Lord's. (See D&C 1:38.) Faithfulness in keeping the commandments thus is not passive; it is active, joyful, anxious engagement in good causes, reverence for righteousness, an eye single to the glory of God. It embodies both commitment and action, and it must be seen within the context of enduring to the end while steadfastly pushing forward, feasting on the words of Christ. (See 2 Nephi 31:20.)

The second responsibility that falls upon us, if we are to keep our covenants, is to magnify our calling—to honor, exalt, and glorify it and to cause it to be held in greater respect and esteem. We magnify our callings, whatever they are, when we see what we do in the framework and context of God's work, when we recognize that the great latter-day work in which we are engaged is of eternal, galactic importance, part of God's eternal plan for His children, foreseen by Him before the foundations of the world were laid. When we do so, we develop the inner joy of recognizing who we are, of knowing that we are God's sons and daughters, known by Him and beloved of Him. We learn of our relationship to our Redeemer and Savior, God's Almighty Son, and we understand that because He bore our sins on Calvary's cross, we may, on condition of faithfulness, return again to our Father's house.

As we magnify our calling, we go the extra mile; we taste the sweet joys of service—the fabric from which a celestial life is woven. And we desire that our brothers and sisters here in mortality may share in the bountiful blessings of the glorious gospel. At the same time, we go even further—we desire the same blessings for our progenitors beyond the veil. Our hearts thus are turned to our fathers; and we carry out vicarious service on their behalf in the holy temple, reaching out in love and service, in caring and compassion, to free them from spiritual captivity.

It is so easy to confuse position in the Church with righteousness—to embrace the pernicious doctrine that those who administer the Lord's affairs are automatically assured first place in the kingdom. While it is certainly true that the Lord loves and trusts His servants, it is worth repeating that our place in the kingdom is determined by our faithfulness in keeping our covenants, not by the position we hold.

The saving and exalting ordinances of the gospel are inextricably intertwined with the sacred covenants. Indeed, no covenant is given unless it is associated with an ordinance, and vice-versa. Thus, the ordinance of the sacrament is associated with three covenants. As we partake of the blessed tokens of the sacrament, we make the following promises to God:

For His part, God promises that we will always have the Spirit to be with us.

If a covenant is a sacred promise, an ordinance is a

sacred act; an act prescribed by the Savior Himself as one of the conditions upon which we receive the exalting blessings of His atonement. The first essential ordinance is that of baptism—the sacred act that provides entrance into the way leading to the celestial kingdom. The essential ordinances that concern exaltation are given and received in the holy temple. Indeed, the Lord has made it clear (D&C 124:40) that the purpose of building temples is to reveal the ordinances therein. The Doctrine and Covenants (84:19-21) also teaches us that the ordinances of the Melchizedek Priesthood contain the powers of godliness. Incidentally, it is worth pointing out that ordinances, to be effective, must be performed by those who have divine authority to do so. God will not accept from us that which He has not Himself commissioned. In this work, more than good intentions and sincerity are required; a valid authorization from God must be obtained.

Wise shepherds use the programs of the Church to meet the needs of the people, to support families and individuals as they strive to carry out the mission of the Church. Much of the correlation necessary to do so should occur in the weekly Priesthood Executive Committee and the Ward Council. The information local leaders need to focus on individuals comes in part from the records that are kept. Wise shepherds look beyond the figures to the individuals they represent and then plan and correlate their efforts to help the individuals involved, using all of the resources of the Church. The spirit of that help should be that expressed in Alma 31:35: "Behold, O Lord, their souls are precious, and many of them are our brethren."

Wise shepherds seek daily to understand each member of the flock. They plead for empathy, recognizing that one of the most fundamental psychological needs of all members is the need to be understood and appreciated. The wise shepherd learns to listen and to understand, not to hastily prescribe solutions—something that can be risky and very difficult. This takes training, practice, and patience. Wise shepherds spend a lot of their time in sharpening that skill, knowing that much of their success will depend upon their ability to truly understand and value each member of the flock.

Wise, caring shepherds see themselves primarily as teachers. Their model is not the white knight in shining armor, leading his troops in glorious victory, but that of the humble teacher who helps others grow and gets the greatest satisfaction when pupils surpass the accomplishments of their mentor. Though no mortal can even approach the performance of Jesus, I believe the Savior has a special joy when He sees undershepherds striving and growing in His service.

Jesus, who taught "as one having authority" (Matthew 7:29), was and ever will be the greatest teacher. He provides the perfect model for us to follow as we strive to improve our own teaching skills. We are to teach by the Spirit (see D&C 42:14 and 50:17-22), "according to the office wherewith I have appointed you," the Lord says (D&C 38:23). As we strive to do so, we will receive wondrous blessings of power and comprehension, far beyond our mortal capacities. "Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God,. . . that ye may be prepared in all things. . . to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you." (D&C 88:78, 80.)

Wise shepherds recognize the need for physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual renewal. They invest in themselves, knowing that if they don't do so, their effectiveness as undershepherds will decrease. They recognize the need for balance in life and know that to develop only one dimension of their talents is to put all others in jeopardy. They realize, on the other hand, that positive renewal of one of the four basic aspects of life mentioned above will positively affect the others. Thus, a shepherd who takes proper care of his or her physical body through proper diet and exercise will find increased mental, emotional, and spiritual strength and enhanced capacity to do the Lord's work. From that renewal, positive change will flow.

In summary, shepherds who understand their divinely appointed responsibility do all in their power to care for each member of the flock, including those who have wandered away. They work hard to improve their effectiveness, knowing that their ministry requires both discipline and determination. They prepare themselves in all things that they may magnify their callings and justify the sacred appellation of undershepherd.
