Alexander B. Morrison, Feed My Sheep: Leadership Ideas for Latter-day Shepherds ( 1992)

CHAPTER THREE

The Communicating Shepherd

In his book The Discoverers, Daniel Boorstin describes the difficulties encountered by travelers attempting to trade but unable to speak each others' language. In ancient times, Muslim traders from North Africa, after traversing the Atlas mountains southward, would arrive after many days at the shores of the Senegal River in West Africa. There they would lay out on the ground separate piles of salt, beads and other trinkets, and inexpensive manufactured goods. They would then retreat out of sight. The local tribesmen, who were gold miners and lived in the workings, would appear and put a heap of gold beside each pile of trade goods. Then they in turn would get out of sight, leaving the traders either to take the gold offered for a particular pile or to reduce the amount of merchandise to suit the offered price of gold. Once again the traders would withdraw, and the process would go on until both sides were satisfied.

This bizarre game, conducted in utter silence by both sides, was the best that could be managed by people who could not talk to each other, a "silent trade" carried out in total isolation. (See Daniel J. Boorstin, The Discoverers, pp. 160-61.)

Unfortunately, there are still many who practice the modern equivalent of the "silent trade": families who don't talk together, leaders who don't communicate expectations or convey appreciation, shepherds who act as if they were tongue-tied, sheep who seem deaf. No part of the shepherd's task is more demanding or rewarding than that of

communicating with the members of the flock. It is, of course, a two-way process, with joint responsibilities to give and receive information. But true communication involves much more than just a transfer of information. It requires a listening heart, the ability to diagnose before we prescribe, to seek first to understand and then to be understood.

Seek First to Understand, Then to Be Understood

This phrase, an extension of the famous words attributed to St. Francis of Assisi ("O divine Master, grant that I may not so much seek. . . to be understood as to understand. . . ") lies at the heart of true communication. Seeking for understanding is the product of a wise and loving heart, of humility and commitment to service. Its enemies are ego and selfishness, an arrogant self-assurance that assumes I know best and others had better listen to me. The importance of seeking first to understand was brought home forcefully to me at the start of my service as a General Authority. My first long-term assignment was as a counselor to Elder Jack H. Goaslind, then president of the United Kingdom/Ireland/Africa Area. I well recall the first meeting of the newly assigned Area Presidency. "Brethren," said Elder Goaslind, "the stake presidents and other priesthood leaders here know far more about their challenges and successes than we do. Our job for the first three months is to listen and pray and ponder. Let's not prescribe solutions until we understand the problems."

Over the next three months we did exactly that, talking to every stake president in the Area and visiting every part of it, from John O'Groats to Cape Town. Everywhere we went, we tried hard to really listen, to look beyond the words to what was really meant, to read "body English" as well as the Queen's English. Priesthood leaders, as they found we really wanted to learn and were slow to judge, opened their hearts and their minds to us. I'm confident we were much more effective than we would have been had we steamed in with all guns firing, providing answers before we even understood the problems. I'll always be grateful to Elder Goaslind for his wise and humble leadership and great example.

Listen with the Spirit

When we listen with the Spirit, we strive above all else to understand the other person, to get inside his or her head and heart, so to speak, to really know what is being said, perhaps without words. This requires not only careful listening but also careful observing. In fact, the

experts tell us that words account for only about 10 percent of communication, with 60 percent coming from "body language" and 30 percent from the tone and inflection of the voice. Listening with the Spirit thus requires far more than just hearing and processing words. It requires close observation of facial expressions, of gestures, of body stance and movement. I recall interviewing a senior priesthood leader and his wife. Sensing that all was not well in their lives, I questioned him closely about specific aspects of his stewardship and relationship with his wife. He insisted there were no problems, none at all. Everything was proceeding just as it should, or so he claimed. Then I glanced at his wife. She, too, insisted there were no problems in their relationship, not a one. Her face, however, betrayed her real feelings. Tears were welling up in her eyes and running down her cheeks. Of course there were problems! Fortunately, they were solvable. He had grown careless about his relationship with his wife and somewhat insensitive to her needs and anxieties. He was and is a good man, striving to be righteous and totally devoted to magnifying his calling and maintaining the honor of a famous name. As occurs with many, however, dedication had slipped over into obsession, and his priorities needed readjustment. Fortunately, once he understood the problem, he was quick to make amends.

Although listening with the Spirit requires the development of skills, more than skill is involved. At its base, listening with the Spirit requires a deep, genuine desire to understand another human soul. Its roots thus lie in character, in service and humility, not in skill. Nor is listening with the Spirit mere sympathy. Indeed, it may not involve sympathy (which implies agreement) at all. Commitment to try to understand is involved, not agreement. Sincerity is essential. Most people quickly comprehend if they are being manipulated and are repelled by behavior perceived as deceitful or self-seeking. Under such circumstances most just "clam up" and won't reveal their true feelings. To do so would be too dangerous, too risky. Indeed, listening with the Spirit is risky for both parties involved. Both must be open, both must lower their guards and reveal their true selves. Both must be open to be taught and hence to be changed. Considerable self-assurance is required on both sides.

In its essence, listening with the Spirit is a mutual teaching process in which all parties participate equally. The scriptures tell us what happens under such circumstances: "He that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the Spirit of truth . . . . Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together." (D&C 50:21-22; italics added.) When we listen with the Spirit, seeking to understand, spirit-to-spirit communication occurs, almost like an electric current flowing from one point to another. Barriers to understanding melt away. True communication occurs. Trust is engendered as hearts open and tender emotions are brought to the surface. And, wonder of wonders, both persons involved are "edified and rejoice together."

In his book The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1989), Stephen R. Covey teaches the skills involved in listening with the Spirit, which he terms "empathic listening." (See pp. 235-60.) A beginning step is to play back the words the other person says. For example, let's assume you are a stake president, and a bishop whom you are interviewing says, "I'm just so tired I can't go on. The company expects more and more from me. I just don't have time to be bishop." Essentially, all you have to do to start the process of listening with the Spirit is to repeat back what you've heard: "You're so tired you can't go on. You don't think you have time to be bishop any longer." Stopping there doesn't do much good, however, except to show that at least you're listening. Much more is needed if you are to really understand and communicate that understanding.

Rephrasing the content is the second stage. To the bishop's comment, "I'm just so tired I can't go on. The company expects more and more from me. I just don't have time to be bishop," the stake president might be tempted to say, "You're burned out, Bishop, and you want to be released." One of the problems with rephrasing, however, is that you may be tempted to make a judgment about the other person's situation, falling into the trap of prescribing before diagnosis is complete. What you say may be logical, or at least seem logical to you, but it may well be wrong and is highly likely to be incomplete at best. In this case it would be better to respond, "You are feeling pressured and are wondering how to fit everything in."

The third stage involves reflecting feeling, not logic. To the bishop's statement, the stake president might reply, "You sound so frustrated, Bishop. Something must really be bothering you." This stage opens up feelings for examination. Both feelings and logic are reflected in stage four. The stake president's reply to the bishop's statement might be as follows: "You're really frustrated with the burdens of your calling and your job combined." Now you appeal both to feeling ("You're really frustrated") and to logic ("the burdens of your calling and your job combined"). Note that though the stake president seeks to understand, he retains his objectivity by not expressing sympathy for the bishop. Furthermore, in doing so, he helps the bishop look at his own problems with both emotion and logic. Only after you are certain you understand the other person should you begin to present your own position. Chances are your views may be different from those you started out with. Your own understanding may well have been altered by what you've learned. But at least there's now a basis for a meeting of minds.

"Come Now, and Let Us Reason Together"

On the surface, Isaiah's persuasive invitation, "Come now, and let us reason together" (Isaiah 1:18) seems eminently sensible. After all, two rational people should be able to sit down together and reason out their differences, each giving a little if need be to arrive at a mutually acceptable position. Unfortunately, it's often not that easy, as illustrated by the following story.

A stake president did little to support the Boy Scouts in his stake. Whenever there was a Court of Honor to be held, he had an excuse for not being there. He was "too busy," or had an "unexpected crisis," or had some other unforeseen difficulty that prevented his attendance. He seemed reluctant to commit time, resources, and good people to the furtherance of Scouting in the stake. In fairness, it wasn't so much that he actively opposed Scouting

as that he just didn't actively support it.

Whatever the cause, there seemed more to the problem than met the eye. And so there was. To one whom he trusted, who knew how to listen with the Spirit, the stake president eventually confided his real reasons. "I was a Scout, a second-class Scout, when I was a boy," he said. "My folks were very poor, and I didn't even have a full uniform—just bits and pieces of patched and faded equipment. Whenever I went to Scouts, the other boys laughed at me. I've never forgotten the feelings of embarrassment and, yes, anger, that I felt. I guess that's why I still can't get enthusiastic about Scouts and Scouting." This stake president is an intensely private individual who finds it extremely hard to express the feelings of his heart. If he had been openly challenged, the truth would never have been revealed. He would, I believe, simply have drawn his dignity around him and refused to talk about the matter.

The Many Facets of Truth

In our congregations we sometimes sing "Oh say, what is truth? 'Tis the fairest gem." (Hymns, no. 272.) Truth is indeed a jewel that sparkles with divine radiance, but it has many facets, many faces. I may see one face; you, another. Yet both may be right. Your point of view may be different from mine, but it deserves attention and respect. Even if I am right, you may not be wrong—only different.

Several years ago, a major international research foundation conducted a program to spray houses with pesticide to eliminate the mosquito vectors of yellow fever in a portion of the Amazon Basin. The first spraying episode went well; with the enthusiastic cooperation of the inhabitants, nearly every house in the three villages involved was sprayed. And the incidence of yellow fever dropped dramatically. When the spraying was repeated six months later, only about two-thirds of the home-dwellers would let the spray team in to do its work. The others flatly refused. Six months after that, all doors were closed to the team, and machete-waving groups of householders refused to even let team members come into the villages. When pressed to explain their dramatic change in attitude, a spokesperson for the villagers had this to say: "As you know, nearly all of the men of these villages work in the local sugar factory. There are about 5,000 jobs and nearly 10,000 men. In the old days, before you started this spraying program, about half of the men would be sick at any given time. So, everyone who was well worked, and since everyone got sick periodically, all of the men worked part of the time. Now, thanks to your spraying program, there's no yellow fever around, and nearly everyone is physically well and able. But since there are only 5,000 jobs and 10,000 men, half of the men are permanently out of work, and their families are hungry. You can keep your pesticides; they don't help us!"

The physician who received that explanation told me of his reaction. "At first," he said, "I was dumfounded and more than a little irritated. Couldn't those simple peasants understand what we were doing for them? Didn't they know we were helping them? Talk about ingratitude!" Then he continued: "I began to cool off. I tried to understand where the villagers were coming from. I began to realize that from their point of view our activities, which had seemed so transparently good, even noble, to me, were to them a mixed blessing at best. I began to see how complex the situation really was and began to realize that preventing disease wasn't enough. Real help involved doing that, of course, but much more was required. We had to think of the need to provide jobs as well."

"The older I get," he concluded, "the more I realize there are no simple answers to complex human problems."

Each of us perceives the truth through the eyes of our own life experience, our own background. None of us can completely escape in mortality the conditioning of the environment in which we live. Each sees as "through a glass, darkly." (1 Corinthians 13:12.) The formative years of childhood and adolescence condition our thought patterns and perceptions more than we may care to admit. Because of this, some argue that truth is only relative and not absolute. The belief that there is no absolute truth lies at the root of the pernicious doctrine of situational ethics, with its seductive message that ethically appropriate behavior in one situation may not be morally correct in another. Such false teachings make God the author of confusion and demean humanity by neglecting our pre-earth life history and our possibilities as members of an eternal community to whom each of us owes responsibilities.

The many facets of truth can only be illuminated by Him who declared, "I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12.) That wonderful flood of light casts away the "cloud of darkness" from our minds and lights up our souls. (See Alma 19:6.) The eyes of our understanding are opened, and we see things as "they really are" and as "they really will be." (See Jacob 4:13.) We draw upon Christ's power to illuminate lives when we seek to listen with the Spirit.

As we listen with the Spirit, we come to appreciate that another's perception of the truth, while perhaps different from our own, is worthy of respect and, indeed, of admiration. Another's viewpoint may help us not only to better define and understand our own but perhaps to modify and adjust our own thinking, that "both [may be] edified and rejoice together." (D&C 50:22.)

Perception Becomes Reality

In communicating with members of their flock and others, wise shepherds understand that even in situations where perception does not agree with the facts, it is perception, and not reality, that determines behavior. People act on what they believe to be true and may cling tightly to perceived notions that make no logical sense at all, even in the face of objective evidence to the contrary. Barriers in the mind, walls of fear and prejudice, may be the hardest to overcome. History abounds with examples.

For many years conventional wisdom held that the human body is physiologically incapable of running a mile in less than four minutes. Try as you may, proclaimed the athletes and their coaches, it just cannot be done. But a young Oxford University medical student, Roger Bannister, refused to believe what everyone else thought they knew. Bannister realized, from experience, that it was certainly possible to run one-quarter of a mile in a minute or less. Why then, he thought, couldn't a superbly trained runner run four sub-minute quarter miles back to back and break the four-minute barrier? Bannister trained hard and well, and on May 6, 1954, he put his theory to the test. So weary was he at the end of the run that after breaking the tape, Bannister collapsed into the arms of his supporters. An excited buzz went through the sedate English crowd. Was it possible Bannister had broken the four-minute mile? The knowledgeable ones among those present demurred: "Not possible, old chap. Can't be done, you know." Then came the announcement of Bannister's time: three minutes fifty-nine point four seconds. The impossible had been done! Bannister had proven that the barrier to the four-minute mile was psychological, not physiological. The limitation existed in the mind and not in the body.

Prince Henry the Navigator, the great fifteenth-century Portuguese patron of sea exploration, was the driving force behind intrepid seafarers whose tiny boats crept down the uncharted west coast of Africa, seeking for a sea route to the spices and jewels of India. It was a chilling experience for brave men who believed in their hearts that if they went too far southward into the Sea of Darkness, they would simply fall into a great void with "no race of men nor place of [habitation]." The rocky cliffs and swirling seas of the desolate coasts upon which they gazed seemed to their frightened minds to be the end of the world itself, the very gates of hell.

The place beyond which the seafarers dared not go was a tiny, almost imperceptible bump on the coastal outline of Africa just opposite the Canary Islands. Cape Bojadar ("bulging cape" in Portuguese), as it was called, was no more a barrier than dozens of others that Portuguese sailors had sailed serenely by in the past. But Bojadar became fixed in the minds of the Portuguese as the guardian of the gates of hell, beyond which they dared not pass. "These mariners of ours," wrote a contemporary of Prince Henry, "[were] threatened not only by fear but by its shadow." (Daniel Boorstin, The Discoverers, p. 166.) Over a ten-year period, Henry sent out no fewer than fifteen expeditions to push south beyond Cape Bojadar. Each failed, returning with one lame excuse or another to explain its inability to go where no one had gone before. The Cape was impassable, they proclaimed. Neither threat, flattery, nor bribes could change their minds. Finally, in 1434, yet another expedition was sent, with renewed promise of rewards for success. This time, the captain steered further out to sea, away from the crashing surf, before turning south. To his amazement, he found Bojadar already behind him and realized that he had neither dropped off the face of the earth nor sailed into the gates of hell. The barrier had been broken, and the shadow of fear erased.

Strive Constantly for Clarity

Spirit-to-spirit communication is hard enough at the best of times, but when the message is garbled or ambiguous, the process becomes more difficult. For that reason, good communicators strive constantly for clarity. They work hard to make sure their message can't be taken two ways, recognizing that if the trumpet gives an uncertain sound, there may be unforeseen results. (See 1 Corinthians 14:8.) They ask others to "play back" the message to make sure it was received properly, and they edit and re-edit their written communications to ensure clarity.

Several years ago a friend of ours decided she would make hand-dipped chocolate candies as Christmas presents for family and friends. Since she'd had no previous experience in making chocolates, she called one of her Relief Society sisters on the telephone to get the recipe for the fondant. Then she started to work. For some unfathomable reason, she couldn't get the fondant to harden. She beat it, cooled it, added cornstarch in her desperation, and beat it again—all to no avail. Like some kind of primeval slime monster, the fondant oozed and slithered across the table and dripped onto the floor. Finally, frustrated and desperate, our friend flushed it all down the drain and collapsed, exhausted.

The next day, the would-be chocolate maker was discussing her lack of success with the woman who'd given her the recipe. "I just don't know what I did wrong," said she who had failed in her earnest attempt. "I just don't get it. I followed the recipe exactly: cream, icing sugar, and forty-five tablespoonsful of corn syrup, along with—" Her friend collapsed in laughter, exclaiming, "Forty-five tablespoonsful of corn syrup! I told you 'four to five,' not 'forty- five'!"

Clarity is particularly important on those occasions when the shepherd is required to "reprov[e]. . . with sharpness." Sharpness does not imply harshness or cruelty. To reprove with sharpness, as "moved upon by the Holy Ghost" involves teaching clearly, precisely, in ways that make a sharp distinction between error and truth and summon the individual to change and improve. As the scriptures point out (see D&C 121:43), reproof should not be undertaken without the assistance and approval of the Holy Ghost. Once done, reproof is to be followed promptly with an increase of love toward the one who was reproved, "lest he esteem thee to be his enemy." How critical it is under these circumstances that the one required to reprove say precisely what must be said but no more or less.

Historians agree that Brigham Young's magnificent leadership abilities were developed and polished during the struggles of the Saints across Iowa in 1846. It was a difficult time for "Brother Brigham" and for those who followed him. In the midst of the travail and turmoil, Hosea Stout recalled Brigham relating to the high council that in a dream he had seen Joseph sitting in a room. "Do you be sure and tell the brethren that it is all important for them to keep the spirit of the Lord," said Joseph. "Keep the quiet spirit of Jesus." (Eugene England, Brother Brigham [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980], p. 132.) To me, the instruction to "keep the quiet spirit of Jesus" says it all. What could be clearer! If shepherds are to communicate with the sheep of the flock in "the Lord's way," they must seek for the "quiet spirit of Jesus." It will teach and direct them, provide the power of discernment, and give assurance to both sheep and shepherd that they are on the Lord's errand. Then, and only then, will both be edified and rejoice together.

Applying the Principles: Guidelines for Shepherds

Wise shepherds know the wisdom found in words attributed to Henry Ford: "If you think you can or think you can't, you're right." They know that the barriers to improved performance are more in the mind and heart than anything else, that human vision is blinded more by habit and fear than by reality. And so they carefully, lovingly, but persistently encourage and challenge, urging the flock to lift their eyes, to lengthen their stride, to get a vision of their real potential as sons and daughters of God. Wise shepherds set the example for their flocks. "Come, follow me," they say, asking no more of others than they give themselves. In the final analysis, it is the ability to develop a vision and then to communicate it to others in ways that first inspire and then transform that characterizes the great leader.

Wise shepherds, therefore, work hard to develop their own powers of communication, recognizing the ability of the written and spoken word to lift hearts and inspire noble deeds. Consider, for example, the majesty in these words Shakespeare has King Henry of England speak on the eve of the Battle of Agincourt (October 25, 1415). Henry's army seemed hopelessly outnumbered. The men were tired, cold, and hungry; their French opponents must surely sweep the field. But Henry raised the ardor and the fighting spirit of his men with these immortal words that "steel[ed his] soldiers' hearts":

He, which hath no stomach to this fight, Let him depart, his passport shall be made, And crowns for convoy put into his purse; We would not die in that man's company, That fears his fellowship to die with us . . . . He that outlives this day, and comes safe home, Will stand a-tiptoe when this day is nam'd . . . . We few, we happy few, we band of brothers: For he today that sheds his blood with me Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile, This day shall gentle his condition: And gentlemen in England, now abed, Shall think themselves accurs'd they were not here, And hold their manhoods cheap, whiles any speaks That fought with us upon Saint Crispin's day. (Henry V, Act IV, scene iii.)

Wise shepherds strive mightily to improve their powers to listen with the Spirit. They learn the skills involved but recognize that ultimately success will lie not in skill but in purity of heart and an "eye single to the glory of God." (D&C 4:5.) Thus they strive to really listen, with all their powers of concentration to blot out the vagrant, gypsy thoughts that wander in and out of the mind and lead the unwary away on flights of fancy. To learn to listen for the still, small voice of the Spirit takes time and practice but, above all else, a willingness to pay the price of hard work and diligence.

I recall with pleasure stopping for a picnic lunch one summer's day alongside a country road in Switzerland. It was a scene of bucolic delight—the verdant mountain meadows, trim Swiss farmsteads with their traditional architecture and ubiquitous clusters of brown Swiss cattle. I was especially thrilled to listen to the mellow ringing of the cow bells. Each Swiss cow, I was told, has its own bell. To me, all sounded alike, each note blending into a polyphonic chorus with indistinguishable component parts. But Swiss farmers learn to recognize the distinctive tone of each individual bell amid all the others and can tell just by listening which cows are with the herd and which are missing. So, too, must the Lord's shepherds learn to listen ever so carefully, to screen out extraneous noises and focus on the one, to become a pure vessel through which and to which the Spirit can be transmitted.

Wise shepherds know it is important to inspire others by word and example. They recognize that people need a vision of what they can do, of their true potential. Failing that, they will in all likelihood remain satisfied with the status quo and simply molder their lives away.

"Where there is no vision, the people perish." (Proverbs 29:18.) The shepherds find the vision they are entrusted to impart in the holy scriptures and words of the living prophets and use them as a textbook to bring a knowledge of the glorious Christ and His gospel to the sheep. In the search for many- faceted truth, the shepherds are led by Him who proclaimed Himself to be the Light of the World. They read by that Light and not by the lamp of their own conceit.

Wise shepherds know that people can do great things if they catch the vision. They see beyond the glorious past to a future limited only by our ability to comprehend and then reach and stretch. With all of their might they attempt to communicate that vision, in clear and unmistakable ways.
