Alexander B. Morrison, Feed My Sheep: Leadership Ideas for Latter-day Shepherds ( 1992)

CHAPTER FOUR

The Courageous Shepherd

Courage is one of the characteristics of effective shepherds. The need for courage in shepherds is constant. None can succeed without it. Shepherds are required to make decisions daily, often in the face of uncertainty and even of opposition. To make them wisely and righteously requires courage. Sometimes it will be the courage to say no that is needed; at other times, the courage to say yes. To listen to the whisperings of the Spirit and then to follow them in faith, even if the reasons for the Spirit-directed call to action are not yet clear, requires courage of a high order. Many times in the service of every shepherd, human wisdom simply does not suffice, and the courage of the day melts away in the dark night of uncertainty. Then, all one can do is turn to God and lean on Him, drawing from His divine strength. Such sentiments were found recorded on a scrap of paper in a slit- trench in Tunisia during the battle of El Agheila in World War II:

Stay with me, God. The night is dark, The night is cold: My little spark Of courage dies. The night is long; Be with me, God, and make me strong. ("A Soldier—His Prayer," in John Bartlett, Familiar Quotations, 15th ed. [Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1980], p. 925.)

Courage wears many coats. It may be manifested in a single dramatic moment of conflict—in the clash and confusion of battle, for example—or in the less dramatic but perhaps even more noteworthy actions of moral courage that often go unnoticed and unsung.

Physical courage is lauded in every society, in every historical era. How thrilling it is to read of the exploits of great military champions and others who performed legendary feats of immense physical bravery, perhaps losing life or limb in the process. The annals of history are replete with stories of physical courage, an example of which is found in a battle that took place during the British-Zulu war in southern Africa in 1879.

Several thousand Zulu warriors fell upon the British garrison at Rorke's Drift, a plain but pleasant mission station located at a ford or drift across the Buffalo River. The station was defended by fewer than 140 British soldiers, of whom 36 were in hospital. They had only a few hours of warning about the impending attack. Frantically, they fortified their position, building a defensive wall of bags of corn and biscuit boxes. They had barely finished when the Zulus arrived, "thick as grass," as one observer recalled.

The Zulu warriors were an imposing spectacle of barbaric splendor. Those of one regiment carried black shields with white spots and wore vests of cowtails over their chests and backs. Others had red shields spotted with white; while those of a third regiment carried white shields and wore a white ostrich plume in their headdress. To a man they hurled themselves, time and again, in wave after wave, against the British wall.

Soon the ground was littered with dead and dying warriors, by the dozens and then by the hundreds. Those who reached the wall were bayoneted. Both sides fought with indescribable ferocity, often at close quarters, bayonet against stabbing spear. A thatch roof was set afire by the Zulus. In its light the battle raged on from 5:00 in the afternoon until after 2:00 a.m.

When the firing ended a few hours before dawn, the British defenders were exhausted, their shoulders bruised and swollen from the constant firing of their rifles, their faces blackened with gunpowder. Most of the defenders were wounded. Fifteen lay dead; two others were dying; ten more were severely wounded. The defenders collapsed over their rifles, totally spent. They could do no more. One more Zulu charge, at dawn, and all would be lost.

But as the sun appeared, the Zulus, instead of launching a final attack, rose from their resting spots, formed a column, and trotted off the field. They too had had enough.

The courage displayed on both sides was remarkable. Eleven Victoria Crosses for valor were awarded to the British defenders—the most in any single engagement in the history of the British army.

What happened at Rorke's Drift tells us much about human courage. Perhaps most important, it teaches the value of never giving up, of hanging on even in the face of overwhelming odds. Tenacity, an unwillingness to accept defeat, the bulldog determination to go on, on to victory or death, characterizes the best of human efforts. (See Donald R. Morris, The Washing of the Spears [London: Sphere Books, 1968], pp. 391-420, and Robert B. Edgerton, Like Lions They Fought [New York: Ballantine Books, 1988], pp. 96-107.)

Heroes come in all sizes and shapes and from every background imaginable; in most instances their actions could not have been predicted beforehand from previous behavior and are rooted in a mysterious amalgam of chemistry and circumstance.

There are important situational components to physical heroism. The presence of a charismatic leader can do wonders to transform demoralized, dispirited, frightened soldiers into raging lions. Writing of a critical point in a battle during the American Civil War, a young Confederate infantryman had this to say of General J.E.B. Stuart: "He leaped his horse over the breastworks near my company, and when he had reached a point about opposite the center of the brigade, while the men were loudly cheering him, he waved his hand toward the enemy and shouted, 'Forward, men! Forward! Just follow me! . . .' The men were wild with enthusiasm.. . . With courage and resolution, [they] poured over the breastworks after him like a wide raging torrent overcoming its barriers." The objective was seized and held. (Emory M. Thomas, Bold Dragoon: The Life of J.E.B. Stuart [New York: Harper and Row, 1986], pp. 211-12.)

The courage of the battlefield thrills and inspires all who witness or read of it. It inspires others to do their duty, to steel their hearts, to stand fast. Who could fail to be aroused by these words which Shakespeare's genius puts into the mouth of King Henry of England:

Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more; Or close the wall up with our English dead! In peace, there's nothing so becomes a man, As modest stillness and humility; But when the blast of war blows in our ears, Then imitate the action of the tiger: Stiffen the sinews, conjure up the blood, Disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage; Then lend the eye a terrible aspect. (Henry V, Act III, scene i.)

There is, however, another type of courage. It arises not from the sudden clash of combat or crisis that transcends rational thought but from the dogged determination to overcome fear, the willingness, in spite of terror, to carry out tasks that induce intense feelings of anxiety. Men and women who practice this form of courage are not likely to be those of whom songs are sung or for whom medals are struck. They are ordinary people who face their sometimes ordinary fears with dignity and courage, wrestle with them and subdue them, doing what must be done in spite of personal trepidation or dread. This form of courage is illustrated with power and clarity in the life and martyrdom of Joseph Standing.

The Deseret News for July 30, 1879, carried this ominous headline: "Another Martyr for the Truth." The accompanying story read in part as follows:

Yesterday afternoon, Elder John Morgan, who has charge of the Southern States Mission, but who is at present staying in this city, received the following telegram:

Catoosa Springs, Georgia, July 21, 3:50 p.m.

John Morgan, Salt Lake:

Jos. Standing, shot and killed today, near Varnell's, by a mob of ten or twelve men. Will leave with body for home, at once.

Notify his family.

Rudger Clawson

That terse announcement summarized an incident that shocked and outraged the Saints and underlined the opposition to the Latter-day Saint cause then being experienced in so many quarters. At the time of his death, Joseph Standing was a Mormon missionary, laboring in the rural counties of northern Georgia. It was a time of intense persecution of the Saints in Georgia and elsewhere in the South, much of it stirred up by local Protestant ministers. The Ku Klux Klan posted threatening notices and often rode at the mere appearance of the missionaries in a community. On two occasions in early 1879, mobs drove the elders from their fields of labor in Georgia; and on one such occasion, marauders entered the house of one of the local Saints, flourishing pistols and threatening to kill the inhabitants if they ever harbored the missionaries again.

By 1879, Joseph Standing had already completed one mission and was well into his second, having arrived in Georgia in February 1878. Born in Salt Lake City in October of 1854, he was noted for his "mild and gentle though firm disposition, one who would suffer wrong rather than do wrong." In May 1879, Joseph was set apart as president of the Georgia Conference of the Church.

Brother Standing had labored without a companion for several months until joined by Rudger Clawson in May of 1879. The two missionaries traveled on foot, without purse or scrip, depending on the kindness of those they met for food and lodging. In return, they helped with farm work and chores. They preached wherever they could, often in the homes of the faithful or in clearings in the woods.

Life was hard in rural Georgia after the Civil War. Wages averaged only twenty-five to fifty cents a day. Excessive taxes, including those on property, stifled personal initiative. Most people lived on cornbread and bacon. Many were dispirited and bitter. Yet most people were kind and hospitable to the missionaries. A trickle of honest seekers after truth, dissatisfied with sectarian preaching, began to join the Church. In August 1878 the total membership of the Southern States Mission was under 550 members; more than half that many had emigrated to the West in 1877.

Joseph Standing was by nature "mild and gentle," but he certainly did not lack for boldness and courage. Outraged by mob violence against the missionaries, he wrote a letter to the governor of Georgia seeking redress. "I am fully aware," Joseph wrote, "that the popular prejudice is very much against the Mormons.. . . But I also am aware that the laws of Georgia are strictly opposed to all lawlessness and extend to her citizens the right of worshipping God according to the dictates of conscience. . . the laws, where prejudice exists, are not always executed with impartiality. A word or line from the governor would undoubtedly have the desired effect."

In response to Joseph's letter, a secretary to the governor replied that the state prosecuting attorney would be instructed to "inquire into the matter." Apparently, however, nothing further was done about the conditions mentioned in Joseph's letter.

A district conference was to be held in Rome, Georgia, in late July 1879. Elders Standing and Clawson, of course, planned to attend. They decided to stop for a few days at a little place called Varnell's Station and accompany the Saints there to conference. On the way, Joseph recounted to his companion the details of a deeply disturbing dream he'd recently had. In the dream, Joseph said, he had gone to Varnell's, "when suddenly clouds of intense blackness gathered overhead and all around me." In the dream he stopped at the home of a Mormon family and was told by the woman of the house, who was influenced "by a sense of great fearfulness," that he could not stay. Joseph awoke suddenly "without. . . being shown the end of trouble."

The dream deeply troubled Elder Standing. He was "fearful that something terrible was going to happen" and was filled with a sense of impending doom. Neither he nor Elder Clawson was able to interpret the dream. Despite their fears, the young men continued bravely on their journey.

The two young missionaries arrived at Varnell's Station late on the evening of Saturday, July 20, and made their way through the darkness to the home of a local member family. There Joseph's terrible dream began to be fulfilled. The woman of the house, in great agitation, told them they could not stay there. She warned the elders there was a "bitter and murderous" attitude toward them in the neighborhood. They spent a sleepless night at the home of a nonmember who promised to defend them so long as they were under his roof.

Joseph was frightened and anxious, with good reason. He had twice escaped a mob previously, when laboring with Elder John Morgan. He confided to Rudger "his intense horror of being whipped" and declared that "he would rather die than be subjected to such an indignity."

Despite his fears, however, Elder Standing evidently gave no thought to turning back. His deep conviction of the divinity of the cause in which he was engaged impelled him to go on. Neither fears of mob violence, a horror of whippings, nor the terrifying dream of blackness deterred him from his duty. How impressive is his moral courage!

The next morning, Sunday, July 21, the two missionaries resumed their journey. Suddenly, on a lonely, densely forested stretch of road, they were apprehended by a mob of twelve men, three on horseback, the rest on foot. The mobsters approached the missionaries with weapons drawn, cursing and shouting profanities. Joseph boldly spoke up: "By what authority do you arrest us upon the public highway here? If you have a warrant of arrest, we would like to see it."

"There is no law in Georgia for Mormons," was the reply.

The two missionaries were escorted down the road, threatened and bullied every step they took, and struck with clubs or guns if they did not move quickly enough. Certain they were being led to their deaths, they were told they would be whipped so they would never forget it. "You'll be pretty limber when we finish with you," one of their captors yelled.

What a horrifying experience that must have been for those two brave young souls, particularly for Joseph, who undoubtedly sensed the fulfillment of his horrible dream of darkness.

At first, it appears the mob intended only to beat the missionaries and put them on a train out of the state. "If we ever find you in this part of the country we will hang you by the neck like dogs," the leader of the group snarled.

The mob and their captives stopped by a secluded stream of clear water about fifty yards off the road. Three of the mobsters left, to reconnoiter the road ahead. Those who remained continued to threaten and bully the elders. Finally, the three who had left returned. "Follow us," they ordered. Elder Standing, undoubtedly with thoughts of torture and death in his mind, made some resistance. As quick as thought, one of the mob shot him dead. The leader of the mob then pointed to Elder Clawson. "Shoot that man," he ordered his fellow ruffians. Elder Clawson, certain he, too, would die, collected himself, folded his arms calmly, and said, "Shoot." Someone yelled, "Don't shoot." The guns were lowered, and the immediate danger passed. Clawson was allowed to leave. As soon as he could make his way to a telegraph, he wired John Morgan in Utah and informed the governor of Georgia, whose failure to respond positively to Elder Standing's earlier letter could not go unnoticed.

When Brother Clawson arrived back at Varnell's Station, he found that the body of Joseph Standing had been mutilated by his murderers. The Coroner's Jury found that "twenty shots or more from guns or pistols" had penetrated Joseph's body.

The body of Joseph Standing was taken back to Utah by Elder Clawson and buried on August 3. Elders John Taylor and George Q. Cannon spoke at the funeral.

Three of the killers were tried by the State of Georgia for their crime—in a trial that John Morgan described as "a farce." The prosecuting attorney was quoted by elders Morgan and Clawson as saying before the trial, "It will be impossible to reach conviction on account of the prejudice of the people." Not surprisingly, all defendants were acquitted of all charges.

In 1952, President David O. McKay dedicated a small memorial park honoring Joseph Standing, on the site of his murder. The land had been donated to the Church by a local resident.

Time has faded remembrances of the circumstances of Joseph Standing's martyrdom. The great physical and moral courage he exhibited, however, stands forever as a shining example to all who cherish religious freedom. (See Deseret News, July 30 and August 1, 1879; David S. Hoopes and Roy Hoopes, The Making of a Mormon Apostle, the Story of Rudger Clawson [New York: Madison Books, 1990], pp. 13-31; Ken Driggs, " 'There Is No Law in Georgia for Mormons': The Joseph Standing Murder Case of 1879," Georgia Law Quarterly, 73:745-72.)

Without belittling the courage of combat, the bravery of that single dramatic moment, the moral courage exhibited by Joseph Standing is even more noble and hence more to be applauded. Moral courage comes from cool heads and thinking minds rather than those ablaze with the danger and stress of a moment of crisis or combat. It involves the rational weighing of alternatives while knowing full well that one of the options available is fraught with danger. Acceptance of that superficially less-attractive alternative may lead to persecution, criticism, dismissal. It may even lead to death itself. Yet that is the chosen, lonely path. It alone is the way of honor and integrity, demanded by the conscience in full knowledge of the likely consequences. To choose another way would certainly be easier. Instead of obloquy, abuse, or persecution, there would be applause, the favors of prominent people, acclaim, or material gain. But the "easy way out" represents the path of dishonor and is simply not acceptable, whatever the cost, because it violates a sense of moral integrity and sacrifices that which is most dear on the altar of expediency.

How noble are those who exhibit the moral courage to live by their adherence to a higher order of truth, whose souls will not be tarnished by the easy accommodation of an elastic conscience to a wicked and perverse world, who cannot live save by clinging to principle. To such celestial souls the conscience—devoid of offense toward God or man (see Acts 24:16)—serves as a guide or guardian. Winston Churchill spoke of such: "The only guide to a man is his conscience; the only shield to his memory is the rectitude and sincerity of his actions. It is very imprudent to walk through life without this shield, because we are so often mocked by the failure of our hopes and the upsetting of our calculations; but with this shield, however the fates may play, we march always in the ranks of honor." (In Familiar Quotations, p. 744.)

Many men and women of conscience throughout history have set great examples of moral courage. One such was John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, England, whose conscience forbade his acceptance of the doctrine of Royal Supremacy over that of the church and would not permit him to agree that Henry VIII's divorce from Catherine of Aragon was valid. (In recounting Fisher's story, I hasten to add that although Fisher was a good and gentle man, he lacked an understanding of the fullness of the gospel, which was not restored to earth until nearly three centuries after his death. One need not fully approve of Fisher's theology to applaud his courage.)

Fisher was confined to the Tower of London under conditions of extreme deprivation. He was denied clothing to keep him warm and decent food; his piteous entreaties for humane treatment were dismissed by the king's lackeys as "mere craft and cunning." On June 17, 1535, Fisher was pronounced guilty of treason and sentenced to a traitor's death by beheading.

Early in the morning of the day he was to die, Fisher dressed in the clean, warm clothing he had at last received. Then he placed a fur cape over his shoulders to keep warm. "Oh, my Lord," exclaimed his jailer, "what need you be so careful of your health at this time?" Fisher, old and sick, did not want to shiver lest the people think him afraid.

As he neared the scaffold, Fisher opened his Bible. "Oh, Lord," he said, "this is the last time that I shall ever open this book, let some comfortable place now chance to me, whereby I, Thy poor servant, may glorify Thee in this my last hour." The book fell open at this passage from John 17:4-5: "I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self."

"Here," said the pious old man, "is learning enough for me to my life's end." To the executioner he proclaimed, "I forgive thee with all my heart, and I trust thou shalt see me overcome this storm with courage." His head was severed with a single blow of the axe.

Two weeks later, Fisher's friend, Sir Thomas More, followed him to the scaffold. Like Fisher, More refused to take the oath of supremacy, giving precedence to king over church. He, too, died true to conscience and conviction. (See Christopher Hibbert, Tower of London [New York: Newsweek Book Division, 1971], pp. 50-52.)

The scriptures are replete with examples of men and women of great moral courage, including Joseph, who withstood attempted seduction by Potiphar's wife (Genesis 39:7-21); Esther, the Jewish maiden who risked her life to save her people (Esther 1-10); Daniel, who was cast into a den of lions for his refusal to worship false gods (Daniel 6); the three young Israelites cast into a fiery furnace because they refused to worship an idol (Daniel 3); Abinadi, who gave his life rather than deny the truth (Mosiah 11- 17); and the great Nephi, who endured the obloquy and bitter enmity of his brethren (1 Nephi 17-18).

Who has not thrilled at Luke's account of the courage of Peter and John? Brought before the council for having healed a man "lame from his mother's womb," the two apostles were asked: "By what power, or by what name, have ye done this?" Peter replied in these words of simple majesty:

Ye rulers of the people, and elders of Israel, If we this day be examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole; Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole. This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. (Acts 4:8-12.)

The council members were nonplussed, not knowing how to deal with the two mighty men of God. "What shall we do to these men?" they asked.

For that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them is manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem; and we cannot deny it. But that it spread no further among the people, let us straitly threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in this name. And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus. But Peter and John answered and said unto

them, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard. (Acts 4:16-20.)

What magnificent moral courage!

The moral courage of the Prophet Joseph Smith was exhibited numerous times during his life. When, as a pure- hearted boy who had seen a vision he attempted to speak of it to a sectarian preacher, he was severely rebuked. In the Prophet's words:

I was greatly surprised at his [the preacher's] behavior; he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt.. . . I soon found. . . that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy. . . men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common among all the sects—all united to persecute me. (JS-H 1:21-22.)

Joseph, however, could not be silent, though the persecution he endured was "the cause of great sorrow" to him. Wrote he:

I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation. I had now got my mind satisfied so far as the sectarian world was concerned—that it was not my duty to join with any of them, but to continue as I was until further directed. (JS-H 1:25-26.)

From those early stirrings of persecution until his martyrdom more than two decades later, Joseph knew no peace. At a particularly dispiriting time in his life, while he and several companions languished in the jail at Liberty, Missouri, in March 1839, the Lord reminded His prophet- son of Joseph's lot in life and the eternal reward that would be his:

The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee; while the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand. And thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors.. . . Hold on thy way, and the priesthood shall remain with thee.. . . Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever. (D&C 122:1-3, 9.)

The demands of moral courage may require one to give up cherished ideas, to abandon old ways and old friends, perhaps to accept ridicule, opposition, persecution, and abuse. Consider Serge Baliff, for example, a preacher whose pulpit was that of the great cathedral in Lausanne, Switzerland. He was respected, looked up to, a man of substance and influence. But one day in the early 1850s two young men from America came to his door, preaching of a new revelation from on high. The gospel of Christ in all its power and purity had again been restored to the earth, they said. The heavens were opened, the authority of the priesthood of God, which they bore, had been given again to man. They spoke of a young prophet—of his vision of the Father and the Son, and they urged Serge Baliff to listen. He did, was converted, joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and was promptly dismissed from his ecclesiastical duties, rejected by friends and associates, jostled and hectored on the streets, and snubbed by Swiss society. But Brother Ballif knew that his testimony was true; armed with that power, he preached the restored gospel against great opposition. In 1854 he left his native land and led a party of several hundred Swiss Saints to America. His great-grandson, President Ezra Taft Benson, serves the Church today as Prophet, Seer, and Revelator.

I was privileged to hear President Benson tell that story at the organization of the Geneva Switzerland Stake in June of 1982. His voice cracking with emotion, Elder Benson bore a powerful testimony that faithful Saints from earlier times were present in the hall that day—and great was their joy to see a landmark achievement of progress they had helped start.

The life of Alma the younger is a great example of the moral courage involved in repentance. For many years Alma traveled the dark, well-trodden highway of sin, rebellion, and destruction. The Nephite record is silent on the details of the sins of Alma but indicate that he was a "very wicked and an idolatrous man,. . . a man of many words, [who] did speak much flattery to the people; therefore he led many of the people to do after the manner of his iniquities. And he became a great hinderment to the prosperity of the church of God." (Mosiah 27:8-9.)

Significantly, the damage Alma did was not limited to his personal influence. Perhaps greater harm came about because he gave "a chance for the enemy of God to exercise his power [over the people]." (Mosiah 27:9.) That power, which leads the unwary "carefully down to hell" (2 Nephi 28:21) often is both seductive and cumulative. C. S. Lewis described how the devil works in the famous Screwtape Letters—a fictional account of instructions given by an old, experienced devil, Screwtape, to his uncertain apprentice, Wormwood:

You will say that these are very small sins; and doubtless, like all young tempters, you are anxious to be able to report spectacular wickedness.. . . It does not matter how small the sins are, provided that their cumulative effect is to edge the man away from the Light and out into the Nothing . . . . Indeed, the safest road to Hell is the gradual one— the gentle slope, soft underfoot, without sudden turnings, without milestones, without signposts. (The Screwtape Letters [Glasgow: William Collins Sons and Co., 1987], pp. 64-65.)

And so Alma went about, doing the devil's work, denying all that his prophet-father taught and stood for, rebelling against God and seeking to destroy the Church. Finally, one day, God took a hand in Alma's life. The prayers of the people and of Alma's father had been heard. (Mosiah 27:14.) An angel appeared to Alma and his companions and spoke to them, as it were, with a voice of thunder. To Alma he said, "If thou wilt of thyself be destroyed, seek no more to destroy the church of God." (Alma 36:9.) Alma was struck dumb by this encounter with the heavenly messenger and for three days and three nights was unable to speak or stand.

With great moral courage, Alma began a process of serious self-examination, perhaps for the first time. Knowledge of the shabby selfishness of his life racked his soul with "inexpressible horror," and he was "tormented with the pains of hell." (Alma 36:14-15.) Alma recalled having heard his father "prophesy unto the people concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God, to atone for the sins of the world." (Alma 36:17.) He had the courage to accept Christ, to leave behind his previous life, and to commit himself to a "mighty change." As he cried out in terrible anguish, "O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me" (Alma 36:18), a great beam of celestial light and peace fell, as it were, on Alma's heart, replacing pain with an effulgent joy as exquisite and sweet as his pain had been bitter and galling. He could remember his pains no more; his sins no longer harrowed up his soul. He had been "born of God, and [was] filled with the Holy Ghost." (Alma 36:24.)

That is what true repentance born of moral courage does—it cleanses and heals and purifies. It changes hearts, turning them from sin to a desire to do good. Wickedness loses its allure and is seen in its true light as a shabby counterfeit of happiness. Alma, who had scorned, ridiculed, and mocked sacred things now wished—nay, longed—to be with the God whom he loved. He began to testify of the goodness of God to him. So full was his joy that he could not be silent: "O that I were an angel, and could have the wish of mine heart, that I might go forth and speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people!" (Alma 29:1.) And, in common with all penitent, repentant, courageous souls, Alma changed the way he lived, trying to make up for his errors, to start a new life and render restitution. "From that time even until now," he declared, "I have labored without ceasing, that I might bring souls unto repentance; that I might bring them to taste of the exceeding joy of which I did taste." (Alma 36:24.)

Doubt and disbelief had been displaced by the calm certainty of true faith; rancor and rebellion gave way to rapturous affirmation of divine support. Alma said the Lord had supported him "under trials and troubles of every kind, yea, and in all manner of afflictions.. . . I do put my trust in him, and he will still deliver me." (Alma 36:27.) That last phrase, "He will still deliver me," speaks volumes about Alma's deep sense of wonderment that he, who had been such a great sinner, was still counted worthy of saving—that God's love and redemptive power could penetrate even into the depths of Alma's wayward world. But Alma, and each of us, has that promise: "Though [our] sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." (Isaiah 1:18.)

It took great moral courage for Alma to accept the pain and suffering of his repentance. Indeed repentance always involves suffering. There is no other way it can be accomplished. Leaving behind addictive habits, carnal pleasures, or associates who degrade rather than exalt may indeed cause pain in the short run. The process involved is analogous to that used in the surgical treatment of an infected wound. In treating such a wound, the surgeon first removes dead and infected tissue. He scrubs and cleanses. Only then can the healing process begin. So it is with our spiritual wounds: we must be cleansed and purified before our souls can heal. But before the healing process can start, we must have the moral courage to recognize the need for change, accept the bitterness of remorse, resolve to change, and then move from the pain of sin to the peace of salvation and exaltation.

The physical courage of the early pioneer members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is justly

renowned. But we must never forget the great moral courage it took to join the Church in pioneer times, knowing that rejection, persecution, abuse, and exile would almost inevitably result. Consider this experience of Priscilla Mogridge Stains, an Englishwoman born in 1823, who emigrated to America after her conversion. Her own words tell best the trials that lay ahead of her as she moved to embrace the restored gospel:

It was a great trial for a young maiden (I was only nineteen years of age) to forsake all for the gospel—father, mother, brothers and sisters—and to leave my childhood's home and native land, never expecting to see it again. This was the prospect before me. The Saints were already leaving the fatherland, in obedience to the doctrine of gathering, which was preached at this time with great plainness by the elders as an imperative command of God. We looked upon the gathering as necessary to our salvation. Nothing of our duty in this respect was concealed, and we were called upon to emigrate to America as soon as the way should open, to share the fate of the Saints, whatever might come. Young as I was and alone of all my family in the faith, I was called to take up my cross and lay my earthly all upon the altar; yet so well satisfied was I with my new religion that I was willing to make every sacrifice for it in order to gain my salvation and prove myself not unworthy of the Saints' reward.

Having determined to be baptized, I resolved to at once obey the gospel, although it was midwinter and the weather bitterly cold.

It is proper to here state that baptism was a trial to the converts in England in those days. They had to steal away, even unknown to their friends of- tentimes, and scarcely daring to tell the Saints themselves that they were about to take up the cross; and not until the ordinance had been administered, and the Holy Ghost gave them boldness, could they bring themselves to proclaim openly that they had cast in their lot with the despised Mormons. Nor was this all, for generally the elders had to administer baptism when the village was wrapt in sleep, lest persecutors should gather a mob to disturb the solemn scene with gibes and curses, accompanied with stones or clods of earth torn from the river bank and hurled at the disciple and minister during the performance of the ceremony.

On the evening of a bitterly cold day in midwinter, as before stated, I walked four miles to the house of a local elder for baptism. Arriving at his house, we waited until midnight, in order that the neighbors might not disturb us, and then repaired to a stream of water a quarter of a mile away. Here we found the water, as we anticipated, frozen over, and the elder had to chop a hole in the ice large enough for the purpose of baptism. It was a scene and an occasion I shall never forget. Memory today brings back the emotions and sweet awe of that moment. None but God and his angels, and the few witnesses who stood on the bank with us, heard my covenant; but in the solemnity of that midnight hour it seemed as though all nature were listening, and the recording angel writing our words in the book of the Lord.. . . Is it strange that such a scene, occurring in the life of a Latter- day Saint, should make an everlasting impression, as this did on mine?

Having been thus baptized, I returned to the house in my wet and freezing garments. (In Remarkable Stories from the Lives of Latter-day Saint Women, compiled by Leon R. Hartshorn [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976], pp. 234-36.)

Anna Gaarden Widtsoe, whose gifted son John Andreas Widtsoe became a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, had a similar trying introduction to the gospel. She first heard of it from a humble shoemaker, Olaus Johnsen, who stuffed gospel tracts into the toes of her children's shoes which she had given him to repair. To her confused query, "Who are you?" he replied with simple dignity, "I am a member of the Church of Christ— we are called Mormons. We have the truth of God."

Mormons! She recoiled in dismay. Her minister had warned her about the Mormons! She had innocently become involved with a dangerous group of people! She hurriedly left the shoemaker's shop, anxious to be away from heresy. Yet she could not forget what Brother Johnsen had said, nor the sincerity of his humble message and testimony. Might it be that the Mormons, of whom she had heard nothing but bad, could have the truth of God? No, the very thought was absurd! Yet—

The seeds of doubt, and then of hope, began to spring up in her bosom. So began two years of struggle for Anna Widtsoe's soul. Slowly she began to understand that she was in the presence of eternal truths, that she had found a pearl of great price. She fought against the needed change but at length admitted she had found the truth and could not deny it.

Mormon meetings were held on the second floor of the shoemaker's humble log home. Anna was at first appalled by the primitive meeting conditions and dismayed by the humble status of the Church members. The Norway of her day had sharp class distinctions; as a member of the professional class, she at first had great difficulty in accepting humble working folk as brothers and sisters. Yet so courageous was she that one day, several months later, as the truth was becoming clear to her, she came home after the Sunday meeting and said aloud to herself, "Must I step down to that? Yes, if it is the truth I must do so."

On April 1, 1881, a little more than two years after she first heard the gospel, Anna was baptized in the icy water of Trondhjem fjord. Within the year, she and her two sons left for America. (See John A. Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net: The Story of Anna A. G. Widtsoe [Independence, Mo.: Zions Printing and Publishing Co., 1941], pp. 53-57.)

Thank God for the life and example of such a noble, courageous soul!

It is thrilling to observe the lives of the humble members of the Church who exhibit such remarkable moral courage and integrity. Several years ago, I sat in the temple at Zollikofen, near Berne, Switzerland, with a French brother from the Nice France Stake. He had traveled fourteen hours, sitting up in the train, to come to the Lord's House, slept in the Church hostel with eleven other men in a room with four rows of triple bunk beds, risen at five a.m. so he could get a place at the first session, and then tenderly and lovingly helped a crippled and blind brother throughout the day. As I shook his rough workman's hand and looked at his weatherbeaten face, it was plain to see he was of humble circumstances. But I thought to myself: "God bless you, my faithful brother, to whom the gospel means so much. God bless you for your courage, your willingness to sacrifice, and your loving spirit."

Susan McCarty, a young married woman then nineteen years old, first heard the message of the Restoration in 1909 from missionaries laboring in the neighborhood of her home in the little rural community of Turkey Creek, Louisiana. Displaying great courage, Susan soon joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as did her brother, Hardy Clark. Susan's husband did not join though he promised to protect and support her in her actions. Given the attitudes held by many people in the southern states toward the Latter-day Saints in those days, that offer of protection and support was deeply appreciated. For more than four decades (until 1956 when a Church-owned building was constructed), members of the Turkey Creek Branch met on Sundays at Susan's home or that of her brother, Hardy Clark. Only occasionally were there more than twenty or twenty-five in attendance.

The meetings were simple. The little group prayed and sang together, and Brother Clark, who was the presiding elder, blessed the sacrament. The hymns were sung without accompaniment; hymn books became available only in the 1940s. Every week one of the members talked for a few minutes about one of the basic principles of the Gospel. Simple classes for adults, teenagers, and children were held. Testimony meeting was held once a month. Usually all of those present who were old enough to speak for themselves gave a humble but strong testimony.

After the meetings were over, the people lingered to talk to each other, and sometimes there was a "dinner on the ground." There were occasional visits from traveling missionaries or others from Church headquarters, but such contact was infrequent, especially in the early years.

The scriptures played a major role in the lives of those humble Saints. They had a strict habit of daily scripture study, with emphasis on the Book of Mormon. The scriptures were talked about around the dinner table each day, and family members read together from them each evening. Faith and trust in the promises of the Lord were the bedrock principles from which these humble Saints operated.

From that simple home-centered branch of the Church in Turkey Creek have come at least twelve full-time missionaries; two patriarchs; and a stake president, Ruben B. Clark, president of the Denham Springs Louisiana Stake, from whom much of the information presented about his family was obtained (in a letter to the author, 5 January 1991). Susan died in January 1991, in her hundredth year. As she lay dying, she gathered around her the many members of her family and bore fervent testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel. I look forward to meeting her in the hereafter and salute her and the other humble Saints in Turkey Creek as courageous, modern-day pioneers.

Applying the Principles, Guidelines for Shepherds

The importance of courage in shepherds cannot be overemphasized. It is an essential ingredient for success. No shepherd—not bishops, stake presidents, or other priesthood and sister leaders—can succeed without courage. Actions that characterize courageous shepherds include the following:

restored gospel and resolutely refuse to weaken them or negotiate them away, regardless of pressure or circumstances. Those principles are nonnegotiable, independent of culture or historical period. They are the foundation upon which all true leaders must stand.

Successful leadership in the Church—indeed, in life itself—must be centered on the principles of the restored gospel and absolute integrity to them. Adherence to anything else, including the multitude of personality centered techniques and skills so avidly presented as "quick fixes" in much of the popular "success" literature, produces little of lasting worth. Such leadership fads come and go, their promises of easy success never fulfilled. At best they are of marginal value; at worst, a malignant distortion of truth that destroys the person addicted to them.

In its essence, therefore, leadership is about character, about values such as courage that never change, though they may not be popular. Stephen R. Covey has developed this theme with power in his books Seven Habits of Highly Effective People and Principle-Centered Leadership. Such

values deserve to be pondered and applied in our lives.

Devotion to the foundational principles of the gospel is possible only if shepherds clearly understand the nature and content thereof. Shepherds must, therefore, be dedicated students of the scriptures and the words of the living prophets. They must strive and struggle for knowledge and understanding. Prayer, pleading, importuning, and plenty of plain hard work are involved. No shortcuts are available; the price must be paid. Steadfast courage is required.

Even the incomparable Joseph the Prophet was corrected on numerous occasions by his tutoring Lord. (See, for example, D&C 10:1-3.) Courageous leaders who understand that "an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure" recognize that for maximum effectiveness reproof must be done "betimes"—that is, early on, before undesirable ways and habits get too firmly entrenched. They recognize also that reproof must be linked with an increased demonstration of love, lest he who has been reproved "esteem thee to be his enemy." (D&C 121:43.) Indeed, the motivation for reproof must be love unfeigned rather than the too-common desire to exercise power, "pull rank," or gratify ego. President Joseph F. Smith expressed these thoughts:

If there are any of my friends who can show me where I fail, oh come to me like a brother, not fault- finding, but come to me as a savior upon Mount Zion and show me my error and give me a chance by the aid of your counsel and advice to me to overcome the evil you see in me, whether you see it literally or whether you simply imagine it. Let me learn to do right by your help. Don't crush me down. Don't discard me. Don't throw me over into the scrap pile because you think I am not as perfect as I ought to be. Rather be patient with my imperfections, and try to help me overcome them and to live nearer unto the Lord than ever before. That is the part of a savior upon Mount Zion. I am talking to the priesthood and to the Latter-day Saints, and to those that preside in the Church, and to those that exercise authority in the midst of the people. (Conference Report, April 1913, p. 8.)

I recall with deep gratitude an example of "tough love" that I was too immature at the time to appreciate properly. Many years ago when I was in high school in Western Canada, one of my teachers was Miss Marjorie Knapp. She was single, somewhat staid in her habits and old-fashioned in her dress. Sad to say, she was the object of considerable adolescent banter and ridicule. But Miss Knapp was a very good teacher and a fine person who expected a lot from her students.

Like many other teenaged boys, I was drifting along, doing no more than was necessary to get by with mediocre grades and trying to be "cool" by affecting an unconcern about most things, particularly academic excellence. One day Miss Knapp returned an exam paper marked with the magnificent grade of C and a penciled notation: "See me after class." I did so, a little resentful at being singled out and less than gratified with the grade awarded. Miss Knapp looked at me over her heavy spectacles. "You have a lot of unused ability," she said, "and the potential to go on to do much university work. You can do better than a C; why don't you decide to do so?"

That conversation, which I didn't appreciate at the time, was a critical change-point for me. On reflection, I decided that maybe working more was a good idea, and my grades began to improve. So, too, did my attitude. Several years later, after passing a graduate language requirement, I wrote to Miss Knapp, who was by that time in a nursing home, telling her how grateful I was she had loved me enough to challenge me. I'm told she appreciated the letter. I know I enjoyed sending it.

Shepherds may lack the courage to practice "tough love" because they are afraid of hurting the feelings of the person being corrected or reproved. In a way, such attitudes are admirable; no leader in Christ's Church should ever want to hurt another human soul. But when godly chastisement is required to save a soul, the shepherd who is afraid to do what must be done is untrue to the trust reposed in him or her by the Lord and His servants. President Brigham Young's wise counsel should guide shepherds required to correct those in their charge:

If you are ever called upon to chasten a person, never chasten beyond the balm you have within you to bind up. I might call some of you to witness that I chasten you, but there is not a soul that I chasten but what I feel as though I could take them and put them in my bosom and carry them with me day by day. They deserve chastisement, but God forbid that I should chasten beyond the healing balm I have to save them and make better men of them.. . . I want to know how to lead you with that intelligence to enable you to live to an everlasting life, that you may be saved in the kingdom of God. I say again, Do not chasten beyond the balm you have within you. If you have the saving influence within you, it is well. When you have the chastening rod in your hands, ask God to give you wisdom to use it, that you may not use it to the destruction of an individual, but to his salvation. (Journal of Discourses, 9:124-25.)

Shepherds who "dish out" tough love must be prepared to "take it" as well. To do so requires substantial courage. Sad to say, the history of the Church is littered with the wreckage of the lives of men and women whose pride prevented them from accepting correction. Men such as Thomas B. Marsh lacked sufficient internal security to be open to correction and felt so threatened by godly chastisement they could not accept it.

Courageous shepherds, on the other hand, recognize that even the best require correction. They have in mind the example of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who required chastening by a loving Master despite his great spiritual gifts. They understand that honest feedback is essential for progress. Because they are committed to continual learning, they recognize that others can teach them much. Courageous shepherds seek counsel and advice; they are not offended by honest, empathetic correction or reproof. They accept it, make the necessary changes, and go on.

President Gordon B. Hinckley tells how he was deeply discouraged by the environment and circumstances in which he found himself during the first few weeks of his missionary service in England. Of those troubled times he has written:

I was not well when I arrived. Those first few weeks, because of illness and the opposition which we felt, I was discouraged. I wrote a letter home to my good father and said that I felt I was wasting my time and his money. He was my father and my stake president, and he was a wise and inspired man. He wrote a very short letter to me which said, "Dear Gordon, I have your recent letter. I have only one suggestion, forget yourself and go to work." Earlier that morning in our scripture class my companion and I had read these words of the Lord: "Whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's, the same shall save it." (Mark 8:35.)

Those words of the Master, followed by my father's letter with his counsel to forget myself and go to work, went into my very being. With my father's letter in hand, I went into our bedroom in the house at 15 Wadham Road, where we lived, and got on my knees and made a pledge with the Lord. I covenanted that I would try to forget myself and lose myself in his service.

That July day in 1933 was my day of decision. I do not say it egotistically. I say it humbly and with gratitude. A new light came into my life and a new joy into my heart. The fog of England seemed to lift, and I saw the sunlight. I had a rich and wonderful mission experience, for which I shall ever be grateful, laboring in Preston where the work began and in other places where it had moved forward, including the great city of London, where I served the larger part of my mission. (BYU Studies, 27 [Spring 1987]: 10.)

It is safe to say that President Hinckley would not be where he is today, a member of The First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, had he not been reproved and challenged to do better at a critical time in his life. Thank God for a father who loved his son enough to correct him, and for a son who had the courage to accept the correction in the spirit in which it was given and resolve to do better!

The Duke of Wellington was Britain's most celebrated military hero of the nineteenth century, honored in every possible way by a grateful king, people, and parliament. Despite all of the adulation showered on him, Wellington retained a healthy control over his ego. He never asked for promotion or honors. "Notwithstanding the numerous favours that I have received from the Crown, I have never solicited one.. . . I recommend to you the same conduct and patience," he wrote to a glory-seeker in 1813.

On his way to Portugal as a subordinate commander in 1806, Wellington placed firmly on record his understanding that obligation to duty transcends the pull of ego in those with true moral courage. A friend had urged Wellington to protest that he (Wellington) deserved a higher place in the army. Wellington demurred. "I have eaten of the King's salt," he said, "and therefore I conceive it to be my duty to serve with unhesitating zeal and cheerfulness, when and wherever the King or his government may think proper to employ me." (John Keegan, The Mask of Command [New York: Viking/Elisabeth Sifton Books, 1987], pp. 144, 163.)

Courageous shepherds who have mastered their egos will be repentant and humble, not puffed up with their own arrogance, recognizing the possibility that they may be wrong, or at least only partly right, aware of the fallibility built into the human race. They are leery about power, knowing that it intoxicates and finally enslaves its practitioner. They concur with Lord Acton's wise dictum "Power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely." (Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, p. 615.) They have the courage to treat power gingerly and not take themselves too seriously.

Courageous shepherds know that change may be painful—and usually is. They recognize that to be fully effective, "mighty change" is needed. (Alma 5:14.) It must extend to a willingness to "give away all [our] sins to know" God. (See Alma 22:18.)

Courageous shepherds recognize that change may require forgiveness, complete and all encompassing. How difficult it can be to forgive someone who has harmed us! What courage it takes to overcome the tendency of the "natural man" to strike back, to exact revenge. Corrie Ten Boom, a devoted Christian, was active in the Dutch resistance against the Nazis during World War II. With sublime courage and at great personal danger, she and her beloved sister Betsie hid and helped numerous fugitives from Nazi terror. Eventually, the two sisters were betrayed and underwent the horror, deprivation, and brutality of a Nazi concentration camp. Through it all, both retained their total dedication to the Master, returning love for hatred, kindness for contempt. After the war ended and the long nightmare was behind her, Corrie underwent an experience that required her to forgive one who had done her and many others terrible wrong:

It was at a church service in Munich that I saw him, the former S.S. man who had stood guard at the shower room door in the processing center at Ravensbruck. He was the first of our actual jailers that I had seen since that time. And suddenly it was all there—the roomful of mocking men, the heaps of clothing, Betsie's pain-blanched face.

He came up to me as the church was emptying, beaming and bowing. "How grateful I am for your message, Fraulein," he said. "To think that, as you say, He has washed my sins away!"

His hand was thrust out to shake mine. And I, who had preached so often to the people of Bloemendaal the need to forgive, kept my hand at my side.

Even as the angry, vengeful thoughts boiled through me, I saw the sin of them. Jesus Christ had died for this man; was I going to ask for more? Lord Jesus, I prayed, forgive me and help me to forgive him.

I tried to smile, I struggled to raise my hand. I could not. I felt nothing, not the slightest spark of warmth or charity. And so again I breathed a silent prayer. Jesus, I cannot forgive him. Give me Your

forgiveness.

As I took his hand the most incredible thing happened. From my shoulder along my arm and through my hand a current seemed to pass from me to him, while into my heart sprang a love for this stranger that almost overwhelmed me.

And so I discovered that it is not on our forgiveness any more than on our goodness that the world's healing hinges, but on His. When He tells us to love our enemies, He gives, along with the command, the love itself." (The Hiding Place [New York: Bantam Books, 1974], p. 238.)

The shepherds of the Lord are quick to forgive the repentant sinner. In his efforts to establish the Church throughout all of the land of Nephi, Alma went to a city called Ammonihah. Amulek—"a man of no small reputation among all those who [knew him]," one who had also "acquired much riches," was commanded by an angel to take Alma into his house and feed him. (See Alma 10.) Amulek became converted to the gospel and began to serve as Alma's missionary companion. The two faithful servants of God soon found themselves contending against the lawyers and judges, who were "learned. . . and cunning," full of iniquity, and busily laying the foundations of the devil. Chief among those perverters of the ways of the righteous was one named Zeezrom, a man "expert in the devices of the devil." Alma and Amulek refuted Zeezrom's questions and preached the principles of the gospel. (See Alma 11.)

They spoke of Christ, who would come to redeem His people and take upon Himself the transgressions of those who believe on His name. They taught that the plan of redemption brings to pass the resurrection and that the repentant have a claim on mercy through Christ. Zeezrom began to tremble. (Alma 11:46.) The more he heard, the more he became convinced of the power of God. "And Zeezrom began to inquire of them diligently, that he might know more concerning the kingdom of God." (Alma 12:8.)

But the damage had been done. Zeezrom's lying words had been instrumental in hardening the hearts of the people. Alma and Amulek were thrown into prison, beaten, mocked, and starved. Their clothes were taken from them, and they were bound with strong cords. Many believers, including a repentant Zeezrom, whose "soul began to be harrowed up under a consciousness of his own guilt; yea, he began to be encircled about by the pains of hell" (Alma 14:6), fled from Ammonihah to the city of Sidom. Alma and Amulek, miraculously delivered from prison, also made their way to Sidom. There they found Zeezrom:

Zeezrom lay sick at Sidom, with a burning fever, which was caused by the great tribulations of his mind on account of his wickedness, for he supposed that Alma and Amulek were no more; and he supposed that they had been slain because of his iniquity. And this great sin, and his many other sins, did harrow up his mind until it did become exceedingly sore, having no deliverance; therefore he began to be scorched with a burning heat.

Now, when he heard that Alma and Amulek were in the land of Sidom, his heart began to take courage; and he sent a message immediately unto them, desiring them to come unto him.

And it came to pass that they went immediately, obeying the message which he had sent unto them; and they went in unto the house unto Zeezrom; and they found him upon his bed, sick, being very low with a burning fever; and his mind also was exceedingly sore because of his iniquities; and when he saw them he stretched forth his hand, and besought them that they would heal him.

And it came to pass that Alma said unto him, taking him by the hand: Believest thou in the power of Christ unto salvation?

And he answered and said: Yea, I believe all the words that thou hast taught.

And Alma said: If thou believest in the redemption of Christ thou canst be healed.

And he said: Yea, I believe according to thy words.

And then Alma cried unto the Lord, saying: O Lord our God, have mercy on this man, and heal him according to his faith which is in Christ.

And when Alma had said these words, Zeezrom leaped upon his feet, and began to walk; and this was done to the great astonishment of all the people; and the knowledge of this went forth throughout all the land of Sidom.

And Alma baptized Zeezrom unto the Lord; and he began from that time forth to preach unto the people. (Alma 15:3-12.)

Zeezrom had been forgiven. His sins were forgotten. The power of love had triumphed.

The Prophet Joseph also was quick to forgive those who had hurt him. One such was W. W. Phelps, whose betrayal had helped put Joseph into the Liberty Jail. To Phelps on July 22, 1840, Joseph wrote the following tender, loving letter—an epistle that tells much of the greatness of the Prophet's heart and his steadfast determination to follow the Christ, whose servant he was.

I must say that it is with no ordinary feelings I endeavour to write a few lines to you.. . . You may in some measure realise what my feelings, as well as Elder Rigdon's & Bro Hyrum's were when we read your letter, truly our hearts were melted into tenderness and compassion when we assertained your resolves & c

I can assure you I feel a disposition to act on your case in a manner that will meet the approbation of Jehovah (whose servant I am) and agreeably to the principles of truth and righteousness which have been revealed . . . .

It is true, that we have suffered much in consequence of your behavior—the cup of gall already full enough for mortals to drink, was indeed filled to overflowing when you turned against us: One with whom we had oft taken sweet council together, and enjoyed many refreshing seasons from the Lord "Had it been an enemy we could have borne it".. . . However the Cup has been drunk, the will of our heavenly Father has been done, and we are yet alive for which we thank the Lord. And having been delivered from the hands of wicked men by the mercy of our God, we say it is your privilidge to be delivered from the power of the Adversary— be brought into the liberty of God's dear children, and again take your stand among the Saints of the Most High, and by diligence humility and love un

feigned, commend yourself to our God and your God and to the church of Jesus Christ

Believing your confession to be real and your repentance genuine, I shall be happy once again to give you the right hand of fellowship, and rejoice over the returning prodigal.

Your letter was read to the Saints last Sunday and an expression of their feeling was taken, when it was unanimously resolved that W. W. Phelps should be received into fellowship.

"Come on dear Brother since the war is past,

For friends at first are friends again at last." (The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, edited by Dean C. Jessee [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984], pp. 472-73; italics in original.)

While a young man serving as a member of the Council of the Twelve, Heber J. Grant learned an important lesson about forgiveness. A prominent man had been excommunicated from the Church. Years later he pled for rebaptism. President John Taylor referred the question to the apostles, indicating there would have to be unanimous agreement before the man could be baptized. Eventually, all but Elder Grant agreed. In conscience he could not do so; the man had acted so despicably. "My boy," said President Taylor, "stay with your convictions.. . . Don't you vote [for him] as long as you live, while you hold those ideas."

Later, feeling vindicated, Heber began to read from the scriptures. His book of Doctrine and Covenants opened to section 64. There he read: "Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men." (D&C 64:9-10.)

Elder Grant returned to the office of President Taylor. "I have had a change of heart.. . . I have come to tell you [Brother So and So] can be baptized, so far as I am concerned."

President Taylor laughed. Said he, "Forgiveness is in advance of justice, where there is repentance;. . . to have in your heart the spirit of forgiveness and to eliminate from your hearts the spirit of hatred and bitterness, brings peace and joy." (Conference Report, October 1920, pp. 5-7.)

Why is it that God requires us to forgive "every man" (and every woman)? The answer is simple in concept,

though difficult in execution: forgiveness is the key to peace in personal relationships. President Spencer W. Kimball spoke often of the healing power of forgiveness. He counseled that as we try to forgive what others have done to us, we begin to let go of all that has been hard to forgive in ourselves. The key to loving oneself—upon which our mental and spiritual health depends—lies in learning to forgive and love others.

The healing power of forgiveness is well illustrated by a story told by President Kimball:

I was struggling with a community problem in a small ward. . . where two prominent men, leaders of the people, were deadlocked in a long and unrelenting feud. Some misunderstanding between them had driven them far apart with enmity. As the days, weeks, and months passed, the breach became wider. The families of each conflicting party began to take up the issue and finally nearly all the people of the ward were involved. Rumors spread and differences were aired and gossip became tongues of fire until the little community was divided by a deep gulf. I was sent to clear up the matter. After a long stake conference, lasting most of two days, I arrived at the frustrated community about six Sunday night, and immediately went into session with the principal combatants.

How we struggled! How I pleaded and warned and begged and urged! Nothing seemed to be moving them. Each antagonist was so sure that he was right and justified that it was impossible to budge them.

The hours were passing—it was now long after midnight, and despair seemed to enshroud the place; the atmosphere was still one of ill temper and ugliness. Stubborn resistance would not give way. Then it happened. I aimlessly opened my Doctrine and Covenants again and there before me it was. I had read it many times in past years and it had had no special meaning then. But tonight it was the very answer. It was an appeal and an imploring and a threat and seemed to be coming direct from the Lord. I read from the seventh verse on, but the quarreling participants yielded not an inch until I came to the ninth verse. Then I saw them flinch, startled, wondering. Could that be right? The Lord was saying to us—to all of us—"Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another."

This was an obligation. They had heard it before. They had said it in repeating the Lord's Prayer. But now: ". . . for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord. . . " (D&C 64:7-9)

In their hearts, they may have been saying: "Well, I might forgive if he repents and asks forgiveness, but he must make the first move." Then the full impact of the last line seemed to strike them: "For there remaineth in him the greater sin."

What? Does that mean I must forgive even if my antagonist remains cold and indifferent and mean? There is no mistaking it . . . .

Shocked, the two men sat up, listened, pondered a minute, then began to yield. This scripture added to all the others read brought them to their knees. Two and two bitter adversaries were shaking hands, smiling and forgiving and asking forgiveness. Two men were in a meaningful embrace. This hour was holy. Old grievances were forgiven and forgotten, and enemies became friends again. No reference was ever made again to the differences. The skeletons were buried, the closet of dry bones was locked and the key was thrown away, and peace was restored. (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], pp. 240-42.)

The terrible afternoon of the martyrdom, the jailer at Carthage jail, sensing no doubt that deviltry was afoot, suggested that Joseph and his companions enter the cell for their safety. Joseph turned to Willard Richards: "If we go into the cell, will you go in with us?" Willard's reply came without hesitation: "Brother Joseph you did not ask me to cross the river with you—you did not ask me to come to Carthage—you did not ask me to come to jail with you—and do you think I would forsake you now? But I will tell you what I will do; if you are condemned to be hung for treason, I will be hung in your stead, and you shall go free." Joseph indicated he could not allow Willard to sacrifice himself, but the doctor stoutly replied, "I will." (History of the Church, 6:616.)

Such is the power of example of a truly courageous leader!

Wise shepherds exemplify the courage they wish others to emulate. They try hard not to show fear or disquietude, though they may well feel them. They do not flag or fail; they struggle on to the end. They set a good example, knowing with Edmund Burke that "example is the school of mankind" (Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, p. 374) and a powerful teacher.
