Alexander B. Morrison, Feed My Sheep: Leadership Ideas for Latter-day Shepherds ( 1992)

CHAPTER FIVE

The Persevering Shepherd

The year a.d. 1306 was one of the darkest in Scotland's long and often gloomy history. Edward I of England, aptly named "The Hammer of the Scots," invaded Scotland at the head of a powerful army. Soon the streets of Scotland's cities echoed to the clash and clatter of mailed soldiery. Noble and prominent families were imprisoned and tortured. Many were killed. The king of the Scots, Robert the Bruce, Lord of Kerrick, fled to his seigniory in the rough hills north of the English border. There he sought refuge in a cave, alone save for a solitary watcher in the heather charged with raising a warning should English troops appear.

Bruce was disconsolate, his spirit broken, his mood black and bitter. Many members of his family were imprisoned. Others had been hanged or drawn and quartered. The land and its people groaned under Edward's iron heel.

As he lay on his bed of heather in the gloomy recesses of the cave, Bruce's courage nearly failed him. What could he do, in the face of such terrible odds, to free his country from tyranny? Perhaps he should just give up, accept the inevitable, and fulfill his ambition to go as a humble pilgrim to the Holy Land.

Bruce's eyes fastened on a spider clinging precariously to a stone high in the mouth of the cave. He watched, first with idle curiosity and then with increasing interest, as the tiny beast attempted to swing on its gossamer strand to another perch several feet away. Six times the spider tried and failed. Finally, on the seventh attempt, it succeeded. Bruce vowed that if a lowly spider could persevere, the king of Scots could do no less. He fought on, with increasing power, finally ridding Scotland of her enemies at the Battle of Bannockburn in a.d. 1314. (See Ronald McNair Scott, Robert the Bruce, King of Scots [Edinburgh: Cannongate Publishing Ltd., 1982], p. 95.)

Like Bruce the Scottish king, faithful servants of truth and justice throughout the ages have understood that perseverance is a large part of their job. They have learned, by a combination of spirit-whisperings and experience, that dismal, even disastrous, failure can turn into scintillating success if only they can exert a little more effort and show a little more patience. They have learned never to give up, to let no temptation, frustration, discouragement, or disappointment deter them from the achievement of their goals. Victory has been the sweeter to them because and not in spite of the fact that they faced opposition and hardship. Life, they have found, is meant for struggle. (See Moses 3:22-25.)

Winston Churchill learned those lessons well. His magnificent wartime speeches, in which he "mobilized the English language and sent it into battle," echo again and again the theme of perseverance in the midst of "an ordeal of the most grievous kind." "We have before us," he said to the House of Commons on 13 May 1940, ". . . many, many long months of struggle and of suffering.. . . You ask what is our aim? I can answer in one word: Victory— victory at all costs, victory in spite of all terror, victory, however long and hard the road may be." (Blood, Toil, Tears, and Sweat: The Speeches of Winston Churchill, edited by David Cannadine [Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1989], p. 149.)

In his Periclean tribute to the fighter pilots of the Royal Air Force (House of Commons, 20 August 1940), Churchill sounded this note of defiance and determination: "The road to victory may not be so long as we expect. But we have no right to count upon this. Be it long or short, rough or smooth, we mean to reach our journey's end." (Ibid., p. 182.) And in one of his most famous speeches, broadcast over the BBC on 9 February 1941, and addressed largely to American ears, the old lion growled again: "We shall not fail or falter; we shall not weaken or tire. Neither the sudden shock of battle, nor the long-drawn trials of vigilance and exertion will wear us down. Give us the tools, and we will finish the job." (Ibid., p. 213.)

Churchill understood that discouragement is a major foe of perseverance. Despondency, born of uncertainty and fear, saps courage and destroys resolution. It is so easy to lose a sense of proportion, to grow weary as we struggle through the "long, stern, scowling valley" (ibid., p. 214) of life, to lose heart as we contemplate what still remains undone. In the spring of 1941, when the tide of war continued to turn even more discouragingly against Britain, Churchill spoke again about the need not to lose heart nor weaken in resolution. "On, on to victory" was his recurring theme. He concluded his remarks, broadcast on the BBC on 27 April 1941, with these words from the poem "Say Not the Struggle Naught Availeth," by English poet Arthur Hugh Clough:

For while the tired waves, vainly breaking, _Seem here no painful inch to gain, Far back, through creeks and inlets making, _Comes silent, flooding in, the main. And not by eastern windows only, _When daylight comes, comes in the light; In front the sun climbs slow, how slowly, _But westward, look, the land is bright. (Ibid., p. 224.)

Churchill knew, and through his prodigious rhetorical gifts inspired millions to come to understand, that perseverance is an important component of victory, in war and in life. Salvation will not be denied to those who with Olympian fortitude bear the pangs of misfortune and disappointment, in sure and certain confidence that in God's good time all will be made right.

The scriptures are replete with references to perseverance and endurance and contain many examples from the lives of great souls illustrating this powerful principle. The story of Job tells of the afflictions that befell a righteous man. One day Job had everything, it seemed, that a person could ever ask for—land, wealth, possessions, and, above all else, a loving family. Then the next day all was gone, and Job was left with nothing but tears and sorrow. "He hath stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head. He hath destroyed me on every side," he lamented. (Job 19:9-10.) Job's faith in God, though sorely tried, remained strong: "Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him:. . . He also shall be my salvation:. . . For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:. . . yet in my flesh shall I see God." (Job 13:15-16; 19:25-26.)

Job's trials and tribulations exemplify the enigma of human suffering. He was a righteous man who had, so far as one can tell from the story, done nothing to warrant God's wrath. Why, then, was he made to suffer? Why indeed does any innocent person suffer? It is one of the puzzling paradoxes of human existence. I do not believe we know the answer in any degree of detail. Perhaps we are not meant to at this stage of our eternal existence but rather are to "live by faith." Experience, discipline and instruction are often cited as reasons why people are required to undergo suffering. One or more of these reasons may indeed partially explain some human suffering. But many have exquisite difficulty in understanding or even accepting why an innocent child, for example, should have to die slowly and in terrible pain as so many do daily. To many believers in God, unable to find in the teachings of their church answers to the paradox of suffering, religious faith reduces to stoical endurance and despair.

I do not even pretend to know in detail the full and complete answers to the enduring enigma of human suffering. But of several things I am sure. First, our Divine Parent, who loves us with a pure father's love, does not act toward us like a malicious child pulling the legs off a bug, just to watch it squirm in agony. He takes no pleasure from our suffering. Nor is He the author of all human suffering. "It is," said the Prophet Joseph, "an unhallowed principle to say that such and such have transgressed because they have been preyed upon by disease or death." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976], p. 162.) We may not conclude that suffering results inevitably from the wrath of an angry God. God operates within a framework of eternal laws.

Secondly, Jesus, who suffered more than mortals can even contemplate, who bore the crushing burden of the sins of the world (D&C 19:18), knows of our suffering and has compassion for us (see 3 Nephi 17:6; D&C 64:2). He came to earth, not to end all suffering, but to end the needless suffering brought on by sin and to teach us that suffering need not be in vain. Through the infinite grace of His atonement, He will help us find the ability to endure, with wondrous promises of divine glory, of eternal joy with Him, if we do so. To a grievously afflicted prophet He proclaimed, "Thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high." (D&C 121:7-8.) And on an earlier occasion Jesus spoke these words of comfort and consolation, which have cheered and lifted so many over two millennia: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls." (Matthew 11:28- 9.)

Even though God is not the author of all human suffering, it is a measure of our devotion to His beloved son that from anguish and affliction can come spiritual enlightenment, soul growth, and a developing sense of self and of our relationship to God and Christ. The fire of affliction, which scars some souls, purifies and ennobles others, transforming them into celestial creatures filled with supernal joy. "All your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection, provided you continue faithful. By the vision of the Almighty I have seen it," said Joseph Smith, who knew more about struggle, pain, disappointment, and anguish than most. (Teachings, p. 296.)

There are, then, times when all we can do is hang on and endure to the end, recalling God's goodness to us in the past and His enduring love for us. In such circumstances Paul's words to the Corinthians take on added meaning: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him." (1 Corinthians 2:9.) On such occasions we know, with Nephi, in whom we can trust. (See 2 Nephi 4:19, 34.)

But it is not my purpose to dwell at length on that aspect of perseverance that deals with the enduring of suffering. The shepherds of the flock, in common with all people, are inevitably required to undergo suffering and anguish. They must search the scriptures and the words of the living prophets to find their own personal answers to the perennial questions that surround suffering and be prepared to counsel members of their flock who cry in anguish, "Why me, or mine?" To provide that counsel requires both wisdom and compassion, neither of which come easily to the children of men. "How much better is it to get wisdom than gold! and to get understanding rather to be chosen than silver!" (Proverbs 16:16.)

"Though Demons Oppose"

Perseverance has many faces, many aspects, all of which shepherds must learn. There is, of course, suffering, to which we have already alluded. But there is also the need to persevere in the face of opposition.

"Mormon-bashing" has long been a favorite pastime of some who for one reason or another disapprove of our doctrines and teachings. Since our earliest days, opposition, persecution, and misunderstanding have been our common companions. Perhaps we should not be too surprised. After all, since we truly are the Church of Jesus Christ, restored in its fullness at a pivotal point in world history, the dark, satanic forces that oppose Him can be expected to hurl themselves in fury also against us. And so they have, for more than a century and a half.

Nor can we expect that as we grow in size and become better known around the world, the opposition will become muted. Indeed, as the great winding-up scenes of human history progress, under an increasingly dark and somber sky, to their inevitable apocalyptic conclusion, Christ and His teachings will continue to be rejected by many, if not most. Sadly, even in many so-called Christian nations the preaching of the Word now struggles to be heard by societies whose members consider it not so much untrue or unbelievable as simply irrelevant. Of our time and place in history the Lord has declared: "They have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenant; they seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall." (D&C 1:15-16.)

In our time much of the opposition to the Church is verbal rather than physical. It was not always so and may not be again. Many of those who oppose us claim to be Christians, yet they use the most unchristian tactics in their attacks, unfettered by even reasonable concerns for fairness, accuracy, or balance in what they say and do. Some clearly feel threatened by our success, perhaps fearing that as we wax they will wane. In like manner the religious establishment during the decades following the death of Christ resented the message of Paul and its potential impact on their religious preeminence and economic well-being. Recall, for example, the instructive account of Paul's encounter with those who worshiped Diana, the goddess regarded as the source of the fruitful and nurturing powers of nature. Luke records:

A certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made silver shrines for Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen; whom he called together with the workmen of like occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth. Moreover ye see and hear, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul hath persuaded and turned away much people, saying that they be no gods, which are made with hands: So that not only this our craft is in danger to be set at nought; but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshippeth. And when they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. And the whole city was filled with confusion. (Acts 19:24-29.)

Is it any real wonder that Paul's detractors labeled him "a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes"? (Acts 24:5.)

Perhaps those who call themselves Christian and harp on what they claim are inconsistencies in our history and doctrine need to be reminded that Christianity itself rests upon very meager historic evidence. The miracles of Christ, including His resurrection and atonement, the details of His life and preachings, simply are not recorded in the secular histories available to Christian and non-Christian alike. Similarly, all Christians must wrestle with the fact that the teachings and records found in the New Testament (which, by the way, display their own internal minor inconsistencies) were written by friends and followers of Jesus, not by objective historians. None of this should be of inordinate concern to any of us, Mormon or non- Mormon. The validity of the Christian message rests on spiritual, rather than secular, foundations.

Yet we must not dwell too long on those who are our professional detractors, who make a living (often a very good living!) by criticizing the Mormons. They will always be with us and will be dealt with in the Lord's good time and in His way. They will not have any appreciable impact on the work, "for the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled." (Mormon 8:22.) Elder Marvin J. Ashton has wisely reminded us that "no religion, group, or individual can prosper over an extended period of time with fault-finding as their foundation." (Ensign, November 1982, p. 63.)

We must be ever mindful of the need to be "swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath: for the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God." (James 1:19-20.) We must avoid like the plague the common tendency to strike back in anger at those who unjustly attack us. We must never revile the revilers (see D&C 19:30) but rather "declare glad tidings" in "all humility," preaching "repentance and faith on the Savior, and remission of sins by baptism, and by fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost." (D&C 19:29-31.)

There are many—the good, honest, fair-minded people of the world—who sincerely want to hear more about us, "for there are many yet on the earth among all sects, parties, and denominations, who are blinded by the subtle craftiness of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, and who are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it." (D&C 123:12.)

In dealing effectively with opposition, there are several great messages the Lord's shepherds must struggle to have presented. Fair-minded people everywhere will respect them, though not all will accept them. They include the following:

The scriptures, particularly the blessed Book of Mormon, are filled with that celestial central message. It is found on every page of the Book of Mormon. Indeed, the name of Christ, in one form or another, appears on average every 1.7 verses in the Nephite scriptures!

members of the Church! The eloquence of such examples will be felt and seen in any culture or community." (Address to Area Office Public Communications Directors, April 9, 1985.)

As always, Jesus said it best: "He that hath my commandment, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me." (John 14:21.) Church members and units demonstrate concern for others by reaching out through Christian service and involvement in the community. Christlike service breaks down barriers and melts prejudice and misunderstanding. The following story, taken from the Ensign a few years ago, illustrates the point:

When Robert Henry Daines and his wife, Anna, moved into their first home in a strange town, they were warned that the town was very anti-Mormon. The Dainses soon noticed that their children were not invited to play in neighbor's houses. When they tried to rent a room for Church meetings at the local YMCA, the board of directors responded by saying that the facilities could not be used by Mormons.

Instead of moving away from such prejudice, Robert and Anna decided to serve the community and perhaps to win acceptance. They enrolled their oldest son in the YMCA, and Sister Daines joined the YMCA Mother's Auxiliary. She raised funds, cleaned up after parties, and chaperoned dances. Since she worked the hardest, she was soon asked to be the president of the Mother's Auxiliary. After working hard for two years, she was asked to run for the YMCA board of directors. She won without opposition, joining the very council that only a few years before had refused to let the Mormons rent a room in the building. While on the board of directors, she worked to change the tradition of an all-night drinking party following high school graduation to a chaperoned party and dance at the YMCA. This new tradition continued for many years. After serving three years on the board, she was reelected. One of her fellow board members confessed, "I must tell you. . . that I was the one who spearheaded the campaign not to let the Mormons use this hall. I didn't know anything good about the Mormons.. . . I feel that I owe you an apology after seeing what fine people you are."

Meanwhile, Robert and Anna Daines had also joined the Parent Teacher Association. They worked hard and soon became co-presidents of the PTA at their local elementary school. After heading a committee that completed an impressive two-year study for the PTA, Brother Daines was urged to run for the Board of Education. There was quite a bit of talk against the idea of a Mormon running the schools; however, he won the election. As president of the school board, Robert Daines worked with the local minister to reverse the policy of holding high school graduation in the local Protestant church. Some students, not belonging to this church, were forbidden by their churches to attend their own graduation. Brother Daines arranged with the church leaders to hold graduation in the school gymnasium. He also arranged for the monsignor of the Catholic church, the minister of the black congregation, the Jewish rabbi, and various Protestant ministers to participate on the program. Respect and acceptance for Brother Daines and the Mormons increased among the leaders of these churches. Brother Daines was reelected twice—the last time by the largest majority in the school board's history.

Eventually, every one of the Daines children married in the temple. All their sons and sons-in-law served missions. They have served in quorum presidencies, bishoprics, and stake presidencies. When, at long last, a stake was organized in their community, Robert Daines was called as counselor and later as stake president. Other stakes were created, and he again served as stake president.

Instead of sheltering their children or running from prejudice, Robert and Anna Daines had won acceptance and had exerted significant leadership and influence in their community. (See Orson Scott Card, "Neighborliness: Daines Style," Ensign, April 1977, pp. 19-22.)

We proclaim (hopefully with "boldness but not overbearance," Alma 38:12) that the gospel of Christ has been restored in its fullness to the earth and that this restoration was necessary precisely because plain and precious truths and the necessary priesthood authority had been lost. (See 1 Nephi 13:26-29, 34-40.) That is our message. We should not shrink from telling it because we want others to like us. We have no wish to offend—and we must be sensitive to the feelings of others—but we cannot subscribe to the homogenized ecumenicism which proclaims that all denominations and beliefs are equally favored of God. All roads may indeed lead to Rome, but they most emphatically don't all lead to the celestial kingdom! Elder Dallin H. Oaks has reminded us: "The value to the world of the Restored Gospel of Jesus Christ lies in its savour, its difference from the rest of Christianity and from the rest of the world. If we fail to communicate that difference, that unique addition we can make to the understanding and authority of the rest of Christianity, we will have lost our value to the world and to the kingdom and will be 'good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men' (Matthew 5:13)." (Address to Regional Representatives, April 5, 1985.)

The other side of the coin is equally important. We must speak out in plainness to oppose those trends and tendencies in our society that erode and degrade the moral fabric of individuals, families, and communities. Perhaps no one in the history of the Church has felt more deeply or spoken more plainly about the importance of the family than has President Ezra Taft Benson. By example and in numerous presentations over many years he has provided us with clear directions. "Come, listen to a prophet's voice, and hear the word of God," we sing. (Hymns, no. 21.) With that message ringing in our ears, let us proclaim the Prophet's words on the importance of family to the world— boldly, nobly, and independently.

Finally, if shepherds are to help bring the Church forth out of obscurity, at times they will have to act rapidly and decisively to set the record straight—to correct blatant, even malicious misunderstandings. A recent example of the effectiveness of such action comes from England. Not too long ago, a sixty-four-year-old widow in the town of Bedford was attacked in her apartment by two men who robbed her. The police described the two men as smartly dressed in dark blue suits and as being in their early thirties. One had a moustache and poorly cut, ragged hair. They spoke in local rather than American accents. Although nothing in this description supports the notion that the attackers were Mormon missionaries, the local newspaper headlined its story, "Mormon Theory on Raid Ordeal" and reported that "detectives believe the two assailants could be Mormons, some of whom are thought to be currently in town."

The Church's public communications director in the area, Bryan Grant, took prompt and effective action to counter this libelous calumny. A check with the local police quickly brought out the fact that they did not implicate Mormon missionaries in the crime. The newspaper editor was approached and politely but firmly reminded of the need to be fair in what he printed. A retraction headlined "Mormons Not Guilty" quickly ensued. Of perhaps greater importance, Brother Grant sent a letter to the newspaper editor involved, thanking him for acting promptly in putting out a corrected story and indicating our appreciation for the responsible way he acted. Furthermore, Brother Grant pointed out to the editor that the Bedford Branch of the Church dates back to 1837 and is in fact the second branch founded in the British Isles. He sent the editor a thousand-word story on the history of the Bedford Branch and included a couple of photos.

This story illustrates several important truths about dealing with opposition. First, we have every right to defend ourselves against patently untrue, malicious attacks on our integrity. After all, if such attacks were directed against other religious groups—Jews or Catholics or many others for that matter—there would be a public outcry and the perpetrators would be brought to public scorn. Fair- minded people everywhere will recognize that we, too, have the right to respond calmly and fairly to those who revile us. Second, if we are to respond, we must do so promptly. Given the normal life of most newspaper stories, failure to respond quickly is a virtual guarantee that our view will not be heard. Finally, if we respond, we must be effective in what we do—going beyond simple denial to provide positive declarations and useful information in a friendly, helpful, noncensorial way. Victories are not won by denials only.

The challenges from opposition to the work of Christ will increase over the coming years. So, too, will the opportunities to serve and help in moving the kingdom forward. In all that we do, we must convey a quiet determination to do the Lord's work, putting into action President Spencer W. Kimball's famous dictum "Do it!" We must portray the quiet dignity that befits those who are servants of the Master.

The Struggle to Persevere with Ourselves

The letters of the Apostle Paul to the branches of the Church he was instrumental in founding throughout Asia Minor constitute the major part of the incomplete record we have of the early Church in those tumultuous three decades after the death and resurrection of Jesus. Fragmentary though they are, Paul's writings provide vivid insight into the struggles of the leaders to keep the infant Church true to the doctrines established by the Savior. Even in Paul's time the dark stain of apostasy had begun to seep into the Church as it tried to accommodate a wicked and perverse world. One of the saddest statements in all of Paul's writings is found in his second letter to his beloved Timothy: "Demas hath forsaken me," wrote Paul from Rome, "having loved this present world." (2 Timothy 4:10.)

I have often wondered and worried about what happened to Demas. He is mentioned in two of Paul's earlier letters—to the Colossians and to Philemon. He had obviously been a strong and beloved companion in the work; but lacking perseverance, he did not endure to the end. Why did he pack up and leave? Were his feelings hurt in some way? Did he perhaps tire of the discipline needed for Christian commitment? Perhaps he was seduced by one or more of the temptations of the flesh. Perhaps a bottle or a woman led him away. Or perhaps it was one or more of the deadly quartet composed of pride, property, power, and prominence. We just don't know. Whether from a sense of propriety or from loyalty to Demas, Paul's record is silent beyond that one terse, tragic comment: "Demas hath forsaken me."

For whatever reason, Demas did not persevere. Losing his grip on the iron rod, he fell away into the dark and filthy torrent of the world. How Paul must have wept and grieved over Demas, undoubtedly remembering the Savior's admonition to seek after and bring back the lost lamb. He must have wanted to reach out to Demas in love, anxious to forgive, pleading and praying and inviting him to come back.

Though our world of the twentieth century is much different from that in which Paul lived, there are many who represent the modern counterparts of Demas. Having loved too much this present world, they slip away from the Church and kingdom of God, forsaking the sweet and satisfying fruits of fellowship with the Saints for the tinsel and glitter of the world's tawdry counterfeits. Some have been hurt or feel neglected. Some feel guilty, unable to forgive themselves for previous transgressions even though their Father in heaven remembers their sin no more. To all who transgress, the devil whispers the deadly lie that their sins are such they can never be forgiven, and thus he leads them away into darkness.

Unless human nature has changed a lot more than I think it has in the past two thousand years, I venture to guess that the cause of Demas' failure to endure to the end probably related in some way to a lack of self-mastery, an unwillingness to "give away all [his] sins to know [God]." (Alma 22:18.) The struggle to control one's self, to master the natural man, is a struggle many unfortunately lose with dire results. "He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city that is broken down, and without walls." (Proverbs 25:28.) Each must contend daily with the temptations of the flesh in all their alluring enticement. The struggle ends only with the grave, though it may take different forms during the various phases of life.

Even the prophets of God struggle to master themselves. Indeed, it may safely be said they would not be called and sustained in their holy calling in the absence of that mastery.

The great Nephi wept at his human weakness: "O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities. I am encompassed about, because of the temptations . . . which do so easily beset me. And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins." (2 Nephi 4:17-19.)

Nephi's sentiments are similar to those of Paul, who also wrote with deep emotion and obvious personal experience of the inner struggle between the flesh and the spirit. Wrote Paul: "I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not. For the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do.. . . For I delight in the law of God after the inward man: But I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" (Romans 7:18-19, 22-24.)

The cultivation of Christlike qualities is a lifelong struggle, demanding and relentless in calling forth the very best in us, stretching our souls. "Who has a harder battle than he who strives to conquer himself? And this must be our endeavour, in a word, to subdue ourselves, day by day to gain the mastery of self and make progress towards something better." (Thomas Kempis, The Imitation of Christ, translated by E. M. Blaiklock [London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1979], p. 26.) The struggle for self-mastery is not a battle we fight only once. In one form or another, we must strive every day of our lives if we are to toil the pilgrim's path to perfection. Thorns, briars, and noxious weeds abound along the path. Yet He who stands with beckoning arms at the end of our journey gives us daily strength as we look to Him for guidance.

It is in the scriptures and the words of the living prophets that we find the lessons required to teach us mastery of self, the template upon which we can build a celestial life. Mastery of self is a major recurring theme of Christ and His prophets. Recall these glorious words of Alma to his son Helaman:

O remember, remember, my son Helaman, how strict are the commandments of God. And he said: If ye will keep my commandments ye shall prosper in the land—but if ye keep not his commandments ye shall be cut off from his presence.. . . I tell you by the spirit of prophecy, that if ye transgress the commandments of God. . . ye shall be delivered up unto Satan, that he may sift you as chaff before the wind. But if ye keep the commandments of God, and do with these things which are sacred according to that which the Lord doth command you, behold, no power of earth or hell can take them from you, for God is powerful to the fulfilling of all his words. (Alma 37:13, 15-16.)

To another son, Corianton, who had fallen into the coils of sin, Alma gave this fatherly counsel:

Repent and forsake your sins, and go no more after the lusts of your eyes, but cross yourself in all these things; for except ye do this ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God.. . . I command you to take it upon you to counsel with your elder brothers in your undertakings; for behold, thou art in thy youth, and ye stand in need to be nourished by your brothers. And give heed to their counsel.. . . Suffer not yourself to be led away by any vain or foolish thing; suffer not the devil to lead away your heart again.. . . Refrain from your iniquities;. . . turn to the Lord with all your mind, might, and strength;. . . acknowledge your faults.. . . Seek not after riches nor the vain things of this world; for behold, you cannot carry them with you. (Alma 39:9-14.)

President Kimball spoke often of the benefits of self- mastery that come from reading the scriptures. Said he: "I find that when I get casual in my relationships with divinity and when it seems that no divine ear is listening and no divine voice is speaking, that I am far, far away. If I immerse myself in the scriptures the distance narrows and the spirituality returns. I find myself loving more intensely those whom I must love with all my heart and mind and strength, and loving them more, I find it easier to abide their counsel." (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], p. 135.)

President Kimball knew, as have all the prophets, that in the struggle to master one's self, service to others is the key. It drives away the selfishness that is the enemy of spirituality, the opponent of righteousness. To the extent we serve others, our souls grow, and we attain mastery of ourselves, eschewing self-indulgence and fleeting pleasure for the stern, sweet joy of obedience to divine commandments.

The lives of many of the pioneer Saints provide vivid examples of the sanctifying power of service. Consider Aurelia Spencer Rogers, whose life was as humble and unpretentious as that of the legendary country mouse. She knew much of sacrifice and sorrow. In the winter of 1845- 46, the Rogers family, along with the other Saints in Nauvoo, were forced to flee the city. Aurelia was then a girl of only eleven years. She wrote of that horrendous experience: "My mother had scarcely recovered from a spell of sickness, which followed the death of little Chloe (a baby sister), and was illy prepared to stand the cold weather and rough roads we had to travel over in the fore part of the journey. She therefore gradually sank from the effects of a severe cold and soon died. As we had only traveled a distance of thirty miles, her body was taken back to Nauvoo and buried.. . . This was my first great sorrow. We missed her very much." (Life Sketches [Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons, 1898], pp. 34-35, 41.)

While the family was at Winter Quarters, Orson Spencer, Aurelia's father, was sent to fulfill a mission in England as editor of the Millennial Star. The children were left largely to look after themselves. Aurelia's fourteen-year-old sister Ellen became "the little mother." It was hard going. In reflecting on that difficult period in her life, Aurelia wrote:

The winter having been uncommon in its severity, our horse and all our cows but one had died, therefore we had no milk nor butter; our provisions had also nearly given out, so that in the spring and summer following, we really suffered for something to eat; part of the time having nothing but corn-meal, which was stirred up with water and baked on a griddle. Many a night I have gone to bed without supper having to wait until I was hungry enough to eat our poor fare.. . . There was no need of our family suffering for food, if the money father sent us had been received; but although the money failed to reach us, the letters received from our dear parent were a great comfort to us. (Ibid., pp. 50-51.)

The Spencer children traveled in President Brigham Young's company to the Salt Lake Valley in the summer of 1848. Aurelia's trials were far from finished when she arrived in the Valley. In recalling her life, she wrote:

In the summer of 1855, grasshoppers came in swarms, destroying the crops and gardens . . . . This caused much suffering. Flour was scarce, and many of the people lived on bran bread. My husband sold a horse for $20, with which he bought a little flour; but for a short time we fared no better than those who lived on the bran diet. (Ibid., p. 155.)

My fourth child, Howard was born July 27th, 1859. He was a bright healthy baby, but was taken sick and died, when fourteen months old. I had been so happy previous to this; the trials of poverty and sickness that we had passed through were nothing compared to this great sorrow that had overtaken me; and I mourned for my babe.. . . I was ill most of the next winter, and came near to death a number of times; yet notwithstanding I longed to see my babe, I did not wish to die, but wanted to live to rear my other children, realizing what it was to be left motherless at an early age. I prayed to the Lord constantly, and told Him if He would spare my life, I would try to keep His commandments and serve Him to the best of my ability. My prayers were answered, and I lived to have eight more children, but only raised four out of the eight; therefore my life has been intermingled with joys and sorrows. (Pp. 163-64.)

My tenth child, which we named William, was born on the 31st of May, 1871, and only lived until the 17th of August, then died of cholera infantum.. . . this making three children that I had lost in succession. Of my ten children only five remained. It seemed indeed as if my last hope was gone, as I felt that I had no health or strength to have any more family. And I almost lost faith in God.. . . Subsequently, when pondering these things over, I felt that perhaps all the people of God would have to pass through certain ordeals to prove whether they would trust in Him to the end. (Pp. 179-80.)

During all the long years of her life as wife and mother in Farmington, Utah, Aurelia did the washing by hand, baked as many as twelve loaves of bread a day, sewed all the clothes for her large family, worked in the fields, and supported her family while her husband Thomas (a Scot from Falkirk who had emigrated to Canada and thence to Nauvoo and the West) was on a mission.

Aurelia's name is famous in the history of the Church because of her great service to children. She had noted the need for an organization for little boys wherein "they could be taught everything good, and how to behave." (P. 207.) Approval was received from President John Taylor to set up an organization for children, to include both boys and girls. The organization was called "Primary," and on August 11, 1878, Sister Rogers was set apart by Bishop John W. Hess as president of the very first Primary of the Church. For the rest of her life, she devoted herself to service in the Primary organization. Only the angels can tell the results of her selfless service. One thing, however, is certain: millions of children and their parents have been blessed by Primary, the organization whose purpose, to help parents teach their children the gospel of Christ and help them to learn to live it, is encapsulated in this single, glorious verse: "All thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children." (3 Nephi 22:13.)

Applying the Principles: Guidelines for Shepherds

so easy for the Lord's shepherds to become impatient, to expect instant results, immediate success. Then, when that doesn't happen, one may be tempted to say, "I'll do it myself," or "Release that person and find somebody who can get the job done." When leaders push and prod, when they lose patience with others, they cease to lead; and even if the work gets done, it may well not be "in the Lord's way."

Impatience is one of the serious spiritual maladies of our age. Modern society encourages haste and the impatience that so often accompanies it. If you don't believe me, just observe the impatience etched on the faces of a crowd of people pushing and shoving their way onto a bus or subway train. Too often we rush here and there, always in a hurry, not really listening to others or to the Spirit, not taking the time to savor life, to enjoy its goodness, or to exercise the patience to wait. The lives of too many increasingly resemble a kind of speeded-up version of the popular television cartoon character, the Road Runner.

Without patience there can be no perseverance, no enduring in faith. As Paul wrote to the Romans, eternal life comes to those who "by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honour." (Romans 2:7.) We must learn to wait, to give people time to catch the vision, to not lose faith in them if they don't at first fully succeed, to never give up. There is, of course, a time to act; but there is also a time to be patient, to follow the divinely appointed rhythm of life. These beloved words from Ecclesiastes perhaps say it best: "To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven: a time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted." (Ecclesiastes 3:1- 2.)

As they contemplate the vast amount of work that has to be done to prepare a Zion people for the second coming of the Master, as they view with sorrow the tendency among many to disregard sacred things, leaders may betimes get discouraged. On that subject, President Joseph F. Smith had these wise words of counsel:

What shall we do? Shall we quit because there are those with whom we come in contact who are not willing to rise to the standard to which we seek to exalt them? No! Someone has said that the Lord hates a quitter, and there should be no such thing as quitting when we put our hands to the plow to save men, to save souls, to exalt mankind, to inculcate principles of righteousness and establish them in the hearts of those with whom we are associated, both by precept and by example. There must be no such thing as being discouraged. Under certain conditions and circumstances, we may fail to accomplish the object we have in view with reference to this individual or the other individual, or a number of individuals that we are seeking to benefit, to uplift, to purify, to get into their hearts the principles of justice, of righteousness, of virtue and of honor, that would fit them to inherit the kingdom of God; to associate with angels.. . . If you fail, never mind. Go right on; try it again; try it somewhere else. Never say quit. Do not say it cannot be done.. . . The word "fail" ought to be expunged from our language and our thoughts. We do not fail when we seek to benefit the erring, and they will not listen to us. (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], pp. 132-33.)

On another occasion, President Smith had this to say about patience in leadership: "In leaders undue impatience and a gloomy mind are almost unpardonable, and it sometimes takes almost as much courage to wait as to act. It is to be hoped, then, that the leaders of God's people, and the people themselves, will not feel that they must have at once a solution of every question that arises to disturb the even tenor of their ways."(Gospel Doctrine, p. 156; italics added.)

Patience, then, is one of the attributes of great leaders who know when to drive forward with all their strength and when to practice patient forbearance, recognizing that many of life's problems yield only to time. There are few quick solutions to major problems.

Whenever we get impatient with others or with ourselves, frustrated with the slow progress of our own drive toward the goal of individual perfection or that of those for whom we bear a shepherd's responsibility, perhaps it would be well to remember that there is a divinely determined velocity to the Lord's work. God has His own timetable that does not always agree with our desires. The very fact that we are required to wait, to endure with patience, to acquire wisdom and understanding "line upon line, precept upon precept" (D&C 98:12) is part of the Lord's developmental plan for us. He knows that it takes time for us to understand and apply in our lives the lofty celestial principles of the glorious gospel. Stalwart souls do not grow like tomatoes forced in a greenhouse, but slowly and gradually: "Behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have." (2 Nephi 28:30.)

It is not that God does not desire to give us more of His eternal truths. He longs to enlighten our minds with the celestial visions of the eternities. The Prophet Joseph Smith, God's mighty messenger of the restoration, longed to impart to others divine knowledge entrusted to him. Said he, "It is my meditation all the day and more than my meat and drink to know how I shall make the Saints of God to comprehend the visions that roll like an overflowing surge, before my mind." (The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 196.)

"I could explain a hundred fold more than I ever have of the glories of the kingdoms manifested to me in the vision, were I permitted, and were the people prepared to receive them. The Lord deals with this people as a tender parent with a child, communicating light and intelligence and the knowledge of his ways as they can bear it." (History of the Church, 5:402.)

Faithful shepherds, be patient: God's truth will prevail, both in the world and in the hearts of humble souls who "come unto Christ, and [are] perfected in him." (Moroni 10:32.)

My thoughts turn to a young man, a very much less active member of the Church when found by faithful home teachers. Brother Bob Smith, as we shall call him, had been baptized at age eight, primarily because of the efforts of his faithful grandmother, one of the pioneer members in her Church branch. But from that point on, Bob had essentially no contact with the Church. His parents were totally inactive, and their life-style was hardly celestial, to say the least. Like too many others, Bob drifted away from the Church. His nonmember friends were no better than they needed to be. He joined a motorcycle gang and spent raucous evenings and weekends in their company. Eventually Bob married but still retained his ties to his motorcycle buddies, wearing a grease-stained leather jacket over the shoulders of which his long unkempt hair cascaded.

Periodically Bob's name was discussed at ward council meetings. Whenever that happened, a subdued sigh went around the table: no sense in contacting that family; everyone knew their history.

But a young home teacher, who took seriously his errand from the Lord, decided to call on Bob Smith. When he arrived, he found Bob out in the yard repairing a motorcycle. Perhaps surprisingly, Bob was cordial, in his rough way, and listened attentively to the home teaching message. A couple of weeks later he accepted an invitation to come to priesthood meeting, creating somewhat of a stir when he arrived unshaven, in his leather motorcycle jacket. The priesthood leaders in the ward saw beyond Bob's appearance, recognizing in him a young man who desperately wanted to make something of himself and had a deep spiritual hunger. Soon Bob's appearance changed. He cut his hair and came to church neatly dressed, with his young wife and two small children.

Bob's faith grew by leaps and bounds. Soon he was called as a home teacher, then as a Sunday School teacher. It wasn't long before Bob and his family were sealed in the temple. He remains true and faithful, honoring his priesthood and striving to live the commandments. I'm convinced that Bob would not be where he is today without the perseverance of dedicated priesthood leaders who looked not on his countenance but "on the heart."

The renowned Christian philosopher C. S. Lewis possessed rare insight into our divine potential, as evidenced by this passage from his book Mere Christianity:

The command Be ye perfect is not idealistic gas. Nor is it a command to do the impossible. He is going to make us into creatures that can obey that command. He said (in the Bible) that we were "gods" and He is going to make good His words. If we let Him—for we can prevent Him, if we choose—He will make the feeblest and filthiest of us into a god or goddess, a dazzling, radiant, immortal creature, pulsating all through with such energy and joy and wisdom and love as we cannot now imagine, a bright stainless mirror which reflects back to God perfectly (though, of course, on a smaller scale) His own boundless power and delight and goodness. The process will be long and in parts very painful; but that is what we are in for. Nothing less. He meant what He said. ([Glasgow: Fount/William Collins Sons and Co., 1977], p. 172.)

As they persevere with people, never giving up on them, wise shepherds will, of course, recognize that all do not start with the same talents, nor do they all progress at the same speed. Yet all are God's children, equally beloved by Him. Each has his or her own strengths and weaknesses. Each faces unique challenges and opportunities. If the Lord's shepherds are to truly be patient with the flock, they must know each sheep intimately. In portraying Himself as the Good Shepherd, Jesus taught with superb skill the important lesson that the shepherd must know each member of the flock. The shepherd, said Jesus, "calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers." (John 10:3-5.) As with all else, the Good Shepherd provides the pattern for faithful undershepherds to follow.

Unless they are very careful, modern-day shepherds can readily fall into the same trap as did Moses, believing that they are indispensable, wearing themselves out trying to be all things to all people. At best, this is foolish and futile; at worst, an ego trip that fosters pride and spiritual arrogance on the part of the shepherd and dangerous dependency on the part of the flock. If they are to endure, shepherds must learn how and what to delegate. They must not attempt to settle every question, to be the inexhaustible fount of all knowledge. They must learn to set priorities and manage their time effectively. Failing that, they will surely wear away, and those they strive to lead will ultimately suffer too.

Time available to shepherds is limited. There is absolutely no stretch to it. It is unchangeable; once expended it is gone forever. For the purposes of this discussion, let us consider three different types of time: leader-imposed time, system-imposed time, and self-imposed time, which may be divided into subordinate-imposed and discretionary time.

Leader-imposed time. Expenditure of this type of time by a shepherd results from requests by his or her ecclesiastical leader. The shepherd dares not ignore them. He who calls the shepherd has the authority (and indeed the responsibility!) to ask him or her to do certain things.

System-imposed time. This type of time expenditure is imposed by the demands of the organization for essential financial systems, membership attendance reporting systems, meetings, and so on. Shepherds cannot ignore needs to deal with system-imposed time. Neither the Church nor the Lord will let them do so. They must learn the "system" and make it work for them. Is it asking too much, for example, to suggest that a Relief Society president learn the manual? Reports must be used as management tools to help shepherds do their work.

Self-imposed time. With subordinate-imposed time, the shepherd must determine whether he or she will accept these demands. In response to one who says "We've got a problem" when really he or she has the problem, the shepherd could appropriately think, "Whose responsibility is this problem, really?" Shepherds should aim to give away as many problems as possible and to keep only those that can't be given to anybody else, because the shepherd bears a unique responsibility to provide help. A glaring example of a compulsive problem grabber is the bishop who does all of his counselors' thinking and acting. Either he does all their work, or he says "I'll take up your problem with Brother Jones, my counselor responsible for Primary." Both responses are wrong. Shepherds should gently but firmly encourage their counselors, teachers, and others to accept responsibility. Shepherds must not think for them. They must encourage them not to bring problems but rather solutions. Shepherds must help all they can but not "pull the trigger" for others.

Wise shepherds can also make routine the repetitive aspects of the work: agendas, meeting times, minutes of meetings (including follow-up), and so on.

Shepherds should use self-imposed discretionary time for important things: to plan and meditate, to think about what really must be done if they are to be successful, to make certain their priorities are in full alignment with the mission of the Church. In managing discretionary time, I have found it useful to assign blocks of time, say ninety minutes, during which I may not be interrupted. I am ruthless in protecting that precious time, instructing my secretary to interrupt me only if there is a dire emergency. During that time I try hard to concentrate and focus my efforts.

Nothing that shepherds can do to husband and replenish their strength will have as significant an effect as that which relates to the care of their families. President McKay's famous dictum "No other success can compensate for failure in the home" testifies to the importance of keeping the family strong. Wise shepherds understand that without the love, understanding, forbearance, and assistance of their eternal companions, success in the Lord's work would not be forthcoming.

Several years ago, President McKay, in speaking to a group of Church employees, put into perspective what shepherds should concentrate on in their lives. Said he:

Let me assure you, brethren, that some day you will have a Personal Priesthood Interview with the Savior Himself. If you are interested, I will tell you the order in which He will ask you to account for your earthly responsibilities.

First, He will request an accountability report about your relationship with your wife. Have you actively been engaged in making her happy and ensuring that her needs have been met as an individual?

Second, He will want an accountability report about each of your children individually. He will not attempt to have this for simply a family stewardship report but will request information about your relationship to each and every child.

Third, He will want to know what you personally have done with the talents you were given in the pre-existence.

Fourth, He will want a summary of your activity in your Church assignments. He will not be necessarily interested in what assignments you have had, for in His eyes the home teacher and mission president are probably equals, but He will request a summary of how you have been of service to your fellowmen in your Church assignments.

Fifth, He will have no interest in how you earned your living, but if you were honest in all your dealings.

Sixth, He will ask for an accountability on what you have done to contribute in a positive manner to your community, state, country, and the world. (Statement given in June 1965, from the notes of Fred A. Baker, a managing director of the Church's Department of Physical Facilities.)

Note that the Lord puts the first emphasis on family, on a priesthood leader's relationships with his spouse and children. He is certainly less interested in how His sons earn a living, though He is most concerned whether they are honest in their dealings.

Whatever else shepherds do, time must be provided for their families. If leaders are as busy and as active as they should be, it will not always be easy to do so. True nobility of character lies in doing what is necessary to build relationships with family members. Efforts to do so require patient perseverence; herein lie the sweetest joys of life.

One of the great tragedies of life is to observe men— and increasingly women—who struggle up the ladder of their careers, perhaps, though not necessarily, over the backs of colleagues, and who, in the process—through carelessness, neglect, or selfishness—lose their families. They divorce their spouses, from whom, in the euphemism of the day, they claim to have "grown apart." Their children drift away, finding no warmth, no giving, no help, no understanding. And then, perhaps in the twilight of their lives, they find that all they've done has turned to ashes. The ladder they climbed was leaning against the wrong wall. It led not to light and joy but to darkness of mind and spirit.

It need not be so. Many there are whose lives are tributes to the happiness that comes from commitments made and renewed daily. President Gordon B. Hinckley tells a sweet and loving story that illustrates the strength and joy that comes from sweet and fulfilling family associations. Said he:

I think of two friends from my high school and university years. He was a boy from a country town, plain in appearance, without money or apparent promise. He had grown up on a farm, and if he had any quality that was attractive it was the capacity to work. He carried bologna sandwiches in a brown paper bag for his lunch and swept the school floors to pay his tuition. But with all of his rustic appearance, he had a smile and a personality that seemed to sing of goodness. She was a city girl who had come out of a comfortable home. She would not have won a beauty contest, but she was wholesome in her decency and integrity and attractive in her decorum and dress.

Something wonderful took place between them. They fell in love. Some whispered that there were far more promising boys for her, and a gossip or two noted that perhaps other girls might have interested him. But these two laughed and danced and studied together through their school years. They married when people wondered how they could ever earn enough to stay alive. He struggled through his professional school and came out well in his class. She scrimped and saved and worked and prayed. She encouraged and sustained, and when things were really tough, she said quietly, "Somehow we can make it." Buoyed by her faith in him, he kept going through these difficult years. Children came, and together they loved them and nourished them and gave them the security that came of their own love for and loyalty to one another. Now many years have passed. Their children are grown, a lasting credit to them, to the Church, and to the communities in which they live.

I remember seeing them on a plane, as I returned from an assignment. I walked down the aisle in the semidarkness of the cabin and saw a woman, white-haired, her head on her husband's shoulder as she dozed. His hand was clasped warmly about hers. He was awake and recognized me. She awakened, and we talked. They were returning from a convention where he had delivered a paper before a learned society. He said little about it, but she proudly spoke of the honors accorded him.

I wish that I might have caught with a camera the look on her face as she talked of him. Forty- five years earlier people without understanding had asked what they saw in each other. I thought of that as I returned to my seat on the plane. Their friends of those days saw only a farm boy from the country and a smiling girl with freckles on her nose. But these two found in each other love and loyalty, peace and faith in the future.

There was a flowering in them of something divine, planted there by that Father who is our God. In their school days they had lived worthy of that flowering of love. They had lived with virtue and faith, with appreciation and respect for self and one another. In the years of their difficult professional and economic struggles, they had found their greatest earthly strength in their companionship. Now in mature age, they were finding peace and quiet satisfaction together. Beyond all this, they were assured of an eternity of joyful association through Priesthood covenants long since made and promises long since given in the House of the Lord. (Ensign, March 1984, pp. 3-4.)

Shepherds must also take the time for personal self- renewal: reading and pondering the scriptures, praying and meditating, developing talents, participating in hobbies that relax and unburden the soul, and physical exercise. Elder Harold B. Lee had this wise advice concerning meditation: "President McKay sometime ago in talking to the Presidency and the twelve, urged us to give time for more meditation so that we could tune in with spiritual forces that we had a right to and should expect to direct us in our work." (Conference Report, October 1962, p. 82.)

In one way, at least, the responsibility to protect and replenish personal strength flows from the broader responsibility the Lord's shepherds have to act as stewards over time, talents, and callings. That responsibility cannot be fulfilled if through misplaced priorities or lack of care they vitiate their strength, undermine their capacities to serve, and "wear away," in Jethro's felicitous words.
