Alexander B. Morrison, Feed My Sheep: Leadership Ideas for Latter-day Shepherds ( 1992)

CHAPTER SIX

In the Shepherd's Footsteps

Each of us walks many paths through life. I grew up on a farm in central Alberta, Canada, never having heard of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints except in the melodramatic novels of Zane Grey. Our farm was twenty-two miles from the nearest town; and in company with all other children in the community, I attended a one-room country school, walking the two miles each way, there and back, every day. How vividly I remember the path to school. It wound through our pastureland and fields, taking the line of least resistance, past the hillside where purple crocuses bloomed in the spring, skirting the slough where wild violets and tiger lilies could be found in June. To the south was a wood where a magpie's hooded nest perched in a tall poplar tree. A ruffed grouse drummed on a log there; and if you were quiet and patient, you could get close enough to watch. Further on were the tumbled rock foundations of a long- abandoned settler's cabin. My brother and I trapped a weasel there one chilly day in October.

Snow came early in that northern land, and each dreary winter's day all I saw along the path to and from school was my elder brother's footsteps in the snow where he had gone ahead to break the trail for me to follow. I carefully placed my feet where he had trod, trying at the same time to keep an eye peeled for signs of a skulking coyote or covey of prairie chickens. But the best part of the trip was my first glimpse of home and the knowledge that soon I would be safe and warm and could bury my face in my mother's apron and feel her loving embrace. Over the years I've walked many paths in many lands, but those magical days of early childhood stay with me. As real as yesterday are the remembered sights and smells and feelings of homecoming on Canada's prairies.

Jesus, too, walked many paths. His teaching and example blazed the trail we each must follow, pointing the way back home to our Father's house. He is "the Shepherd. . . of [our] souls" (see 1 Peter 2:25) and we "the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand" (Psalm 95:7). We who are blessed to serve as His undershepherds—as apprentice shepherds, if you will—can learn much from a careful examination of the paths Jesus walked.

From such an examination we learn the essence of leadership in the Lord's kingdom. We learn what He expects of us and how to fulfill our sacred stewardship. Perhaps the most important lesson we learn is that we do not walk the paths of life alone. He is there with us to protect and strengthen, lift and forgive. He promises: "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up." (D&C 84:88.)

The paths Jesus walked include the following:

Jesus sorrows at our transitory faith, our seeming inability to put our full trust in God, our incessant demanding to know why, our unwillingness to surrender the totality of our heart and will to the Almighty. Faithful Nephi was blessed, as few mortals have been, to hear the words of Elohim, the Father Himself, on this matter: "The words of my Beloved are true and faithful. He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved." (2 Nephi 31:15; italics added.) Sometimes we have to wait for God's response to our pleas for help or relief.

Jesus sorrows, too, at our spiritual superficiality. He grieves at our unwillingness to struggle to understand the great spiritual truths that bring salvation and exaltation. He weeps when we seek a sign rather than an understanding heart. Our fickleness, our lack of constancy, are an affront to Him. We seem so often unwilling to pay the price to know Him. In one of the greatest sermons of all time, He described Himself as the living bread and water and proclaimed: "Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him.. . . He that eateth me,. . . shall live by me. This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead: he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever." (John 6:54-58.) Many of His listeners, greedy only for the bread of this world, and foolishly seeking a sign of Christ's divinity, murmured, "This is an hard saying; who can hear it?" (John 6:60.) "From that time," John recorded, "many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him." (John 6:66.)

One can almost sense the sorrow in Jesus' voice when He said to the twelve, "Will ye also go away?" Thank God for the great Peter, who with all of his mortal fallibilities was already deeply committed to Christ. He replied: "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God." (John 6:67-69.)

Those who are called to serve the Good Shepherd may have to walk the path of suffering with Him. Some in their callings as undershepherds will work with those who are reaping the consequences of sinful actions or experiencing other severe challenges in life. As shepherds strive to help and strengthen their brothers and sisters, their feelings of empathy and sorrow should reflect a Christlike suffering for such tribulations.

Others will be required to walk a more personal path of suffering. Such a one was Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna, a city on the Western coast of Asia Minor. Polycarp was martyred in a.d.156 for his belief in Christ.

Unwilling to bow to Caesar and to worship him, the aged bishop was brought into the stadium to be tried by the Roman Proconsul in the presence of a mob of "lawless heathen." Polycarp was ready for his ordeal. He knew he would be martyred, having said to his companions a few days before his arrest, "I must needs be burned alive." As he was entering the stadium there came to Polycarp a voice as it were from heaven: "Be strong, Polycarp, and play the man."

"Curse the Christ," the Proconsul ordered. The reply was simple: "Eighty and six years have I served him, and he hath done me no wrong; how then can I blaspheme my king who saved me?"

The Proconsul persisted: "I have wild beasts; if thou repent not, I will throw thee to them." Boldly Polycarp replied, "Send for them. For repentance from better to worse is not a change permitted to us; but to change from cruelty to righteousness is a noble thing."

Again the Proconsul spoke: "If thou dost despise the wild beasts I will make thee to be consumed by fire, if thou repent not." Courageous Polycarp answered: "Thou threatenest the fire that burns for an hour and in a little while is quenched; for thou knowest not of the fire of the judgement to come, and the fire of the eternal punishment, reserved for the ungodly. But why delayest thou? Bring what thou wilt."

"Polycarp hath confessed himself to be a Christian," proclaimed the Proconsul's messenger to the assembled multitude. "Burn him alive," they raged. Timber and faggots were brought, and Polycarp was submitted to the flames. (See Martyrium Polycarpi, a letter from the Church in Smyrna, in Documents of the Christian Church, 2nd edition, edited by Henry Bettenson [Oxford University Press, 1986], pp. 9-12.)

Peter, the great apostle, who himself suffered a martyr's death (see John 21:18-19), recognized that divine merit is associated with patient suffering for Christ's sake but that little glory accrues to us if we suffer for our own sins. He wrote: "This is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God." (1 Peter 2:19-20.) As we endure undeserved suffering, we develop Christlike attributes that perfect our souls and bring us closer to Him.

Daniel Defoe's Robinson Crusoe, although published over two and a half centuries ago, has an enduring place in the hearts of every generation of readers. As the sole survivor of a ship caught in a storm and broken apart on a reef near an uninhabited island somewhere off the South American coast, Crusoe had every reason to feel lonely. Washed ashore by the ocean currents, he managed first to survive and then to build a life for himself, using a mixture of materials salvaged from the ship and what was available to him on the island. For a quarter of a century he lived a lonely, solitary life. Then he rescued a young native man from cannibals and civilized him. He called the young man "Friday," after the day of his rescue. After a series of further adventures, Crusoe and Friday left the island, rescued at last.

Crusoe underwent a kind of metamorphosis on the island. At first he was overcome with loneliness and self- pity:

I had a dismal prospect of my condition, for as I was not cast away upon that island without being driven, as is said, by a violent storm quite out of the course of our intended voyage, and a great way, viz., some hundreds of leagues out of the ordinary course of the trade of mankind, I had great reason to consider it as a determination of Heaven that in this desolate place and in this desolate manner I should end my life; the tears would run plentifully down my face when I made these reflections, and sometimes I would expostulate with myself why Providence should thus completely ruin its creatures and render them so absolutely miserable, so without help abandoned, so entirely depressed that it could hardly be rational to be thankful for such a life. (Daniel Defoe, Robinson Crusoe [New York: Bantam Books, 1991], pp. 54-55.)

Later, however, Crusoe found first solace and then deep faith in a study of the Bible, a copy of which he located in a seaman's chest rescued from the wreck. He began to pray, for the first time in his life, and to reflect upon the "distinguishing goodness which had preserved [him]." He began to give thanks to God, "who had so happily and comfortably provided for [him] in [his] desolate condition." Wrote he, "I learned here and again to observe that it is very rare that the providence of God casts us into any condition of life so low, or any misery so great, but we may see something or other to be thankful for, and may see others in worse circumstances than our own." (Ibid. p. 240.) Challenges became tests of worthiness for the castaway. Crusoe found he was not alone.

To me that is the great lesson to be learned from Defoe's masterpiece: regardless of what happens to us, we are never alone. When we are torn by despair, crushed by loneliness, when we cry out for a friend, we can turn to Jesus, our ever-present guide and eternal friend. We can talk to Him, and He will understand, for He has felt the same pain, the same sorrow as we feel. "With his stripes we are healed." (Isaiah 53:5.)

As with Jesus, so it is with us. We are not given the opportunity to overcome Satan in a single act of combat. The struggle between flesh and spirit, between God and the devil, is a constant battle throughout life. But, one may ask, was Jesus tempted as I am? In the same way and with the same enticements? After all, He is God, and I am but a weak and fallible mortal. The answer from the scriptures is clear: "We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." (Hebrews 4:15; italics added.)

The Nephite prophets also understood the nature of the temptations of Christ. Alma, speaking of the Savior not yet born into mortality, proclaimed with prophetic clarity, "He shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people." (Alma 7:11; italics added.) Jesus, then, having been tempted, understands our temptations. "In that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted." (Hebrews 2:18.) Does He still love us, as soiled and imperfect as we are? Oh, yes! Yes! There is no truth greater than that in all the universe!

One of the temptations the Lord's undershepherds must be particularly wary of is the temptation of power. These prescient words of the Prophet Joseph Smith come to mind. They should be required periodic reading for all undershepherds!

Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness. That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man. Behold, ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks, to persecute the saints, and to fight against God. We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion. (D&C 121:34-39.)

How seductive the lure of power and the prestige that goes with it can be! The acclaim of the people, the virtual adulation in which leaders are held by many members, the hanging-on-every-word attention leaders receive—all are powerful intoxicants, easily capable of corrupting the unwary shepherd. Leaders should, of course, be grateful for the love and support of the Saints. But they must discount personal praise directed at them, recognizing that whatever fraction is deserved rightfully belongs to the Good Shepherd and the Father. We can take little credit if we utilize well gifts and talents that have been bestowed upon us. The credit belongs to the Giver of Gifts, not the receiver. When dealing with the praise of men, perhaps it would be wise to adopt something of the attitude of the Duke of Wellington. "Asked if he were pleased to have been mobbed by the ecstatic population of Brussels on his return from Waterloo [Wellington] rejoined, 'Not in the least; if I had failed, they would have shot me.' " (John Keegan, The Mask of Command, p. 163.)

Thomas Cromwell, principal adviser to King Henry VIII of England, is an example of a man of great talent corrupted by power. Cromwell served Henry for ten years (1530-40), during much of which time he occupied all key positions in the English government and exercised complete control over every aspect of its administration. He was always careful, however, to pretend to be acting on the king's authority. Cromwell, an administrative genius, was totally ruthless in the pursuit of his aim to establish the reformation in England and strengthen the power of the king. With a single stroke, he solved the impasse between Henry and the Pope occasioned by the king's wish to divorce Catherine of Aragon and marry Anne Boleyn. Cromwell's solution was elegant in its simplicity: overrule the papacy, remove the Pope from England, and pressure the Archbishop of Canterbury into granting the divorce Henry wanted so desperately. The king had his way; the clergy were browbeaten and bludgeoned into submission; the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer, appointed by Henry, ruled that the king's marriage to Catherine was void and that his union with Anne was "good and lawful"; the separation from Rome was final.

Henry's foreign wars and extravagant tastes resulted in chronic shortages of government funds. Cromwell saw in the vast treasures held in the monasteries a ready source of money to fill the royal coffers. He presided with an iron hand and ferocious energy over the dissolution of the monasteries, shrinking at nothing to achieve his purpose. By 1540 all monastic institutions—several hundred in all—had ceased to exist, and their property and immense wealth were in the king's hands, to be used according "to the pleasure of Almighty God and to the honour and profit of this realm."

Cromwell's enemies multiplied like vermin. They bided their time, waiting for him to make a mistake. Finally it happened. Cromwell worked and schemed to establish a closer relationship between Henry and the protestant princes of Germany. Central to Cromwell's plan was a marriage alliance between Henry and Anne, the only daughter of the Duke of Cleves, a German nobleman. Cromwell assured Henry that Anne was unspeakably beautiful. When Henry found she was anything but that, he repudiated Anne and charged Cromwell with deceit and treason. All of Cromwell's numerous and powerful enemies then openly turned against him. He was condemned without trial as a "most false and corrupt traitor" and a "detestable heretic" who had boasted of his power over the king. Taken to the Tower of London, he was kept alive until he had provided the necessary evidence for Henry to obtain a divorce from Anne of Cleves. Cromwell was executed by beheading on July 28, 1540. He died as he had lived, a victim of unbridled ambitions, lack of scruples, and love of power. (For details of Cromwell's life and times see De Lamar Jensen, Reformation Europe: Age of Reform and Revolution [Lexington, Mass.: D. C. Heath and Co., 1981], pp. 146-55, and Jasper Ridley, Henry VIII, the Politics of Tyranny [New York: Fromm International Publishing Corporation, 1986], pp. 325-44.)

In Macbeth, Shakespeare portrays a man in whom the worm of ambition, of greed for power, steadily grows until it leads to his destruction. When told by the three witches (Act I, scene iii) that he will be king hereafter, Macbeth first demurs, insisting he has no ambitions. But the worm begins to grow, and soon Macbeth is plotting murder, vacillating between willingness to kill Duncan the king and momentary shrinking from the dreadful deed. "If it were done, when 'tis done, then 'twere well / It were done quickly," he muses. Then drawing back from the increasingly delicious contemplation of evil, he piously proclaims that Duncan is "here in double trust: / first, as I am his kinsman and his subject, / Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, / who should against his murderer shut the door, / not bear the knife myself." (Act I, scene vii.) Urged on by his avaricious wife ("screw your courage to the sticking-place, / And we'll not fail"), Macbeth succumbs to evil, and the devil leads him thenceforth. Shakespeare's genius portrays the triumph of evil in a man who did not start out bad but ended up with "his secret murders sticking on his hands."

The lesson of the play—that ambition for power and the improper use of power corrupts and ultimately destroys—is universal and applicable in all societies and in every period of history.

Let Jesus be our exemplar in this and all other aspects of our leadership responsibilities. Always meek and humble, He never succumbed to the temptation to abuse power and authority. Humility and meekness are the keys to avoiding the corruption of power. He who fashioned the miracle of the loaves, He who was the Bread of Life, thanked His Father for the bread! On the cross He meekly and submissively finished the work He had been sent to do. Significantly Christ's last words, as He hung on the cross, demonstrated humble obedience: "Father it is finished, thy will is done." (JST Matthew 27:54.)

Some shepherds may be tempted to believe the in- sidious falsehood that they are indispensable, irreplace- able. Those who feel that way may complain, sulk, or be offended when they are released from whatever responsibility they have been assigned to. They may grumble that their successor isn't up to doing the job properly and even go so far as to withhold their support. Those who act in this way evidently fail to understand that as sure as they are called they will also be released. All that remains to be determined is the timing. It may be sooner or later, but release is inevitable. When the clock is turned on to start their service, it begins the countdown on their release as well. Even those trusted servants who serve for the duration of their mortal lives are released by death from earthly responsibilities. The spirit with which shepherds accept release from a calling is a test of their obedience and humility.

The unity shepherds must feel and practice is not only a practical necessity if the work of the Lord is to be done, but it also arises from a mutual faith in God and in His cause. It is the shared faith that binds us together, each contributing his or her small part toward the accomplishment of our divinely appointed task, each caught up in a cause greater than ourselves.

How sublime a word is obedience: the cornerstone of righteousness, the mark of the true disciple of Christ, the prerequisite for self-mastery, the companion of virtue, the first law of God. Faith and humility are its parents; service and sacrifice, its offspring; celestial joy, its reward.

Faithful shepherds are distinguished by their obedience to God and His prophets. Brigham Young's ministry was marked by humble obedience, by an intense desire and willingness to follow counsel. In early 1840, while leading a group of the Twelve on a mission to England, Brigham penned the following letter to the First Presidency:

To President Joseph Smith and Counselors:

Dear Brethren: You no doubt will have the perusal of this letter, and minutes of our conference; this will give you an idea of what we are doing in this country. If you see anything in or about the whole affair, that is not right, I ask, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you would make known unto us the mind of the Lord, and His will concerning us. I believe that I am as willing to do the will of the Lord, and take counsel of my brethren, and be a servant of the Church, as ever I was in my life; but I can tell you, I would like to be with my old friends; I like new friends, but I cannot part with my old ones for them. (History of the Church, 4:119-20.)

Faithful shepherds learn obedience from the holy scriptures and from following the counsel of the living prophets and other Church leaders. They learn obedience by disciplining their lives, by striving always to follow the principles of the gospel, including the laws and ordinances thereof. They learn obedience as the Savior did, by the things they suffer. Their willingness to be obedient is a measure of their love of the Father and the Son. They know that through obedience weak things are made strong. God is bound to reward those who obey Him. (See D&C 82:10.)

Some time ago I spoke to a young man who learned almost too late the role of obedience as the prerequisite for self-mastery. I will call him John, though that is not his real name. He was "born of goodly parents," graduated from Primary, and was active in his priests quorum. Though at that time in his life he attended Church regularly and on the surface was a faithful member, John was already, as a young man, living a double life. He had been introduced to alcohol at a school dance and by the time he graduated from high school was for practical purposes an alcoholic. A year at a large state university only confirmed his appetite for strong drink. His life began to spiral out of control as his grades at university plummeted and his attendance at Church ceased. At the very brink of disaster, John was saved by a loving bishop who said gently, "John, don't you see what you're doing to yourself? Don't you understand where this life-style you've adopted is leading you?" Others, including his parents, had tried to talk to John previously, but he had pushed them away, unwilling to listen, unable to admit he was in trouble. But something in the bishop's voice and manner touched John's heart. "I went to my room that night," he recounted, "and for the first time in my life I prayed. Oh I had gone through the motions lots of times previously—I'd mumbled a few trite phrases, anxious to get it all over with. But this time, I really prayed, asking God to help me because I just couldn't do it myself. There came to me a sudden realization that in debasing myself I also, in a sense, crucified Christ afresh. It was almost more than I could bear. For the first time ever I pled for forgiveness and pledged obedience to the Father's will."

From that moment on, John's life began to change. He stopped drinking, began to come back to Church, read the scriptures daily, and prayed fervently for strength and forgiveness. Obedience replaced rebellion as he tasted the sweet fruits of repentance. His "drinking buddies" soon abandoned him, but he no longer cared. He had found clean and wholesome friends at Church and, above all else, a Special Friend, who knew and understood him. He had found joy in walking the paths Jesus had trod so long ago.

Yes, Jesus walked many paths, and so must we. "Come follow me," He says. As we follow in His footsteps, our lives will change. We will become more effective and obedient servants, better human beings, more like the Good Shepherd in whose cause we labor.
