Napoleon Hill, in his renowned book, Think and Grow Rich, claimed the following: “Every adversity, every failure and every heartache brings with it the Seed of an equivalent or greater Benefit.”

When the COVID pandemic invaded our world, no one could claim that it was a blessing. However, there were some associated indirect blessings.

One was the increased need to use modern technology. Fortunately, in my home ward of South Shields in the Sunderland England Stake, we were extremely fortunate to have a bishop who was already into technology.

Bishop Adlington needed no persuasion to embrace this new opportunity, and quickly set up Zoom meetings and watch parties.

Initially, this new way of doing things was met with resistance by some ward members, particularly more senior members. So, the bishop, with a few of his allies, set about educating these discomforted members by setting up training for anyone who might be apprehensive about using computers, tablets or smartphones.

Pretty soon, ward meetings were being held regularly, and tentatively cameras were being turned on and people began to feel more comfortable when appearing on screen.

Sunday School classes for the youth and adults are held weekly now, and weekly fun nights are run for those who may feel the need for some extra companionship.

These activities may well continue long after COVID restrictions have been lifted, and more senior members have begun to embrace the new technology, previously thought to belong to the younger generation.

Single sisters particularly have realized the blessings that stem from this new way of communicating. While there is no substitute for face-to-face contact, this is certainly the next best thing, and in some cases has proven to be more convenient, requiring no costly travel or night visits to Church meetings.

Elsie Power is one such sister, who writes: “I knew nothing about Zoom or technology and was afraid I might, press the wrong button but our bishop was there at the end of the phone, whenever needed, to walk me through the process. He is always available, and that is reassuring. I am now confident in using Zoom and enjoy meeting with the ward and now know how to contact my family members all over the world. It is a wonderful blessing and a friend who I once thought was my enemy.”

Note
