On the evening of 16 November, a young adult from Africa posed a probing question to Elder Ronald A. Rasband of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

“During the pandemic, a lot of young single adults found themselves in a mental, emotional and spiritual decline from a lack of fellowship,” this person said. “What advice do you have for those who are struggling with mental health and facing feelings of depression, anxiety or hopelessness?”

It was one of several anonymous questions posed by youth and young adults spanning 32 countries across the Africa Central and Africa South Areas, who tuned in to watch his responses in a live Facebook broadcast.

Several global and local Church leaders participated, presided over by Elder Rasband. These included Elder Patrick Kearon (Senior President of the Seventy), and his wife, Jennifer; Bishop L. Todd Budge of the Presiding Bishopric) and his wife, Lori; Elder Christoffel Golden (President of the Africa South Area) and his wife, Diane; and Gladys Sitati, wife of Elder Joseph W. Sitati (Africa Central Area President).

Together, they offered heartfelt counsel and testimony on topics ranging from the COVID-19 vaccine, to sexual abuse, to a discussion about which attributes one should seek in a future spouse.

Almost 800 comments from viewers streamed in over the course of the hourlong event.

“Thank you for this amazing time and the Spirit we felt during this moment,” remarked Yvresse Rousseau from Congo Brazzaville.

“This broadcast really helped,” commented Natalie Kapema from Zambia.

The event was part of a busy 11-day visit to Africa by Elder Rasband, the Kearons and the Budges.

With the help of technology, the visiting leaders held priesthood leadership conferences and other meetings across the Africa Central Area and participated in stake conferences in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nairobi, Kenya. The leaders also met virtually with missionaries assigned to serve in Gabon and Cameroon, as well as those who have recently been evacuated from Ethiopia due to unrest. They met with Church leaders and members in the Africa South Area and made an impromptu trip to the newly-reopened missionary training centre in Roodepoort, west of Johannesburg, South Africa. In most settings, Elder Rasband invited and responded to questions from the Saints.

Elder Joseph W. Sitati, President of the Africa Central Area, said that having Elder Rasband visit—who has recently been assigned as the supervising Apostle for the Africa Central and Africa South Areas—felt as if the Lord were reaching out to the Saints of the African continent.

“Having an Apostle of the Lord focused specifically on the Church in the Africa Central Area was really like having the Lord Himself speak directly to the challenges that we as leaders and members face,” he said.

Elder Christoffel Golden, Africa South Area President, reflected on some of the messages that encapsulated the essence of Elder Rasband‘s visit.

“The first principle involved love,” he said. “Elder Rasband emphasised the importance of cultivating a love of God and a love of our fellow beings.”

He also “instructed us as leaders to strengthen the Church and live the gospel here in Africa,” Elder Golden continued. “He expressed that the Lord and his prophet, Russell M. Nelson, the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles love us, are grateful for our service, and need us in this holy work.

Along with that came a clarion call to following the living prophet. This, said Elder Sitati, “was especially relevant at a time when not only are many not vaccinated against COVID-19, but we also have several places where there is growing anxiety due to insecurity such as Ethiopia, Uganda and some areas in the DRC.”

But despite these difficulties, said Elder Golden, “we were given the apostolic assurance that we can live and prosper in faith and joy, irrespective of where we live, in all circumstances and at all times—even within the current COVID-19 pandemic.”

Elder Sitati also described the comfort and assurance that emanated from the Apostle.

“In my interactions with Elder Rasband, I felt the confirming witness deep in my heart that he is an Apostle of the Lord,” he said. “It is difficult for me to properly describe the feeling to someone else but being around him made me feel holy.”

Shortly before returning to the USA, Elder Rasband said that he was amazed and impressed with the people he had interacted with in Africa.

“This is the sixth time I’ve been to Africa and I’m constantly pleased and inspired by everyone,” he said. “Whether it be the leadership we’ve been with, or members, or missionaries—I’m amazed by these wonderful people who are doing their best and building up the Lord’s Church and kingdom.”
