In 2007, the United States was in the middle of an economic downturn. Because of this recession, some of my business clients were filing for bankruptcy and shutting down their businesses. This was hurting my business. As I sought to provide for my family and to help my clients, I was seeking guidance from Heavenly Father on what I should do. I wasn’t getting a clear answer and I didn’t know what to do. One morning as I was praying and reflecting upon this problem, I picked up the Book of Mormon and began to read. As I read this wonderful book, I felt ideas come to my mind on what I could do to help my clients and my business. It was a clear answer to my prayers.

In the introduction to the Book of Mormon, there is an invitation and a promise. The invitation to all of God’s children is to read it and to seek to know if it is true. The promise to those who gain a divine witness from the Holy Spirit that the Book of Mormon is true, will also come to know by the same power that Jesus Christ is the Saviour of the world, that Joseph Smith is His revelator and prophet in these last days, and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the Lord’s kingdom once again established on the earth, preparatory to the Second Coming of the Messiah.

There is another associated promise that I have found to be true in my life. This promise has to do with receiving revelation in our everyday lives.

Concerning the Book of Mormon, the Prophet Joseph Smith said: “I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book.”

When we read the Book of Mormon with real intent, not only will we have confirmed to us that Jesus Christ is the Saviour of the world and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the Lord’s reestablished kingdom on the earth, but we can also receive additional revelation in our lives about questions or challenges we are currently facing.

The Holy Ghost, the third member of the Godhead, has many responsibilities, including being a testator of truth, a revelator, a comforter, and a teacher.

Speaking of the Holy Ghost, Jesus Christ taught “​Howbeit when he, the ​​​Spirit of truth​ [referring to the Holy Ghost], is come, he will ​​​guide​ you into all ​​​truth​: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, ​that​ shall he speak: and he will ​​​shew​ you things to come” (John 16:13, emphasis added).

The Savior also taught this truth about the Holy Ghost: “But the ​​​Comforter​, ​which is​ the ​​​Holy Ghost​, whom the Father will send in my ​​​name​, he shall ​​​teach​ you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you” (John 14:26, emphasis added). Moreover, the Book of Mormon teaches in Moroni 10:5, “By the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things.”

Oftentimes we will pray to God for guidance. We may ask for guidance regarding family matters, or relationships, or work, or solving personal problems we are facing. One of the ways God answers our prayers is through the Holy Ghost.

In my own life, I have found that as I read the Book of Mormon, I regularly feel the Holy Ghost witnessing of the truth of what I read. And then I receive additional blessings. Because I feel the Holy Ghost witness of the truth of the words in the Book of Mormon, while he is witnessing of these truths, my heart and mind are also open to receiving other impressions about what I should do in other aspects of my life. The Holy Ghost truly guides me in truth, and teaches me all things, as the scriptures promise. I have received guidance in work matters and in family matters. I have received direction in Church callings and help in solving other problems I am facing.

As I read the Book of Mormon, I am opening the door for the Holy Ghost to testify of the truth of its message. And as He testifies of the truth of its message, if I listen and seek, I often receive additional guidance in what I should do in other aspects of my life.

In the Book of Mormon, we learn this truth: “For behold, again I say unto you that if ye will enter in by the way, and receive the Holy Ghost, it will ​​​show​ unto you all things what ye should do” (2 Nephi 32:5).

I invite you to read the Book of Mormon. Read it daily. Receive the confirming witness of its truth from the Holy Ghost. Receive the confirming witness of Jesus Christ’s divine mission and of the reestablishment of God’s kingdom upon the earth today. And then be ready to receive the guidance and teachings and help from the Holy Ghost in the other areas of your life. I witness it can come to you if you seek it.

Matthew L. Carpenter was called as a General Authority Seventy in March 2018. He is married to Michelle (Shelly) Kay Brown; they are the parents of five children.
