“When Elder [David A.] and Sister [Susan] Bednar were married, they consistently had family prayer, scripture study, and family home evening with their three sons. Sometimes things did not go well, and Elder and Sister Bednar wondered if their efforts were worthwhile. Now and then during scripture study there were outbursts such as, ‘He’s touching me!’ ‘Make him stop looking at me!’ and ‘Mom, he’s breathing my air!’ Family prayers were sometimes interrupted with giggling and poking. And family home evening lessons were not always calm with three active, noisy boys.

“But they kept trying.”

Family home evening is a time to strengthen family ties. We do this by learning the gospel together, by listening to each other’s feelings, thoughts and ideas, and by enjoying activities together. It is usually held on Monday evenings.

The practice of learning the gospel in the home began with Adam and Eve (see Moses 6:57). It has continued throughout succeeding generations, as prophets counseled parents to teach their children to love God and follow His ways (see Deuteronomy 6:5–7; Ephesians 6:4).

Family home evening is a time to enjoy each other and have fun together. Through simple activities—games, service, sharing talents, visits to local sites of interest—families create connections and build unity.

Family home evening is for everyone. Recently married couples, fathers and mothers with children, single parents with children, couples who have no children at home, single adults in home evening groups, and those who live alone or with roommates can all be blessed by holding family home evening.

Prophets have promised great blessings to those who follow this counsel, including greater faith in the hearts of the youth, increased ability to resist temptation, and greater peace, love, and harmony in the home.

Participating in family home evening is not always convenient or easy. But if you keep trying, like Elder and Sister Bednar, you and your family will be blessed.
