Ronald John Zirker, Parent and Teen: Teamed for Success ( 1985)

1

Parents' Responsibilities

Years ago, when the youngest of our five children was about two years old, I learned one of the most important lessons of my life—one that would set the tone for all my future relationships with my children.

Steven was full of energy, full of ideas, full of curiosity, and full of charm. A flash of his winsome grin and arms wrapped tightly around my leg would usually melt my heart completely. One day, however, I was exasperated beyond limit. A spank aimed at his bottom landed right where I meant it to. Startled, then righteously indignant, Steven faced me squarely, hands on his hips, his head tilted up to mine, and he roared: "I'm going to tell Father on you!"

I knelt to his level and said, "But Steven, I am your father."

He glared unyieldingly. "No sir. You're my dad. I'm going to tell Father on you."

And with that, he turned on his heel and left. It took a moment for his words to sink in. Then I hurried after him—anxious to continue the conversation. He didn't even remember what he had said. But I did. In fact, I couldn't forget it.

I had long been acquainted with scriptures that counsel parents in their important responsibility (Ephesians 6; D&C 68:25; 93:36-40) and record the problems that result when that responsibility has been neglected (Exodus 34:6-7; 1 Samuel 1-3). I held a temple recommend and went to the temple as often as I could, served on a high council, performed my duties as a school psychologist with integrity, belonged to several service organizations in the community, and had a wonderful relationship with Sherri, my wife. Our home was almost paid for, we had a two-years' supply of food, and we held family prayer and family home evening regularly. I felt satisfied and contented with myself and my life.

Steven's announcement had jarred my contentment and triggered a private search that marked a turning point in my life. Just what was my stewardship as a parent? What was I expected to accomplish with it?

My search created in me a new awareness of parent-child dynamics. As a high councilor, I was assigned to work with the Young Adults and the Indian Placement program. Over the years I saw Young Adults with energy and purpose take positions of leadership, marry fine companions, and start families with children born under the covenant. I also observed Young Adults who wandered aimlessly from job to job, married quickly, and ended up struggling, sometimes unsuccessfully, with unhappy, immature marriages.

Our family has taken in many foster children for varying lengths of time. One Indian Placement student, Lori, came to us from an adoring father who wrote often, encouraging her to "learn all you can where such wonderful opportunities are given you to grow." She became a part of our family, filling our home with goodwill and laughter. She learned to sing and to play the violin and piano. She became a cheerleader and a fine student. Other foster children, however, stole our property, mocked our family's values, resisted all efforts at friendship—and some even ended up in Juvenile Hall. Many of these children received little or no communication from their parents. We concluded that Lori's father had magnified his stewardship by sending her to us for greater purposes, whereas others had hoped to use the placement program to absolve their responsibility for their children.

I remember one teenage girl I'll call Becky who was referred to me for counseling. She had just been released from the hospital where she had been taken after an attempted suicide. She was so hostile that I could do nothing for her during the first few visits. She maintained a front of silence and belligerence. Finally, tossing aside the usual questions and therapy techniques, I felt impressed to ask, "Has anyone ever told you they loved you?"

My question broke the silence. Huge, racking sobs filled the room as she shook her head over and over again. In a faltering voice she said, "And I've never told anybody I loved them."

Her story gradually came out. Her parents had been killed in an accident when she was about three years old, and she had lived in foster homes and with relatives from that time on. She felt like a burden, totally alone.

Our visits became regular and productive. I helped convince her that she could make something of her life, helped her gain control over her study habits, and challenged her to make friends and get involved in school activities.

Then I moved fifteen hundred miles away. A letter was forwarded to me. It read:

Dear Mr. Zirker:

You are just like all the rest. I was only a job to you, wasn't I? You didn't care any more than the others did.

Becky

The letter broke my heart. I didn't have the stewardship to offer her the continuity she so desperately needed; the courts decided such jurisdiction and were impersonal in their assessment of her needs. There was no affidavit for her tears—or mine.

I wept again when I saw a foster son deported for theft and another placed in the county detention hall for trying to leave town with a stolen automobile and the neighbor's daughter. These young men, both age fourteen, had tried to fit into our neighborhood. They felt angry and frustrated when friends' parents shut their doors against them. They had acquired only limited academic skills, and their failures in school further humiliated them. Suffering from low self-esteem, they grew so deviant in their behavior that they lost the freedom to mingle with those who might have helped.

I observed that parents of teenagers felt great frustrations. Their ability to control their children had diminished the minute those sons or daughters discovered they could do anything an adult could—drive a car, get a job, come and go at will, even wear adult-size clothing. Trouble accelerated. Parents who expected good grades, adherence to a curfew, and some measure of a moral code—in fact, who made any attempts to structure their teenagers—were met with defiance.

As a counselor, I was often asked by parents, "Where did I go wrong? He never used to be this way." This question was asked by nice guys, like myself. Others asked me why I hadn't done my job better, why teachers hadn't done their part better. Society was to blame, everyone else was at fault, even their teen: "He never would listen, never has given me any peace since the day he was born!"

When my wife was called to work with the Young Women in the ward, she came home from a meeting with Elaine Cannon, the new general president of the organization. Sister Cannon knew that Latter-day Saint teens were having problems: drugs, running away, suicides, abortions—and that the girls were getting into trouble much younger, even at Primary age. She felt two things would help young women avoid such pitfalls: a concerned priesthood holder and a woman the girl could love and respect enough to emulate. Could girls find that example in their homes? In their mothers and fathers?

As I've reread the scriptures looking for guidance as a parent, I have found very few scriptural references dealing with teenagers. Counsel to parents always includes the word child or children: "Train up a child in the way he should go . . ." "Provoke not your children to wrath . . ." "And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion . . ." "And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly . . ." (Proverbs 22:6; Ephesians 6:4; D&C 68:25, 8; italics added.) References to teenagers are limited to autonomous activities separate from parental jurisdiction: Christ in the temple at age twelve, the prodigal son, Alma's son and the four sons of Mosiah, the stripling warriors, Laman and Lemuel, Samson, and so forth. Such accounts do not reveal much about family structure; rather, they suggest that these young people acted on their own and that parents could only watch and pray. Most scriptural counsel for parents concerns children under twelve, or even under eight.

When a distraught parent of a teenager comes in for help, one of the first things I do is ask questions about the son or daughter's childhood. How often was he or she left with a baby sitter? What kind of health problems did he or she encounter? How is the family structured? What kind of relationship does the wife have with the husband? Having asked these questions for twenty years, I can usually guess the answers from a teen's behavior.

It is surprising, however, to hear teenagers themselves describe what they think their parents should have done during their younger years. The response is remarkably uniform regardless of religion, sex, race, or economic circumstances: more rules, more time spent with parents, family meals and recreation, schedules they can count on. These teenagers talk about the future and what it's going to be like for them: no divorce no matter what, much more time spent with their children. Teens are often ashamed of their parents, bitter, resentful, and hurt. They feel uncared for, unloved, and therefore unlovable. Even worse, their lack of self-esteem carries over into their adult lives: when selections are made for employment, college, and marriage partners, these unlucky people are often at the bottom of the heap.

Of course, those I see in my work as a psychologist are extreme. But what disturbs me just as much are those teens who live barely above the line. They don't do anything that would land them in my office, but I see them tucking tobacco chews in their back pockets, discussing the latest R-rated movie, laughing at questionable stories, poring over pornographic magazines, packing into cars during their lunch hour and wheeling wildly away and then frequently returning late. Their grades are mediocre and their elective choices follow the line of least resistance. They are seen holding hands on campus at age twelve, intimately swaying in dark corners at unsupervised junior high dances. Parents confide in tired voices how glad they'll be when the teenage years pass. Teachers talk endlessly about the latest technique for controlling disinterested and sometimes rude teenagers, and their own family life is disrupted as they try to be pseudoparents to these frustrated teens.

I've seen even the best teens agonize at age thirteen that they don't have a boyfriend, that they don't have even one pair of designer jeans, that they weren't picked for the team, that their complexions are beyond hope, that the popular kids at school exclude them, that they are overweight or underweight, overdeveloped or underdeveloped. They fret over unfair treatment: everybody else in the neighborhood has a motorcycle, never has to do any chores, gets to shop at the most exclusive stores, has a personal charge card and set of car keys, and has a pocketful of tokens and endless hours to spend at the arcade.

Could training at home have made a difference? When does training turn into unrighteous dominion? At what age do you resign yourself to saying, "Well, they have their free agency"? When should teens no longer be held accountable to you for what they do? Who makes the rules, and what happens when they are broken? Can parents be too strict? What do you do when a teen resists all of the parents' honest efforts?

Would my own young children someday pass this way? What could I do to minimize their problems? My Church callings had made me aware of the Lord's expectations of the youth. As an admissions advisor for the Church Education System I knew the requirements for post-high-school education and the necessity to start preparing as early as possible. I was acquainted with college entrance tests and could see that with rapid Church growth and rising educational costs, requirements for entering LDS schools would be raised higher and higher, and only those fully prepared would qualify. Would my children be among them?

I asked myself these questions, and I heard them from both parents and teenagers I worked with every day. I observed that both parents and teens really wanted to be close. Parents dreamed of the day when their son or daughter would move into the world to make a difference—happy, in love, prepared to live a provident and useful life. Teens wanted their parents' approval, admiration, unconditional love, and trust. They wanted desperately to succeed and to make their loved ones proud.

When President David O. McKay said that no other success can compensate for failure in the home, he confirmed what I saw on the faces of countless parents and teens daily. Neon couldn't flash a brighter message than do the faces of happy parents. And no one looks more dejected than teens and parents in conflict with each other.

Is it important that both win? The Lord said, "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) To accomplish this he needs a righteous generation, youth who have discovered that living correctly—which includes honoring their fathers and mothers—frees them to receive all that the Father has. He needs a generation that chooses obedience because it makes life more successful, more uplifting, more progressive. The Lord also needs righteous parents to witness for him. When we account to him for our parental stewardships, will he call our children to testify?

I don't think the Lord will evaluate our success or failure as parents by counting our children's virtues and mistakes. Rather, I think he will be more interested in how hard we tried. He will want to know how important our children were to us and whether our efforts with them were righteous. He has not left us without guidelines—ancient and modern scriptures and prophets and the Holy Ghost (D&C 121:26)—to help us fulfill our stewardship successfully.

I have a hunch the Lord will ask my son Steven how well he handled his trials in life—even if some of them were his parents. I believe he will expect Steven to succeed in spite of unfavorable circumstances. As for me, he will judge my parenthood by his own. The actions of my children won't convict or exalt me, but how I handled their actions will. That is the test of godhood.

It has become clear to me that the role of a parent must be that of a teacher. As Joseph Smith said, "I teach them correct principles and they govern themselves." Your teens will have a head start if they are given experiences that will build their resolve to resist temptation. Telling isn't teaching, and listening isn't learning. The real lessons are learned through experience. (See Alma 32.) Parents are in the best position to provide such experience. I ponder daily: David seems extra tired; I wonder why? Connie has a twinkle in her eye; who put it there? What kind of academic experience does Steven need? How can I motivate him to try harder?

This book is a glimpse into what Sherri and I have learned from our search for answers, and a personal testimony of the value of those principles. As I've prayed for each of my children and asked the Lord what Sherri and I could do to help them learn good from evil, to make choices to live worthily, I have learned and taught these principles.

I caution parents to pray diligently before trying any of the methods in this book. I share them only to show that the Lord will help us tailor our teaching to each individual for whom he has called us to be responsible. As I asked him how to effectively lead my children, I found that the quality I most needed was strong personal discipline. To the extent that I actually did, day in and day out, what I felt inspired to do, I was able to help my children bypass many mistakes and emerge as valiant, righteous disciples of Christ, motivated from within.

Our three daughters are college age. Our two sons are teenagers. It took—and takes—a lot of time. It gave—and gives—unending rewards.
