Ronald John Zirker, Parent and Teen: Teamed for Success ( 1985)

2

The Preteen Years

As a psychologist, I'm constantly asked how to correct misbehavior: What should I do when my children refuse to go to church? What do I do with my son when he takes the car without permission? How can I get my daughter to come in by the curfew? When a parent explains, I can generally see why the child misbehaved, and between the two of us we can speculate on ways to handle the problem. But, curiously, in the most successful families I know, the parents spend their best time and thought not correcting but preventing misbehavior. I've discovered in the course of my lifetime that the best kind of control is self-control. If parents have laid a foundation from the beginning, they may never have to deal with the most serious teenage crises.

To discipline is to instruct, educate, train. Self-control must be taught and nurtured, the earlier the better. A child has to learn what is permissible step by step, over years of experience. A disciplined person voluntarily chooses a certain way of life. If parents themselves have accepted this way of life, then they can help their children develop self-discipline, not by punishing, but by showing, modeling, explaining, and teaching.

Thinking of ourselves as teachers and trainers instead of disciplinarians (though the term still applies, and correctly so) helped my wife and me to see our role a little clearer. Together, we came up with a set of principles we felt applied under this definition:

With these guidelines in mind, let's build a foundation for self-discipline, progressing upward by age and stage. Even though we all have children in different stages of development, it helps to take a panoramic view of where children are in the process. If you can see the end from the beginning, you will be better able to evaluate where a gap in training might have occurred and thus take remedial steps where possible.

Self-Centered

During this stage a child depends on others for basic needs, is relatively unprejudiced toward others, acts on his own wishes and needs, and expresses all feelings. Play is an all-consuming concern, and peer pressure has very little influence.

This stage begins at birth and usually phases out around age five or six, when the child leaves the parents' side for extra training by schools, music teachers, coaches, and other adults. 12

It is important at this age that he receive a lot of attention and direction from parents. You set parameters and provide a daily routine within those parameters. Now is the time to determine what your children will need to know when they leave your side as independent adults.

At this stage children need daily eye contact, touch, hugs, smiles, soft voices, and a comfortable feeling of health from proper feeding and care. Give them plenty of room to grow and learn. Make your home safe for them. If they move toward danger or trouble, intervene with another activity. Introduce them hourly to their new world; stimulate their senses. Let them know that you make their life happy.

When your child bites, don't bite back to show how much it hurts. At this stage children aren't capable of transferring learning. Find something he can bite and move him away from the situation that prompted the problem biting. Use eye contact every time you are specifically training the child, and speak in the tone of voice you wish him to use.

Between three and five years of age, a child should learn to care for himself and the home. Remember, he must be walked with every step of the way—say, "This is what grown-ups do!" Use the word let's: "Let's brush your teeth. Let's make your bed. Let's pick up the toys. Let's set the table. Let's take your bath." Set the routine. Your child will learn faster if it's repeated day after day with you right by his side.

Hug a lot. Explain everything. Avoid don'ts. Praise efforts: "I like the way you remembered to put the lid back on the toothpaste." "You are learning to sit quietly during church just like Daddy." Be positive: "You can do it!" "You are special!" "You are wonderful!" "You are growing up!"

Skill-Centered

At this stage, about ages six to twelve, conflict arises between the need for guidance and the need for independence. Your child will begin to discover new values and to question old ones.

The arrival of this stage indicates that a significant amount of teaching and learning has already taken place and that your child is anxious to do and think for himself. Disciplining with logical consequences will best teach a healthy sense of independence.

You'll know when your child reaches this stage. You will be helping him make his bed and he will suddenly look up and say, "I can do it all by myself." Then, for the next several years, it will be trial and error. Your child will want to go it alone and will be frustrated at any inability to do things up to standard. He will know what to do and will not want you to tell him to do it—even when he forgets or does it poorly. So this is the time to stay close by and help with subtlety.

As the parent, you will still set the parameters, but now the child can help you plan the daily routine. Six- to nine-year-olds need lots of opportunities to make simple choices (out of several alternatives that would be acceptable to you). List activities, chores, responsibilities, and rules; then let your child help choose how these will be carried out. Keep the chores few and simple so you can check on them consistently. Make your child feel you depend on him.

Continue to walk with him, if necessary, to see that he accomplishes what he agreed to do. Give small, tangible rewards after a job well done—never to stop undesirable behavior. Hug him, talk to him eye to eye, feed him well, keep him comfortably dressed, and smile when you look at him.

Between ages ten and twelve children do not like to be told what to do, so use a chart. Again, make a list together, including the times when tasks should be accomplished. Hold your son or daughter to it through natural consequences. For instance, he doesn't leave the house in the morning till the chores are done; he doesn't go to bed until chores are done. Children need to experience the grownup feeling of receiving privileges by earning them.

Be positive, matter-of-fact, and honest. Let the chart tell the child what he's earned. Love, support, and guide him, but don't take away the consequences, or you will be teaching him to misbehave again. Keep touching; sit together, hug, or rub a tired back.

Provide adventures together and times for serious talks when your child can pour out thoughts, feelings, fears, and frustrations without feeling threatened. This will create a habit that will carry over into the teen years, easing the way for healthy communication later on.

Help your child choose at least two areas to excel in, and help him form good study habits now. Conquering a difficult subject or learning to play an instrument or a sport well is hard. Your child will make hundreds of mistakes. When your child grows resistant—no one likes to fail—you need to be the strong one, giving emotional support and encouragement but holding your child to practice or study. Without this firm support, a child will back away from the struggle and remain on the level at which he feels competent.

Don't be swayed by your child's excuses. Knowing the mitigating circumstances may help you evaluate how to correct misbehavior—but such circumstances do not and should not remove the consequences.

Service-Centered

When children reach this stage, their first concern is for others. They are able to nurture others without sacrificing personal growth. They know the right reasons for giving, have a positive self-image, and take responsibility for providing their own physical, financial, and emotional needs. Such people are self-motivated and self-actualized; they work toward achieving their own potential. And they are able to establish and maintain harmony with the laws of God and society, knowing that their own strength comes through obedience to these laws. The rewards are freedom, self-respect, and the respect of others. When a child has arrived at this stage, you will know he is well on his way to reaching his potential.

Between ages thirteen and sixteen, if the child has lived within a clear set of parameters, he plans his own daily routine and sets goals. You are still very much available; you meet with your teen and plan ahead through daily conversations and weekly planning sessions.

Clearly define what you expect, and then let him schedule himself to meet those expectations. Have him make a list of Musts, Oughts, and Wants. Then ask him to arrange these things in a workable schedule and present it to you; this will help you work together, not interfering with one another's goals. It should be clearly understood that your teen has privileges (not rights) that are granted according to mature behavior and concern for the rights and privileges of others.

Your role as an authority will be paramount when your teen needs to fall back on it to save face with his peers. Peer interaction reaches its peak in most teenagers when they reach fifteen years old. That is the time to stay close and be there to support them. Teens need a chance to test and evaluate principles at home with support from those who love them—even when they occasionally fall.

Our son David was encouraged by a neighbor friend to set fire to some explosives. He sensed that we would not approve, so he took the precaution of keeping the plan a secret. When an explosion damaged his left hand severely, it took a great deal of courage for him to admit that he had done something foolish. But the pain and fear of losing his hand left him no choice.

The doctor diagnosed burned tendons. David would need surgery. His hand would also be scarred to the point of needing plastic surgery. David asked me for a blessing. With our home teacher, Wayne Whitlock, assisting me, I felt impressed to bless David that his hand would heal without scars. The next day when the doctor removed the bandages to prepare for surgery, David's hand had visibly improved. Within a very short time it was completely healed, with no visible sign of the mishap.

The experience left David with mixed emotions: a feeling of awe for the power of the priesthood, a healthy respect for explosives, gratitude for his reprieve, and the knowledge that repeated disobedience could place him outside his covenant relationship with the Lord in the future.

Between ages sixteen and nineteen, teens can learn to provide for themselves financially. They need to feel competent, successful, useful, and important. They need monitored exposure to reality with time to evaluate and analyze how they respond. This is the age for driver's licenses, dating, and plans that will take them away from home.

These teens still see you as the authority in your home. If you neglect to follow through on limits, they learn that authority can be challenged when it interferes with their immediate desires. They want the security of limits. They need to understand that freedom brings responsibilities and that they have an obligation to pay their own way in life. Your teens will accept these principles happily if you have prepared them during the earlier stages of development.

Let's use the money issue as an example. Sherri and I make sure our teenagers know that they live in our home and use our car. Therefore, we make the rules governing the home and the use of the car. We explain that someday they will have their own possessions. They don't have to account to us for what they do with their belongings—only for what they do with ours.

This has encouraged our children to search for ways to acquire the things they want. Our eldest daughter, Kathy, took many things into her marriage that would make a home comfortable, including lovely paintings and wall hangings, several pieces of furniture she had refinished herself, and a large trousseau. Carolyn, Connie, David, and Steven are following in her footsteps.

As our children turn sixteen, we turn the household budget over to them for the summer. They pay utilities, buy the food, plan the menus, feed us three meals a day, budget for gas, and meet other necessities. We find them reminding us to keep the door closed so the air conditioner won't be required to cool the entire outdoors. They struggle when there is too much month at the end of the money and burst into tears when the dessert is sampled early. The accounting at the end of each month is an especially valuable lesson.

Sherri loves to sew and makes a considerable amount of what we wear. But she had to struggle with each of our daughters to teach them the skill. It was interesting, though, that when Kathy married, she asked to borrow the old sewing machine we had in storage. With that machine, she made her curtains, maternity clothes, baby clothes, slipcovers, aprons, baby toys, and gifts. She also keeps her family healthy, grinding her own wheat and making bread, gleaning from orchards and gardens, canning and drying. Her ability to manage the small income of a student husband helped keep him in college. She is using the lessons learned at home, lessons that were sometimes hard to teach her.

We take self-sufficiency seriously. All our sons and daughters have learned how to bake bread, sew, clean, and choose and care for their clothes. When they turn twelve, they take over their own washing and ironing. Fifteen-year-old David sorts a wash, adds the detergent, knows when to add bleach, and irons his own white shirt for Sunday.

There's a certain virtue in working hard as well as working skillfully. Our farm gave hundreds of opportunities—changing water; milking the cow; weeding; picking and selling fruit from our fruit trees; canning, drying, and preserving food. When we moved to the city, we switched to painting house numbers on curbs; making suckers and selling them at football games; giving piano, violin, and gymnastics lessons to the children in the neighborhood; baby-sitting; and eventually applying for jobs and working hard to keep them.

We let our children know they were responsible for taking the driver's education course before driving and that they had to earn good grades to keep the insurance cost down. We told them one ticket would cost them a three-month suspension of their license, the second six months, and the third, suspension for a year. We established our right to know where they were going with the car and when they planned to return. When they have announced, "I can earn the money to buy my own car," we have counterannounced that they will also need to earn enough to support themselves too. This does not mean that they would have to leave home to get a car—just that a car is definitely a luxury and a low priority.

We thought through and talked through these issues before our eldest could drive, so our children grew up knowing the family's rules. We had observed that cars create a false sense of independence and also cost a great deal of money. We didn't want our teens, in their immaturity, to liquidate college tuition savings in order to pay for a car. Much of what we did, frankly, postponed decisions about cars until they were mature enough that a car fit into—instead of dominated—their lives.

On the other hand, we have been very open to their responsible use of our cars. They have all found quality jobs that have helped them to finance their needs, including the gas they use. We continue to give gifts that we hope are both generous and sensitive, but from age sixteen on our children have earned their necessities completely including putting themselves through college full-time. We've helped when it was needed (for instance, contributing large amounts toward tuition), but generally they meet their needs through their own efforts. Their confidence has grown as they have felt competent and useful. By gaining and honing marketable skills, they are able to face their futures with equanimity.

We found it was unnecessary to ground or otherwise punish our children at this age. Indeed, we have found that there is very little you can really do to discipline teenagers, since they are physically able to do just about anything they want to do. Thus, it is imperative that they control themselves. They no longer need someone right by their side but can be completely independent so long as they control their behavior. With independence comes responsibility; if they choose to behave correctly, they receive the reward they have earned. If they use their freedom incorrectly, then they must assume the consequences, which may include restrictions. We have tried to make it very clear to our children that they can choose to be controlled or to control themselves. The latter is the apex of true freedom.

We cannot expect our children to do more or less than they are able. To become capable they first need to be taught and trained, then given opportunities to do things alone with us close by, and then—on their own—take responsibility for their actions.

It takes a dispassionate parent to analyze the beginning with the end in mind, to allow children to progress past the self-centered stage and to assume supervised independence that becomes self-motivated independence. If children can be taught to direct themselves before they leave home, they will be capable of living independently. They will be free, responsible, righteous adults, our peers as well as our children. What more, as parents, could we desire?
