Ronald John Zirker, Parent and Teen: Teamed for Success ( 1985)

4

Traps for Teens

All teenagers dream big about the future. At the same time, they hunger for something here and now—a boyfriend, a position on the football team, a queen's title, a date to the prom, a pair of shoes just like Kyle's, an invitation to join the gang at McDonald's after the game. Two questions to ask teens are: What is it that you want right now more than anything else in the world? Is that consistent with what you want to become?

The way teenagers spend their time is crucial to their future. They will someday look back and either be grateful for the things they learned and applied, or puzzled and upset that they aren't what they want to be. Here are some things that may get in the way of future success:

Carelessness

Our insurance agent stopped by one night. When I let him in, he walked to the nearest chair and slumped down into it. Slowly he shook his head from side to side, and then he began to speak.

His teenage son and a friend were helping a neighboring farmer change water by moving the pipes to another part of the field. Tired of walking the distance, they reasoned that if they raised the pipe in the air and pivoted it in the direction they wanted it to land, they would get the job done quicker. They lifted the pipe right into a high-voltage wire, which electrocuted both of them immediately.

As a student, I remember visiting the dean of my college to give him an update on my progress. As I entered his office I noticed that his face was ashen. He looked as if he was in shock. I waited a moment, giving him time to compose himself.

"My youngest son. . ." he began. The son had brought his buddy up to his room to see his .22 rifle and let him handle it for a moment. Taking the gun in his hand, the friend struck a macho pose, aimed the gun, and pulled the trigger without checking to see whether the gun was loaded or not. "It was. The bullet hit my son in the forehead and killed him instantly."

I loved guns and hunted every year with my dad and my uncles. No one was more excited than I was when I received my first gun—a .22 rifle—for Christmas. I couldn't wait to use it and ran outside, popping off at anything that moved. I hit a bird. Watching it fall to the ground, writhe momentarily, then lie still made me sick inside. I vowed at that moment that I would never again kill for sport.

Teaching carefulness begins with helping toddlers envision consequences: "What will happen if you drop the cup?" It continues with safety instruction—how to respect speed, heat, cold, gravity, explosives, chemicals, and pressures. You can also teach such habits as planning, sizing up, and imagining consequences. Provide many, many, many supervised experiences. Speed, weapons, and chemicals—especially drugs—are so susceptible to misuse among teenagers that they must always be supervised during these years.

Lack of Supervision

One mother came to see me at my office, asking for direction. Her son had been referred to me many times for minor offenses, and I warned her that he needed rules and supervision—particularly from the time he came home from school until bedtime. She shrugged her shoulders. She had a job and couldn't see any way her hours could be changed. That summer I read in the paper that her son had been killed in a crazy game of Russian roulette with neighborhood friends.

Teenage years are information-hungry years, and teens deserve to have their questions answered with solid information that they can experiment with in nondamaging ways. This doesn't mean that teenagers should never be alone. It does mean that "alone" time should be on a continuum with "together" time in which teenagers and parents share information about times apart rather than lead separate lives. It also means that parents need to seek information, where appropriate, when their teenagers are under the supervision of other adults or older children. If that information seems to be vague, parents should be suspicious.

Lack of Experience

Teenagers are in the most vulnerable time of life, and they will make many mistakes through inexperience. David's encounter with explosives was a mistake. So was Connie's collision with the back of another car. She didn't have the experience to know how to handle a car on slick, icy roads. Her mistake cost us $200 and a substantial increase in insurance premiums; it cost the insurance company $1,700. Connie learned a lot from the mistake: that at age sixteen she did not know everything about driving, that her mistake was too great for her to personally pay for and would mean that the family would have to forego the new couch she had been hoping for, and that we, her parents, were legally responsible for the damage even though we hadn't committed the offense. From that point on she never questioned our driving or curfew rules.

Disobedience

Teens need to know the difference between a mistake and a sin. Deliberate disobedience is a sin.

We had an inexpensive electric car, which saved us a substantial amount on gas. Sherri took the children to school in it every day. It was incredibly easy to drive, requiring only a turn of the key and a foot on the accelerator—absolutely begging to be used. David and Steven, ages thirteen and nine, drove it from time to time around our big yard, though they had been told explicitly never to touch it. The moment of truth came, however, when they accidentally dented the fender going around the corner of the fence. Then they had to own up.

In the conference that followed, we asked them if they remembered the rule about the car. They remembered. We reminded them about Joseph Smith's practice of teaching correct principles and then letting people govern themselves. They remembered that, too. We told them that we realized they needed practice in governing themselves before moving out into the world, but that governing oneself took maturity. Unless they were capable of governing themselves, they couldn't have opportunities mature people had. We asked them who they thought should govern them: us, society, or themselves.

It was a bottom-line test. A lifetime of lip service to principle could be helpless in the face of intense immediate desires. David and Steven realized that their desire to drive that car had been greater than their desire to govern themselves according to a correct principle.

The discussion caused some tears and serious reflection. When we asked the boys what action should be taken, their answer was, "We are old enough to govern ourselves. Just wait and see. Leave the key in the ignition. No matter what, we will never touch it again until you give us permission. And you just tell us how much it is to fix that dent and we will somehow earn the money to pay for it."

It cost $400, and we knew they would never be able to pay for it, but we did assign some pretty heavy tasks, which they carried out faithfully. We paid the debt, but they made restitution. Since that time they have never touched that car without our express permission. We feel that we can trust them now, not only in this area but probably in some others as yet untested.

We knew that the future would bring many intense desires that could be controlled only from within. Our daughters are now on their own, and David is physically strong—there is no way to control them externally. But because we began early, with preventive discipline, we see with joy the strength of their own internal controls.
