Ronald John Zirker, Parent and Teen: Teamed for Success ( 1985)

5

Teaching Correct Principles

One night I dreamed I was walking along a country road with David and Steven, ages fourteen and ten. As we came around a bend in the road, there before us was a huge black bear. When it caught sight of us, it reared up on two feet and moved toward us threateningly. For some reason, I knew that the bear did not have power to harm me but was bent on destroying my sons. Their only hope was me. I immediately put myself between them and the bear and told them to start running as fast as they could.

I woke up in a cold sweat, adrenalin flowing. To this day the dream remains as vivid as if it had really happened. Seeking to know what the bear represented, I instinctively felt that my sons were in danger because they did not have the firm understanding of the gospel they needed. They had not yet developed a love for the scriptures and an understanding of Church doctrines. My dream told me that this teaching was my responsibility.

My sons were born under the covenant. Our family read the standard works together in early morning devotionals, we attended church faithfully, and listened to the general conference messages twice a year. Yet it was clear to me that the boys needed something more.

I hadn't had the same feeling about our daughters. They had somehow caught the spirit of scripture study while still in Primary. Looking back, I can see many factors that accounted for this. Their mother worked in the Primary the entire time they were in it, and when the oldest daughter entered Young Women, Sherri accompanied her into that organization. She knew the manuals our girls were being taught from, taught them all the songs in the Primary songbook, and reinforced at home what they learned at church.

Before each of our daughters was baptized, we made sure she had read the Book of Mormon and was taught the significance of the sacrament. On the day of her baptism each girl received a new dress, a complete set of scriptures, and her own updated Book of Remembrance. It was a reverent and memorable occasion, and when each daughter was confirmed on the Sunday following her baptism, her spirit communicated that she was aware of the sacredness of the moment.

In seminary our daughters were attentive and serious and earned good grades. They loved their teachers and often discussed with us what they had learned.

We were gratified to see the influence the scriptures had on their lives. First Thessalonians 5:21-22 strengthened their resolve to avoid dating young men of questionable character. The concept of avoiding even the appearance of evil gave them courage to walk out of indecent movies and ask to be taken home. Second Timothy 1:7 helped them overcome their fears of recitals, important tests at school, and job applications.

When they received their patriarchal blessings, they kept copies of them with their scriptures as a reminder that these were their own personal revelations from the Lord.

Kathy, our oldest, bore her testimony to whoever would listen. A boy who rode her bus listened to her testimony every day, coming and going from school. In junior high they became good friends and before long he was taking the missionary lessons. As a result he was baptized, converted his adoptive parents, and served a successful mission. When Kathy invited her non-LDS friends to our home, she insisted they join us as we knelt around the table for prayers and then read the scriptures. At age ten she visited a Bible school with a friend and delivered a brisk lecture on the nature of the Godhead. Before she graduated from high school many of her friends had joined the Church.

Carolyn was much the same. Asked to give a speech in English class when she was a junior in high school, she outlined the plan of salvation on the blackboard and explained it in detail. Her speech was to have taken seven minutes, but the class and the teacher started asking questions and the discussion lasted the entire hour. Three years later this same teacher approached my wife and asked about Carolyn. When she was told Carolyn was at BYU, she hugged my wife and said, "I just want you to let her know that because of her speech that day, I began investigating the Church. My husband and I have been members now for two years, and we couldn't be more grateful. Please thank her for introducing me to the gospel."

For our sons, however, family scripture reading was something to be endured rather than enjoyed. Receiving a new white shirt and suit for their baptism didn't excite them. In fact, while our daughters' friends reinforced them with oohs and aahs on their lovely day, the boys were made to feel a bit sissy for having to dress up. Reading was a delightful accomplishment for the girls, a chore for the boys. Singing the hymns was "girls' stuff"—even in Primary.

In short, the approach that worked with our daughters did not work with our sons. Study or discussion with Sherri somehow seemed to prove to them that the gospel was for girls. They obediently attended early morning devotionals and did their share of the reading, but the lively discussions passed over their heads. The boys attended church, but as they moved into the Blazer group and into the priesthood, they reported the disturbances made by the other guys, saying that they felt unpopular if they even acted like they were listening. It wasn't macho to know too many answers in class. The positive aspects of church meant basketball, hiking, and Scout camp to them. Even memorizing the Articles of Faith was a strain.

My dream about the bear crystallized in a powerful way a number of uneasy feelings. It became clear to me that if our sons were going to learn the gospel they would have to do so from me—and I would have to present it in such a way that they would feel personally benefited. Sherri and I had long discussions. We fasted and prayed. Then we made some decisions.

The first thing I did was ask to have David as my home-teaching partner. I felt that home-teaching was important, and I didn't want to take the chance that someone else would teach him it was mundane and unimportant. I wanted him to feel committed to his families and to develop the habit of making regular visits. I gave him the Ensign's message from the First Presidency and asked him to study it, be prepared to bear his testimony about it, and add anything he felt would reinforce the message. Following my lead, he has taken his calling seriously month after month for the three years we have been partners. He now makes all of the appointments, checks on his families often, bakes treats for special occasions, arranges holiday get-togethers, and has definitely grown in his ability to plan ahead and follow through.

In another effort to teach, I bought a video recorder and told the boys that I wanted to experiment with it. I directed each of them to listen to the lessons and talks given at church each Sunday and to select some message they felt would be of interest to the rest of the family. On Sunday afternoon they were to record these messages on videotape for their own sons and daughters to learn from twenty years hence.

I was amazed to see how much they learned—and their leaders and teachers would have been gratified. The boys didn't like their appearance on video at first so they spent extra effort grooming for the camera, following willingly their sisters' lead. And seeing themselves on tape taught them a great deal about annoying mannerisms, speech problems, grammar, and voice inflection. Most of all, their fluency in expressing gospel principles developed quickly, and their memory and retention of lessons and stories increased weekly.

Their ability to think on their feet and to organize a gospel subject from introduction to conclusion led them to voluntarily accept opportunities to give talks at church and seminary. Instead of the usual, "What shall I give it on?" and "What will I say?" it was, "Hey, listen, what do you think of this?" They expanded their use of our Church books, gathering ideas and supportive scriptures for the topics they chose instead of relying on a compilation of two-and-a-half minute sermons.

Another thing that unexpectedly increased their spiritual understanding was our insistence that they continue taking piano lessons. We had decided at the beginning of our married life that every one of our children would learn to play the piano. Our daughters accepted the discipline without question and learned the skill. Our boys resisted from the start, giving token obedience but begging us not to tell their friends they were taking lessons. Their progress was painfully slow. My wife endured power struggles on the piano bench day after day with each of them. As our daughters progressed one lesson a week, for years our sons progressed one note.

We refused to give up on them, vowing to stay with it until they ran away, and they finally began to progress. Just before our eldest son entered seminary as a freshman, his ability exploded. For the first time he began practicing voluntarily (though he still swore us to secrecy). Everything began to click, and his playing improved dramatically. Before long he was playing for seminary; then he was called to be organist for the priesthood meeting. That was frightening to him, so I played the piano while he played the organ, giving him confidence and pacing his tempo until he began to feel comfortable playing for others. His little brother followed his lead and is now polishing off hymns in preparation for the day when he too might be needed in priesthood meeting or seminary.

Serendipity is a marvelous thing. By playing the hymns over and over in preparation for congregational singing, the boys began singing along to their own accompaniment—and, to practice under pressure, asked us to sing while they played. These beautiful gospel messages were now reaching our sons. One day David reported that his seminary teacher had popped a surprise quiz. Quoting Elder Boyd K. Packer's encouragement to sing a hymn when a bad thought entered the mind, the teacher asked each of his students to take out a sheet of paper and write the words to any hymn. "I was one of the few able to do it," David proudly exclaimed. It hadn't occurred to him that he was memorizing words to the hymns.

Brother Robert Cochran, David's seminary teacher, reinforced the students' progress in ways that appealed to David. His relay races, teams, game shows, contests, scripture chases with huge candy bars for perfect scorers, and special privileges given for extra effort all hooked David into the memorization he hated. Week after week, he and his mother were up late, laboriously memorizing scriptures for a test the next day—something he found boring and difficult and irrelevant. But slowly, over the year, we saw a change in him. A speaker in church would tell a story to emphasize a point of doctrine, and David would attach a scripture to the story. When we listened to general conference, David linked scriptures he had memorized to doctrines the General Authorities expounded on. A television show would spark a quick scriptural retort dispelling the "good looks" that camouflaged a false doctrine.

We didn't want David's progress to diminish when school let out, so during the summer we launched into an accelerated study of the life of Jesus Christ, and we read together the biographies of each of the latter-day prophets. This, too, had unexpected results. Because teenagers haven't lived long enough to project how today's actions will affect tomorrow's, it is difficult for them to see beyond the here and now. They need careful steering away from those situations that could destroy them, but they resist being told what to do—not because they are incorrigible, ornery, rebellious, or inherently disobedient, but because they feel invincible, powerful, capable of handling any situation that comes along. They instinctively want freedom so much that they will fight against anything or anyone that controls them—even if that control is for their good. Studying the lives of great men gave our teens the opportunity to live great lives vicariously. Through this reading they were able to understand the details of preparation necessary for ultimate accomplishment.

When my sons read how Joseph Fielding Smith made bread before going to work all day at ZCMI, and how he used to make pies for his children, they could more readily identify with me; I had worked for my room and board at BYU by cooking for the rest of the guys in the apartment, studying while the bread rose and baked. They no longer felt so picked on if Sherri gave them kitchen assignments when all their buddies were out racing. When they tried their hand at several sports and spent most of their time benched, they took heart from the story of Heber J. Grant, who was rejected by the neighborhood baseball team until he solved the problem by intensive practice.

When a close nonmember friend asked David some doctrinal questions, he was stuck for an answer. Reading about Wilford Woodruffs converting and baptizing six hundred people after two days of preaching in Herefordshire, England, humbled him and taught him that if he was going to give an intelligent answer to even one question, he had better get busy.

The boys read about Joseph Fielding Smith hefting two-hundred-pound sacks for a living—and later providing a wonderful home for his family and moving on to pilot a jet in his fifties. This gave meaning to the teens' mundane, dusty work; it wouldn't always be that way if they could just focus on preparing now for tomorrow. The boys complained about blisters on their hands from working until they read about President Spencer W. Kimball's milking cows and working so hard that his hands were blistered and swollen; he had to hold them up in the air to keep them from throbbing.

Reading about how Christ and the prophets were rejected by the ignorant and the wicked can comfort teens faced with peers who reject them because of their values. In fact, it can create a bond and a sense of kinship with the great men and women who have succeeded in spite of harassment and rejection.

Of course, getting a teenager to read is not accomplished without moans, groans, and other resistance. They will present, with drama and pathos, lists of all the more exciting ways they could spend their time. For instance, during one summer my wife set a morning schedule for the family of early morning jogging, piano practice, a good breakfast, and then a reading session at the table. Since I was gone to work by 5:30 A.M., she had the superhuman task of enforcing the schedule by herself. Eventually a protest committee approached me.

"Dad, she makes us read for thirty to forty minutes." Another piped up, "Yeah, and we have to stop at every page and tell what we just read."

"I know, and you aren't any help," said one to another. "You keep asking all those questions."

"Well, it is interesting—kind of."

"Great!" I said with gusto. "Forty minutes ought to be a minimum."

The committee dispersed quickly, fearing I would add another forty. (One thing I've learned from teaching seminary is that when teenagers resist you, it's best not to pay too much attention. If you are sure they are just expressing independence and that the thing you have asked them to do is right, they are likely to feel cheated and let down if you give in.)

Shortly after our interview the prevailing attitude began to change. When I would come home for lunch during this period, the boys would proudly boast of their early morning activities: "I jogged three miles today, Dad"; "We finished reading about John Taylor"; "Guess what, I finished Third Nephi." They had forgotten that their mom had had to pull them out of bed by the heels, singing heartily while pulling T-shirts over their heads and shoving tennis shoes on their feet. They didn't mention that she had had to place a German Shepherd at one door and triple-lock the other, hide the TV, and muzzle the telephone before bringing the latest biography to the kitchen table following breakfast.

Of course, such measures are necessary for only a week or so. Once your teens get into the routine and know you mean business, they will settle into it without comment; before long they will be reading more on their own. Then you'll find them quoting this story or that in their talks, bringing home good grades on their seminary tests, and reporting they were able to answer questions in church. Their prayers are more sincere. They feel good about themselves.

The hardest time to read scriptures together is after a crisis such as a move or a change of schedule that breaks the momentum. Getting started again is never easy, and somehow it's even harder when one of the parents is unable to be there, which is often the case. Demands at work and church, illness, divorce, death, and many other things may prevent parents from reading together. I remember one summer when I had to spend five weeks completing classes for my doctorate at a university a hundred miles away. Sherri's letter detailing her efforts to keep the family at their scripture reading during my absence is a treasure:

Dearest Ronald,

Oh, the trials of a single parent! You just don't know how much easier it is when you are here. I'll be so glad when you can take over again. I led the family in scripture reading last night. We each took our turn reading the first two chapters in Matthew. So if anyone wants to know if we still read even when you're gone I can say, "Yes—remember June 28 when David was half-dead in the bathroom soaking in the tub right after gym?" Connie sat on one beanbag right outside the door just out of vision, Steven sat next to her on another beanbag, and I sat on the floor between the bathroom and the hall. I read four verses and then let Steven finish the chapter.

When Steven started on the second chapter, Connie got upset and asked him who gave him the right to do all the reading—it was time she had her turn, you know. After a brief tug-of-war between the two, Connie finally managed to free the Bible from Steven, and she commenced reading, finishing the second chapter for us all. She was glad we weren't going for the third because Twilight Zone was just starting and she had her exercises to do.

I then turned my attention to the task of reviving David, who had passed out in the tub. . . .

By the time I returned, the family had established an early-morning routine similar to the one we had had while I was there. Sherri communicated to the children a sure sense of direction and proceeded despite circumstances and oppositions, demonstrating by her actions the importance of the scriptures.

You may wonder how such a scenario could possibly communicate a sense of reverence and love for the scriptures, but it did. The invaluable habit was being set. In fact, our teens report that they feel as uncomfortable skipping the daily scripture reading as they do going without brushing their teeth.

Once in a while the reading generates discussions that bring the Spirit of the Lord so undeniably into our midst that the hope of it happening again is enough to keep us going. And breakthroughs in knowledge occur unexpectedly for one or another. Though we've read the material more or less mechanically, when we seek an answer, a scripture or a phrase pops up before us in a way we never thought of before, strengthening us when our need is greatest.

There is a spirit of unity in gospel-living commitment that removes the necessity of preaching. Our teens can see for themselves the importance of living according to correct principles, and when a question arises, we have a common point of reference from which to decide.

There is a sense of security in knowing we have followed the admonition to study and teach one another the doctrines of the kingdom. We feel more worthy to approach the Lord in prayer and more aware of his presence. This increases our faith and helps us pray with confidence. No one likes to belong to an organization that constantly makes them feel they aren't doing all they should. Even though it is a struggle to keep our efforts continuous and we encounter mountains of resistance at times, the payoff comes when we are listening to conference or reading a message by the First Presidency or listening to a talk in sacrament meeting exhorting us to read the scriptures. A side glance at our teens reveals a clear, satisfied gaze that confirms the importance of our efforts. The respect they feel for their church leaders is transferred first to us—for we are teaching the same gospel as the leaders and speakers—and then to themselves.

Self-respect is one of the greatest sources of independence in teens. It is a far better motivator than any external pressure. It helps them to reach the point where "have to" becomes "want to." The strength we provide as parents is then no longer as important as the inner strength they have developed, a strength that will serve them the rest of their lives.
