Ronald John Zirker, Parent and Teen: Teamed for Success ( 1985)

6

The Power of Prayer

One morning when Connie was in the second grade, Sherri and I heard her crying in the next room. When I asked what was the matter, she blurted out between sobs that she was never going to school again. She was finding it very difficult to read and had been placed in the bottom reading group at school. She told us that her teacher was cross and got mad at her when she mispronounced her words, that the other children laughed and made fun of her, and that she couldn't take it anymore.

Quietly, Sherri asked her if it was important to her to learn to read. Of course, she knew that it was, but she just couldn't get the hang of it and didn't think she ever would.

"Connie," Sherri said, "reading is one of the most important things you will ever learn to do. Why don't we pray about it?"

They knelt by the side of the bed, Sherri's arm close around her; together they poured out their hearts to the Lord.

"Father, Connie is having difficulty learning how to read," Sherri said. "Her teacher loses her patience and the other children don't understand. Just for today, wilt thou bless her teacher that she will have the patience necessary to help Connie, and help Connie understand how difficult it is for her teacher to teach thirty-seven students. Bless the students with understanding and thoughtfulness, and help Connie to understand that they have not yet matured in some ways—and to be friendly and understanding until they do. And please bless Connie with a clear and active intellect. Help her to listen carefully and to forget what others might think and concentrate on learning. We know this request is a righteous one—vital to future learning and growth—and we know that Connie is trying hard to be obedient to thy commandments. Wilt thou grant her this request this day. In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

"Connie, now it's your turn to pray. Remember, the Lord loves you, and your success is important to him. With his help, nothing is impossible. He has helped you many times before. Remember those times and thank him for them and then pray with the faith that he will help you again."

Connie prayed with all the fervor of a shy little seven-year-old. The Lord heard our prayers that day. The teacher was patient, the children were understanding, and Connie was able to concentrate and learn.

The next morning, however, anxiety returned. Connie asked for a repeat of the morning prayer. She brought home her books, and we three worked diligently together. Day after day, week after week, found Sherri and Connie on their knees together as the school bus rumbled up the road. Night after night we worked hard, side by side on the couch reading together. Her fear of school gradually subsided, and before long she began moving up through the levels—not only in reading but in every discipline.

She continued to work hard and pray, and she eventually passed through junior high with every scholastic and artistic honor given.

Entering high school, she elected to study challenging subjects: physics, chemistry, computer science, math analysis. They were extremely difficult for her, and only hard work and prayer helped her through them. When it came time for her college entrance test at the end of her junior year, she experienced another miracle. She took the test at a very inconvenient time. Performing for Education Week, she had to finish one show, leave at 11:00 P.M. , and drive three and a half hours to the testing site. After four hours of sleep she was to take the test, return home, and perform again. She called on the Lord for help. English and history were easy enough, but then she got to the math section. She had struggled all year in her math analysis class and she wondered now if she could remember the formulas for solving the problems in front of her. Again she asked the Lord for help. As she attempted to solve the first problem, she said, she could see in her mind the page number of her high-school math book with the very formula she needed to solve that problem. When she reached the second problem, her mental page turned again to the exact formula needed to solve that that one—and so on, until she completed the section. She felt sustained and loved and blessed.

During her senior year she repeated the math analysis class to ensure that the knowledge would be there when she needed it in college. She realized that the Lord had filled in the gaps when necessary but would expect her to do as much as she could on her own.

Our sons train for three hours daily in competition gymnastics. They have told us that often they have called upon the Lord to sustain them during difficult moments. Sometimes the skin on their hands has ripped in the middle of a difficult move, and a quick prayer for the ability to endure until the move was completed has brought immediate relief from the pain.

When Wilford Woodruff was president of the Church he counseled, "Live near to God; pray while young; learn to pray; learn to cultivate the Holy Spirit of God; link it to you and it will become a spirit of revelation to you, inasmuch as you nourish it." (Annette C. Hullinger, The Illustrated Story of President Wilford Woodruff [Provo, Utah: Eagle Systems International, 1982], p. 45.)

We have taught our teenagers that the Lord will speak directly to them through the Holy Ghost. By not providing every answer for them, we have tried to help them build the faith to call on the Lord for guidance.

When Carolyn wanted to know whether to go to college here or out of state, we encouraged her to pray about it. We told her that we knew she had the capacity to determine the Lord's will through fasting and praying and that we would stand behind her decision. When Kathy was considering marriage and asked us what she should do, we explained that she must seek her own answer carefully and prayerfully. We knew that even though she was aware of our feelings about the proposal, if difficulties ever arose she would find strength by remembering the Lord's assurance that she was doing the right thing.

If we can even once help our children experience an answer to prayer, that experience may be the foundation of their own testimony of prayer. They can't experience answers if they aren't asking for them. We can lead them in specific prayers for the blessings they need, avoiding meaningless words and trite, overused phrases. (See Matthew 6:7.) Prayer is truly "the soul's sincere desire, uttered or unexpressed"; learning to focus on sincere desires eventually prompts introspection and promotes a spirit of commitment.

Think of the strength and independence teenagers garner when they have been taught how to pray. The scriptures admonish us to "pray always, that you may come off conqueror." (D&C 10:5.) If teenagers are praying over schoolwork, dates, career choices, missions, sports events, service projects, and personal problems and temptations, they will conquer the destroyer.

We've watched our teenagers ace their seminary scripture-memorizing tests when they prayed the whole time they were taking the test. (Of course, they had done their share earlier: "Give them to me one more time, Mom.") We've watched them pray for each other during sports events, recitals, and talks.

When a teenager is drawn toward righteous activities through verbally petitioning the Lord daily for help, there just isn't room for unrighteous activities. The Spirit strives with those who allow their hearts to be full, "drawn out in prayer unto him continually." (Alma 34:27.) Such teenagers will receive wisdom to solve their problems, skill as they work at developing their potential, protection from harm, and comfort when hurt and disappointed. They will feel strength, purpose, and divine guidance, and will need few if any external controls. Parents can build this foundation by first leading the teens through an experience and encouraging them to pray for their own specific blessings. Once they discover the power of prayer for themselves, they won't forget it.

If you and your teenagers are not close enough to pray together, then pray for them, as Alma the Elder did for his son Alma and as Mosiah did for his four sons. Never lose hope that the Lord will help your teenagers discover that they can personally control their own destinies by learning to commune with Heavenly Father, seeking and then carrying out his will. After all, isn't that what we really want for our teenagers? We search for ways to help them bypass temptation, not only to ease our own sense of guilt when they transgress, but for their eternal joy. There is also great satisfaction in feeling that we have assisted the Father and the Savior to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) Only then can we experience companionship with a soul who was once our brother or sister in the premortal existence. That is parenthood at its apex.
