Ronald John Zirker, Parent and Teen: Teamed for Success ( 1985)

7

Councils and Goals

President Harold B. Lee said, "Planning is the nearest activity there is to Godhood." We have certainly experienced the importance of planning in our own family. It has helped us become more productive, strong, and happy.

To plan together as a family you need to be together without distractions. When plans are made during dinner, for example, emotions, table accidents, or even the taste of the food may get in the way of understanding or committing to a particular goal. A family council can create the necessary focus; each new session provides a new beginning and an occasion to evaluate the past. Because councils are frequently held, goals, if accounted for and persisted toward, will eventually become habit, particularly when results provide an incentive.

To pattern the council after Church councils, you should take minutes or make some effort to record the goals. When goals are actually written down, they are easier to remember and are there as daily reminders. Regular councils provide definite time periods in which to reach goals. When a person has a definite goal to accomplish in a definite period of time, he is much more likely to achieve it. Teachers at school give due dates for tests, assignments, and term papers. Why not apply the same principle at home?

The Church has many different kinds of councils for different purposes, and the family can operate the same way. There should be councils between husband and wife, councils between both parents and one child, between one parent and one child, and with the whole family. Also, councils can be called to accomplish different purposes. Consider the following organization:

Annual Councils

In our family, we meet at the beginning of each year as an official Zirker Family Organization. We give assignments to each child to complete during the year. The purpose of these assignments is to serve the family in some way.

For example, when Kathy was still home I assigned her to compile our family history and update our scrapbooks, certificates, photos, news clippings, and other materials. Sixteen-year-old Carolyn was assigned to lead us all in physical fitness, and Connie, age twelve, was assigned to be music chairman and cultural refinement leader. David, at eleven, was assigned to be physical facilities chairman, supervising the yard work and fattening up our calf. His seven-year-old brother Steven was assigned to be education coordinator. He was to select good books to be read to him and ask someone to listen to him read. My wife was selected as nutritional chairman and learning skills coordinator in addition to her duties as home manager. I announced my plans to be financial chairman and head of the ways and means committee.

The results:

We have stacks of scrapbooks, with more accumulating. Carolyn charted us all on losing weight and doing physical fitness routines, introducing the gold, silver, and bronze award system. We presented twenty dollars along with gold medal status, ten with silver, and five with bronze. Our children earned part of their Christmas gift money this way.

Connie accompanied our singing weekly in family home evening, won several achievement awards with her violin and piano, won the leading role in the school musical, and organized the family "Singing Strings" quartet to enter Lehi-in-Concert and play in the Lehi Stake Orchestra.

David fattened up the calf and led in our own family butchering session. We filled our freezer with roasts and hamburger, cut, ground, and wrapped by us. We also painted fences, pruned trees, weeded, mowed, and planted under his direction.

Steven, who was poor at reading, advanced three levels in one year and was read to every night before he went to bed. He heard every scripture story in the standard works and the Friend month by month, cover to cover.

Sherri helped us eliminate all mix buying, taught the older children how to make everything from scratch, and worked hard to eliminate doctor bills through good eating. She assigned our daughters to alternate weeks baking bread and gave them complete charge over the Sunday meals. Each child was assigned chores to be done before leaving in the morning. All those over twelve were assigned to take care of washing, ironing, and buying their own clothes.

I managed finances, getting us completely out of debt. I paid for insurance, a wedding, a funeral, some home repair, college tuition for myself during the summer and the hundred and one other necessities a family requires.

Semiannual Councils

Every fall, just before school starts, we meet to set up a schedule in harmony with each age and interest. It's tight, but with careful planning, everyone can meet his or her goals.

For instance, at our council for the school year 1980, Kathy had a job from eight to five, was enrolled in college classes at night, taught a children's choir, and was planning a wedding in the spring. She needed one of the cars to meet her goals.

Carolyn was a senior in high school, held a part-time job to which she needed transportation, was graduating in the spring, played the cello in the school orchestra, and belonged to a performing group.

Connie was in junior high, took piano and violin lessons, baby-sat frequently, and performed often with Bell Canto Strings and the Mesa Youth Symphony. She also entered regional violin competitions and played the lead in the class musical.

David played Pop Warner football, took bass and piano lessons, and played the bass in his school's orchestra. He also worked toward his Eagle Scout award, milked the cow night and morning, and sold extra milk and cream for his spending money.

Sherri was committee chairman for the National Convention of American Mothers coming to Arizona; she was also the stake Young Women president.

I was completing my doctoral requirements, serving as a member of the bishopric and as the stake admissions advisor for the Church Education System, working daily as a school psychologist, and managing property in Washington.

Each family member had household and outdoor chores. Each one had to clean his or her own room and one other room in the house, practice, and do outside daily chores before school. We got each child a calendar and had him fill them out for the year, including school requirements, concert dates, and holidays. Then we listed phone numbers of all the school teachers, music teachers, sports coaches, Scoutmasters, mutual leaders—everyone pertinent to each child. We placed the calendars on our kitchen wall with stick-on pens close by. All phone messages were written down on the appropriate date, along with the owner's assignments. New emergencies came up. David broke his arm. Grandpa died and we had to make several trips to Washington to settle his estate. Sherri's father died, leaving her mother needing extra help and concern. But we accomplished it all because we were organized and knew what was expected of everyone, and when.

Just before school is out we meet again to plan the summer. That particular summer of 1980 I had to attend Northern Arizona University for my doctoral residency for five weeks. Connie and David attended youth camp, July called for a trip to Washington to clean up our farm from the volcanic ash deposited, and we spent a week at BYU's Aspen Grove, where I was a guest lecturer. It may sound exhausting, but day by day it actually went quite smoothly.

Quarterly Councils

Preparing for the seasons makes them much more memorable—especially if everyone is in on the planning, preparation, and implementation. In October, we made our house into a haunted house for all the neighbors; at Thanksgiving we hosted forty-five relatives at our home for dinner; during the Christmas, Valentine's Day, and Easter seasons we prepared appropriate music and entertained at numerous functions together as a family. Looking forward to, planning, and anticipating holidays, we are less likely to feel life rushing by without tasting and savoring any of it.

Monthly Councils

Each Fast Sunday I have personal priesthood interviews with each of my children, taking note of how they feel and what they need, and then I follow through during the month (see chapter 13). Connie complained of having no place to keep her valuables so little brothers wouldn't get into them, so I took her shopping for a strongbox with a lock and key. David confided that he was the worst ball player in Little League; I set him up at the batter's cage and planned daily practice sessions with him. Steven cried that he never got to be alone with me; I planned occasions when he could.

Sherri is executive secretary. She checks over the month with each child and makes notes on what he or she needs: new shoes, a concert dress and our attendance at the concert, school projects due, recitals to prepare for. For years she had the children write their goals for the coming month in her journal, then checked on them the following month, writing new goals or redefining old ones. It was exciting to see one person's goal become the family's. When Kathy wanted to be able to swim a mile, we all wanted to swim one. When David began running four miles a day, Connie started joining him; now she is in the habit every day and her mother and Steven have joined in. Everybody became involved in David's goal to conduct a blood drive and learned that it takes hours and hours to perform a service we all take for granted.

Weekly Councils

We teach gospel principles weekly in family home evening and set goals to improve behavior. One valuable aid has been to derive behavioral objectives from conference talks, post these objectives for six months, and evaluate our progress at the next conference.

We prefer to spend family home evening totally alone rather than including other families. We didn't even invite Grandpa to join us, though he lived with us for five years. It is a private time spent in the spirit of the following counsel:

When several families meet together regularly to hold family home evening, the purposes of the home evenings are defeated. These purposes are: to learn to talk to and listen to each other, to discuss frankly their own intimate problems in connection with living the gospel, and to strengthen love and unity in their own particular family. It is impossible to do these effectively when several families meet together, for each family is different and its needs are different from those of any other family. The home evening should meet these unique and personal needs. (Priesthood Bulletin, March-April 1966, p. 2.)

President Kimball said of this time together, "The Lord has offered an old program in new dress, and it gives promise to return the world to sane living, to true family life, to family interdependence." (Improvement Era, June 1965, p. 513.)

Our most intimate and cherished memories are of time spent together, with the phone off the hook, enjoying a love that transcends the daily irritations of family life. Such moments provide the spiritual and emotional strength sufficient for any crisis.

Daily Councils

We hold our daily family council twice a day, and it is the most important one of all, for that is when we approach our Father in heaven together. President Brigham Young said, "Family prayers that request divine help in preparing children to go on missions, marry in the Temple, avoid evil, and display honest clean behavior have an influence for good on both the children and the parents in those family circles."

We have found it appropriate to kneel following a few moments of reading the scriptures together. One leads us all in prayer about general matters concerning the family and the world, and then we pause for several moments while each adds private comments he or she wishes to share with the Father. Even during those early years when our youngsters were toddlers, they would remain quiet, pudgy arms folded, though no one spoke.

We've learned to make a daily chart to spell out the day in detail and do our remembering for us. All of the children have had such a chart since they were old enough to read. Some don't need the chart anymore; activities have become second nature. Half the battle in any goal-setting program is remembering what you planned to do, carving it up into small daily proportions, and accomplishing a little each day.

Our youngest wakens at five o'clock, is dressed and on the piano bench till six, then comes to the table for scriptures, breakfast, and prayers. He cleans his room and one bathroom, brushes his teeth, and finishes any homework needing completion or heads outdoors for a game of ball—all before the school bus comes. He never goes to bed at night until he has set everything out: comb, hair dryer, socks, shoes, and coordinated clothes. He has watched his older brothers and sisters and set his own standards.

Selecting Goals

Priority goals are those that refine our ability to live the gospel of Jesus Christ. We have found that by listening to the conference talks every six months and listing each commandment emphasized, we have developed a list of those commandments most vital to us in this particular time period.

We try, by example, to teach our children that when the prophet says to "do it," we do it! There is no other alternative if we hope for the blessing. When he admonished us to clean up our environment, we did. We painted our fences. David and Steven are required to keep the lawn mowed and the place looking clean and neat. We've all done our share of weeding, pruning, raking, and cleaning. Our teens have seen us go regularly to the temple. Each child is expected to keep his or her Book of Remembrance up to date; volumes that have been kept over the years now fill our home. Each family member keeps a journal; these early entries of Steven's are pithy little memoirs he's already glad he recorded: "Wednesday, October 3, 1979. I went to Jimascixs. I was scerd but know that I cod not cri. Now I cept it and I felt glad"; or "Last nit I took a shawr and I dint haft to."

Goals should be varied to maintain balanced living. The personal and family preparedness program stressed by the Church suggests goals in career development, financial and resource management, education, physical health, home production and storage, and social, emotional, and spiritual strength.

Goals should be appropriate to the person. Some may be learning to read or play the piano, some to date, others to crawl. Also, each person has a different mission, different attributes to develop, and different weaknesses to overcome.

Meeting Goals

Goals need to be identified with the end in mind. For instance, Connie decided she wanted to be able to play a certain piano piece at the school talent show. Goals need to be written down with an approximate time limitation: Connie's talent show was six weeks away. An outline of what it will take to reach the goal must be made: Connie decided she would have to spend at least fifteen minutes a day learning and practicing the piece. If another person's help is needed, then this must be scheduled too: Connie asked for help at her weekly piano lesson and then scheduled the family to listen to her practice from time to time. However, goals should eventually lead to independence: Connie knew she would be able to play her piece well only if she could free herself from having to look at the music. She certainly didn't want a metronome there or her mother counting the beat. And finally, the most worthwhile goals include service: Connie did play the piece at the talent show, and also has since entertained with it often.

Who makes the goals? This depends on the child's age. The fortunate child is one whose parents have set goals for him from the beginning, for many goals are best made before a child is born. The whole idea of parenthood is to lead the young ones to adult independence so that they in turn can guide their young ones.

The Lord's plan was to place a veil over our minds to see if we would obey the commandments and make something of ourselves even when Heavenly Father wasn't around. However, Satan was cast out of heaven, and no veil was placed on his mind. He still knows those noble and great ones who made commitments to serve the Lord on the earth, and he is determined to thwart those commitments. The Lord gives us a fighting chance by withholding Satan's power from the new ones, giving us eight years to teach them first. A child's brain is fully developed by age six; logic and reasoning are matured by age eight. If parents wish to be effective, they will set patterns during the first eight years in the areas in which they want their children to achieve: prayer, scripture reading, obedience, learning, family life, developing talents, work, keeping the commandments. The list goes on and on.

If patterns are not set before the age of eight, success is not impossible, but you will have the downward pull of Satan to fight. You will need even greater spiritual commitment and communication because your older children may find it more difficult to listen to you. After age eight they learn best through cause and effect, experiencing the consequences—and that can sometimes have drastic effects that are difficult to overcome.

When is the best time to make goals? When you have just been inspired, uplifted, and are feeling capable and committed. Goals will then lock you into positive action during the down times—and meeting them tends to inspire you to do so again.

Years ago, Sherri was challenged in a Relief Society meeting to do something uplifting in her community. With small children at home, she wondered how she could possibly accept that challenge. After asking the Lord to help her come up with ideas, she felt impressed to check with the local newspaper to see if they would be interested in a weekly column on rearing children. She loved to write and felt that a half-hour at the typewriter wouldn't detract from family life and might give ideas to some of the parents whose questions I heard daily. The editor reluctantly agreed to publish the column, saying that other citizens had tried such things before but usually gave up just as it was going well.

She began the column first under the title "Family Forum." Later, under different circumstances, she changed it to "Recipe for a Happy Family." It was fun for the first few months, but keeping it up week after week became something of a chore at times. We were committed, however, not wanting to be like those citizens the editor had spoken about.

The column has now been running fourteen years, and though it has never been easy, it has been extremely satisfying. One woman called recently to thank Sherri for an article on self-esteem and personal worth. Feeling alone and depressed after being released from a mental institution, she read that article and immediately had copies made for all of her friends in the institution she had just left. She said it had lifted her out of a blue day and gave her hope she hadn't felt in years. The mother of a child with Down's syndrome called to say she was ready to give up until she read our article telling about another valiant mother who persisted with a brain-damaged child and eventually found success. These experiences have given us the incentive to stay with it.

Why is it important to set goals? We are told that we were found qualified in the premortal existence to be God's governing ones on this earth. (See Abraham 3:22-23.) Read your patriarchal blessing; it will probably tell you of your mission—of commitments you made before you came here. You will be going back someday to account for the time you spent on the earth. What will you say you accomplished?

In June 1965, President David O. McKay, meeting with a small group from the Church Physical Facilities Department in his Hotel Utah apartment, said:

Let me assure you, brethren, that someday you will have a personal priesthood interview with the Savior himself. If you are interested I will tell you the order in which he will ask you to account for your earthly responsibilities.

First, he will request an accountability report about your relationship with your wife. Have you actively been engaged in making her happy and insuring that her needs have been met as an individual?

Second, he will want an accountability report about each of your children individually. He will not attempt to have this for simply family stewardship, but will request information about your relationship to each and every child.

Third, he will want to know what you personally have done with the talents you were given in the pre-existence.

Fourth, he will want a summary of your activity in your church assignments. He will not be necessarily interested in what assignments you have had, for in his eyes, the home teacher and a mission president are probably equal, but he will request a summary of how you have been of service to your fellowmen in your church assignments.

Fifth, he will have no interest in how you earned your living, but if you were honest in all your dealings.

Sixth, he will ask for an accountability on what you have done to contribute in a positive manner to your community, state, country, and the world. (Fred A. Baker, Managing Director of the Department of Physical Facilities, handout by Anita Canfield during Education Week, June 1983.)

It is my testimony that what the Lord learns from us during that interview will determine his next action. Let us hope and pray and work toward hearing: "Well done, thou good and faithful servant . . . enter thou into the joy of thy lord." (Matthew 25:21.)
