Ronald John Zirker, Parent and Teen: Teamed for Success ( 1985)

8

Excellence: No Excuses

When our son David was twelve years old, he broke his arm. Our hearts went out to him as we watched his pain, but three days of recuperating at home, plus the sympathy heaped on him at school, erased a good deal of the trauma. It wasn't long, however, before he came crashing back to reality. Reality was a broken arm in a cast that left only an inch of fingers showing, with term papers due, hunger that up to now only a deft right hand could alleviate, a cow to milk, and Scout camp to attend. Despair hit him hard, and he looked to his parents for the sympathy he was sure he deserved.

He first negotiated with me concerning the cow. Anyone could see that a one-handed milker was inefficient. Surely I would take over that chore for the next six weeks? Food would obviously have to be limited to milk shakes and pizza, something a lefty could manage; schoolwork would have to be given the benefit of a doubt (he would retire a month early); and he guessed Scout camp was impossible. He couldn't believe it when I listened sympathetically and declined to buy any part of the program, including milking the cow. "It will be inconvenient, son," I told him, "but it is possible. You can do it. You are responsible for doing it."

When he incredulously told his mother my verdict, Sherri recognized the old divide-and-conquer routine and said firmly, "If that's what your father said, that's what will happen, David. You know that." To me, she said, echoing his note of incredulity, "Ron, how can he?"

"Trust me, Sherri," I assured her. "I milked cows all my life—with broken arms, legs, ribs, you name it. He can do it. Let him know you depend on him. Don't buy extra milk. Show him you are grateful for what he does get and let him know that the family will make do with what he provides."

Nobody said a word at the table the first day he milked the cow, but the inch and a half in the glasses was eloquent. It took three days and a very uncomfortable cow before David realized I meant business. It really was going to be up to him! Within a week, a very proud son began bringing in buckets foaming to the brim. The satisfaction of seeing the family drink with gusto rewarded him daily.

Encouraged by that success—and the scarcity of pizzas and milk shakes—David became proficient once more at eating. He also began practicing writing and was able to complete his term papers legibly. By the time Scout camp came, David felt invincible. He not only went, but he single-handedly (literally) garnered six merit badges.

It was a tremendous experience to watch David learn he had greatness within himself. I knew he had it in him to succeed in spite of a handicap, but he didn't. Giving him the opportunity to find out, while staying close by to offer support, was hard on everybody but worth it. Since then, this knowledge about himself has encouraged him many times to persist when things got tough and he has been tempted to give up. It helps Sherri and me stick to our guns when we have thought through the decisions ahead of time, too.

The excuse "I can't" is crippling and cannot be accepted—especially in the face of so many examples of those who can. It is usually more honest to say, "I'm afraid to try," "I've only milked with two hands so I don't have the experience to know that I could milk with just one," or "I don't like to milk; I'm glad I have an excuse not to." What a boon it is to a young man to learn how to communicate to himself what he is feeling and why! That takes maturity, however, and parents should have more of it than their children. We've tried to teach our children the difference between being responsible for the things they can control (preparation for a competition, studying for a test) and not feeling guilty about results they can't control (the actual outcome of the competition). We've always tried to separate trying from succeeding. If you try a lot, you'll succeed a lot, but you'll also fail a lot. It's important to understand the process and not make excuses that will let you short-circuit it.

Another excuse that will hurt teenagers and keep them from progressing is, "I don't feel like it right now." I remember as a teenager going to bed once without feeding the cows and cleaning the barn. I was tired. I reasoned that it wouldn't matter just this once. About 10:30 P.M. my father shook me awake. "The calves are bawling, Ron. If they haven't been taken care of, then you must do it right away."

Several responses rushed to my lips, but in view of the incriminating evidence I didn't dare voice them. I had to get up and do my chores by flashlight. The calves were starving and twice as ornery as usual. It was twice as cold and very dark. All in all, the job took me twice as long. When I wearily finished the last task and trudged to my room at midnight, I had learned a lesson I never forgot.

Years later, I had the opportunity to teach a daughter the same lesson. It was twelve-year-old Carolyn's turn to do the dishes, and with her happy reassurance, Sherri and I left for an evening out. When we returned the dishes were still in the sink and Carolyn was sound asleep. It was 11:00 P.M. Sherri sighed and got out her apron. I stopped her, and we talked about it. Then Sherri went to bed and I woke up Carolyn.

Carolyn couldn't believe I would actually get her out of bed to do dishes in the middle of the night. She was stunned, resentful, and angry. Ignoring her groggy resistance and talking quietly and gently, I informed her the dishes must be done. What was more, because she had not kept her promise to do them, her duties would include every dish in the house.

Tears sprang to Carolyn's eyes as she plunged her hands into the dishwater. I pulled plates and tumblers from the cupboard until the drainboard was filled. Under her breath she murmured angry words that grew angrier with each dish. I stayed up the whole time with her—humming, reading the paper, sweeping up a little—and helping with a dish or two toward the end.

Late into the night when the kitchen was clean, I put my arm around her and sat down with her. Feeling genuine love and tenderness toward her, I thanked her for the beautiful job she had done. Then I said, "Carolyn, I know how angry I made you tonight. Well, your mother and I left you with your word that you would wash those dishes. They were your responsibility, and yet you took no thought of how your mother would feel when she had to face your dirty dishes before she could begin breakfast in the morning. She would have had not only her jobs in the morning, but yours, too. Carolyn, you are too precious and too special for me to allow you to behave in such a way. I want more for you than that. I want you to know the feeling of accomplishment when you have carried your load, done your share, and understood what others will feel about you when you don't. I don't want you to have to go through life believing that you aren't important—that what you do or don't do doesn't matter. There will be work to do in this life, Carolyn, that will not get done unless you do it. Never underestimate the importance of doing your duty—even when you don't feel like it."

Carolyn crumpled into my arms in tears, this time not hurt or angry tears. Years later, she told Sherri, "I never loved Dad more than I did that night!"

She was not an irresponsible person before that night, but she took a quantum leap in maturity after this concept of duty crystallized. She is the first to jump up if an item is missing from the table. She makes bread without being asked and cleans out cupboards on her own. Her loyalty to duty flowed over into other aspects of her life as she practiced second-mile service at school. She is now on a mission in Canada, and we have confidence she will serve with the same spirit.

There have been times when a child has let slip an improper word. When questioned about it, the excuse was, "I couldn't help it. It just slipped out," or, "I didn't mean to but when that hammer hit my finger. . . well, I hear my friends say it so much it just came out." Or worse, "You should be glad I'm not like my friends, Dad. I only say it when I get mad. They use those words all the time!"

What they were trying to tell me was that profanity is all right under certain circumstances and that a little is better than a lot. Needless to say, these are excuses we do not accept. President David O. McKay spoke clearly on the subject: "No parents can consistently teach faith in Christ who profane the name of Deity. . . . Blasphemous exclamations drive out all spirit of reverence." (Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953], p. 420.)

On occasion I have shared this experience with my family: My father and uncle owned a sawmill, and during the summer of my fifteenth year, I went to work for them. I had to get up early, sawing and hauling logs till late in the day. It was extremely hard work, tiring and dangerous. There was no way to avoid some of the scratches and bruises. Profane words flew like flies all day long. I learned enough words to fill a dictionary.

One morning, I arose very early and walked through the trees to begin work. Everything was quiet and still around me. I looked toward the east and watched the sun rise slowly, filtering through the branches of the beautiful pines and ferns, catching the dew on the underbrush. Birds were chirping happily, and other forest sounds blended with their chorus. I stopped to observe the beauty with a reverence and awe I had never felt before. Just then, a shouted expletive followed by several others rang through the forest as the other young men arrived to begin work. The contrast was so abrupt, so startling, so shattering, and so offensive that I made a vow on the spot that no one would ever hear me say a profane word.

Another excuse that never ceases to amaze me—and doesn't get far around our house—is, "But everyone else does it." This excuse covers attendance at improper movies ("I'll just close my eyes during the bad parts"), dances not up to standard ("I dance the same way I do at Church dances"), rock concerts ("Most of the songs are okay"), and drug parties ("Don't worry. I'm not going to smoke marijuana even if the rest of my friends do"). It covers immodest clothing, skipping school, cheating, and even shoplifting.

I hear these excuses more frequently from other children than my own, but I'll confess I am still shocked when I also hear excuses from parents: "It's just a phase they are going through." "That's a teenager for you." "If I don't let them do it, they'll do it behind my back. Better that it's done where I can be available if need be." Some parents say, "I don't like it, but there's no way to stop it. I just hope they'll grow out of it." Others will actually attend movies or concerts they don't let their teenagers go to, cautioning their sons and daughters to wait until they are "adult and responsible." How much easier it is to take advantage of those preteen years and never lose the control of a good example in the first place!

Another invaluable way parents can support teens is by not accepting excuses during the painful process of reaching a goal. Learning to pay the price for what you want in life is not always easy to do. It's not easy to teach. But it is one of the most important principles for reaching success.

When David reached about age thirteen, it became obvious that he needed something that was his own achievement. He knew it and we knew it. His older sisters had plaques and awards bulging their scrapbooks and covering the wall. Though he had given himself faithfully to the study of violin at age five, changing to the cello in fourth grade and to the bass in seventh, playing music didn't bring him the full sense of satisfaction or recognition he craved. He plodded along on the piano, joined Pop Warner football and Little League baseball, and felt the momentary thrill of suiting up and applying his wit and skill on the field. But he was one of hundreds of young boys and sat on the bench a good deal of the time. And even though he was part of a championship team one year, the season was soon over, leaving nine months with nothing to work for.

Even nine-year-old Steven had found his niche. We had enrolled him in gymnastics a couple of years before and discovered to our surprise that it was just what he needed to use up his excess energy and settle him sufficiently for quality schoolwork. His grades shot up, his confidence soared, and he entered competition training, spending three hours a day working out and bringing home several ribbons from every meet.

David and I talked it over. I asked him what he'd like to do. He said he didn't know but maybe it would be fun to try competition gymnastics, too. I warned him that gymnastics was a very demanding sport and that one of the biggest hurdles he would face would be to work as a beginner beside his accomplished younger brother. He agreed that everybody has to start somewhere, so we scheduled an interview with the coach.

He was crushed when the coach told him he needed to lose thirty-five pounds before he would even be considered for training. That just about stopped it right there—but I reminded him that all disciplines had requirements and that this was one he had personal control over. Still, the obstacle looked like Mount Everest. I said, "David, would you give me the opportunity to prove to you that you have what it takes to control your own destiny? If you will trust my judgment and do exactly what I tell you to do every day, I promise you that you will be on that competition team by spring. But you have to decide first of all if this is something you really want. If it is, I want to prove to you that you have what it takes to achieve it."

He didn't really believe me, but he said, "Yes, I really do want to get on that team. I really do!" So we set a goal that within six months his weight would be acceptable to the coach. Then we researched ways to get in shape. Locking the refrigerator looked like the First step. But a physical examination indicated that his metabolism needed to be changed and that running would be the most effective means to accomplish it. Together we visited a running coach, and he gave us important pointers on the type of running shoes to buy, the best way to avoid shinsplints, and strategies for David to gain proficiency steadily and safely. We shopped for shoes, shorts, and sweatsuits. We put his schedule on the calendar.

Then I asked the big question: "David, are you sure this is what you want to do?"

"You bet," he replied.

"There are going to be times when you are going to want to quit. If you do, you'll lose the opportunity to become a member of the team. Is it still your goal to try to get on the gymnastics team?"

"It's still my goal. It's something I've just got to do," he said.

"What do you want me to do if you are tempted to give up?"

"Dad, keep all of the wrong foods away from me and never, never give in, even if I act like I might want to quit."

"There are going to be treats everywhere you go, David. I won't always be around to stop you. You'll have to control what you do if you want to reach your goal. There will be days when you'd rather do anything but run—but running is something that you must do regularly or all your effort will be ineffective. Will you accept my efforts to keep you at it even when you don't feel like doing it?"

"Yes, Dad, I need your help."

I knew what was coming and he didn't. I knew he would be hard hit with muscle soreness. There would be rainy days, competing activities, a favorite television show, extra homework, and a hundred other excuses not to follow through on his plan. He had nothing to serve as a reference that consistent effort would pay off. I had to get his verbal commitment that he would accept my strength when his ebbed, because he was in for one of the most grueling experiences of his life, and it would take both of us to keep him running until he discovered that setting goals and accomplishing them was something he was capable of. I knew that if he didn't learn that now, he might go through life full of lame excuses, believing erroneously that he was incapable of success.

The plan was to start by running a half-mile the first week, move it up to one mile the next week, alternating with a half, and to gradually work up to between four and six miles a day, five days a week. Food would consist of items from the four basic groups—no desserts or goodies, and nothing after 5:00 P.M.

Scouts offered pizza feeds, sundae-building parties, and barbecues. David's school celebrated every holiday with gala, calorie-laden treats. His buddies devoured three hamburgers, two shakes, fries, and pie for school lunches. He would sit there with salad.

Running after school was an adventure at first. I tried to run with David but realized my physical condition called for a build-up at a slower pace. I couldn't restrict him on my account. I tried driving him a mile or two from home and letting him run back, but one day he came in sooner than usual without looking flushed, then admitted some good soul had felt sorry for him and offered him a ride. He needed steady companionship on the track. So I tried several things. I rode next to him on a bicycle, or put my car in low gear, turned up the radio, rolled down the windows, and slowly chugged my way beside him. I carried a water jug and vaporizer he could use to keep from getting dehydrated. His daily discipline became mine.

Excuses began flooding in after three weeks. The adventure was gone and he always felt winded and tired. Nothing seemed to be happening. There was complaining, pleading, resistance. I developed an acute case of deafness and kept a firm upper hand every single day. The hardest part came when he finally arrived at the four-mile run. That took time and stamina he was sure he didn't have. Just the mathematics intimidated him. But I held him to it, and his body finally began to respond. His waist went down five sizes. Six weeks short of his six-months goal he had lost thirty-five pounds, could run with ease and stamina, and looked like a million dollars.

Together we visited the coach. He said, "I'll put him in recreation gymnastics first for three months to see if he can work up to the moves he needs." David no longer needed prodding. He had passed a superhuman test already. Within one month he was ready for the competition team.

"How hard do you want to work, David?" the coach asked.

"I want to put in extra time so that I can catch up with the rest of the team in as short a time as possible," David answered. School was just about out. How would he feel about working six hours a day throughout the summer so he could try to be ready for meets during the coming year?

"I'll do whatever it takes."

David didn't understand what he was asking for. Six hours a day put terrific pressure on his hands. Sherri and I treated rips nightly. There were many days he was tempted to give up, but the memory of the previous year kept him going. Every morning he had to be at the gym by seven o'clock and would work there steadily till one. He still had his lawn-mowing and money-making projects to do, kept up a reading program, and worked toward his Eagle Scout, taking a week off for the big Jamboree with general authorities in Flagstaff. (He came home with eleven merit badges.)

When school started that fall he had mastered a lot of skills, and the coach decided he would take him with the team for his first practice meet in November. Any person with lesser commitment would have quit at that point. He was the lowest scorer on the team and had to suffer the humiliation of struggling with each move in full view of his teammates, who walked away with all of the honors. But he had learned what it felt like to be scored under pressure before judges and spectators. He stayed with it. I encouraged him, hoping he would at least be good enough to be able to compete at the state meet in April, but his performance in November left me worrying.

Then I used the video recorder—and real progress began taking place. I filmed his practice meets, and then together, his younger brother included, we watched each move in slow motion. We had the coach spot trouble points to look for: toe not straight, not enough angle on the spread of the legs, drop-kick too awkward, not enough time holding a handstand on the parallel bars. These tapes were about the only thing he watched throughout the preparation season. He and Steven were rapidly closing the gap between their gymnastic skills, and they became special companions, sharing hard and triumphant moments together. I went with David frequently to watch his three-hour workouts after school and headed the parent booster team that earned money to pay for travel and uniforms.

The meets began in earnest shortly after the turn of the year. The boys drove or flew to Idaho, Nevada, California, and all over Arizona attending meets almost every Saturday. I went with them to almost all of the meets and filmed their routines.

Week after week went by, and David's scores got higher and higher until pretty soon he started bringing home his fair share of the ribbons. By March, his score was high enough that he could be entered in the State Gymnastics Federation Competition Championship Meet. A dream had come true. Even though David figured he didn't have a chance his first year to win anything, he felt it a great honor just to be good enough to be in the meet.

On April 30, all of the teams met in Tucson and the meet began. The coach warned the team members in advance not to look at their scores until the meet was over because a low score might depress them and throw their next performance. David was so sure he didn't qualify for any awards that he changed into his jeans and team T-shirt before the awards ceremony.

Six places are awarded for each event, starting with the sixth first. When the first five names were read and his name wasn't one of them, David knew he had figured right—until they announced his name as the gold medal winner: first on the still rings, first place again for the floor exercise, silver medal for second place on the parallel bars, another gold medal for the pommel-horse, and again first place on the vault. For the final event, the high bar, they called him up for third place with a bronze medal.

We couldn't believe it. Seeing him stand there on the platform as they placed the medals around his neck made our hearts leap clear across the gym. When they announced him as the 1983 All-Around USFG Champion for highest scorer in his division and placed the fifth gold medal around his neck, we were all completely overwhelmed.

We knew that the medals meant much more than the fact that he had outscored his competitors. They symbolized his knowledge that success comes at a price and that he had what it took to pay the price. He had learned lessons about himself that would last forever. And he knew he hadn't done it alone.

As a parent, the experience confirmed for me that I could be influential in a way no other human being would ever take the time to be. Teenagers sometimes need the tough kind of faith from us that literally won't let them give up until after they've experienced success for themselves. Until they know that they can succeed, who will be their support system but parents?
