Ronald John Zirker, Parent and Teen: Teamed for Success ( 1985)

9

Excellence: No Exceptions

The last chapter showed how parents can help teenagers develop a taste for excellence by not allowing an undercurrent of excuses to wash away their resolve. We as parents also feel responsible for teaching our children standards of excellence—not just music, but the best music; not just recreation, but the best recreation. Here again, we're grateful to have had those preteen years when the desires for experimentation could be channeled upward toward achievement and proficiency. We needed that time to allow our children to test themselves rather than to turn their energies outward in a test of the rules or downward in repeated tests of physical sensations.

We've felt a great need to be both firm and supportive as parents, for our no-exception standard has frequently confronted a "just-this-once" alternative. It has been a challenge to make saying yes to family standards more rewarding than saying yes to teenage friends.

In many families, teenagers' music is not defined as a problem as long as "how loud" can be negotiated. We accept and respect those families' choices. But in our family, we have chosen an absolute ban on most popular music, not only because we see negative elements in it but because we want the very best music for our children.

We came into our living room one day to find five-year-old Kathy and her friend gyrating enthusiastically to some rock music they had been able to find on the radio. Though we had never shown a liking for it, our daughter obviously didn't share our value.

We took a long look at the future. Kathy's delight was not a one-time occurrence. It had appeared when she was a toddler. We fasted and prayed about it. Coincidentally, an article in the Instructor by Alexander Schreiner included a list of his hundred "best" pieces of music. The concept clicked: if we wanted to safeguard our children from the temptations that could come through rock music, we should teach them to appreciate the good. We took his list of the great classics and began collecting them. We had a fine stereo, but went a step further, installing an intercom system that piped sound into all the bedrooms. We played music for at least an hour every night, accompanying baths, back rubs, stories, and prayers.

We also bought tickets to community concerts and religiously took our children to all of them. Their reaction was one of boredom at first—and so, frankly, was ours. Our children would fall asleep during a long violin sonata, yawn and squirm during a cantata, whisper frequently, "Is it time to go home yet?" But we kept at it, dressing them in their best clothes, stopping afterward for an ice cream cone, doing what we could to make it a pleasant experience.

We kept at it: going to concerts, playing music at bedtime, starting the children on piano and violin. It took three years before we began to like it. We then began to notice our piano player. She would be wide awake, watching every movement of the concert pianist's fingers. And our violinist would crane her neck to catch all she could of the visiting artist.

Our daughters have now passed through the teen years, and though they whistled a popular tune now and then, rock music never became an issue in our home. They have never desired to watch the television midnight specials or asked to attend a rock concert. The pictures on their walls, by their own choice, depicted Christ instead of rock stars. They have never purchased any rock music. Gift records remained unused. Instead, their own talents flourished and the music of the stereo takes second place to their own.

Every note confirms to us that the Lord is willing to teach us how to lead our children in righteousness if we will ask.

Obviously, this long-range, intensive plan could not have worked if both Sherri and I had not been equally committed to it. Such experiences have helped us to develop a great faith and trust in each other. Together we are worth more than we are apart. For instance, years ago we were called to be a fellowshipping couple in a new branch of the Church—and we had no idea where to begin. There were no instructions, no manual, but we were told that one was coming and to do our best until it came. We did not feel that our calling was in suspension until then. We fasted and prayed to know how to carry out our stewardship. Ideas flowed thick and fast, and we worked diligently to put them to good use. Imagine our feelings, when the instructions finally arrived, to find that they were identical to the ideas we had received through inspiration!

We've used this model when our children haven't been quite sure where to begin. Principles aren't always clear at first. A book of instructions isn't always available. Where it is, it should be followed closely, but where it isn't, we are entitled to inspiration that can be received only through fasting and prayer. We are thrilled to find our children asking us to fast with them for enlightenment about their own decisions. This kind of independent relationship with Heavenly Father is a great strength in their decisions to reach for excellence with no exceptions.

When sixteen-year-old Connie was asked to join a group of friends at a party, they asked her to bring her own car because they knew she would have to be home before the party was over. As it turned out, Connie was home less than an hour after she left. The party was a dance that did not meet her standards.

It had not been a hard choice for her; her real test had come years before. Just a few weeks after her fourteenth birthday she had been invited to a friend's for an evening party—her first. She had looked forward for months to group associations and went in high spirits. She returned home early in the evening, very downcast, and went to her room. The next day, after sacrament meeting, when she felt calmer, she told us the story:

The day before the party, she had traveled with a busload of other teenagers from neighboring schools and communities to an honors regional music festival. On board, the conversation turned to current movies—who had seen what? She hadn't seen most of them. Why? "They're R-rated, and I don't go to R-rated movies."

They were incredulous, teasing, "I'll bet you will when the time is right." She vigorously shook her head. Then, just one night later, her friends at the party put on a videocassette of an R-rated movie. She told us, "I sat there for about five minutes. It felt like an eternity. What should I do? 'I'll never go to an R-rated movie' ran around and around inside my head like a broken record. I finally decided I either had standards or I didn't, and to just sit there was making a statement—to my friends, to myself, and to the Lord." She asked to be taken home, and a very disgusted friend complied.

"It was hard to embarrass my friends and cause them inconvenience," she said, "but I was so grateful I could partake of the sacrament with clean hands and a pure heart and have the Spirit confirm that I had done the right thing."

We knew how hard it must have been—it is hard for us, too, sometimes, to turn off an entertaining show that becomes crude or profane. But if choosing the show was a mistake, to continue watching substandard material would be a transgression. The excuse "How did I know it was going to be so bad?" is only valid up until the first bad moment.

I don't feel I can take a chance on shutting the Spirit out of my life for even a day. It's hard enough in this telestial world to get it and keep it. I depend on it too much to deliberately choose something that alienates it. I'm not saying that people who make different decisions are unrighteous, but I do know what the consequences would be for me.

We have tried to define appropriateness in the media by what we want it to do for us. Are we asking to be entertained, educated, informed, moved to action, proselyted? All these expectations are worthy of our time if the material edifies. We are told in Doctrines & Covenants 50:23, "That which doth not edify is not of God." Even if the media is not particularly offensive, it can cause bickering, waste time, substitute for parental guidance, or create a fantasy approach to life. Some who watch game shows daily feel covetous and discontented. Some who watch soap operas are disappointed and resentful that their own marriages lack such "romance."

Some parents use questionable material as the basis for a discussion about right and wrong. We have occasionally done the same, but we've usually found that the answer is very obvious—so obvious that the lengthy drama made out of it obscures the question. Some parents reason, "If I don't let them watch what they want here, they'll go someplace else and watch it anyway." If our children do this, we feel that the transgression is then upon their own heads—but to allow such material in our home is to condone it. Even if our children reject our values, at least we have made it clear what those values are.

What if your teens defy you? It has been our experience that teens are extremely sensible and just. They can understand reasoning and have a sense of fair play. I also believe teenagers have strong moral spirits that recognize truth and steadfastness. Their immaturity may cause balking and irritability at times, but they respect those who expect excellence from them.

I remember when Kathy invited a group of friends to a slumber party to celebrate her thirteenth birthday. "Oh, good, 'Saturday Night Live' will be on," they said. "I'm sorry," Kathy had to tell them, "but we'll have to watch something else." No one showed up. That was tough on Kathy. We tried to be close, to share her disappointment and express our pride. But underneath, I wondered how she was really taking it. The next weekend, she invited another group of friends over to a baking party; the goodies would be delivered room to room at a nearby home for the elderly. Everyone showed up and had a wonderful time. Both incidents anchored her conviction that the "popular" media didn't have to be part of her life.

This book includes a lot of negative examples because crises make values very clear—but in day-to-day living, we rarely mention what we are against. We are for a lot of good, exciting, growth-promoting things. In an atmosphere of progress, excuses die from lack of nourishment.

With so many foster children in our home, our children have seen firsthand the results of "just this once." They visited Ronnie in the detention home and saw the holes he had mashed in the walls of his cell from the frustration of being locked up—a bright and handsome fourteen-year-old with too much free time and no supervision.

We feel deeply that our children have the right to hear us witness for the truth. We don't have the right to change that truth so that they will like us better, even if they rebel against us and deny that truth. Where else but from us will they learn of their greatness, their foreordained missions, their ability to call upon the Lord for strength to rise above handicaps or weaknesses, their birthright of excellence without excuses or exceptions?

Our commitment to the truth doesn't mean we don't love and accept our children. It does mean we can never give our permission for them to do something contrary to what the Lord expects of them. It means that we can accept no exceptions to excellence.
