Ronald John Zirker, Parent and Teen: Teamed for Success ( 1985)

11

Effective Interviews

Some time ago I discovered a principle of Church government that seemed made to order for parents who feared losing contact with their children. I discovered this principle—known as the personal priesthood interview—when I uneasily realized that even with my very best efforts and Sherri's unceasing work to keep the family running smoothly it still lurched along, barely chalking up a day without some contention here, some unfinished chores there, some rebelliousness elsewhere.

When these unpleasantnesses erupted, I found myself getting involved with the children (at that time ages thirteen to three) quite swiftly and directly. I understood my motivation: I wanted to be the power in my child's life—a force for good—even if it involved sharpness at times. It is true that my reproving really did bring us closer together when it was followed by "an increase of love" (D&C 121:43), but I was uneasy about this cycle of rebuke and affection. Wasn't there some way to keep things consistently positive?

Consistently positive. It suddenly came to me that family home evening, a real power in our family, was like sacrament meeting in exactly that way. We held it consistently every week, and its regularity gave us repeated chances to focus our lives on positive spiritual matters and set commitments for the coming week. And if home evening worked in that way for the family as a whole, why wouldn't a regular, consistent session with each child work too? Wouldn't it help take the element of crisis and contention out of the everyday contacts among individuals in our home? That was when the model of the personal priesthood interview occurred to me. I couldn't wait to try it out with my family.

But when? Holding interviews on Monday night before or after home evening meant uncomfortable time limits, even though it had the advantage of being a night when I never had any other commitments. Sundays I was busy early and late with Church assignments, except for Fast Sunday. Since we fasted from evening to evening and our testimony meeting was always held right after Sunday School, that left a long, hungry stretch of four or five hours.

So, resisting the urge to sleep out the long wait, one Fast Sunday I announced my desire to meet with each of my children that day. They naturally wondered, "What have I done wrong now?" Beaming, I assured them it would be a good time for them just to talk, to tell me their problems, ask for help, or otherwise use the time as they saw fit. Dubiously, they each came in that day with very little to say.

"Well, dear, how are things?"

"Fine."

"Good! [long pause] Any problems'"

"Can't think of any."

"Can I help you with anything?"

"Oh—I don't know. Everything is just fine."

That was when I learned my first lesson. Because I had set up a new and somewhat formal way of relating to my children, they were a little nervous and uncomfortable with the change, and so was I, even though some warmth seeped through the awkwardness. I kept thinking something was missing. What did my priesthood leader and I do in our personal priesthood interviews? I could remember feeling a little awkward the first few times there, too, a little reticent to set goals, to say what I felt. But we had prayer together. All right. Prayer! Next month, so would we—opening and closing.

"Prayer?" they said. "Just you and me?"

So the younger ones prayed that those who didn't come this time would come next time. The older ones stammered through a sentence or two, not quite knowing what to say. Come to think of it, neither did I.

But the Spirit was there. The children were a little less self-conscious. I felt good about just the consistency of following through by holding the interviews two months in a row. The children opened up a little more this time, but hesitantly. I responded by biting back all recriminations, accusations, lectures, advice, counsel. We focused only on what they wanted to discuss.

The next month, I had proof that they had begun to believe I was serious, that they really could say what they wanted, and that I really was available for their concerns. And I had the shock of my life. What I heard were unsparing criticisms of me as a father. Floods of them. Everything they had ever wanted to say came blurting out. They cried. I cried. I listened. I bit my lip and listened some more. I checked my feelings and listened again. Then I hugged each one, we prayed, and I called in the next one.

The family surrounding the table was quieter that evening. Eyes were soft, a little embarrassed, a little apologetic. I smiled. I didn't say a word. Their goodnight hugs were especially tender that night. I hugged them back. After all the things they said, they needed assurance that I still loved them—and I think they were trying to let me know that they loved me.

Their tenderness increased throughout the month, and a surge of excitement grew in me as Fast Sunday approached. What was the next one going to be like?

I should have been able to guess what would happen. Having released their feelings toward me, they now began to release them about the rest of the family. If their comments came out sounding selfish, they knew it was allowed. We asked the Lord (less self-consciously now) to help us discover our problems and find ways of overcoming them. A big problem, the teenage girls decided, was Mother—cross, unappreciative Mother. Someone else always got more attention; the younger ones had all the restrictions and none of the privileges. Again, I listened. I hugged. We closed with prayer. Around the table that evening were fearful faces, wondering if I would betray a confidence and talk about what they had said against each other. I smiled. I kissed each of them warmly that night.

Then Sherri went to June Conference—the historic last such conference in 1975—and came home bubbling about an achievement program titled "Behold Thy Handmaiden." She was anxious to implement the program in the lives of our Laurels in the stake, but she could also see the possibilities for our own teenage daughters, who were not yet Laurels. We discussed it and decided that after our daughters met with me, they would then meet with her to set specific goals: short-term goals for the next month and long-term goals for the coming year (see chapter 7). This meant extra organization, since she wouldn't have time to get dinner ready while we were having our interviews—but it was worth it to both of us.

She divided a notebook into sections, one for each member of the family. Then she wrote down the areas discussed at conference: spiritual awareness, homemaking arts, recreation and the world of nature, service and compassion, cultural arts and education, and personal and social refinement. In her interviews she asked each daughter to write down one thing she would like to achieve during the month in each area. The next month, they would evaluate the goals together, make new ones or renew old ones, and discuss other things done during the month that also fit any of the areas of focus.

The first obstacle was the vagueness of the goals. For spiritual awareness, one would say: Read the scriptures. One daughter was a good reader, and the Old Testament would be her seminary course of study the coming year. Predictably, that month she had read only a few pages of Genesis and was pretty discouraged. But the discussion pinpointed another problem: she had chosen a goal that she thought Sherri wanted her to choose. When she realized that she was really free to pick what she wanted to do, she came up with goals that were a lot more realistic—goals she was much more motivated to work on.

We all got caught up in helping the children achieve their goals. One wanted to sew a dress for her homemaking goal. Her younger sister hadn't set that goal herself, but she got involved and ended up making one for herself. Another daughter wanted to swim a mile without stopping. The whole family made it to the pool so often that three of the children mastered it instead of one.

It became so much fun that it kept spreading. Our boys were younger, but they participated in their own version. It made living together richer; our lives became filled with doing and growing. The children began to feel better about themselves, and they sensed our growing admiration and love for them. Bickering had been replaced with cooperation.

We are still having those monthly interviews, and I've learned for myself those conditions that have made them the single most effective thing we've done to draw our children close to us, and why they have been so effective.

A recent television documentary revealed that teenage suicides are epidemic. One of the reasons given was that teenagers don't have anyone they can talk to, anyone they can feel close to, who will be there when needed, who knows their past, loves them, and cares about them—yet whom they can go to if they are in trouble, whom they can trust to advise them, with their best interests in mind.

As a psychologist, I have met many teenagers who have expressed this same need and many parents who would like to help but don't know how. A clue from psychologists as to how they do it might be of value: One advantage they have is a set time and place.

I have found that teens or children don't open up to me until I've seen them several times. Also, it takes a lot of courage for them to risk a relationship by divulging some of their inner feelings, fears, transgressions worries, and problems.

If there was a chance that what they divulged got around, they would never take that risk again. Also, if they thought it would spoil a relationship, they wouldn't feel safe talking anymore.

By following a few principles, I found I could create a climate where my children would feel safe in my presence to be themselves and communicate freely. These principles follow:

The Interview

Touch is very important. It should communicate your love and the feeling that "our time together is very special to me!"

In Luke 2:52, we read: "Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man." This scripture might be used as a guide for organizing personal interviews or counseling sessions with our children. We might ask about their progress in "wisdom," which includes how they are getting along in school, what plans they have for future careers, and how well they understand gospel principles; "stature," which may involve their feelings of self-worth, their physical and emotional health, even their personal appearance; "favor with God," including personal worthiness, spiritual growth, obedience to the commandments, scripture study, love for the gospel, personal prayers, and testimony development; and "favor with man," which may involve social development, relationships with members of the family, friends, employers, teachers.

The most important ingredient, however, is to communicate your sincere devotion to each child. Pray to know the heart of this brother or sister entrusted to you by the Lord. Pray for personal vision of his or her greatness and foreordained mission. Elder A. Theodore Tuttle has promised, "When we as parents have a genuine desire to teach the gospel to our children, the Lord will give us entrance into their hearts. Then may we know that as we enter there we stand on holy ground." (Ensign, May 1984, p. 25.)

My greatest moments with my children have been during our interviews. Now when we meet, we have prayer only at the end. Having it at the beginning seemed to focus our minds on problems rather than on feelings. I always make sure I am in some kind of physical contact with them. Many times they will lay their head in my lap or on my shoulder. That contact keeps the tone constant, warm, and tender. Their feelings flow; sometimes the tears do also, but through it, the touch remains steady and warm and tender. We are able to look each other in the eye when we are through, and then we kneel together. The specific blessings of the priesthood that each child needs are poured upon his or her head, and our fasting is dedicated to his or her special needs along with the family goal we have previously selected.

There is no doubt when the interview is over of the special love we share, and it is sweet—sweet enough to help preserve us from temptation throughout the month. I find myself wanting to give my life for them. They sense this and return my love for them by steadfastly living the principles of the gospel. Our family unity grows stronger every month; each part of the whole is in better working order. Sherri and I have found that our own communications are becoming more honest and accepting, too. As husband and wife, we've never been closer.

We look forward to Fast Sunday. There is a relevance to the fast that we never felt before. I see a glow of spirituality on my children's faces and my own spirit soars. I believe that I am experiencing fatherhood in a more complete way. Our children come to me throughout the month, trusting that I truly have their best interests in mind.

There is a simplicity in parenthood that has gradually become clearer in the twenty-five years I've spent with my children: They have always been willing to respond to me in direct proportion to the amount of love and attention I was willing to give them. And that love has motivated me to be worthy for their sakes far above what I might aspire to for myself. If I pray that they will not have to suffer the consequences of breaking the law, I must make sure I never break it. If I expect them to feel the accomplishment that comes from rising early with a clear set of objectives for the day, they need to see me doing it—and enjoying it. If I wish never to punish them for swearing, speaking disrespectfully to their mother, lying, or cheating, they must never hear me doing these things. If I am concerned about preventing vandalism, late-night cruising and boozing, or blatant disrespect for authority, I need to make home a place of peace, affection, and attention—one where they would rather be.

These one-on-one monthly talks have been my greatest tool for keeping communication open. The children's freedom to speak their minds, to ask any question, to pour out their hearts, knowing that the interaction will be totally confidential and that I will take great pains to clear up a problem or help answer a need, has built a bond of loyalty between us that I was not able to build any other way. They know there aren't any games between us.

Over the years this ability to relate to each other one-on-one has helped various of our children bring low grades to high, develop talents where there didn't seem to be any, overcome tendencies of laziness or sloppiness, prepare well for a successful future, and avoid harmful situations—and it has built the kind of love that makes it possible for me to imagine heaven. 1985

I walked in—I thought on time, but found I was tardy by about fifteen minutes—and as fate would have it, there wasn't a seat left in the congregation. So what do you do?—a new board member on assignment, no seat in the audience. I thought, "I'll take my place on the stand." Well, I wasn't too diplomatic, and I walked up while a man was talking. It embarrassed him, so he stopped and watched me come up. I hurried and took my seat, bowed my head so the pressure would be elsewhere. Then he said something, about three minutes later, that told me I was in the wrong ward.

"Oh, good heavens," I thought. "What do you do now? I need to make my report. I've got to go visit the other ward." Then it struck me that I had one thing in my favor. Nobody knew me—here I was a new board member, new stake—so I quickly got up and walked out. The same fellow was still talking. You can imagine how my leaving must have built his confidence. I was never so glad to get outside in all my life. I hurried on, and found the right ward, and completed my assignment.

The following Tuesday we had a stake Sunday School board meeting. I went to report. The superintendent was so excited when I walked in, he grabbed me.

He said, "Do you know what happened in our stake?"

"No, what happened?"

"Well, last Sunday we had a spiritual experience we'll always remember."

"Oh! What was that?"

He said, "Do you know that at Blank Ward (the ward I had walked into first) they had a visit from one of the Three Nephites!"

I want to assure you this morning I'm not here in either capacity. But I am honored to be here.

(Speeches of the Year, "Know Thyself, Control Thyself, Give Thyself," October 7, 1969, pp. 6-7.)
