Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Paul Dunn, Come Up Here"

I don't know whether I have shared this with you before, but you know sometimes little incidents in life can be great barriers later. I had one in the fifth grade. (I can remember back that far, I really can.) I was a student in the Little Rock, Arkansas, city schools. They were a little backward in some of their educational philosophies then, and this was in an era when you started in the first grade and you stayed with the same thirty students right through high school—they just promoted the class. Grades were secondary. So the peer group became quite a factor in my life—to be accepted, to be important, to be one of the gang.

I remember one incident that occurred in my English class. Down in Arkansas it gets pretty warm in the spring and the summer, real humid, and this was in the days before air-conditioning. (I was born even before TV, if you can imagine that!) I was sitting in this fifth-grade English class, dreaming about my mansions on high—do you ever do that, just day-dream?—and I was dreaming about one day being a great athlete. Right at that precise moment, my teacher called on me. She had a philosophy that when one's interest waned, call on him. Did you ever get a teacher like that?

This is the way she did it. She really snapped me back to reality. She said, "Paul Dunn, come up here!" I responded, and she handed me a piece of chalk as I walked up to the front of the class.

She said, "Young man, go to the board and diagram that sentence." (She had placed a sentence on the board.)

Well, I didn't know how you diagrammed a sentence, so I took the chalk and I walked to the board. Then I drew a big square around it, and I handed the chalk back to her.

She snatched it and she said, "I thought so. Come here, young man!" She stood me right in front of her desk and I was looking right into the eyes of my twenty-nine colleagues. There was a sweet little thing sitting on the second row, third seat, that I was trying to impress.

The teacher placed her hands very heavily on my shoulders, and said, "Class, I have been teaching English in this school, in this room, for over thirty years (I think that was part of her problem), and without a doubt, there is no question, this is the dumbest boy I've ever had!"

Now, you and I know that kind of comment doesn't build confidence. After hearing her expression of my abilities, I took a silent oath and covenant to never study again—not that I had done much up to that point anyway. And would you believe it, I actually didn't take a book home for the next seven years, and I've got report cards to prove it!

Well, isn't it sad sometimes what one misunderstanding person can do to our lives. I grew up for the next seven years thinking, "I'm a nothing. I'm a nobody. I can't."

Thank God for a father and a few great people who entered my life who said, "Oh, yes you can, when you find out who you really are."

(Speeches of the Year, "Know Thyself, Control Thyself, Give Thyself," October 7, 1969, pp. 8-9.)
