Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"The New Testament Came Very Forcefully to My Mind"

The department of education provides, as you know, some very excellent Church facilities at the various colleges and universities. We have a number of such institute buildings in the southland. I have been using the Institute of Religion building at the University of Southern California for an office. This required that I travel frequently—in fact, daily—from my home in Downey to the USC campus and back.

I am the type of fellow who gets very concerned about being in a rut. I like a change of environment, new things, challenges. So quite frequently I will take a different road to work just to break the monotony. I hate driving there on the freeway, looking at all those license plates day after day.

One morning as I made a tour through the northern part of our fair city, I went down a street which I had not traveled before. Lo and behold! there was under construction one of the finest looking homes I had ever seen! This house struck my fancy because it was almost identical to a plan which my wife had hoped that we would one day build. Working for the Church, we realized it would not be possible, but we dreamed about it.

I found myself, more often than not, going that way just to see the progress of the home that was not even mine. I am sure you do things like this in your own way. A month or two had gone by; and as the house was about two-thirds completed, one morning as I passed that way I noticed that the workmen had ceased their labors. No work was being accomplished.

The days grew into weeks. The thing that gave me the most concern, as I am sure it did the owner, was that the once bright, shiny, new lumber was now starting to fade because it was not yet painted. It turned first to a light brown, a darker brown, and then to kind of an off-yellowish, indicating that the deterioration process had set in. I thought, as I made one of my frequent trips by that way, how unfortunate more insight and vision hadn't gone into the planning.

Then, one morning as I passed by to see if there had been any progress, one of the eternal truths of the New Testament came very forcefully to my mind as I viewed the situation. It is one I am sure you are familiar with. We all have read it many times in New Testament courses and studies. Luke records it this way. He tells about an incident in the life of the Savior when a great multitude gathered, and as they frequently did, commenced to ask questions in an attempt to trap him. In this particular setting the Savior makes a very profound observation, so profound that it is just as applicable here today as it was in the time in which he uttered it. He said, as he turned to meet the multitude:

For which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it?

Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him,

Saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish.

Then he goes on to suggest another possibility:

Or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand? (Luke 14:28-31.)

Now his logic here makes pretty good sense, doesn't it?

We could make application to the tower the Savior refers to as it might apply to eternal life. We can say, in essence, "For which of us, intending to build eternal lives, sitteth not down first and consulteth whether we will have sufficient to complete the task?" The process of educating the body, the mind, and the spirit is the foundation on which this can be achieved.

(Education Week Devotional, "Blessed Are the Teachable," June 8, 1964, pp. 4-5.)
