Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Father Wants You To Come Back"

Here is a story that illustrates the response to a testimony borne from a sense of conviction. Two missionaries arrived at a home in the late afternoon. It was to be their last tracting visit for the day. It so happened that the family, with the father home, was just preparing to sit down to an early evening meal; they had planned as a family to go to the theater later. It was raining slightly as the missionaries began their door approach. Because of the anxiety of the mother at the door and the family for their evening plans, the missionaries had little success with their message at the door. However, not being aware of the situation in the home, the missionaries continued to declare their message, seeking the invitation to return and meet with the family in a cottage meeting. They could hear some voices from the inside of the house, one of which said, "Tell them to go away, the dinner is getting cold. We'll be late for the show." At this the woman began to close the door. Seizing the opportunity before it was too late, the missionaries ceased their door message and bore testimony to the truthfulness of the gospel and of the statements they had made. In bearing testimony, one of the elders purposely raised his voice so that those on the inside could hear it. In the meantime, the rain had increased and the missionaries left rather hurriedly from the doorstep as the door was closed.

They had half walked and run about half a block when they heard someone calling to them through the rain. They stopped to listen, and shortly a young man of about fourteen years of age caught up with them and said, "Father wants you to come back." So they returned to the home where an explanation was given to them as to the reason for their wanting to get on with the dinner and of their closing the door. The father said that he had not felt impressed with what he had heard at the door until the missionary bore his testimony. Then he said, "A strange feeling came over me, and I knew we had done wrong in sending you away." This awakened interest brought about by the testimony and the spirit of conviction led to the baptism of this family of five.

True conversion will serve as a compelling influence in our lives, leading to changes for the better. This motivating power of conviction produces a new and more righteous life. The individual who comes under its power is literally born again, as all must be to enter the kingdom of our Father. The Holy Ghost, then, will lead him unto truth.

(Speeches of the Year, "When Thou Art Converted," November 17, 1970, p. 4.)
