Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"They Had No Permit"

We had another experience in leaving Poland to fly to Prague, Czechoslovakia, as Dr. Novinski bade farewell to us in the Drome (or the airport). We had grown attached to him and he to us. He said to Brother Arnold Seiler, who was my traveling companion, and myself, "You men are different. I have felt a spirit, and an influence, and a power that I have never experienced before." His eyes were blurred with tears as he spoke.

Of course this was not us. It was the Priesthood of God that we bore and carried with us into this land behind the Iron Curtain.

I felt and have seen the demonstration of this same power in meeting with the people in East Germany, where under regulation, under the strictest form of regulation, we carry on our Church program. The presidents of branches find it necessary each Monday to go to the police court and there obtain permits for the holding of meetings for that week. They can hold no other meetings in East Germany other than those for which they receive a permit. Upon one occasion, in the city of Dresden, one of our German sisters thought that she would have a few of the young people into her home in traditional Mormon fashion to have a fireside. She had prepared some nice things to serve, to try and keep from these young people the pressures and the influences that were crowding in upon them because of regulations behind the Iron Curtain. In the midst of their fireside the police came and demanded the showing of the permit for holding the meeting. They had no permit. They were fined 200 marks, which they had to pay, with a warning that if they held another that the fine would be much greater and the leaders might be sent to prison.

In Czechoslovakia we are not able to hold any meetings. The members of the Church continue within their hearts the love of the gospel and hope and dream for the day when they might be able to meet again and feel the association with their brothers and sisters.

In Poland we are permitted to meet, but we do not have many members there now—only about eighty-seven. They still meet, principally at Selbongen, but here also under extreme conditions.
