Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

PRESIDENT SPENCER W. KIMBALL

Biographical Sketch

Spencer Woolley Kimball, Acting President of the Council of the Twelve of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is a public servant of long standing and varied experience.

He was born March 28, 1895. He was the sixth of eleven children born to his parents, Olive Woolley and Andrew Kimball. Andrew was one of the younger sons of Heber C. Kimball, apostle, prophet, missionary and counselor in the First Presidency of the Church. He was a member of the Council of the Twelve from 1835 to 1847, when he became a counselor to President Brigham Young until his death. Heber C. Kimball was one of the original twelve apostles of this dispensation.

Elder Kimball's maternal grandfather, Edwin Dilworth Woolley, was the business manager for President Brigham Young and was President Heber J. Grant's bishop.

Though born in Salt Lake City, he was destined to become an Arizonian, as his father was sent by the First Presidency of the Church to Thatcher in the rich Gila Valley to preside over the St. Joseph Stake, over which he presided for twenty-six and one half years, following a ten-year mission as president of the Indian Territory Mission.

Elder Kimball was first called on a mission to the Swiss-German Mission, but when the first world war began in 1914, he was transferred to the Central States Mission. During most of his twenty-eight months in the Central States Mission, he was president of the Missouri Conference. Since that early beginning in missionary work, he has visited missions and missionaries in all parts of the world, and now he is chairman of the executive committee of the missionary work for the Church in all the world, and has interviewed tens of thousands of missionaries.

Upon his return from his mission, he met Camilla Eyring, who was teaching in the Gila Junior College, and they were married in November, 1917. She was a refugee from Mexico, born in Colonia Juarez and, with her family, driven from that country in the time of the Villa Revolution.

Her education came from the Juarez Stake Academy, Brigham Young University, Utah State University and the University of California. She is the daughter of Edward Christian Eyring and Caroline Romney. They are the parents of four living children, three sons and one daughter, and they have twenty-seven grandchildren and six great-grandchildren as of 1971. He boasts of a family total of forty-five, and his family is central in his life. Their daughter, Mrs. Grant M. Mack (Olive Beth) is a member of the Tabernacle Choir. Spencer L. Kimball is dean of the University of Wisconsin, a Rhodes scholar, author of textbooks on insurance law, and former Dean of the University of Utah Law School. Andrew Kimball, of New York City, is prominent with General Electric. Edward is a professor of law at the University of Wisconsin.

Elder Kimball was called to be a member of the Council of the Twelve on July 8, 1943, and was ordained an apostle by President Heber J. Grant, October 7, 1943.

In his work on the Council of the Twelve, he has traveled the world around—to the Orient and to the Occident, in South America from the north to the south and Central America and Mexico many times; in Canada from east to west, in Europe in practically every country; in the South Pacific including the islands and New Zealand and Australia; and in the United States from Maine to San Diego, and from Seattle to Florida and in between. He has toured most missions, has visited most stakes, and has created many of the stakes, dividing and reorganizing in South America, the South Seas, Britain, America, and Canada. As a director he supervised missionary work in South America for three years and in Great Britain for two years, and now in his new work presides over all missions of the Church and is the chairman of the executive committee of the Missionary Committee for the Church.

Dating back to President Heber J. Grant's administration, Elder Kimball has been closely associated with and a leader in the Indian Program and was chairman of the Indian Committee for a quarter of a century. Under his leadership, much was done for the Indians, and he helped to institute the successful program now known as the Indian Student Placement Program and assisted in all the other development programs for the Indians.

He is the author of many pamphlets and one widely read book, The Miracle of Forgiveness.
