Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"The Story of Lazarus"

Today I would like to talk to you about miraculous events, those happenings that are difficult of explanation and understanding. There are two kinds of miracles. There are temporal miracles and spiritual miracles. There are the miracles which affect the body, and those which affect the soul—the one somewhat temporary, the other much more permanent. Recently a young doctor came into my office, and it seemed from his general attitude that the greatest thing in all the world was his work of relieving pain and saving bodies and lives, protecting mortal lives. And I remembered a little incident in the book which many of you have read, The Robe, the story of Miriam, who in her very crippled condition kept herself hidden in her room. She became sour and bitter; nothing was good; she was very selfish. And then came along the Master in the story and touched her life. He didn't heal her body, but he touched her in such a way that her bitterness changed to sweetness, her selfishness to unselfishness. And each night when the sun was setting, her friends came and carried her out to the well in the center of the village where all the villagers came together. And there with her changed life she inspired the many who came to hear her beautiful voice as she sang from an understanding, a sweet, sympathetic heart.

Then I related to this young doctor the story of Lazarus, how he had been treated by the most skillful physician that has ever graced the earth, and how that physician emphasized the transcendency of the spiritual above the physical. Word was sent to the Saviour at considerable distance from Bethany, that his great friend Lazarus was very, very ill. But according to his own words he purposely delayed going to the death-bed scene two days, and then it took him a long time to get there. And he did it on purpose; he could have gone earlier and saved this man before he died. But this is what he said, "And I am glad for your sakes"—the sakes of the followers and the disciples that were with him—"And I glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the intent that ye may believe." It was better that this one man should die perhaps that these many might get a bit of the inspirational life of Jesus and his power, and might get an insight into the gospel that he was trying to teach to them. The sickness and death of Lazarus then provided this great opportunity for him to teach faith to a large number of people.

(Assembly Addresses, February 11, 1947, pp. 2-3.)
