Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Who Is Responsible?"

I remember so well a good sister coming to my office one day. She sat at my desk in tears and kept saying over and over to herself, "Why should this happen to me? Why should this happen to me? Why should this happen to me?" When she was able to compose herself, she told me about her boy who was in jail, having committed a serious crime. And she said again, "Why should this ever happen to me?" The boy had committed his crime under the influence of alcohol.

When I found out more about this family, I learned that this was the case: The father and mother used to argue a good deal over the breakfast table. The mother loved her cup of coffee. She simply had to have her cup of coffee. The father always talked with mother about it, asked her to live the Word of Wisdom, asked her to drink something else for breakfast. And always mother would say, "You can't tell me that a cup of coffee will ever keep me out of heaven. You can't tell me that the Lord is going to be so narrowminded that he will keep me out of heaven when I go to church regularly, just because I drink a cup of coffee." Always she justified herself in breaking that part of the Word of Wisdom.

There was, sitting at that breakfast table, a little boy. That little boy listened to the conversation between father and mother, and as the mother defended her infraction of the Word of Wisdom, as the mother said that the cup of coffee would not matter and the Word of Wisdom really did not matter either, that little boy believed his mother.

When he got a little older, he still believed his mother. When he started going with boys who smoked, he began to smoke. His mother had taught him that the Word of Wisdom really did not matter. "If it did not matter to Mother, if it would not stand in the way of her salvation, why should it matter to me? How can it keep me out of heaven, if it does not keep Mother out of heaven?" he would say to himself as he also justified his actions.

And so as the mother taught him to break the Word of Wisdom, he took up the habit of smoking. When he went to college and joined a certain fraternity where drinking was the custom, he began to drink. One night under the influence of liquor he committed a serious crime and went to jail. And now the mother sat at my desk, weeping and saying, "Why should this ever happen to me?"

There is another couple. They also talk over the breakfast table and over the dinner table, and by their conversation they also teach their children certain things. Mother and father see eye to eye in this family. They agree perfectly, and they talk over the things on which they agree as they sit there at dinner or breakfast. And do you know what the principal topic of conversation is? The bishop. How they despise the bishop! How they could tear him limb from limb! Everything the bishop does is wrong. Why nothing in the world that bishop does could possibly be right. That father and mother sit there picking at the bishop and pulling him apart, and depreciating him, and doing all they can to make each other feel that the bishop is a most unworthy representative of the Church.

Did it hurt the bishop? The bishop went right on doing a fine job in the ward. But somebody was hurt. There was a little boy in that family, also. Whom did he believe? He believed father and mother. He had no reason to disbelieve them. They were his ideals. They were the law in that family. And when they, who laid down the law, constantly taught that boy by their own conversation to have no regard for the bishop, no regard for anything that the bishop did, they taught the boy to disregard everything for which a bishop stands.

That boy is now a grown young man. He does nothing in the Church. He has no respect for the Church, no respect for his bishop, nor for the men who installed the bishop.

Who is responsible?

(Conference Report, October 1952, pp. 29-30.)
