Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

PRESIDENT HARTMAN RECTOR, JR.

Biographical Sketch

Elder Hartman Rector, Jr., a member of the First Council of Seventy of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints since April, 1968, served as supervisor of the European-Germanic and Italian missions of the Church. He now presides over the Alabama-Florida Mission of the Church, with headquarters in Tallahassee, Florida.

A former naval aviator, he holds the rank of captain in the United States Naval Reserve, and for ten years was with the U.S. Department of Agriculture where he was program and budget analyst in the office of Budget and Finance in Washington, D.C.

Elder Rector is a convert to the Church, having been converted in 1952 along with his wife, Constance Kirk Daniel, whom he married in 1947. They are the parents of seven children.

Elder Rector was born August 20, 1924, at Moberly, Missouri, a son of Hartman and Vivian Fay Garvin Rector. He was reared on a farm near Moberly, where he graduated from high school and junior college. In 1942, he enlisted in the Naval Reserve aviation cadet program, became a naval aviator, and was commissioned in 1945 with the rank of ensign. He was released from active duty in 1947, but was recalled in 1951 and saw action in Korea, remaining on active duty until April, 1958.

During his service in the Navy he received additional education at several colleges and universities, including Murray State Teachers College in Kentucky and the University of Southern California in Los Angeles.

He was ordained an elder in 1952 and a seventy in May, 1956. He has served the Church in many positions, including four and one-half years as a stake missionary. He was a counselor for one year in the Washington Stake mission presidency and for two years was stake mission president. He was a president in the 253rd Quorum of Seventy for three years, was stake MIA superintendent for three years, and for five years was the senior president of the 542nd Quorum. He also served five years as a ward seminary teacher.

Mrs. Rector has also served in many Church positions, including ward Primary and YWMIA president and member of the Potomac Stake Relief Society presidency.
