Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Close Enough to the Angels"

President Dyer came across the hall and said, "President McKay would like to see you two brethren right away." And so we went across to the Hotel Utah and up to President McKay's suite and into a little waiting room and met Sister Middlemiss.

She said, "You're Brother Rector, and you're Brother Dunn [Loren C. Dunn]."

"Yes."

"President McKay would like to see you first, Brother Rector."

And so I went with President Dyer into the Prophet's office, and there I saw the Prophet, with that wonderful President McKay smile, the white hair, those penetrating blue eyes. I knew that I was standing in the presence of a prophet of God—there was no doubt in my mind. And there wouldn't have been any doubt in anyone's mind, whether they were a member of the Church or not. He is the prophet on earth today.

He said, "Brother Rector?" I took his hand, and I told him how much it meant to me, a newcomer into the kingdom, to shake hands with the prophet. He smiled and said, "Brother Rector, will you accept a call to the First Council of the Seventy?"

Now if I had been expecting that, I guess I could have understood it. But as it was I said, "What?"

He said, "I want you to serve as one of the General Authorities of the Church."

I said, "President McKay, do you mean am I worthy to serve as one of the General Authorities?

He said, "No, no, no." I guess he decided to see if he could get through to me some other way. He said, "Do you know who died recently of the General Authorities?"

I said, "Yes, President Antoine R. Ivins."

He said, "Yes, I want you to take his place."

Then I understood what the Prophet had asked me. I probably said something very trite, for I said "President McKay, I could never take his place, but I might fill the vacancy. And if you and the Lord want me to fill this position, yes, yes, I will accept it,"—not knowing fully what I was saying, I'm sure.

He smiled and settled back in his chair. President Dyer came in and said, "President McKay, this man has a wonderful aunt (that was his recommendation for me), and he converted her, too." Well I do have a wonderful aunt. I said, "President, I did baptize her, but I didn't convert her; she has always been converted, I'm sure."

President McKay, with a twinkle in his eye, said, "Well, President Dyer, he's a good man too!" And then he took my hand again and said, "Brother Rector, I want you to know that the Lord loves you, and that we love you too. And we are delighted that you are going to be serving with us."

I thanked him and told him how much he has meant to us (particularly the brethren in the Church). Among other things, he has taught us how to love our wives. President McKay is the greatest example of gallant manhood that I know anything about. If you want to know how to treat your wife, or mother, or your fiance, you must treat them like the Prophet treats Sister Emma Riggs McKay. And that will be close enough to the angels.

(Speeches of the Year, "Get Yourself In Condition to Serve," Oct. 1, 1968, pp. 13-14.)
