Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"My Spirit Is Nine Feet Tall"

Now the thing that normally stands before and between us and our accomplishments in this life is our weaknesses. If I asked you where you got your weaknesses, how would you answer that question? Some will say that they are responsible for their own weaknesses, that we make a lot of mistakes—we keep adding to the list of weaknesses. But that answer would not be strictly correct.

Others would answer, "Well, from Mom and Dad—you know, heredity." Their weaknesses come from their parents. We hear a lot about heredity. It is very convenient—We can always blame things on mom and dad. And yet that answer would not be strictly true either.

Well then, how about environment? There is a lot of information available to show that environment pretty much determines what we are going to be. And there are a lot of people who obviously believe this and use it as an excuse for their weaknesses. But when you come right down to it, where do you get your weaknessess? You will find the answer on page 502 in the Book of Mormon.

All the answers are in this book. I have never found a question whose answer could not be found in here. They are all in here [the Book of Mormon].

I started to read the Book of Mormon shortly before I met the missionaries in my home. Then I went into a Sunday School investigator's class in San Diego. The teacher of that class was a little man five feet, two inches tall, by the name of Joseph Smith Wilson. Joseph Smith Wilson had been dedicated to preach the gospel by his mother before he was born. She lived over in Scotland—married to a nonmember, a drunkard, who beat her and beat the children. She made a covenant with the Lord that if he would give her a son she would dedicate him to preaching the gospel and send him to Zion. Her husband ridiculed her and laughed at her—said that she couldn't have a son; but she did. You see, the Lord recognized that covenant with that good sister. She had a son, and she named him Joseph Smith Wilson. And when he was nineteen years old she kissed him goodbye for the last time, put him on a ship, sent him to Salt Lake City, and never saw him again in her life. She literally gave her son to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Well he was true to that charge. I believe he is one of the greatest living authorities on the Book of Mormon. As I attended his class I had lots of questions that I was going to ask. I had been looking for the answers all my life and hadn't been too successful in finding them. So I would ask him my questions. He would say, "Brother Rector, that is on page 127," and he would turn to page 127 and read me the answer. I would say, "That's interesting, now what about this?" He would say, "That's on page 232," and he would turn to page 232 and read me the answer.

Tremendous individual, this. As I said, he is five feet two. He used to say, "My body is very small (he kept his Scottish accent, he liked it) but my spirit is nine feet tall." And it is!

(Speeches of the Year, Get Yourself in Condition to Serve," Oct. 1, 1968, pp. 4-5.)
