Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"You Do It If You Are Going to Be Honest"

Brother Sterling W. Sill tells an interesting story about buying a bottle of pop. He was driving down the road and got thirsty, so he stopped to buy some pop. He put a dime in the pop machine at the filling station and got a bottle of pop, but his dime was returned. He took the dime out, looked at it, put it in his pocket, started back to the car, and said, "They charge too much for this stuff anyway." But he did not quite get back to the car, because there was a still, small voice that shouted in his ear and asked him a very interesting question. The question was "Sill, are you really going to be a thief for ten cents?" Well, no, of course he was not going to be a thief for ten cents. Who would? The price is not nearly high enough. So, he went back to the pop machine and started to put the dime back in. But now he had a problem. If he put the dime in the pop machine, what would happen? He would get another bottle of pop. Right? He might even get his dime back. This would sort of "compound the fracture." What would you do in a situation like that? You might figure that this just too big a problem for me to solve. The Lord would not expect me to solve this problem. You can get a clue as to what you should do by considering what you would do if you had put a dime in the pop machine and you did not get a bottle of pop. After you got through kicking and shaking and beating on the machine, you would probably go to the filling station attendant and say, "Look, that machine is a thief; it robbed me. I want my money back."

This is what Brother Sill did: he gave his dime to the filling station attendant who, of course, thought he was crazy, because you just do not do things like that. But you do if you are going to be honest. Did you ever stop as you were walking past a telephone booth and pull down the little coin box and look in? Did you ever do that? What were you looking for? And if you found a whole box full of money there, what would you say about that? Would you think, "Oh, the Lord provided for me." You see, if you are not careful, you will try to give the Lord credit for things that he does not want to take credit for. And that you have to watch always.

(Speeches of the Year, "Get Up and Glow," January 5, 1971, pp. 6-7.)
