Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"This Young Lady Was Loyal"

Now if I may be personal for a minute or two, may I tell you that one of the greatest blessings of my life has been an eternal companionship with my sweet-heart. When I was just about your age, we were having an M Men and Gleaner conference in Southern California. I had been the first speaker, representing the young men, and while I was speaking some dignitary came and occupied my seat on the stand. Upon concluding my talk, I sat on the front row in the congregation, and then they introduced the Gleaner representative. As she talked I became very, very interested in what she was saying. I can't tell you a word she said, but I know how she said it, and I know the spirit that was there. And I decided right then and there, "This is a young lady that I would like to get to know better."

Well, we had some dates. And you know, on that first date, I didn't even have enough money to take her to a show, and shows only cost thirty-five cents in those days. We walked up and down Hollywood Boulevard (of all places) and we looked in the windows and we chatted. We communicated, and I found out some of the things that she liked and believed in and she found out about some of the things I liked and believed in, and they were amazingly similar. Then we dated some more, and finally it was time to become engaged.

During these months of dating, it was a rich experience. It was during these dating opportunities that I observed one or two very important things. It might even sound silly, but I would take her to a show—when I finally got thirty-five cents I would take her to a show and she always cried in the right places. Now doesn't that sound foolish? But this impressed me; she always cried in the right places, just to the right degree. And when it was humorous she laughed in the right places, but she did it in a controlled way, and this pleased me and impressed me.

Then I noticed that this young lady was loyal. She was loyal to her family, she was loyal to the old high school she used to go to (and they were our arch rivals and I didn't see how anyone could be loyal to that school, but she was). She was even loyal to UCLA—she was a student at UCLA. And she was loyal to the Church. I thought to myself, "She has a built-in capacity for loyalty." And I said, "If she is loyal to all these things, if she accepts me to be her companion, she will be loyal to me. No question about it." And that is exactly the way it has been.

Young people, what a great blessing when we take time to do it in the Lord's appointed way; when we don't rush these things; when we look earnestly, prayerfully; when we communicate and find out what is way down deep inside. This is what we must do, because choosing an eternal companion wisely will be just as important as was the acquisition of a mortal body or going into the waters of baptism, for without that eternal companion there will be no exaltation. The celestial kingdom? Could be. But exaltation? Only with that eternal companion who believes as you believe, who feels as you feel, who shares with you an abiding faith and testimony in God, His Son, and the power of the priesthood.

(Speeches of the Year "Eternity Is Serious Business," September 30, 1969, pp. 7-8.)
