Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Right into My Hands"

May I tell you that I have had a glorious summer. May I tell you that during this summer I had thrilling experiences as I contacted people all over these United States who were excited about what the Church is doing. One man in particular just unwittingly fell right into my hands. We were seated in an aircraft going from Chicago down to Miami and he started talking about politics.

He said, "You know, I think President Nixon is doing a tremendous job." And he said, "The thing that thrills me most is the fact that he has surrounded himself with really religious competent men. You take this man Romney, for example. Why he has just been chosen the Churchman of the Year in America. Now," he said, "that is the kind of men we need running this country."

And I said, "Well, did you happen to know that he was a Mormon?"

"Yes, I knew that."

And I said, "Well, I happen to be a Mormon too."

And he said, "Well, that's interesting."

I went on to tell him about Ezra Taft Benson and other great men in Washington who had filled similar roles, and he said, "Well, they're not all Mormons." He said, "There is another great churchman on President Nixon's cabinet, but he must be a Catholic because his name is Kennedy."

And I said, "Well, you're probably talking about the Secretary of the Treasury. He happens to have been our stake president in Chicago before he had this role."

He just couldn't believe that until I finally convinced him. Then they served lunch on the airplane, and as they put the meal before us and while we were enjoying it, he said, "You know, the man that prepares all these meals for the airlines also took charge of President Nixon's inauguration, and he is a great spiritual man."

I said, "You must be talking about Willard Marriott."

He said, "Yes, how did you know the name?"

I said, "Well, he happens to have been our stake president in Washington, D.C."

Everyone he mentioned just happened to be a tremendous member of the Church, and we had a great conversation all the way down to Miami.

(Speeches of the Year, "Eternity Is Serious Business," September 30, 1969, pp. 1-2.)
