Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"I Am Healed, I Am Well"

Just recently a woman told me of her experience. She became very ill. It had been determined that she had cancer. She had gone through surgery on numerous occasions, until she had come to a point where the doctors had given her up and told her that she did not have months to live, but only weeks. There was no hope for her. She was living at home with a nurse to take care of her. A neighbor called one day. She had a phone near her bed so she could answer it, and the neighbor said to her, "Now when the doorbell rings, don't answer it. It is just those Mormon missionaries coming down the street; so when the doorbell rings, just don't answer it. Don't pay any attention to it."

So the woman thanked her for her consideration, her kindness. She told her nurse that when the doorbell rang she was not to answer it; it was just those Mormon missionaries and to pay no attention to them. Well, the doorbell rang after a few minutes, and the nurse, from force of habit, opened the door, then realized that she had been told not to. She quickly disposed of the missionaries. Immediately after, the nurse left the house to get some groceries. There came a knock on the door. For some reason or other the missionaries had returned. They knocked and got no answer, so they opened the door and called in. Hearing a response from an inner room they went on in. The woman said the missionaries came and stood beside her bed and mumbled a little between themselves, something she did not understand. Then one of them said, "Well, it's highly irregular, but I guess if you say so it is all right." The next thing she knew she had been administered to by these Mormon missionaries.

She said when they took their hands off her head she sat up in bed. She got out of bed and went into the kitchen and got some food from her refrigerator. Then she excused herself while she dressed. The missionaries made an appointment to come back at another time. When the nurse returned and saw the woman was up and around, she told her to get back into bed. "No, I'm not going back to bed. I am healed. I am well," the woman said.

The nurse, thinking she was delirious, called the doctor. The doctor also ordered her to get back into bed, but she refused again and said she was well. Over a year later, after the doctor had told her she had but weeks to live, she came to Salt Lake City and went to the temple, then came to my office for a blessing. She was very happy, thrilled as she had never been before in her life. The happiest part of her life has been since the doctor told her she couldn't live. Yet she said it was not the experience of healing alone that gave her a testimony of the gospel.

(Eldred G. Smith, "That Ye May Know the Truth," Improvement Era, 62:940.)
